Dickson Musslewhite Acquisitions Editor: Charlyce Owen-Jones Editorial Assistant: Maureen Diana Executive Marketing Manager: Wendy Gordon Senior Digital Media Editor: Paul DeLuca Digital Media Editor: Alison Lorber Media Project Manager: Joseph Sleby Senior Managing Editor: Ann Marie McCarthy Project Manager: Carol O’Rourke Full Service Project Management and Composition: Aptara®, Inc.
Jayne Conte Cover Designer: Suzanne Behnke Cover Photos: Clockwise from top left: Syrian rebel with son, 2012, © Odd Andersen/AFP/Getty Images.
Refugees from Kyrgzstan receive help from UNICEF, 2010, Hrc/ Wenn Photos/Newscom, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon with PSY, 2012, Hrc/Wenn Photos/ Newscom.
Mary Ann Gloriande Printer & Binder: Courier/Kendallville Cover Printer: Lehigh-Phoenix Color/Hagarstown For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the copyright holders on 517, which are hereby made part of this copyright page.
Each chapter ends with a summary, key terms, and critical thinking questions.
Despite these increasing connections and their implications for everyday life, many students begin college misinformed about basic facts of international relations such as the extent of poverty and levels of foreign assistance given to the developing world and the trend toward fewer wars over the past two decades.
An introductory textbook plays a key role in students’ education about international affairs, and we have worked hard to make this one timely, accurate, visually appealing, and intellectually engaging.
We hope this textbook can help a generation develop knowledge and critical thinking in order to find its voice and place in the changing world order.
The rich complexity of international relationships—political, economic, and cultural—provides a puzzle to try to understand.
The puzzle is not only an intellectual challenge but also emotionally powerful.
It contains human-scale stories in which the subject’s grand themes—war and peace, intergroup conflict and community, integration and division, humans and their environment, poverty and development—play out.
New to the Tenth Edition 2013-2014 Update The tenth edition 2012-2013 update includes important revisions throughout to keep the book current in a time of historic changes in the international system.
New developments such as the Syrian civil war and the new European recession are featured in text and photos throughout the book.
In international security affairs, this edition gives particular attention to the rapidly changing face of war across the world.
The Syrian civil war grinds on, with more than 70,000 lives lost as of early 2013; the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has heated up, while violence in the Democratic Congo has re ignited; Iranian and North Korean nuclear programs hurtle toward a showdown with Western powers; and island disputes threaten to trigger violence in both the East China Sea and the South China Sea.
At the same time, the NATO campaign in Afghanistan is winding down; France has routed Islamists from northern Mali, as has the African Union in most of Somalia; and the United States defense budget has begun a sharp decline.
The spread of democracy continues, with elections in Egypt and civilian rule in Burma.
Cyberwarfare, such as the Flame virus and expanding drone attacks, also contributes to the changing international security picture covered in this edition.
In international political economy, as some countries climbed back from the financial upheaval of 2008, the European Union fell into a second recession after debt crises in Greece, Spain, Portugal, and elsewhere led to massive street protests, bailouts, and austerity budgets.
The euro currency, a successful experiment in its first decade, began to look shaky, and further expansion of the EU was put aside.
Meanwhile, telecommunications continued to revolutionize the global economy, with 6 billion cell phone subscribers worldwide.
While militants and governments across the world told their stories on Twitter, Chinese citizens used Twitterdike microblogs to bypass their government and have their say.
But deep divisions of governance of the Internet emerged at an international conference in Dubai tasked with developing a new Internet treaty.
On the world health front, tremendous progress has been registered in such areas as fighting measles, cutting maternal deaths, and providing access to safe drinking water.
But looming over these positive trends is the threat of global warming, marked by stark warning signs such as freakish weather, floods, and droughts, while the international community proves incapable of coming to grips with the problem.
This update edition discusses all these major development of the past eventful year.
Chapter 2 discusses realist theories, while Chapter 3 discusses alternatives to realism, including liberal and social theories.
Chapter 4 covers foreign policy, including how domestic politics influences international relations in both positive and negative ways.
We have updated the tables and figures with the most recent available data.
This includes new data on GDP, military forces, migration and refugees, debt, remittances, foreign aid, the HIV/AIDS epidemic, and UN peacekeeping operations, to name a few.
Dozens of new photos, mostly from 2012 and 2013, draw visual attention to current events while reinforcing key concepts in the text.
Each chapter contains an example of a collective good that states are attempting to achieve.
We hope these new examples can provide a meaningful anchor for students to consider the concept of collective goods problems and the three potential approaches to solving them.
This map is organized around the subfields of international security and international political economy.
These subfields, although separated physically in this book, are integrated conceptually and overlap in many ways.
Common core principles—dominance, reciprocity, and identity—unify the book by showing how theoretical models apply across the range of topics in international security and political economy.
The overall structure of this book follows substantive topics, first in international security and then in international political economy.
Chapter 1 introduces the study of IR; explains the collective goods problem and the core principles of dominance, reciprocity, and identity; and provides some geographical and historical context for the subject.
The historical perspective places recent trends, especially globalization, in the context of the evolution of the international system over the 20th century, while the global orientation reflects the diversity of IR experiences for different actors, especially those in the global South.
Chapter 4 discusses the formulation and implementation of foreign policy including a discussion of the key institutions involved in that process.
Chapter 5 introduces the main sources of international conflict, including ethnic, religious, territorial, and economic conflicts.
The conditions and manner in which such conflicts lead to the use of violence are discussed in Chapter 6, on military force and terrorism.
Chapter 7 shows how international organizations and law, especially the United Nations, have evolved to become major influences in security relations, and how human rights have become increasingly important.
The study of international organizations also bridges international security topics with those in international political economy.
The remaining chapters move through the various topics that make up the study of international political economy, beginning with microeconomic principles and national economies through trade and finance, international integration, the environment, and North-South relations, focusing heavily on development.
Chapter 8 introduces theoretical concepts in political economy (showing how theories of international security translate into IPE issue areas) and discusses the most important topic in international political economy, namely, trade relations.
Chapter 9 describes the politics of global finance and multinational business operations in an era of globalization.
Chapter 10 explores the processes of international integration, telecommunications, and cultural exchange on both a regional scale— the European Union—and a global one.
Chapter 11 shows how environmental politics and population growth expand international bargaining and interdependence both regionally and globally.
Chapter 12 addresses global North-South relations, with particular attention given to poverty in the global South.
Chapter 13 then considers alternatives for economic development in the context of international business, debt, and foreign aid.
Chapter 14—a brief postscript—reflects on the book’s central themes and encourages critical thinking about the future.
Pedagogical Elements In a subject such as IR, in which knowledge is tentative and empirical developments can overtake theories, critical thinking is a key skill for college students to develop.
In each example, we highlight how one or more of the core principles (dominance, reciprocity, and identity) has been used successfully in the provision of the good.
The one-page “Policy Perspectives” feature in each chapter places students in the decision-making perspective of a national leader.
This feature bridges international relations theory to policy problems while demonstrating the trade-offs often present in political decision-making and highlighting the interconnectedness of foreign and domestic politics.
The topics in each chapter are chosen to pick up on important concepts discussed in that chapter.
Thus, this feature deepens the treatment of particular topics, while reinforcing the general themes in each chapter.
Many people find information—especially abstract concepts—easier to grasp when linked with picturesThus, the book uses color photographs extensively to illustrate important pointsPhoto captions reinforce main themes from each section of the text and link them with the scenes pictured, including in this edition many 2012 and 2013 photos.
Students who are visual learners should find not only the photos but also the many color graphics especially useful.
Basic data, presented simply and appropriately at a global level, allow students to form their own judgments and to reason through the implications of different policies and theories.
The text uses global-level data (showing the whole picture), rounds off numbers to highlight what is important, and conveys information graphically where appropriate.
IR is a large subject that offers many directions for further exploration.
The footnotes in this book, updated for the tenth edition, suggest further reading on various topics.
Joshua S Goldstein Jon C Pevehouse MyPoliSciLab™ MyPoliSciLab is a state-of-the-art interactive and instructive solution for the International Relations course, designed to be used as a supplement to a traditional lecture course, or to completely administer an online course.
MyPoliSciLab provides access to a wealth of resources all geared to meet the individual teaching and learning needs of every instructor and every student.
An assignment calendar and gradebook allow you to assign specific activities with due dates and to measure your students’ progress throughout the semester.
The eText for International Relations features integrated videos, simulation activities, and interactive self-quizzes.
This layered approach promotes better critical thinking skills, helping students succeed in the course and beyond.
New Feature in MyPoliSciLab A new set of simulations that connect with topics from the text, engaging students with the concepts and dynamics of international relations and decision-making.
Supplements Pearson is pleased to offer several resources to qualified adopters of International Relations and their students that will make teaching and learning from this book even more effective and enjoyable.
Several of the supplements for this book are available at the Instructor Resource Center , an online hub that allows instructors to quickly download bookspecific supplements.
Please visit the IRC welcome page at www.pearsonhighered.com/ ire to register for access.
Instructor's Manual/Test Bank This resource includes chapter summaries, learning objectives, lecture outlines, multiple-choice questions, true/false questions, and essay questions for each chapter.
To learn more, please visit www.mypearsontest.com or contact your Pearson representative.
Acknowledgments Many scholars, colleagues, and friends have contributed ideas that ultimately influenced the ten editions of this book.
The book owes a special debt to the late Robert C North, who suggested many years ago that the concepts of bargaining and leverage could be used to integrate IR theory across four levels of analysis.
For help with military data issues, we thank the late Randall Forsberg.
For suggestions, we thank our colleagues, and the students in our world politics classes.
For help with the footnotes and glossary, thanks to Louis Cooper and Peter Howard.
For help with data research and bibliographic work, we thank Tana Johnson, Felicity Vabulas, Stephanie Dufek, Ben Zimmerman, and Roberta Braga.
Finally, we appreciate the years of support we received from our late colleague, teacher, and friend Deborah “Misty” Gerner.
To the Student The topics studied by scholars are like a landscape with many varied locations and terrains.
This textbook is a map that can orient you to the main topics, debates, and issue areas in international relations.
This text is a phrase book that can translate such lingo and explain the terms and concepts that scholars use to talk about international relations.
The text translates some of those voices—of presidents and professors, free traders and feminists—to help you sort out the contours of the subject and the state of knowledge about its various topics.
In this tenth edition, we have especially tried to streamline and clarify this complex subject to help you not just understand but deeply understand international relations.
But ultimately, the synthesis presented in this book is that of the authors.
Thus, this book is only a starting point for conversations and debates.
With map and phrase book in hand, you are ready to explore a fascinating world.
The great changes taking place in world politics have made the writing of this textbook an exciting project.
P xv A Note on Nomenclature In international relations, names are politically sensitive; different actors may call a territory or an event by different names.
This book cannot resolve such conflicts; it has adopted the following naming conventions for the sake of consistency.
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is called Britain.
Burma, renamed Myanmar by its military government, is referred to as Burma.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly called the Belgian Congo and then Zaire) is here called Democratic Congo.
We refer to the Sea of Japan, which some call the East Sea, and to the Persian Gulf, which is also called the Arabian Gulf.
The 1991 U.S.-led multinational military campaign that retook Kuwait after Iraq’s 1990 invasion is called the Gulf War, and the United States war in Iraq after 2003 is called the Iraq War.
The war between Iran and Iraq in the 1980s is called the Iran-Iraq War.
Jobs in government and diplomacy offer team players the chance to affect policy, but require patience Jobs in Government and Diplomacy SUMMARY with large bureaucracies.
Despite differences between careers in IGOs and governments, there are numerous similarities.
Both are hierarchical organizations, with competitive and highly regulated working environments.
Whether in the United States State Department or the UN, entrance into and promotion in these organizations is regulated by exams, performance evaluations, and tenure with the organization.
Another similarity lies in the challenges of being pulled in many directions concerning policies.
Governments face competing pressures of public opinion, constituencies, and interests groups—each with distinct policy opinions.
IGOs also deal with interest groups , but an IGO’s constituents are states, which in many cases disagree among themselves.
Many employees of IGOs or governments thrive on making decisions that influence policies.
Both work environments also attract coworkers with deep interests in international affairs, and the resulting networks of contracts can bring professional and intellectual rewards.
Finally, jobs in governments or IGOs may involve travel or living abroad, which many enjoy.
Usually, only individuals with advanced degrees or technical specializations achieve non-entry level positions.
It can take years to climb within the organization and the process may involve working in departments far from your original interests.
In addition, both IGOs and governments are bureaucracies with formal rules and procedures, requiring great patience.
SKILLS TO HONE The key to working in IGOs or government is to get your foot in the door.
Be flexible and willing to take entry positions that are not exactly in your area of interest.
Foreign language training is also important, especially for work in large IGOs with many field offices.
The ability to work well in groups and to network within and across organizations is an important asset.
People who can strengthen lines of communication can gain support from many places in an organization.
Finally, strong analytical and writing abilities are extremely important.
Both IGOs and governments deal with massive amounts of information daily.
The ability to analyze information (even including mathematical or computational analysis) and to write clear, concise interpretations will make one invaluable.
BENEFITS AND COSTS As the pace and scope of globalization have accelerated, opportunities to work in international business have blossomed.
For many large companies, the domestic/global distinction has ceased to exist.
This new context provides opportunities and challenges for potential employees.
Business jobs can pay substantially more than those in governments or NGOs and can open opportunities to travel extensively and network globally.
Foreign-based jobs mean relocation to another country to work and immerse oneself in another culture.
Many jobs require extensive hours, grueling travel, and frequent relocation.
As with any job, promotion and advancement may fall victim to external circumstances such as global business cycles.
Banking, marketing , sales, and computing/telecommunications have seen tremendous growth in recent years.
Traditional MBA and business xviii school programs will be helpful for all three types of jobs, yet for jobs based abroad, employers often also look for a broader set of skills taught in economics, political science, and communications.
Thus, not only traditional business skills, but language and cultural skills, are essential.
Employers look for those who have knowledge of a country’s human and economic geography as well as culture.
Experience with study abroad, especially including working abroad, can help show an ability to adapt and function well in other cultures.
Strong analytical and especially writing abilities also matter greatly to employers.
Employers often look for knowledge of a particular industry or company, in order to make best use of an employee’s language and cultural skills.
Of course, while experience in non-international business never hurts, be mindful that the practices, customs, and models of business in one country may not apply well abroad.
Cross-cultural skills combined with substantive business knowledge in order to translate the operational needs of companies from the business world to the global realm are highly valued.
BENEFITS AND COSTS Nearly 30,000 NGOs ex ist, and that number grows daily.
Thousands of individuals are interested in working in these organizations.
While working for an NGO can be extremely rewarding personally, it is rarely rewarding financially.
Most NGOs are nonprofit operations that pay workers meagerly for long hours.
Moreover, many smaller NGOs engage in a constant fight for funding from governments, think tanks, private foundations, or individuals.
Despite the large number of NGOs, relatively low pay, and long hours, finding a job with an NGO can be difficult.
Try to narrow down your interests in terms of substantive areas (e.g., human rights, environment) and/or geographic region.
Also think about whether you want to work in your own country or abroad.
Positions abroad may be more rewarding but are in lower supply and higher demand.
Basic office skills are essential, but employees also need to cover a range of duties every day.
Writing and communication skills are key, especially when fundraising is part of the job.
Foreign language skills also matter since many NGOs maintain or work with field offices abroad.
Often, NGOs ask potential employees to volunteer for a period while they train, before being hired.
Increasingly, some companies place workers in an NGO or volunteer opportunity for a price.
By paying to work, you can gain a probationary period to develop your skills and familiarize yourself with the operation so as to become efficient before going on the payroll.
Finally, in cities where NGOs cluster (e.g., Washington, D.C.), personal networks play an important role in finding good opportunities.
For this reason, many volunteer or accept jobs with NGOs not in their immediate area of interest to gain experience and contacts, which can help future career advancement.
BENEFITS AND COSlS People follow various your own time schedule, balancing other duties (such as paths to an interest in teaching and researching in the work as a teaching or research assistant) that can easfield of international relations.
Many who complete the instructor is likely to have a unique story about how he coursework for an advanced degree do not finish their or she became interested in international affairs. thesis or take many years to do so.
One advantage of an academic and research career, whether at a teaching-oriented institution or a large reLL Q ON Whether one wants to pursue an adsearch university, is intellectual freedom.
One can spend vanced degree for the purposes of teaching in an academic a career approaching a variety of topics that are intersetting or engaging in applied research, there are imporesting and constantly evolving, that may involve travel tant skill sets to develop.
First and foremost is critical abroad for fieldwork, and that may let you network with thinking.
Second, there is little or no teaching Finally, think about developing a set of applied skills to involved.
Still, for those interested in IR research, such use as a toolbox while analyzing questions.
The contents jobs can result in a wider dissemination of one’s work to of this toolbox might include other languages to facilia broader audience that often includes policy makers. tate fieldwork abroad.
It could include statistics and data To teach IR at an advanced level or to perform skills to facilitate quantitative analysis.
Or it could include research for think tanks and government agencies mathematics to use game theoretic models.
Masters deanswer research questions, whether as part of the academy gree programs often take between one and two years, or in a private or governmental research organization, while a Ph.D. in international relations usually takes a minimum of five years.
Online at chronicle.com/ to travel internationally or get work experience to hone American Political Science Assoc.
Washington, D.C., 2004. to extend their education if they find a job that allows Ernest J Wilson.
Is There Really a Scholarthem to achieve their personal and career goals.
Political Finally, in completing most advanced degrees, a Science and Politics, January 2007. large amount of self-direction is necessary.
White l*orse Ydfcnknife alpfeaf ‘Stove late l&ttwti of ■ Ye tvfou ‘talar) if Hudson Bay Happy ViHcvCopjte Bay SchuSfcrvilIc, lake AthflbDfCQ Chisasto 'Fcm George i ■ St.
Kamclwllkii' OffSto ■ j£f ^ \ X o# j \ . ,tV | Se-Ww/iYl i IMVNA ■ ' \ CK(.mu*iSJ try ihr 5fl\*Tl Ihri'i II' itfriiiiwiSniJi] El; R.iwi.
Narrowly defined, the field of international relations concerns the relationships among the world’s governments.
They are closely connected with other actors (such as international organizations, multinational corporations, and individuals); with other social structures and processes ; and with geographical and historical influences.
These elements together power the central trend in IR today—globalization.
The young protesters of the Arab Spring who overthrew several governments in 2011-2012 used Facebook and cell phones to plan and coordinate their revolutions.
And the global economic recession of 2008-2009, which began with a collapse of the United States home mortgage market, spread quickly to other nations.
Highly integrated global financial markets created a ripple effect across the globe that is still being felt today.
Thus, two hallmarks of globalization—expanding communications technology and integrated markets— propelled events that impacted our daily lives.
The prospects for getting jobs after graduation depend on the global economy and international economic competition.
Those jobs also are more likely than ever to entail international travel, sales, or communication.
And the rules of the world trading system affect the goods that students consume every day, such as electronics, clothes, and gasoline.
Globalization has distinct positive impacts on our daily lives as well.
Better communication and transportation capabilities constantly expand the ordinary person’s contact with people, products, and ideas from other countries.
In addition to feeling the influence of globalization and international relations on our daily lives, individual citizens can influence the world as well.
Often, international relations is portrayed as a distant and abstract ritual conducted by a small group of people such as presidents, generals, and diplomats.
Although leaders do play a major role in international affairs, many other people participate.
College students and other citizens participate in international relations every time they vote in an election or work on a political campaign, buy a product or service traded on world markets, and watch the news.
The choices we make in our daily lives ultimately affect the world we live in.
Through those choices, every person makes a unique contribution, however small, to the world of international relations.
The purpose of this book is to introduce the field of IR, to organize what is known and theorized about IR, and to convey the key concepts used by political scientists to discuss relations among nations.
This first chapter defines IR as a field of study, introduces the actors of interest, and reviews the geographical and historical aspects of globalization within which IR occurs.
Underneath this complexity, however, lie a few basic principles that shape the field.
We will lay out the range of theories and approaches in Chapters 2 through 4, but here we will present the most central ideas as free from jargon as possible.
For example, every country has an interest in stopping global warming, a goal that can be achieved only by many countries acting together.
Yet each country also has an individual interest in burning fossil fuels to keep its economy going.
Similarly, all members of a military alliance benefit from the strength of the alliance, but each member separately has an interest in minimizing its own contributions in troops and money.
Individual nations can advance their own short-term interests by seizing territory militarily, cheating on trade agreements, and refusing to contribute to international efforts such as peacekeeping or vaccination campaigns.
But if all nations acted this way, they would find themselves worse off, in a chaotic and vicious environment where mutual gains from cooperating on issues of security and trade would disappear.
We will refer to the general case as the collective goods problem, that is, the problem of how to provide something that benefits all members of a group regardless of what each member contributes to it.
In a small group, the cheating of one member is harder to conceal, has a greater impact on the overall collective good, and is easier to punish.
The advantage of small groups helps explain the importance of the great power system in international security affairs and of the G20 industrialized countries in economic matters.
Explore the Simulation ""Why Study International Relations"" at MyPoliSciLab 1 Olson, Mancur.
Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life 5 The collective goods problem occurs in all groups and societies, but is particularly acute in international affairs because each nation is sovereign, with no central authority such as a world government to enforce on individual nations the necessary measures to provide for the common good.
By contrast, in domestic politics within countries, a government can force individuals to contribute in ways that do not serve their individual self-interest, such as by paying taxes or paying to install antipollution equipment on vehicles and factories.
Although this solution is far from perfect—cheaters and criminals sometimes are not caught, and governments sometimes abuse their power—it mostly works well enough to keep societies going.
These three principles are fundamental across the social sciences and recur in such disciplines as the study of animal societies, child development, social psychology, anthropology, and economics, as well as political science.
To explain each principle, we will apply the three principles to a small-scale human example and an IR example.
Dominance The principle of dominance solves the collective goods problem by establishing a power hierarchy in which those at the top control those below—a bit like a government but without an actual government.
Then social conflicts such as who gets resources are resolved automatically in favor of the higher-ranking actor.
Fights over the dominance position have scripted rules that minimize, to some extent, the harm inflicted on the group members.
Symbolic acts of submission and dominance reinforce an ever-present status hierarchy.
Staying on top of a status hierarchy does not depend on strength alone, though it helps.
Rather, the top actor may be the one most adept at forming and maintaining alliances among the group’s more capable members.
In international relations, the principle of dominance underlies the great power system, in which a handful of countries dictate the rules for all the others.
Sometimes a socalled hegemon or superpower stands atop the great powers as the dominant nation.
The UN Security Council, in which the world’s five strongest military powers hold a veto, reflects the dominance principle.
The advantage of the dominance solution to the collective goods problem is that, like a government, it forces members of a group to contribute to the common good.
However, the disadvantage is that this stability comes at a cost of constant oppression of, and resentment by, the lower-ranking members in the status hierarchy.
Also, conflicts over position in the hierarchy can occasionally harm the group’s stability and well-being, such as when challenges to the top position lead to serious fights.
In the case of international relations, the great power system and the hegemony of a superpower can provide relative peace and stability for decades on end but then can break down into costly wars among the great powers.
Reciprocity The principle of reciprocity solves the collective goods problem by rewarding behavior that contributes to the group and punishing behavior that pursues selfinterest at the expense of the group.
Reciprocity is very easy to understand and can be “enforced” without any central authority, making it a robust way to get individuals to cooperate for the common good.
A disadvantage 6 Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations TRAVEL COMPANIONS of reciprocity as a solution to the collective goods problem is that it can lead to a downward spiral as each side punishes what it believes to be negative acts by the other.
Psychologically, most people overestimate their own good intentions and underestimate the value of the actions of their opponents or rivals.
To avoid tit-for-tat escalations of conflict, one or both parties must act generously to get the relationship moving in a good direction.
In international relations, reciprocity forms the basis of most of the norms and institutions in the international system.
Many central arrangements in IR, such as World Trade Organization agreements, explicitly recognize reciprocity as the linchpin of cooperation.
For instance, if one country opens its markets to another’s goods, the other opens its markets in return.
On the negative side, reciprocity fuels arms races as each side responds to the other’s buildup of weapons.
But it also allows arms control agreements and other step-by-step conflict-resolution measures, as two sides match each other’s actions in backing away from the brink of war.
Collective goods are provided to all members of a group regardless of their individual contributions, just as these migrant workers crossing the Sahara desert in Niger in 2006 all depend on the truck's progress even while perhaps jostling for position among themselves.
In many issue areas, such as global warming, the international community of nations is similarly interdependent.
However, the provision of collective goods presents difficult dilemmas as players seekto maximize their own share of benefits.
Identity A third potential solution to the collective goods problem lies in the identities of participants as members of a community.
Although the dominance and reciprocity principles act on the idea of achieving individual self-interest (by taking what you can, or by mutually beneficial arrangements), the identity principle does not rely on self-interest.
On the contrary, members of an identity community care about the interests of others in that community enough to sacrifice their own interests to benefit others.
The roots of this principle lie in the family, the extended family, and the kinship group.
But this potential is not limited to the close family; it can be generalized to any identity community that one feels a part of.
As members of a family care about each other, so do members of an ethnic group, a gender group, a nation, or the world’s scientists.
In each case, individual members will accept solutions to collective goods problems that do not give them the best deal as individuals, because the benefits are “all in the family,” so to speak.
A biologist retiring at a rich American university may give away lab equipment to a biologist in a poor country because they share an identity as scientists.
A European Jew may give money to Israel because of a shared Jewish identity, or a computer scientist from India may return home to work for lower pay after receiving training in Canada, in order to help the community he or she cares about.
Millions Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life 7 of people contribute to international disaster relief funds after tsunamis, earthquakes, or hurricanes because of a shared identity as members of the community of human beings.
In IR, identity communities play important roles in overcoming difficult collective goods problems, including the issue of who contributes to development assistance, world health, and UN peacekeeping missions.
The relatively large foreign aid contributions of Scandinavian countries, or the high Canadian participation in peacekeeping, cannot be explained well by self-interest, but arise from these countries’ self-defined identities as members of the international community.
Even in military forces and diplomacy (where dominance and reciprocity, respectively, rule the day), the shared identities of military professionals and of diplomats—each with shared traditions and expectations—can take the edge off conflicts.
And military alliances also mix identity politics with raw selfinterest, as shown by the unusual strength of the U.S.-British alliance, which shared interests alone cannot explain as well as shared identity does.
Nonstate actors, such as nongovernmental organizations or terrorist networks, also rely on identity politics to a great extent.
The increasing roles of these actors—feminist organizations, churches, jihadists, and multinational corporations, for example—have brought the identity principle to greater prominence in IR theory in recent years.
An Everyday Example To sum up the three core principles, imagine that you have two good friends, a man and a woman, who are in a romantic relationship.
First, you could say, “Traditionally, relationships work best when the man wears the pants.
For thousands of years the man has made the decision and the woman has followed it.
This might be better for both of them than spending all their evenings arguing about where to go out.
On the other hand, this solution might leave the woman permanently resentful at the unequal nature of the outcome.
You could help the couple set up agreements, accounting systems, and shared expectations to govern the implementation of this seemingly simple solution.
Get past the superficial issues and strengthen the core feelings that brought you together.
This approach could powerfully resolve your friends’ conflict and leave them both much happier.
Over time, one partner might actually begin to prefer the other’s favorite activity after more exposure—leading to a change in identity.
Indeed, one partner can subtly exploit the other’s commitment to get past the superficial conflicts.
This recurring problem results when two or more members of a group share an interest in some outcome of value to them all, but have conflicting individual interests when it comes to achieving that valued outcome.
For example, the world’s countries share a desire to avoid global warming, but each one benefits from burning fossil fuels to run its economy.
But if too many do so, then the collective good will not be provided for anyone.
For instance, if too many countries burn too much fossil fuel, then the whole world will suffer the effects of global warming.
Within domestic societies, governments solve collective goods problems by forcing the members of society to contribute to common goals, such as by paying taxes.
Three core principles—dominance, reciprocity, and identity—offer different solutions to the collective goods problem.
IDENTITY Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life 9 An IR Example Now consider the problem of nuclear proliferation.
All countries share an interest in the collective good of peace and stability, which is hard to achieve in a world where more and more countries make more and more nuclear weapons.
Within a society, if individuals acquire dangerous weapons, the government can take them away to keep everyone safe.
In 2006, North Korea tested its first nuclear bomb and Iran continues uranium enrichment that could lead to a nuclear bomb—defying UN resolutions in both cases.
One approach to nuclear proliferation legitimizes these weapons’ ownership by just the few most powerful countries.
The “big five” with the largest nuclear arsenals hold veto power on the UN Security Council.
Through agreements like the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Proliferation Security Initiative, the existing nuclear powers actively try to keep their exclusive hold on these weapons and prevent smaller nations from getting them.
In 2003, when the United States thought Iraq’s Saddam Hussein might have an active nuclear weapons program, as he had a decade earlier, it invaded Iraq and overthrew its government.
Similarly, in 1982, when Iraq had begun working toward a nuclear bomb, Israel sent jets to bomb Iraq’s nuclear facility, setting back the program by years.
One drawback to these dominance solutions is the resentment they create among the smaller countries.
Those countries point to an unenforced provision of the NPT stating that existing nuclear powers should get rid of their own bombs as other countries refrain from making new ones.
And they ask what gives Israel the right to bomb another country, or the United States the right to invade one.
It is the basis of the provision in the NPT about the existing nuclear powers’ obligation to disarm in exchange for smaller countries’ agreement to stay nonnuclear.
Reciprocity also underlies arms control agreements, used extensively in the Cold War to manage the buildup of nuclear bombs by the superpowers, and used currently to manage the mutual reduction of their arsenals.
The identity principle has proven equally effective against nuclear proliferation, if less newsworthy.
Many nations that have the technical ability to make nuclear weapons have chosen not to do so.
They have constructed their national identities in ways that shape their self-interests so as to make nuclear bombs undesirable.
Others, like Germany, belong to alliances in which they come under another nation’s nuclear “umbrella” and do not need their own bomb.
South Africa actually developed nuclear weapons in secret but then dismantled the program before apartheid ended, keeping the bomb out of the hands of the new majority-rule government.
Similarly, Japan’s experience of the catastrophic results of militarism, culminating in the destruction of two of its cities by nuclear bombs in 1945, continues generations later to shape Japan’s identity as a country that does not want nuclear weapons, even though it has the knowhow and even the stockpile of plutonium to make them.
Collective goods problems fascinate social scientists, and especially scholars of IR, precisely because they have no easy solutions.
In later chapters, we will see how these three core principles shape the responses of the international community to various collective goods problems across the whole range of IR issues.
There is a close connection between scholars in colleges, universities, and think tanks and the policy-making community working in the government—especially in the United States.
Some professors serve in the government (for instance, Professor Condoleezza Rice became national security advisor in 2001 and secretary of state in 2005 under President George W Bush), and sometimes professors publicize their ideas about foreign policy through newspaper columns or TV interviews.
Influencing their government’s foreign policy gives these scholars a laboratory in which to test their ideas in practice.
Diplomats, bureaucrats, and politicians can benefit from the knowledge produced by IR scholars.
Theoretical debates in the field of IR are fundamental, but unresolved.
It will be up to the next generation of IR scholars—today’s college students—to achieve a better understanding of how world politics works.
The goal of this book is to lay out the current state of knowledge without exaggerating the successes of the discipline.
As a part of political science, IR is about international politics —the decisions of governments about foreign actors, especially other governments.
To some extent, however, ^ Walt, Stephen M The Relationship between Theory and Policy in International Relations.
POLICY PERSPECTIVES Overview International policy makers confront a variety of problems every day.
The first, ""Background,"" provides information about a political problem faced by the leader.
This background information is factual and reflects real situations faced by these decision makers.
The second section, ""Domestic Considerations,"" reflects on the implications of the situation for domestic politics within the leader's government and society.
The third section, ""Scenario,"" suggests a new problem or crisis confronting the leader.
Although these crises are hypothetical, all are within the realm of possibility and would require difficult decisions by the leaders and their countries.
The fourth section, ""Choose Your Policy,"" asks you to make a choice responding to the Scenario.
As you consider each problem faced by the decision maker, try to reflect on the process and logic by which you have reached the decision.
At times, it is difficult to choose between two good options; at other times, one has to decide which is the least bad option.
Political relations among nations cover a range of activities—diplomacy, war, trade relations, alliances, cultural exchanges, participation in international organizations, and so forth.
Examples of issue areas include global trade, the environment, and specific conflicts such as the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Within each issue area, and across the range of issues of concern in any international relationship, policy makers of one nation can behave in a cooperative manner or a conflictual manner—extending either friendly or hostile behavior toward the other nation.
IR scholars often look at international relations in terms of the mix of conflict and cooperation in relationships among nations.
The scope of the field of IR may also be defined by the subfields it encompasses.
Some scholars treat topics such as this book’s chapters (for example, international law or 11 12 Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations international development) as subfields, but here we will reserve the term for two macro level topics.
Traditionally, the study of IR has focused on questions of war and peace— the subfield of international security studies.
The movements of armies and of diplomats, the crafting of treaties and alliances, the development and deployment of military capabilities—these are the subjects that dominated the study of IR in the past, especially in the 1950s and 1960s, and they continue to hold a central position in the field.
The subfield of international political economy , a second main subfield of IR, concerns trade and financial relations among nations and focuses on how nations have cooperated politically to create and maintain institutions that regulate the flow of international economic and financial transactions.
Although these topics previously centered on relations among the world’s richer nations, the widening of globalization and multilateral economic institutions such as the World Trade Organization has pushed IPE scholars to focus on developing states as well.
In addition, they pay growing attention to relations between developed and developing nations (often labeled North-South relations), including such topics as economic dependency, debt, foreign aid, and technology transfer.
Also newly important are problems of international environmental management and of global telecommunications.
Theoretical knowledge accumulates by a repeated cycle of generalizing and then testing.
For a given puzzle, various theories can explain the result as a case of a more general principle.
Each theory also logically predicts other outcomes, and these can be tested empirically.
A laboratory science, controlling all but one variable, can test theoretical predictions efficiently.
IR does not have this luxury, because many variables operate simultaneously.
Thus, it is especially important to think critically about IR events and consider several different theoretical explanations before deciding which (if any) provides the best explanation.
Actors and Influences I Watch the Video 'Conflict Diamonds and the Kimberley Process"" at MyPoliSciLab The principal actors in IR are the world’s governments.
Scholars of IR traditionally study the decisions and acts of those governments in relation to other governments.
The international stage is crowded with actors large and small that are intimately interwoven with the decisions of governments.
Actors and Influences 13 State Actors A state is a territorial entity controlled by a government and inhabited by a population.
The locations of the world’s states and territories are shown in the reference map at the front of this book, after the Careers section.
A state government answers to no higher authority; it exercises sovereignty over its territory—to make and enforce laws, to collect taxes, and so forth.
The population inhabiting a state forms a civil society to the extent that it has developed institutions to participate in political or social life.
The state’s government is a democracy to the extent that the government is controlled by the members of the population.
With few exceptions, each state has a capital city—the seat of government from which it administers its territory— and often a single individual who acts in the name of the state.
In some countries, such as the United States, the same person is head of state and government.
In other countries, the positions of the president or royalty, or even the prime minister, are symbolic.
In any case, the most powerful political figure is the one we mean by “state leader,” and these figures are the key individual actors in IR, regardless of whether these leaders are democratically elected or dictators.
The state actor includes the individual leader as well as bureaucratic organizations such as foreign ministries that act in the name of the state.
The international system is the set of relationships among the world’s states, structured according to certain rules and patterns of interaction.
They include who is considered a member of the system, what rights and responsibilities the members have, and what kinds of actions and responses normally occur between states.
Before then, people were organized into more mixed and overlapping political units such as city-states, empires, and feudal fiefs.
But since World War II, the decolonization process in much of Asia and Africa has added many new states, some not at all nation-states.
A major source of conflict and war at present is the frequent mismatch between perceived nations and actual state borders.
Here, leaders of Britain, the United States, and Germany watch a British-German soccer game (overtime shootout) together during a G8 summit at Camp David, 2012.
This substate nationalism is only one of several trends that undermine the present system of states.
Others include the globalization of economic processes, the power of telecommunications, and the proliferation of ballistic missiles.
The independence of former colonies and, more recently, the breakup into smaller states of large multinational states have increased the number of states in the world.
The exact total depends on the status of a number of quasi-state political entities, and it keeps changing as political units split apart or merge.
The population of the world’s states varies dramatically, from China and India with more than 1 billion people each, to microstates such as San Marino with 32,000.
With the creation of many small states in recent decades, the majority of states have fewer than 10 million people each, and more than half of the rest have 10 to 50 million each.
But the 17 states with populations of more than 80 million people together contain about two-thirds of the world’s population.
The world economy is dominated by a few states, just as world population is.
Each is an important actor in world affairs, especially the nine in the center that are largest in both population and economy.
A few of these large states possess especially great military and economic strength and influence, and are called great powers.
The most powerful of great powers, those with truly global influence, have been called superpowers.
This term generally meant the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, and now refers to the United States alone.
Some other political entities are often referred to as states or countries although they are not formally recognized as states.
It operates independently in practice but is claimed by China (a claim recognized formally by outside powers) and is not a UN member.
Formal colonies and possessions still exist; their status may change in the future.
Hong Kong reverted from British to Chinese rule in 1997 and retains a somewhat separate identity under China’s “one country, two systems” formula.
Other would-be states such as Kurdistan , Abkhazia , and Somaliland may fully control the territory they claim but are not internationally recognized.
Such data are difficult to compare across nations with different currencies, economic systems, and levels of development.
In particular, comparisons of GDP in capitalist and socialist economies, or in rich and poor countries, should be treated cautiously.
Left and center columns listed in population order, right column in GDP order.
These actors are also called transnational actors when they operate across international borders.
First, states often take actions through, within, or in the context of intergovernmental organizations —organizations whose members are national governments.
IGOs fulfill a variety of functions and vary in size from just a few states to virtually the whole UN membership.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , the World Trade Organization , military alliances such as NATO, and political groupings such as the African Union are all IGOs.
Another type of transnational actor, nongovernmental organizations , are private organizations, some of considerable size and resources.
Increasingly NGOs are being recognized, in the UN and other forums, as legitimate actors along with states, though not equal to them.
Some of these groups have a political purpose, some a humanitarian one, some an economic or technical one.
Sometimes NGOs combine efforts through transnational advocacy networks.
The interests of a large company doing business globally do not correspond with any one state’s interests.
MNCs often control greater resources, and operate internationally with greater efficiency, than many small states.
They may prop up friendly foreign governments, as the United Fruit Company did in the “banana republics” of Central America a century ago.
But MNCs also provide poor states with much-needed foreign investment and tax revenues.
MNCs in turn depend on states to provide protection, well-regulated markets, and a stable political environment.
MNCs as international actors receive special attention in Chapters 9 and 13.
For example, the terrorist attacks since September 11, 2001, have demonstrated the increasing power that technology gives terrorists as nonstate actors.
Just as Greenpeace can travel to a remote location and then beam video of its environmental actions there to the world, so too can al Qaeda place suicide bombers in world cities, coordinate their operations and finances through the Internet and the l mbassador t Conscience yard Nonstate actors participate in IR alongside states, although generally in less central roles.
Here the singer and activist Bono helps present an Amnesty International award to Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi, 2012.
Examples IGOs* Intergovernmental Organizations Members are national governments United Nations, NATO, Arab League NGOs* Nongovernmental Organizations Members are individuals and groups Amnesty International, Lions Clubs, Red Cross MNCs Multinational Corporations Companies that span borders ExxonMobil, Toyota, Wal-Mart Others Individuals, Cities, Constituencies, etc.
Actors and Influences 17 global banking system, and reach a global audience with videotaped appeals, “Global reach,” once an exclusive capability of great powers, now is available to many others, for better or worse.
For instance, the state of Ohio is entirely a United States entity but operates an International Trade Division to promote exports and foreign investment, with offices in Belgium, Japan, China, Canada, Israel, India, Australia, and Mexico.
The actions of substate economic actors— companies, consumers, workers, investors—help create the context of economic activity against which international political events play out, and within which governments must operate.
In this world of globalization, of substate actors and transnational actors, states are still important.
But to some extent they are being gradually pushed aside as companies, groups, and individuals deal ever more directly with each other across borders, and as the world economy becomes globally integrated.
Now more than ever, IR extends beyond the interactions of national governments.
Both state and nonstate actors are strongly affected by the revolution in information technologies now under way.
The new information-intensive world promises to reshape international relations profoundly.
Technological change dramatically affects actors’ relative capabilities and even preferences.
Telecommunications and computerization allow economics, politics, and culture alike to operate on a global scale as never before.
The ramifications of information technology for various facets of IR will be developed in each chapter of this book.
Levels of Analysis The many actors involved in IR contribute to the complexity of competing explanations and theories.
A level of analysis is a perspective on IR based on a set of similar actors or processes that suggests possible explanations to “why” questions.
The individual level of analysis concerns the perceptions, choices, and actions of individual human beings.
Great leaders influence the course of history, as do individual citizens, thinkers, soldiers, and voters.
The study of foreign policy decision making, discussed in Chapter 3, pays special attention to individual-level explanations of IR outcomes because of the importance of psychological factors in the decision-making process.
The domestic level of analysis concerns the aggregations of individuals within states that influence state actions in the international arena.
Such aggregations include interest groups, political organizations, and government agencies.
These groups operate differently in different kinds of societies and states.
For instance, democracies and dictatorships may act differently from one another, and democracies may act differently in an election year 12 Singer, J David.
Levels of Analysis Many influences affect the course of international relations.
Levels of analysis provide a framework for categorizing these influences and thus for suggesting various explanations of international events.
Decision making in crises Assassinations, accidents of history from the way they act at other times.
The politics of ethnic conflict and nationalism, bubbling up from within states, plays an increasingly important role in the relations among states.
Within governments, foreign policy agencies often fight bureaucratic battles over policy decisions.
The interstate level of analysis concerns the influence of the international system upon outcomes.
This level of analysis therefore focuses on the interactions of states themselves, without regard to their internal makeup or the particular individuals who lead them.
This level pays attention to states’ relative power positions in the international system and the interactions among them.
It has been traditionally the most important of the levels of analysis.
Levels of analysis offer different sorts of explanations for international eventsFor example, many possible explanations exist for the 2003 U.S.-led war against Iraq.
At the individual level, the war could be attributed to Saddam Hussein’s gamble that he could defeat the forces arrayed against him, or to President Bush’s desire to remove a leader he personally deemed threatening.
At the domestic level, the war could be attributed to the rise of the powerful neoconservative faction that convinced the Bush administration and Americans that Saddam was a threat to United States security in a post-September 11 world.
At the interstate level, the war might be attributed to the predominance of United States power.
With no state willing to back Iraq militarily, the United States (as the largest global military power) was free to attack Iraq without fear of a large-scale military response.
Finally, at the global level, the war might be attributable to a global fear of terrorism, or even a clash between Islam and the West.
Although IR scholars often focus their study mainly on one level of analysis, other levels bear on a problem simultaneously.
Rather, levels of analysis help suggest multiple explanations and approaches to consider in explaining an event.
They remind scholars and students to look beyond the immediate and superficial aspects of an event to explore the possible influences of more distant causes.
Note that the processes at higher levels tend to operate more slowly than those on the lower levels.
Individuals go in and out of office often; the structure of the international system changes rarely.
Globalization Globalization encompasses many trends, including expanded international trade, telecommunications, monetary coordination, multinational corporations, technical and scientific cooperation, cultural exchanges of new types and scales, migration and refugee flows, and relations between the world’s rich and poor countries.
Although globalization clearly is very important, it is also rather vaguely defined and not well explained by any one theory.
One view sees globalization as the fruition of liberal economic principles.
This economic process has made traditional states 14 Held, David, Anthony McGrew, David Goldblatt, and Jonathan Perraton.
States are thus losing authority to supranational institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the European Union , and to transnational actors such as MNCs and NGOs.
The values of technocrats and elite, educated citizens in liberal democracies are becoming global values, reflecting an emerging global civilization.
The old North-South division is seen as less important, because the global South is moving in divergent directions depending on countries’ and regions’ integration with world markets.
The skeptics also doubt that regional and geographic distinctions such as the North-South divide are disappearing in favor of a single global market.
Also, the economic integration of states may be leading not to a single world free trade zone, but to distinct and rival regional blocs in America, Europe, and Asia.
The supposed emerging world civilization is disproved by the fragmenting of larger units into smaller ones along lines of language, religion, and other such cultural factors.
State power is not so much strengthened or weakened by globalization, but transformed to operate in new contexts with new tools.
While scholars debate these conceptions of globalization, popular debates focus on the growing power of large corporations operating globally, the disruptive costs associated with joining world markets , the perception of growing disparities between the rich and the poor, and the collusion of national governments in these wrongs through their participation in IOs such as the THINK GLOBALLY As the world economy becomes more integrated, markets and production are becoming global in scope.
The key 2001 WTO meeting to launch a new trade round was held in Qatar, where protesters had little access.
At the 2003 WTO meeting in Cancun, Mexico, thousands of protesters marched against the talks and the economic elites conducting them, but were kept away from the WTO conference center.
At the 2005 Hong Kong WTO meeting, protesters blocked nearby roads and some even tried to swim across Hong Kong harbor to disrupt the meeting.
Just as scholars disagree on conceptions of globalization, so do protesters disagree on their goals and tactics.
Union members from the global North want to stop globalization from shipping their jobs south.
Window-smashing anarchists meanwhile steal media attention from environmentalists seeking to amend the trade agenda.
Globalization is changing both international security and IPE, as we will see in the coming chapters, but it is changing IPE more quickly and profoundly than security.
The coming chapters address a broad range of topics, each affected by globalization.
Chapter 4 shows how nonstate actors influence foreign policies of states.
Chapter 7 discusses global institutions, international law, and human rights, all of growing importance as globalization continues.
Chapters 8 and 9 look at economic globalization in trade, finance, and business, where globalization’s influences are most apparent.
Chapter 10 considers the information technology side of globalization, as the world becomes wired in new ways.
Chapter 11 discusses the global environment and examines how increasing interaction through globalization influences our physical environment.
Chapters 12 and 13 cover the global North-South divide, which is central to the concept of globalization.
The rest of this chapter takes up two contextual aspects of globalization that shape the issue areas discussed in subsequent chapters— the relations among the world’s major regions, especially the rich North and poor South; and the evolution of the international system over the past century.
Global Geography To highlight the insights afforded by a global level of analysis, this book divides the world into nine regions.
These world regions differ from each other in the number of states they contain and in each region’s particular mix of cultures, geographical realities, and languages.
But each represents a geographical corner of the world, and together they reflect the overall larger divisions of the world.
The global North-South gap between the relatively rich industrialized countries of the North and the relatively poor countries of the South is the most important | Watch the Video ""Global Food Prices and Changing Diets' at MyPoliSciLab 17 Broad, Robin.
Nine Regions of the World Russia /CIS Europe North merica China The North The South South Asia Latin merica 2000 Kilometers Japan / Pacific Global Geography 23 geographical element at the global level of analysis.
The regions used in this book have been drawn so as to separate the rich countries from the poor ones.
The North includes both the West (the rich countries of North America, Europe, and Japan) and the old East, including the former Soviet Union and the Commonwealth of Independent States , a loose confederation of former Soviet republics excluding the Baltic states.
The South includes Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and much of Asia.
The South is often called the third world (third after the West and East)—a term that is still widely used despite the second world’s collapse.
Countries in the South are also referred to as “developing” countries or “less-developed” countries , in contrast to the “developed” countries of the North.
Several criteria beyond income levels help distinguish major geographically contiguous regions.
Countries with similar economic levels, cultures, and languages have been kept together where possible.
States with a history of interaction, including historical empires or trading zones, are also placed together in a region.
Finally, countries that might possibly unify in the future—notably South Korea with North Korea, and China with Taiwan—are kept in the same region.
Of course, no scheme works perfectly, and some states, such as Turkey, are pulled toward two regions.
Most of these regions correspond with commonly used geographical names, but a few notes may help.
Southeast Asia refers to countries from Burma through Indonesia and the Philippines.
Russia is considered a European state although a large section is in Asia.
The Pacific Rim usually means East and Southeast Asia, Siberia, and the Pacific coast of North America and Latin America.
Narrow definitions of the Middle East exclude both North Africa and Turkey.
The Balkans are the states of southeastern Europe, bounded by Slovenia, Romania, and Greece.
As the table indicates, income levels per capita are, overall, more than five times as high in the North as in the South.
The North contains only 20 percent of the world’s people but 55 percent of its goods and services.
The other 80 percent of the world’s people, in the South, have only 45 percent of the goods and services.
Within the global North, Russia and the CIS states lag behind in income levels, having suffered declines in the 1990s.
In the global South, the Middle East, Latin America, and China have achieved somewhat higher income levels than have Africa and South Asia, which remain extremely poor.
Even in the somewhat higher-income regions, income is distributed quite unevenly and many people remain very poor.
Note that more than half of the world’s population lives in the densely populated regions of South Asia and China.
From Korea, for example, China and Russia are to the west, and Japan and the United States are to the east.
On world-level geography, see Kidron, Michael, Ronald Segal, and Angela Wilson.
Estimates for Russia, CIS, China, and other nonmarket ortransitional economies are particularly suspect and should be used cautiously.
Here we will review briefly the key events of the 20th century and focus in particular on the post-Cold War era since 1990.
But they shaped the character of the century. u Nothing like those wars has happened since, and they remain a key reference point for the world in which we live today.
With perhaps just two other cases in history—the Thirty Years’ War and the Napoleonic Wars—the two world wars were global or hegemonic wars in which almost all major states participated in an all-out struggle over the future of the interna'l 1 tional system/ For many people, World War I symbolizes the tragic irrationality of war.
It fascinates scholars of IR because it was a catastrophic war that seems unnecessary and perhaps even 20 Ferguson, Niall.
The Two World Wars, 1900-1950 Europe mobilization plans developed Balkan crises World War 1 Sarajevo United States enters war — Italy invades Ethiopia Munich Agreement — World War II United States enters war D-Day Germany naval arms race with Britain ^> cc CD H— CD Q Weimar Republic hyperinflation Hitler invasion wins r D , . of Poland power occupation rearmaofAustriai o ment Czech.
United States Defense Department N5 28 Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations accidental.
After a century of relative peace, the great powers marched off to battle for no good reason.
There was even a popular feeling that Europe would be uplifted and reinvigorated by a war—that young men could once again prove their manhood on the battlefield in a glorious adventure.
Such ideas were soon crushed by the immense pain and evident pointlessness of the war.
The previous major war had been the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871, when Germany executed a swift offensive using railroads to rush forces to the front.
All the great powers made plans for a quick railroad-borne offensive and rapid victory—what has been called the cult of the offensive.
Under these doctrines, one country’s mobilization for war virtually forced its enemies to mobilize as well.
Thus, when a Serbian nationalist assassinated Archduke Ferdinand of Austria in 1914 in Sarajevo, a minor crisis 'l 'l escalated and the mobilization plans pushed Europe to all-out war/ Contrary to expectations, the war was neither short nor decisive, and certainly not glorious.
For example, in 1917 at the Battle of Passchendaele , the British in three months fired five tons of artillery shells per yard of front line, over an 11-mile-wide front, and then lost 400,000 men in a failed ground attack.
The horrific conditions were worsened by chemical weapons and by the attempts of Britain and Germany to starve each other’s population into surrender.
But the entry of the United States into the war on the anti-German side that year quickly turned the tide.
In the Treaty of Versailles of 1919, Germany was forced to give up territory, pay reparations, limit its future armaments, and admit guilt for the war.
German resentment against the harsh terms of Versailles would contribute to Adolf Hitler’s rise to power in the 1930s.
After World War I, United States president Woodrow Wilson led the effort to create the League of Nations, a forerunner of today’s United Nations.
But the United States Senate would not approve United States participation, and the League did not prove effective.
United States isolationism between the world wars, along with declining British power and a Russia crippled by its own revolution, left a power vacuum in world politics.
Japan had already occupied Taiwan and Korea after defeating China in 1895 and Russia in 1905.
In 1931, Japan occupied Manchuria (northeast China) and set up a puppet regime there.
In 1937, Japan invaded the rest of China and began a brutal occupation that continues to haunt Chinese-Japanese relations.
Meanwhile, in Europe in the 1930s, Nazi Germany under Hitler had re-armed, intervened to help fascists win the Spanish Civil War, and grabbed territory from its neighbors under the rationale of reuniting ethnic Germans in those territories with their homeland.
Hitler was emboldened by the weak response of the international community and the League of Nations to aggression by fascist regimes in Italy and Spain.
Appeasement has since had a negative connotation in IR, because the Munich Agreement seemed only to encourage Hitler’s further conquests.
In 1939, Germany invaded Poland, leading Britain and France to join the war against Germany.
Hitler signed a nonaggression pact with his archenemy, Joseph Stalin of the 22 Van Evera, Stephen.
The Evolving International System 29 Soviet Union, and threw his full army against France, occupying most of it quickly.
Hitler then double-crossed Stalin and invaded the Soviet Union in 1941.
This offensive ultimately bogged down and was turned back after several years.
This trauma continues to be a powerful memory that shapes views of IR in Russia and Eastern Europe.
The United States economy produced critically important weapons and supplies for allied armies.
The United States played an important role with Britain in the strategic bombing of German cities—including the firebombing of Dresden in February 1945, which caused 100,000 civilian deaths.
In 1944, after crossing the English Channel on June 6 , British-American forces pushed into Germany from the west while the Soviets pushed from the east.
At its peak, Nazi Germany and its allies had occupied virtually all of Europe, except Britain and part of Russia.
While the war in Europe was raging, Japan fought a war over control of Southeast Asia with the United States and its allies.
The United States, however, built vast new military forces and retook a series of Pacific islands in subsequent years.
The strategic bombing of Japanese cities by the United States culminated in the only historical use of nuclear weapons in war—the destruction of the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945—which triggered Japan’s quick surrender.
From the failure of the Munich Agreement in 1938 to appease Hitler, many people have concluded that only a hardline foreign policy with preparedness for war will deter aggression and prevent war.
Yet in 1914 it was just such hardline policies that apparently led Europe into a disastrous war, which might have been avoided by more conciliatory policies.
Each had its ideological mission (capitalist democracy versus communism), its networks of alliances and clients, and its deadly arsenal of nuclear weapons.
Europe was divided, with massive military forces of the United States and its North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies on one side and massive military forces of the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies on the other.
Germany itself was split, with three-quarters of the country—and three-quarters of the capital city of Berlin—occupied by the United States, Britain, and France.
The remainder, surrounding West Berlin, was occupied by the Soviet Union.
Crises in Berlin in 1947-1948 and 1961 led to armed confrontations but not war.
In 1961, East Germany built the Berlin Wall separating East from West Berlin.
The Evolving International System 31 Despite the hostility of East-West relations during the Cold War, a relatively stable framework of relations emerged, and conflicts never escalated to all-out war between the largest states.
At a U.S.-Soviet-British meeting at Yalta in 1945, when the defeat of Germany was imminent, the Western powers acknowledged the fact of the Soviet army’s presence in Eastern Europe, allowing that area to remain under Soviet influence.
The United Nations (unlike the ill-fated League of Nations) managed to maintain almost universal membership and adherence to basic structures and rules throughout the Cold War era.
The central concern of the West during the Cold War was that the Soviet Union might gain control of Western Europe—either through outright invasion or through communists’ taking power in war-weary and impoverished countries of Western Europe.
This could have put the entire industrial base of the Eurasian landmass (from Europe to Siberia) under one state.
The Marshall Plan — United States financial aid to rebuild European economies—responded to these fears, as did the creation of the NATO alliance.
Half of the entire world’s military spending was devoted to the European standoff.
Through the policy of containment, adopted in the late 1940s, the United States sought to halt the expansion of Soviet influence globally on several levels at once— military, political, ideological, economic.
The United States maintained an extensive network of military bases and alliances worldwide.
Virtually all of United States foreign policy in subsequent decades, from foreign aid and technology transfer to military intervention and diplomacy, came to serve the goal of containment.
But China became fiercely independent in the 1960s following the Sino-Soviet split, when China opposed Soviet moves toward peaceful coexistence with the United States.
In the late 1960s, young radicals, opposed to both superpowers, ran China during the chaotic and destructive Cultural Revolution.
But feeling threatened by Soviet power, China’s leaders developed a growing affiliation with the United States during the 1970s, starting with a dramatic visit to China by United States president Richard Nixon in 1972.
During the Cold War, China generally tried to play a balancer role against whichever superpower seemed most threatening at the time.
In 1950, the Korean War broke out when communist North Korea attacked and overran most of U.S.-allied South Korea.
The United States and its allies (under UN authority obtained after the Soviets walked out of the Security Council in protest) counterattacked and overran most of North Korea.
China sent masses of “volunteers” to help North Korea, and the war bogged down near the original border until a 1953 truce ended the fighting.
The Korean War hardened United States attitudes toward communism and set a negative tone for future East-West relations, especially for U.S.-Chinese relations in the 1950s.
The first summit meeting between superpower leaders took place in Geneva in 1955.
This thaw in relations led both sides to agree to reconstitute Austria, which had been split into four pieces like Germany.
But the Soviet Union sent tanks to crush a popular uprising in Hungary in 1956 , and the Soviet missile program that orbited Sputnik in 1957 alarmed the United States.
The shooting down of a United States spy plane over the Soviet Union in 1960 scuttled a summit meeting between superpower 24 Zhang, Shu.
America’s Embargo Against China and the Sino-Soviet Alliance, 1949-1963.
Meanwhile in Cuba, after Fidel Castro’s communist revolution in 1959, the United States attempted a counterrevolution in the botched 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion.
The Soviet aims were to reduce the Soviet Union’s strategic nuclear inferiority, to counter the deployment of United States missiles on Soviet borders in Turkey, and to deter another United States invasion of Cuba.
United States leaders, however, considered the missiles threatening and provocative.
As historical documents revealed years later, nuclear war was quite possible.
Some United States policy makers favored military strikes before the missiles became operational, when in fact some nuclear weapons in Cuba were already operational and commanders were authorized to use them in the event of a United States attack/ 3 Instead, President John F Kennedy imposed a naval blockade to force their removal.
The Soviet Union backed down on the missiles, and the United States promised not to invade Cuba in the future.
Leaders on both sides were shaken, however, by the possibility of nuclear war.
They signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963, prohibiting atmospheric nuclear tests, and began to cooperate in cultural exchanges, space exploration, aviation, and other areas.
The two superpowers often jockeyed for position in the global South, supporting proxy wars in which they typically supplied and advised opposing factions in civil wars.
For instance, the United States backed the Ethiopian government and the Soviets backed next-door rival Somalia in the 1970s; however, when an Ethiopian revolution caused the new government to seek Soviet help, the United States switched its support to Somalia instead.
One flaw of United States policy in the Cold War period was to see all regional conflicts through East-West lenses.
Its preoccupation with communism led the United States to support unpopular pro-Western governments in a number of poor countries, nowhere more disastrously than during the Vietnam War in the 1960s.
The war in Vietnam divided United States citizens and ultimately failed to prevent a communist takeover.
The fall of South Vietnam in 1975 appeared to signal United States weakness, especially combined with United States setbacks in the Middle East—the 1973 Arab oil embargo against the United States and the 1979 overthrow of the U.S.-backed shah of Iran by Islamic fundamentalists.
In this period of apparent United States weakness, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979.
But, like the United States in Vietnam, the Soviet Union could not suppress rebel During the Cold War, the United States and Soviet sides sought spheres of influence.
Europe was divided, and Germany itself was split, with its capital, Berlin, also divided.
In 1961 the communist side built the Berlin Wall, seen here in 1962, to keep its population from leaving.
The Evolving International System 33 armies supplied by the opposing superpower.
The Soviets ultimately withdrew after almost a decade of war that considerably weakened the Soviet Union.
Meanwhile, President Ronald Reagan built up United States military forces to record levels and supported rebel armies in the Soviet-allied states of Nicaragua and Angola as well as Afghanistan.
Superpower relations slowly improved after Mikhail Gorbachev, a reformer, took power in the Soviet Union in 1985.
But some of the battlegrounds of the global South continued to suffer from brutal civil wars into the new century.
In retrospect, it seems that both superpowers exaggerated Soviet strength.
In the early years of the nuclear arms race, United States military superiority was absolute, especially in nuclear weapons.
The Soviets managed to match the United States over time, from A-bombs to H-bombs to multiple-warhead missiles.
By the 1970s the Soviets had achieved strategic parity, meaning that neither side could prevent its own destruction in a nuclear war.
But behind this military parity lay a Soviet Union lagging far behind the West in everything else—wealth, technology, infrastructure, and citizen/worker motivation.
In June 1989, massive pro-democracy demonstrations in China’s capital of Beijing were put down violently by the communist government.
Later that year, as the Soviet Union stood by, one Eastern European country after another replaced its communist government under pressure of mass demonstrations.
The toppling of the Berlin Wall in late 1989 symbolized the end of the Cold War division of Europe.
China remained a communist, authoritarian government but liberalized its economy and avoided military conflicts.
In contrast to the Cold War era, China developed close ties with both the United States and Russia and joined the world’s liberal trading regime.
Scholars do not agree on the important question of why the Cold War ended/ 0 One view is that United States military strength under President Reagan forced the Soviet Union into bankruptcy as it tried to keep up in the arms race.
A different position is that the Soviet Union suffered from internal stagnation over decades and ultimately imploded because of weaknesses that had little to do with external pressure.
Indeed, some scholars think the Soviet Union might have fallen apart earlier without the United States as a foreign enemy to bolster the Soviet government’s legitimacy with its own people.
The Post-Cold War Era, 1990-2013 The post-Cold War era began with a bang while the Soviet Union was still disintegrating.
In 1990, perhaps believing that the end of the Cold War had left a power vacuum in its region, Iraq occupied its neighbor Kuwait in an aggressive grab for control of Middle East oil.
Western powers were alarmed—both about the example that unpunished aggression could set in a new era and about the direct threat to energy supplies for the world economy.
The United States mobilized a coalition of the world’s major countries (with almost no opposition) to counter Iraq.
Working through the UN, the U.S.-led coalition applied escalating sanctions against Iraq.
When Iraq did not withdraw from Kuwait by the UN’s deadline, the United States and its allies easily smashed Iraq’s military and evicted its army from Kuwait in the Gulf War.
The costs of the Gulf War were shared among the participants in the coalition, with Britain and France making 26 Herrmann, Richard K., and R Ned Lebow.
The pass-the-hat financing for this war was an innovation, one that worked fairly well.
The final collapse of the Soviet Union followed only months after the Gulf War/ The 15 republics of the Soviet Union—of which Russia was just one—had begun taking power from a weakened central government, declaring themselves sovereign states.
This process raised complex problems ranging from issues of national self-determination to the reallocation of property.
Russia and the other former republics struggled throughout the 1990s against economic and financial collapse, inflation, corruption, war, and military weakness, although they remained political democracies.
A failed Russian military coup attempt in 1991—and the prominent role of Russian president Boris Yeltsin in opposing it—accelerated the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Soon both capitalism and democracy were adopted as the basis of the economies and political systems of the former Soviet states.
Of the former Soviet republics, only the three small Baltic states and Georgia are nonmembers.
Western relations with Russia and the other republics have been mixed since the 1990s.
Because of their own economic problems, and because of a sense that Russia needed internal reform more than external aid, Western countries provided only limited aid for the region’s harsh economic transition, which had drastically reduced living standards.
Russia’s brutal suppression of its secessionist province of Chechnya in 1995 and 1999 provoked Western fears of an expansionist, aggressive Russian nationalism.
Russian leaders feared NATO expansion into Eastern Europe that placed threatening Western military forces on Russia’s borders.
Meanwhile, Japan and Russia could not resolve a lingering, mostly symbolic, territorial dispute/ u Despite these problems, the world’s great powers overall increased their cooperation after the Cold War.
Russia was accepted as the successor state to the Soviet Union and took its seat on the Security Council.
Russia and the United States agreed to major reductions in their nuclear weapons, and carried them out in the 1990s.
Just after the Gulf War in 1991, the former Yugoslavia broke apart, with several of its republics declaring independence.
With help from Serbia, which controlled the Yugoslav army, they killed hundreds of thousands of non-Serb Bosnians and Croatians and expelled millions more, to create an ethnically pure state.
The international community recognized the independence of Croatia and Bosnia, admitting them to the UN and passing dozens of Security Council resolutions to protect their territorial integrity and their civilian populations.
But in contrast to the Gulf War, the great powers showed no willingness to bear major costs to protect Bosnia.
Instead they o 1 tried to contain the conflict by assuming a neutral role as peacekeeper and intermediary.
In 1995, Serbian forces overran two UN-designated “safe areas” in eastern Bosnia, expelling the women and slaughtering thousands of the men.
Finally, two weeks of NATO airstrikes , along with losses to Croatia on the ground, induced Serbian forces to come to terms.
The treaty to end the war (authored by United States negotiators) formally held Bosnia together but granted Serbian forces autonomy on half of their territory, while placing about 60,000 heavily armed troops on the ground to maintain a cease-fire.
Meanwhile, Serbian strongman Slobodan 27 Freedman, Lawrence, and Efraim Karsh.
The Evolving International System 35 Milosevic was indicted for war crimes by the UN tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, was delivered to the tribunal in 2001, and died in 2006 near the end of a lengthy trial.
In contrast to their indecision early in the Bosnia crisis, the Western powers acted decisively in 1999 when Serbian forces carried out “ethnic cleansing” in the Serbian province of Kosovo, predominantly populated by ethnic Albanians.
NATO came under criticism from Russia and China for acting without explicit UN authorization and for interfering in Serbia’s internal affairs.
In the end, Serbian forces withdrew from Kosovo and NATO has controlled the province ever since/ z In 2008, with the UN Security Council still deadlocked over its status, Kosovo declared independence, bringing protests from Serbia and its allies.
In 2010, the World Court declared Kosovo’s declaration of independence legal, although its substantive status remains in dispute.
Other Western military intervention decisions since 1990 were less effective.
In Somalia, a U.S.-led coalition sent tens of thousands of troops to suppress factional fighting and deliver relief supplies to a large population that was starving.
However, when those forces were drawn into the fighting and sustained casualties, the United States abruptly pulled out A In Rwanda in 1994, the genocide of more than half a million civilians in a matter of weeks was virtually ignored by the international community.
The great powers, burned by failures in Somalia and Bosnia, decided that their vital interests were not at stake.
In 1997, the Rwanda conflict spilled into neighboring Zaire , where rebels overthrew a corrupt dictator.
Neighboring countries were drawn into the fighting, but the international community steered clear even as millions of civilians died of hunger and disease.
The United States military intervened in Haiti to restore the elected president, but Haiti remains mired in poverty.
New rifts opened in 2001 between the United States and both China and Europe— possibly signaling a realignment against United States predominance in world affairs—on issues ranging from global warming to the proposed International Criminal Court.
Russia and China signed a treaty of friendship in 2001, and European countries helped vote the United States off two important UN commissions.
These divisive issues receded when the United States was attacked by terrorists on September 11, 2001.
The attacks mobilized support for the United States by a very broad coalition of states.
President Bush declared a “war on terrorism” that lasted for years and spanned continents, employing both conventional and unconventional means.
The great power divisions reappeared, however, as the United States and Britain tried to assemble a coalition to oust Iraq’s Saddam Hussein by force in early 2003.
France and Germany bitterly opposed the war, as did millions of protesters around the world.
The dispute disrupted the Atlantic alliance for several years and weakened the UN’s role as the U.S.-led coalition went forward despite its failure to win Security Council authorization for war.
A United States military force of 250,000 troops with advanced technology overpowered the Iraqi army in three weeks.
Many Iraqis welcomed the end of a dictatorial regime, as had most Afghans in late 2001, but the war 32 Bacevich, Andrew J., and Eliot A Cohen.
Insurgent forces in Iraq gained strength as the United States occupation stretched on for years, and within several years United States public opinion had turned against the protracted war.
After a United States troop surge in 2007 and the arming of Sunni communities fed up with foreign Islamist radicals, violence in Iraq fell.
Estimates of Iraqi deaths caused by the war range from tens of thousands to more than 600,000.
Elections in 2010 were relatively peaceful, but left the country divided along ethnic lines.
In Afghanistan, fighting worsened beginning in 2007 as the Taliban ran an insurgency campaign from bases in Pakistan.
Disputed elections, corruption, and “insider” attacks by members of Afghan security forces on NATO troops all made the foreigners’ jobs difficult.
NATO sent in tens of thousands of additional troops in 2009, but then began a withdrawal set to conclude in 2014.
One goal of the Afghan intervention was accomplished in 2011, when United States special forces killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan.
United States drone attacks on other militants inside Pakistan and elsewhere weakened al Qaeda but raised thorny legal and political issues.
Meanwhile, nuclear weapons programs in North Korea and Iran raised alarms.
North Korea produced possibly a half-dozen nuclear bombs and tested three in 2006, 2009, and 2013.
In 2012, it successfully tested an advanced long-range missile in defiance of a UN Security Council ban.
Starting in 2004, Iran made and broke several agreements to suspend the enrichment of uranium that could be used to build nuclear weapons.
In response, the UN Security Council passed a series of sanctions against Iran, demanding that it stop its enrichment program.
In 2010, centrifuges key to its enrichment program began mysteriously destroying themselves, and investigation pinned the problem on the sophisticated Stuxnet computer virus, evidently a creation of Israeli and American defense scientists.
The Arab Spring uprisings in 2011-2012 began with nonviolent protests in Tunisia and Egypt, both resulting in the overthrow of dictators and the holding of free elections.
Egypt elected a leader of the long-banned Muslim Brotherhood as president.
In Libya and Syria, violent repression against protesters sparked violent uprisings, leading to the bloody overthrow of Libya’s dictator with NATO air support, and a prolonged and agonizing civil war in Syria with a divided international community unable to respond effectively.
Yemen had its own revolution—a mix of peaceful protest, violent repression, ethnic conflict, and political compromise leading to a transitional government.
And far away in Burma (Myanmar), a longstanding military regime finally made a concerted move toward democracy.
Old wars have ended faster than new ones have begun/ * * 3 Latin America and Russia/CIS have nearly extinguished wars in their regions, joining a zone of peace already encompassing North America, Europe, Japan/Pacific, and China.
Warfare is diminishing even in the arc of conflict from Africa through the Middle East to South Asia.
Since 1990, long, bloody wars have ended in South Africa, Mozambique, Angola, southern Sudan, and Ethiopia-Eritrea, as did the various conflicts in Central America and the civil war in Sri Lanka.
General David Patraeus and the American Military Adventure in Iraq, 2006-2008.
After the Cold War, world order did not spiral out of control with rampant aggression and war.
However, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which saw rising expectations of peace in the 1990s, worsened after a proposed deal fell through in 2000.
With the 2006 Palestinian election victory of the militant Islamist party Hamas, responsible for many violent attacks on Israel, hopes for a durable peace faded.
In 2006, Israel fought a brief but intense war with Hezbollah guerrillas in southern Lebanon, while violent clashes between Israel and Hamas continued from 2009 to 2012.
Israel deployed a new “Iron Dome” missile defense system against Hamas missiles in a 2012 clash.
In international economic relations, the post-Cold War era is one of globalization.
New hubs of economic growth are emerging, notably in parts of Asia with remarkable economic growth.
Globalization has created backlashes among people who are adversely affected or who believe their identities are threatened by foreign influences.
The resurgence of nationalism and ethnic-religious conflict—occasionally in brutal form—results partly from that backlash.
So does the significant protest movement against capitalist-led globalization.
With increasing globalization, transnational concerns such as environmental degradation and disease have become more prominent as well.
Global warming looms as an ever more present danger, underscored in 2005 by the toll of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans and the accelerating melting of arctic ice.
In 2008-2009, a virulent swine flu spread worldwide, triggering efforts to control the virus through quarantines and a new vaccine.
Major oil spills in the Gulf of Mexico and China in 2010 refocused international attention on the issue of pollution and the environment, especially in the context of the global race for natural resources.
China is becoming more central to world politics as the 21st century begins.
Its size and rapid growth make China a rising power—a situation that some scholars liken to Germany’s rise a century earlier.
Historically, such shifts in power relations have caused instability in the international system.
Its poor record on human rights makes it a frequent target of Western criticism from both governments and NGOs.
China holds veto power in the UN Security Council, and it has a credible nuclear arsenal.
China adjoins several regional conflict areas and affects the global proliferation of missiles and nuclear weapons.
It claims disputed territory in the resource-rich South China Sea and disputes ownership of islands with Japan in the East Peaceful trends mark the post-Cold War era, though war and terrorism continue.
The Arab Spring popular uprisings in 2011-2013 brought the world's latest wave of democracy to the Middle East.
They overthrew governments in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen; sparked civil war in Syria; and reshaped the region's international dynamics.
Here, supporters of newly elected Islamist president Mohammed Morsi celebrate in Tahrir Square—in the capital of Egypt, at the heart of the Arab world—in 2012.
Its population size and rapid industrialization from a low starting point make China a big factor in the future of global environmental trends such as global warming.
All these elements make China an important actor in the coming decades.
It remains to be seen whether, in the coming years, the international system can provide China with appropriate status and respect to reflect its rising power and historical importance, and whether China in turn can come to conform with international rules and norms.
So will the Chinese leadership’s decisions about whether to encourage or discourage the rising tide of nationalism among China’s young people as communist ideology loses its hold.
The transition into the post-Cold War era has been a turbulent time, full of changes and new possibilities both good and bad.
It is likely, however, that the basic rules and principles of IR—those that scholars have long struggled to understand—will continue to apply, though their contexts and outcomes may change.
Most central to those rules and principles is the concept of power, to which we now turn.
The process may be weakening, strengthening, or transforming the power of states.
Antiglobalization activists oppose growing corporate power but disagree on goals and tactics.
This bipolar standoff created stability and avoided great power wars, including nuclear war, but turned states in the global South into proxy battlegrounds.
Chapter Review 39 ■ The United States military campaign in Iraq overthrew a dictator, but divided the great powers, heightened anti-Americanism worldwide, and led to years of insurgency and sectarian violence.
In 2011, United States Special Forces killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan, where drone attacks targeted other militants.
Pick a current area in which interesting international events are taking place.
The idea of the state as a key organizing principle dates back hundreds of years.
Political philosophers such as Thomas Hobbes saw governments as providing individuals protection from the state of nature (where life without the state was ""nasty, brutish, and short"") and from other groups of individuals.
Yet, as Europeans spread throughout the world in efforts to colonize and settle new lands, they brought the idea of a nation-state with them.
In a relatively short period of time, the world was organized as a set of states interacting on the world stage.
States became the central actors providing services to individuals, while coming into conflict or cooperating with one another.
Yet in the era of globalization, the power of the state is being challenged.
With globalization has come the rise of technology, nonstate actors, fluid state borders, and intergovernmental organizations, all of which are eroding the state's ability to control what goes on within and across its borders.
State Power Is on the Decline Nonstate actors are now as important as the state.
Whether they are nongovernmental organizations or multinational corporations , nonstate actors play an increasingly important part in world politics.
NGOs pressure governments to change human rights practices, MNCs compel states to adapt laws to suit their businesses, and terrorist groups undermine state security.
These challenges to state power have grown in the past decade and will continue to grow as globalization allows citizens more access to one another.
Except for the economically largest states such as the United States and Japan, MNCs and private investors control more resources and capital than many nation-states.
Add to this list the powerful IGOs such as the World Bank, the World Trade Organization, and the International Monetary Fund, and states are but one category of player in the global economic game.
While nationalism was a powerful force supporting the state in the past, other ideas have emerged to challenge it.
Religion has replaced allegiance to the state for some, and strong ethnic ties also challenge loyalty to the state.
If more individuals' primary loyalty is to something besides their nation-state, state power will continue to decline.
ARGUMENT 2 States Are Down, but Not Out States have always been challenged, but they have always persevered.
Whether the threat was from nonstate actors , from NGOs , or from MNCs , the state has emerged as the central power in international relations.
States still perform functions that cannot be handed off to other actors.
Despite the rise of nonstate actors, certain functions will always fall to states, such as collecting taxes, making laws, and protecting citizens from external threats.
States will always need help to perform these duties, but no other entity can perform them outright.
Nationalism will remain a powerful ideological force for the foreseeable future.
Witness the number of separatist groups that still try to achieve their independence as a state.
Centuries ago, Europe was a series of citystates, then slightly larger kingdoms, then larger principalities, then nation-states, and now a larger union.
This approach, called realism, is favored by some IR scholars and vigorously contested by others, but almost all take it into account.
Realism is a school of thought that explains international relations in terms of power.
The exercise of power by states toward each other is sometimes called realpolitik, or just power politics.
Idealism emphasizes international law, morality, and international organizations, rather than power alone, as key influences on international events.
Idealists were particularly active between World War I and World War II, following the painful experience of World War I United States president Woodrow Wilson and other idealists placed their hopes for peace in the League of Nations as a formal structure for the community of nations.
Those hopes were dashed when that structure proved helpless to stop German, Italian, and Japanese aggression in the 1930s.
Since World War II, realists have blamed idealists for looking too much at how the world ought to be instead of how it really is.
Sobered by the experiences of World War II, realists set out to understand the principles of power politics without succumbing to wishful thinking.
Realism provided a theoretical foundation for the Cold War policy of containment and the determination of United States policy makers not to appease the Soviet Union and China as the West had appeased Hitler at Munich in 1938.
Sun Tzu argued that moral reasoning was not very useful to the state rulers of the day, faced with armed and dangerous neighbors.
He showed rulers how to use power to advance their interests and protect their survival/ At roughly the same time, in Greece, Thucydides wrote an account of the Peloponnesian War focusing on relative power among the Greek city-states.
Much later, in Renaissance Italy , Niccold Machiavelli urged princes to concentrate on expedient actions to stay in power, including the manipulation of the public and military alliances.
Today the adjective Machiavellian refers to excessively manipulative power maneuvers.
Realism Power ■ Defining Power ■ Estimating Power ■ Elements of Power The International System ■ Anarchy and Sovereignty ■ Balance of Power ■ Great Powers and Middle Powers ■ Power Distribution ■ Hegemony ■ The Great Power System, 1500-2000 Alliances ■ Purposes of Alliances ■ NATO ■ Other Alliances ■ Regional Alignments Strategy ■ Statecraft ■ Rationality ■ The Prisoner's Dilemma Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab Bardin, Terry, and David R Mapel, eds.
Hobbes favored a strong monarchy (which he labeled a Leviathan ) to tame this condition—essentially advocating a dominance approach to solve the collective goods problem in domestic societies.
Realists see in these historical figures evidence that the importance of power politics is timeless and cross-cultural.
He reasoned that no nation had “God on its side” and that all nations had to base their actions on prudence and practicality.
He opposed the Vietnam War, arguing in 1965 that a communist Vietnam would not harm United States national interests.
The target of the IR scholars’ ad was the group of foreign policy makers in the Bush administration known as neoconservatives, who advocated more energetic use of American power, especially military force, to accomplish ambitious and moralistic goals such as democratizing the Middle East.
Thus, realism’s foundation is the principle of dominance; alternatives based on reciprocity and identity will be reviewed in Chapter 3.
Realists tend to treat political power as separate from, and predominant over, morality, ideology, and other social and economic aspects of life.
Theories of IR Individual Domestic Levels of AnalysisInterstate Realism Neorealism Global Liberal Theories Democratic Liberal Institutionalism Peace CjOCAW-"" thE 0WES_. » ' 4 4 4 4 I I \ Constructivist Theories Postmodernist Theories Peace Studies Gender Theories Marxism *** \ 5 Morgenthau, Hans.
Realists see states with very different religions, ideologies, or economic systems as quite similar in their actions with regard to national power.
Power Power is a central concept in international relations—the central one for realists—but it is surprisingly difficult to define or measure.
A variation on this idea is that actors are powerful to the extent that they affect others more than others affect them.
One problem with this definition is that we seldom know what a second actor would have done in the absence of the first actor’s power.
Power is not influence itself, however, but the ability or potential to influence others.
Many IR scholars believe that such potential is based on specific characteristics or possessions of states—such as their sizes, levels of income, and armed forces.
Capabilities are easier to measure than influence and are less circular in logic.
Measuring capabilities to explain how one state influences another is not simple, however.
States possess varying amounts of population, territory, military forces, and so forth.
The best single indicator of a 6 Morgenthau, Hans J., and Kenneth W Thompson.
But even GDP is at best a rough indicator, and economists do not even agree how to measure it.
So GDP is a useful estimator of material capabilities but not a precise one.
Capabilities give a state the potential to influence others only to the extent that political leaders can mobilize and deploy these capabilities effectively and strategically.
This depends on national will, diplomatic skill, popular support for the government (its legitimacy), and so forth.
Some scholars emphasize the power of ideas —the ability to maximize the influence of capabilities through a psychological process.
This process includes the domestic mobilization of capabilities—often through reli1 gion, ideology, or nationalism.
International influence is also gained by forming the rules of behavior to change how others see their own national interests.
If a state’s own values become widely shared among other states, it will easily influence others.
For example, the United States has influenced many other states to accept the value of free markets and free trade.
Although realists emphasize dominance approaches, they acknowledge that Power is the ability to influence the behavior of others.
Military force and economic sanctions are among the various means that states and nonstate actors use to try to influence each other.
Russia's position as a major energy supplier to Europe has increased its power in recent years even though its military threat to Europe has decreased.
The shutoff, visible here in a pressure gauge reading zero, left customers across Europe without heat.
In 2010, Ukrainians elected a new president more friendly toward Russia.
Furthermore, even realists recognize that power provides only a general understanding of outcomes.
Real-world outcomes depend on many other elements, including accidents or luck.
Because power is a relational concept, a state can have power only relative to other states’ power.
Relative power is the ratio of the power that two states can bring to bear against each other.
It matters little to realists whether a state’s capabilities are rising or declining in absolute terms, only whether they are falling behind or overtaking the capabilities of rival states.
Estimating Power The logic of power suggests that in wars, the more powerful state will generally prevail.
Thus, estimates of the relative power of the two antagonists should help explain outcomes.
These estimates could take into account the nations’ relative military capabilities and the popular support for each one’s government, among other factors.
But most important is the total size of each nation’s economy—the GDP—which reflects both population size and income per person.
With a healthy enough economy, a state can buy a large army, popular support , and even allies.
For example, the Libyan revolutionaries fighting against dictator Muammar Gaddafi in 2011 had passion and determination but could not defeat the government with its heavy weaponry.
Then, with the government poised to crush the rebels with tanks, the United States and NATO allies began an air campaign that decisively turned the tide.
In GDP, NATO held an advantage of about 300:1, and NATO forces were much more capable technologically.
In the end, Gaddafi lay dead, his supporters routed, and NATO had not suffered a single casualty.
Despite the decisive outcome of this lopsided conflict, the exercise of power always carries risks of unintended consequences.
In 2012, an armed Islamic faction that Gaddafi had previously kept in check attacked a United States consulate in Libya and killed the United States ambassador.
Other ethnic fighters and Islamic militants who had fought for Gaddafi took large quantities of weapons and crossed the desert to northern Mali, where they seized control of half the country.
In early 2013, France had to intervene militarily in Mali to stop them, and the Islamist militants crossed into Algeria, where they seized hundreds of foreign hostages at a gas facility and killed dozens of them when the Algerian army attacked.
Thus, a big GDP may help a country win a war, but does not eliminate the elements of complexity and luck as situations evolve over the longer term.
Elements that an actor can draw on over the long term include total GDP, population, territory, geography, and natural resources.
Less tangible long-term power resources include political culture, patriotism, education of the population, and strength of the scientific and technological base.
The credibility of its commitments (reputation for keeping its word) is also a long-term power base for a state.
The importance of long-term power resources was illustrated after the Japanese surprise attack on the United States fleet at Pearl Harbor in 1941, which decimated United States naval 48 Chapter 2 Realist Theories capabilities in the Pacific, In the short term, Japan had superior military power and was able to occupy territories in Southeast Asia while driving United States forces from the region.
In the longer term, the United States had greater power resources due to its underlying economic potential.
It built up military capabilities over the next few years that gradually matched and then overwhelmed those of Japan.
Other capabilities allow actors to exercise influence in the short term.
The size, composition, and preparedness of two states’ military forces matter more in a short-term military confrontation than their respective economies or natural resources.
Another capability is the military-industrial capacity to quickly produce weapons.
The quality of a state’s bureaucracy is another type of capability, allowing the state to gather information, regulate international trade, or participate in international conferences.
Less tangibly, the support and legitimacy that an actor commands in the short term from constituents and allies are capabilities that the actor can use to gain influence.
Given the limited resources that any actor commands, trade-offs among possible capabilities always exist.
Building up military forces diverts resources that might be put into foreign aid, for instance.
Or buying a population’s loyalty with consumer goods reduces resources available for building up military capabilities.
Generally, money is the most fungible capability because it can buy other capabilities.
Realists tend to see military force as the most important element of national power in the short term, and other elements such as economic strength, diplomatic skill, or moral legitimacy as being important to the extent that they are fungible into military power.
Yet, depending on the nature of the conflict in question, military power may be only one of many elements of power.
Robert Gates, as United States secretary of defense, called for a “dramatic increase” in spending on diplomacy and economic aid, noting that despite very high military spending, these “other elements of national power” have lagged behind in an era of asymmetric warfare in which conflicts are “fundamentally political in nature” and not simply military.
Secretary Gates went on to point out that the United States has more members of military marching bands than foreign service officers.
In 2009, the top United States military officer added that although United States leaders had “reached for the military hammer in the toolbox of foreign policy fairly often” in recent years, “armed forces may not always be the best choice” to achieve foreign policy goals.
The large United States economy supports United States military predominance.
In the 2003 United States invasion of Iraq, the United States could afford to send a large and technologically advanced military force to the Middle East.
The International System 49 aid has increased dramatically since the attacks of 9/11 , Morality can contribute to power by increasing the will to use power and by attracting alliesStates have long clothed their actions, however aggressive, in rhetoric about their peaceful and defensive intentions.
Of course, if a state uses moralistic rhetoric to cloak self-interest too often, it loses credibility even with its own population.
In geopolitics, as in real estate, the three most important considerations are location, location, location.
States increase their power to the extent they can use geography to enhance their military capabilities, such as by securing allies and bases close to a rival power or along strategic trade routes, or by controlling key natural resources.
Today, control of oil pipeline routes, especially in Central Asia, is a major geopolitical issue.
Military strategists have also pointed out that the melting of the continental ice shelf has opened new shipping routes for military purposes, creating new a geopolitical issue for Russia and the United States.
The International System States interact within a set of long-established “rules of the game” governing what is considered a state and how states treat each other.
Anarchy and Sovereignty Watch the Video ""Chamberlain's Appeasement Speech"" at MyPoliSciLab Realists believe that the international system exists in a state of anarchy—a term that implies not complete chaos or absence of structure and rules, but rather the lack of a central government that can enforce rules. iZ In domestic society within states, governments can enforce contracts, deter citizens from breaking rules, and use their monopoly on legally sanctioned violence to enforce a system of law.
Both democracies and dictatorships provide central government enforcement of a system of rules.
Realists contend that no such central authority exists to enforce rules and ensure compliance with norms of conduct.
States must therefore rely on self-help, which they supplement with allies and the constraining power of international norms.
In this anarchic world, realists emphasize prudence as a great virtue in foreign policy.
Thus states should pay attention not to the intentions of other states but rather to their capabilities.
The great majority of state interactions closely adhere to norms of behavior—shared expectations about what behavior is considered proper.
Norms change over time, slowly, but the most basic norms of the international system have changed little in recent centuries.
Sovereignty—traditionally the most important norm—means that a government has the right, in principle, to do whatever it wants in its own territory.
Sovereignty also means that states are not supposed to interfere in the internal affairs of other states.
Although states do try to influence each other on matters of trade, alliances, war, and so on, they are not supposed to meddle in the internal politics and decision processes of other states.
More controversially, some states claim that sovereignty gives them the right to treat their own people in any fashion, including behavior that other states call genocide.
The lack of a “world police” to punish states if they break an agreement makes enforcement of international agreements difficult.
The international community used a mix of positive incentives and threats to persuade North Korea to stop producing nuclear material.
In practice, most states have a harder and harder time warding off interference in their affairs.
Such “internal” matters as human rights or self-determination are, increasingly, concerns for the international community.
For example, election monitors increasingly watch internal elections for fraud, while international organizations monitor ethnic conflicts for genocide.
Also, the integration of global economic markets and telecommunications makes it easier than ever for ideas to penetrate state borders.
Many of today’s borders are the result of past wars or were imposed arbitrarily by colonizers.
The International System 51 PASSPORT PLEASE t The territorial nature of the interstate system developed long ago when agrarian societies relied on agriculture to generate wealth.
In today’s world, in which trade and technology rather than land create wealth, the territorial state may be less important.
Information-based economies are linked across borders instantly, and the idea that the state has a hard shell seems archaic.
The accelerating revolution in information technologies may dramatically affect the territorial state system in the coming years.
States have developed norms of diplomacy to facilitate their interactions.
For instance, in 2012-2013, when Ecuador’s embassy in Britain harbored the founder of Wikileaks, who had been ordered extradited to Sweden, British authorities did not simply come in and take him away.
But China did not make an issue of it (the plane had not gone into service), and a U.S.-China summit the next month went forward.
In the post-Cold War era, spying continues, even between friendly states.
Realists acknowledge that the rules of IR often create a security dilemma—a situation in which states’ actions taken to ensure their own security (such as deploying more military forces) threaten the security of other states.
The responses of those other states, such as deploying more of their own military forces, in turn threaten the first state.
The dilemma is a prime cause of arms races in which states spend large sums of money on mutually threatening weapons that do not ultimately provide security.
The security dilemma is a negative consequence of anarchy in the international system.
If a world government could reliably detect and punish aggressors who arm Sovereignty and territorial integrity are central norms governing the behavior of states.
Terrorism and secessionist movements present two challenges to these norms, but the world's mostly stable borders uphold them.
Every day, millions of people cross international borders, mostly legally and peacefully, respecting states' territorial integrity.
Here, tightrope walker Nik Wallenda crosses the U.S.Canadian border at Niagara Falls, 2012.
Some IR scholars find states practically obsolete as the main actors in world politics, as some integrate into larger entities and others fragment into smaller units.
Other scholars find the international system quite enduring in its structure and state units/ One of its most enduring features is the balance of power.
Balance of Power In the anarchy of the international system, the most reliable brake on the power of one state is the power of other states.
The term balance of power refers to the general concept of one or more states’ power being used to balance that of another state or group of states.
Balance of power can refer to any ratio of power capabilities between states or alliances, or it can mean only a relatively equal ratio.
Alternatively, balance of power can refer to the process by which counterbalancing coalitions have repeatedly formed in history to prevent one state from conquering an entire region.
The theory of balance of power argues that such counterbalancing occurs regularly and maintains the stability of the international system.
This stability does not, however, imply peace; it is rather a stability maintained by means of recurring wars that adjust power relations.
Building up one’s own capabilities against a rival is a form of power balancing, but forming an alliance against a threatening state is often quicker, cheaper, and more effective.
In the Cold War, the United States encircled the Soviet Union with military and political alliances to prevent Soviet territorial expansion.
Sometimes a particular state deliberately becomes a balancer , shifting its support to oppose whatever state or alliance is strongest at the moment.
Britain played this role on the European continent for centuries, and China played it in the Cold War.
Sometimes smaller states “jump on the bandwagon” of the most powerful state; this has been called bandwagoning as opposed to balancing.
For instance, after World War II, a broad coalition did not form to contain United States power; rather, most major states joined the United States bloc.
States may seek to balance threats rather than raw power; United States power was greater than Soviet power but was less threatening to Europe and Japan . z Furthermore, small states create variations on power-balancing themes when they play off rival great powers 19 Aydinli, Ersel, and James N Rosenau, eds.
For instance, Cuba during the Cold War received massive Soviet subsidies by putting itself in the middle of the U.S.-Soviet rivalry.
Other small states may, 'l 'Z for domestic reasons, fail to mobilize to balance against threats/ In the post-Cold War era of United States dominance, balance-of-power theory would predict closer relations among Russia, China, and even Europe to balance United States power.
And indeed, Russian-Chinese relations improved dramatically in such areas as arms trade and demilitarization of the border.
But in recent years, with United States power seemingly stretched thin in Afghanistan and Iraq, its economy also weak, and Chinese power on the rise, more countries are balancing against China and fewer against the United States.
In 2012-2013, Japan struck military agreements with former enemies South Korea and the Philippines and reaffirmed its United States ties, in response to China’s growing power.
In 2003, as the Iraq war began, widespread anti-American sentiment revealed itself in Muslim countries.
In Indonesia, Pakistan, Turkey, and Nigeria—containing half of the world’s Muslims—more than 70 percent worried that the United States could become a threat to their own countries, a worry shared by 71 percent of Russians.
A survey of 38,000 people in 44 nations showed a dramatic drop in support for the United States from 2002 to 2003.
Then after 2008, with the United States seeking to exit its wars and exert its power less forcefully around the world, opinions turned upward.
These shifts in public opinion make the governments in those countries more or less likely to cooperate with, or oppose, the United States on the world stage.
Great Powers and Middle Powers The most powerful states in the world exert most of the influence on international events and therefore get the most attention from IR scholars.
By almost any measure of power, a handful of states possess the majority of the world’s power resources.
At most a few dozen states have any real influence beyond their immediate locality.
These are called the great powers and middle powers in the international system.
Although there is no firm dividing line, great powers are generally considered the half-dozen or so most powerful states.
Sometimes great powers’ status is formally recognized in an international structure such as the 19th-century Concert of Europe or today’s UN Security Council.
In general, great powers are often defined as states that can be defeated militarily only by another great power.
Great powers also tend to share a global outlook based on national interests far from their home territories.
The great powers generally have the world’s strongest military forces—and the strongest economies to pay for them—and other power capabilities.
These large economies in turn rest on some combination of large populations, plentiful natural resources, advanced technology, and educated labor forces.
Because power is based on these underlying resources, membership in the great power system changes slowly.
Only rarely does a great power—even one defeated in a massive war—lose its status as a great power, because its size and long-term economic potential change slowly.
Thus Germany and Japan, decimated in World War II, are powerful today, and Russia, after gaining and then losing the rest of the Soviet Union, is still considered a great power.
They include the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, which are also the members of the “club” openly possessing large nuclear weapons arsenals.
The United States is considered the world’s only superpower because of its historical role of world leadership (especially in and after World War II) and its predominant military might.
China has the world’s largest population, rapid economic growth (8-10 percent annually over 30 years), and a large and modernizing military, including a credible nuclear arsenal.
Nonetheless, both have large and capable military forces, which they have begun to deploy abroad, especially in peacekeeping operations.
Russia, France, and Britain were winners in World War II and have been active military powers since then.
Although much reduced in stature from their colonial heydays, they still qualify as great powers.
Middle powers rank somewhat below the great powers in terms of their influence on world affairs.
Some are large but not highly industrialized; others have specialized capabilities but are small.
Some aspire to regional dominance, and many have considerable influence in their regions.
A list of middle powers might include midsized countries of the global North such as Canada, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Poland, Ukraine, South Korea, and Australia.
It could also include large or influential countries in the global South such as India, Indonesia, Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Nigeria, South Africa, Israel, Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan.
Middle powers have not received as much 'll attention in IR as have great powers.
Global Forecast by American Intelligence Expects al Qaeda’s Appeal to Falter.
Power distribution as a concept can apply to all the states in the world or just the states in one region, but most often it refers to the great power system.
Neorealism, sometimes called structural realism, is a 1990s adaptation of realism.
Recently, neoclassical realists have sought to restore some of these lost aspects/ The polarity of an international power distribution refers to the number of independent power centers in the system.
This concept encompasses both the underlying power of various participants and their alliance groupings.
The International System 57 A multipolar system typically has five or six centers of power, which are not grouped into alliances.
Each state participates independently and on relatively equal terms with the others.
In the classical multipolar balance of power, the great power system itself was stable but wars occurred frequently to adjust power relations, Tripolar systems, with three great centers of power, are fairly rare, owing to the tendency for a two-against-one alliance to form.
Aspects of tripolarity colored the “strategic triangle” of the United States, the Soviet Union, and China during the 1960s and 1970s.
Some scholars imagine a future tripolar world with rival power centers in North America, Europe, and East Asia.
A bipolar system has two predominant states or two great rival alliance blocs.
IR scholars do not agree about whether bipolar systems are relatively peaceful or warlike.
The U.S.-Soviet standoff seemed to provide stability and peace to great power relations, but rival blocs in Europe before World War I did not.
At the far extreme, a unipolar system has a single center of power around which all others revolve.
Some might argue that peace is best preserved by a relatively equal power distribution because then no country has an opportunity to win easily.
Power transition theory holds that the largest wars result from challenges to the top position in the status hierarchy, when a rising power is surpassing (or threatening to surpass) the most powerful state.
At such times, power is relatively equally distributed, and these are the most dangerous times for major wars.
Status quo powers that are doing well under the old rules will try to maintain them, whereas challengers that feel locked out by the old rules may try to change them.
Germany’s rise in the 19th century gave it great power capabilities even though it was left out of colonial territories and other signs of status; this tension may have contributed to the two world wars.
It is possible China and the United States may face a similar dynamic in the future.
China may increasingly bristle at international rules and norms that it feels serves the interests of the United States.
For its part, the United States may fear that growing Chinese economic and military power will be used to challenge United States power.
According to power transition theory, then, peace among great powers results when one state is firmly in the top position and the positions of the others in the hierarchy are clearly defined and correspond with their actual underlying power.
The Italian Marxist theorist Antonio Gramsci used the term hegemony to refer to the complex of ideas that rulers use to gain consent for their legitimacy and keep subjects in line, reducing the need to use force to accomplish the same goal.
Britain’s predominance followed the defeat of its archrival France in the Napoleonic Wars.
In the late 1940s, the United States GDP was more than half the world’s total; United States vessels carried the majority of the world’s shipping; the United States military could single-handedly defeat any other state or combination of states; and only the United States had nuclear weapons.
United States industry led the world in technology and productivity, and United States citizens enjoyed the world’s highest standard of living.
As the extreme power disparities resulting from major wars slowly diminish (states rebuild over years and decades), hegemonic decline may occur, particularly when hegemons have overextended themselves with costly military commitments.
IR scholars do not agree about how far or fast United States hegemonic decline has proceeded, if at all, and whether o C international instability will result from such a decline/ Realists emphasize relative power as an explanation of war and peace.
The modernization of China's military—in conjunction with China's rapidly growing economy—will increase China's power over the coming decades.
Some observers fear instability in Asia if the overall balance of power among states in the region shifts rapidly.
Hegemons can help resolve or at least keep in check conflicts among middle powers or small states.
When one state’s power dominates the world, that state can enforce rules and norms unilaterally, avoiding the collective goods problem.
In particular, hegemons can maintain global free trade and promote world economic growth, in this view.
This theory attributes the peace and prosperity of the decades after World War II to United States hegemony, which created and maintained a global framework of economic relations supporting relatively stable and free international trade, as well as a security framework that prevented great power wars.
By contrast, the Great Depression of the 1930s and the outbreak of World War II have been attributed to the power vacuum in the international system at that time—Britain was no longer able to act as hegemon, and the United States was unwilling to begin doing so.
As the most advanced state in productivity and technology, a hegemon does not fear competition from industries in other states; it fears only that its own superior goods will be excluded from competing in other states.
Thus, hegemons use their power to achieve free trade and the political stability that supports free trade.
Hegemony, then, provides both the ability and the motivation to provide a stable political framework for free international trade, according to hegemonic stability theory.
From the perspective of less powerful states, of course, hegemony may seem an infringement of state sovereignty, and the order it creates may seem unjust or illegitimate.
For instance, China chafed under U.S.-imposed economic sanctions for 20 years after 1949, at the height of United States power, when China was encircled by United States military bases and hostile alliances led by the United States.
To this day, Chinese leaders use the term hegemony as an insult, and the theory of hegemonic stability does not impress them.
Even in the United States there is considerable ambivalence about United States hegemony.
United States foreign policy has historically alternated between internationalist and isolationist moodsW It was founded as a breakaway from the European-based international system, and its growth in the 19th century was based on industrialization and expansion within North America.
The United States acquired overseas colonies in the Philippines and Puerto Rico but did not relish a role as an imperial power.
In World War I, the country waited three years to weigh in and refused to join the League of Nations afterward.
United States isolationism peaked in the late 1930s when polls showed 95 percent of the public opposed to participation in a future European war, and about 70 percent against joining the League of Nations or joining with other nations to stop aggression.
United States leaders after that war feared Soviet communism and pushed United States public opinion toward a strong internationalism during the Cold War.
In the post-Cold War era, United States internationalism was tempered by a new cost consciousness, and by the emergence of a new isolationist camp born in reaction to the displacements caused by globalization and free trade.
However, the terrorist attacks of September 2001 renewed public support for United States interventionism in distant conflicts that no longer seemed so distant.
Its ability and willJ n• A ri • i ingness to resume a role as hegemon—as after World War II—are important protracted conflict m Afghanistan, and factors that will shape world order, but the United States role is still uncertain.
America's difficult economic times at home have willingness to absorb casualties will affect its role.
Here, soldiers return from spurred a new isolationist trend in the Afghanistan, 2009.
A second area of United States ambivalence is unilateralism versus multilateralism when the United States does engage internationally.
Multilateral approaches—working through international institutions—augment United States power and reduce costs, but limit United States freedom of action.
For example, the United States cannot always get the UN to do what it wants.
Polls show that a majority of United States citizens support working through the UN and other multilateral institutions, as did the first Bush administration.
However, members of the United States Congress since the 1990s, and the second Bush administration, expressed skepticism of the UN and of international agencies, generally favoring a more unilateralist approach.
The 2003 U.S.-led war in Iraq, with few allies and no UN stamp of approval, marked a peak of United States unilateralism.
Since then the NATO alliance has assumed new importance, in Afghanistan and in the 2011 Libya campaign, and UN dues have been repaid.
The International System 61 The Great Power System, 1500-2000 To illustrate how these concepts such as the balance of power, power transition, and hegemony have operated historically, we briefly review the origins of the modern international system.
These rules of state relations did not, however, originate at Westphalia; they took form in Europe in the 16th century.
Key to this system was the ability of one state, or a coalition, to balance the power of another state so that it could not gobble up smaller units and create a universal empire.
This power-balancing system placed special importance on the handful of great powers with strong military capabilities, global interests and outlooks, and intense interactions with each other.
A system of great power relations has existed since aroundd.00, and the structure and rules of that system have remained fairly stable through time, although the particular members change.
The structure is a balance of power among the six or so most powerful states, which form and break alliances, fight wars, and make peace, letting no single state conquer the others.
The most powerful states in 16th-century Europe were Britain , France, Austria-Hungary, and Spain.
The Ottoman Empire recurrently fought with the European powers, especially with Austria-Hungary.
Within Europe, Austria-Hungary and Spain were allied under the control of the Hapsburg family, which also owned the territory of the Netherlands.
The Hapsburg countries were defeated by mostly Protestant countries in northern Europe—France, Britain, Sweden, and the newly independent Netherlands—in the Thirty Years’ War of 1618-1648.
Since then, states defeated in war might have been stripped of some territories but were generally allowed to continue as independent states rather than being subsumed into the victorious state.
In the 18th century, the power of Britain increased as it industrialized, and Britain’s great rival was France.
Sweden, the Netherlands, and the Ottoman Empire all declined in power, but Russia and later Prussia emerged as major players.
In the Napoleonic Wars , which followed the French Revolution, France was defeated by a coalition of Britain, the Netherlands, Austria-Hungary, Spain, Russia, and Prussia.
The Congress of Vienna ending that war reasserted the principles of state sovereignty in reaction to the challenges of the French Revolution and Napoleon’s empire.
In this period, Britain became a balancer, joining alliances against whatever state emerged as the most powerful in Europe.
Powerful states were industrializing, extending the scope of their world activities and the might of their militaries.
After Prussia defeated Austria and France in wars, a larger Germany emerged to challenge ^Rabb, Theodore K., ed.
The Great Power System, 1500-2000 o> IS5 Wars Spain conquers Portugal Spanish Armada 30 Years' War Napoleonic Wars War of the Spanish Succession 7 Years' War FrancoPrussian War World War I World Warll Cold War Major Alliances Turkey vs.
In World War I , Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire were defeated by a coalition that included Britain, France, Russia, Italy, and the United States, After a 20-year lull, Germany, Italy, and Japan were defeated in World War II by a coalition of the United States, Britain, France, Russia , and China.
Those five winners of World War II make up the permanent membership of today’s UN Security Council.
After World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union, which had been allies in the war against Germany, became adversaries for 40 years in the Cold War.
Europe was split into rival blocs—East and West—with Germany split into two states.
The rest of the world became contested terrain where each bloc tried to gain allies or influence, often by sponsoring opposing sides in regional and civil wars.
The end of the Cold War around 1990, when the Soviet Union collapsed, returned the international system to a more cooperative arrangement of the great powers somewhat similar to the Concert of Europe in the 19th century.
Alliances An alliance is a coalition of states that coordinate their actions to accomplish some end.
Most alliances are formalized in written treaties, concern a common threat and related issues of international security, and endure across a range of issues and a period of time.
Shorter-term arrangements, such as the U.S.-led forces in Iraq, may be called a coalition.
Two countries may have a formal alliance and yet be bitter enemies, such as the Soviet Union and China in the 1960s or NATO members Greece and Turkey today.
Or, two countries may create the practical equivalent of an alliance without a formal treaty. gg Watch the Video ""Normalizing Sino-Japanese Relations"" at MyPoliSciLab Purposes of Alliances Alliances generally have the purpose of augmenting their members’ power by pooling capabilities.
For smaller states, alliances can be their most important power element, and for great powers the structure of alliances shapes the configuration of power in the system.
Of all the elements of power, none can change as quickly and decisively as alliances.
When a state’s power grows and threatens that of its rivals, the latter often form an alliance to limit that power.
This happened to Iraq when it invaded Kuwait in 1990, as it had to Hitler’s Germany in the 1940s and to Napoleon’s France in the 1800s.
Alliances are based on national interests, and can shift as national interests change.
So states often adhere to alliance terms even when it is not in their short-term interest to do so.
Nonetheless, because of the nature of international anarchy, the possibility of turning against a friend is always present.
Realists would agree with the British statesman Lord Palmerston, who told Parliament in 1848, “We have no eternal allies and we have no perpetual enemies.
Anticommunist Richard Nixon could cooperate with communist Mao Zedong in 1972.
Joseph Stalin could sign a nonaggression pact with a fascist, Adolf Hitler, and then cooperate with the capitalist West against Hitler.
The United States could back Islamic militants in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union in the 1980s, then attack them in 2001.
Every time history brings another such reversal in international alignments, many people are surprised.
If there were only two states, each could match capabilities to have adequate defense but an inability to attack successfully.
But if a third state is free to ally with either side, then each state has to build adequate defenses against the potential alliance of its enemy with the third state.
Alliance cohesion is the ease with which the members hold together an alliance.
Cohesion tends to be high when national interests converge and when cooperation within the alliance becomes institutionalized and habitual.
Extended deterrence refers to a strong state’s use of threats to deter attacks on weaker clients—such as the United States threat to attack the Soviet Union if it invaded Western Europe.
Great powers face a real danger of being dragged into wars with each other over relatively unimportant regional issues if their respective clients go to war.
If the great powers do not come to their clients’ protection, they may lose credibility with other clients, but if they do, they may end up fighting a costly war.
The Soviet Union worried that its commitments to China in the 1950s, to Cuba in the 1960s, Alliances generally result from a convergence of practical interests, not sentimental or ideological reasons.
Here, a United States general gets rival Afghan warlords to patch up relations, 2002.
The Influence of Military Alliances on the Initiation of Militarized Interstate Disputes.
Alliances 65 and to Syria and Egypt in the 1970s could result in a disastrous war with the United StatesNATO At present, two important formal alliances dominate the international security sceneBy far the more powerful is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , which encompasses Western Europe and North America.
Using GDP as a measure of power, the 28 NATO members possess nearly half the world total.
Members are the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Denmark, Norway, Iceland, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania, and Croatia.
At NATO headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, military staffs from the member countries coordinate plans and periodically direct exercises in the field.
The NATO allied supreme commander has always been a United States general.
In NATO, each state contributes its own military units—with its own national culture, language, and equipment specifications.
Its counterpart in Eastern Europe during the Cold War, the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact, was founded in 1955 and disbanded in 1991.
During the Cold War, the United States maintained more than 300,000 troops in Europe, with advanced planes, tanks, and other equipment.
But NATO stayed together because its members believed that NATO provided useful stability even though its mission was unclear.
Article V, considered the heart of NATO, asks members to come to the defense of a fellow member under attack.
It was envisioned as a United States commitment to help defend Western Europe against the Soviet Union, but instead was invoked for the first time when Europe came to the defense of the United States after the terrorist attacks in 2001.
The first actual use of force by NATO was in Bosnia in 1994, in support of the UN mission there.
A “dual key” arrangement gave the UN control of NATO’s actions in Bosnia, and the UN feared retaliation against its lightly armed peacekeepers if NATO attacked the Serbian forces to protect Bosnian civilians.
As a result, NATO made threats, underlined by symbolic airstrikes, but then backed down after UN qualms; this waffling undermined NATO’s credibility.
Later, NATO actions in the Balkans (the air war for Kosovo in 1999 and peacekeeping in Macedonia in 2001) went more smoothly in terms of alliance cohesion.
NATO’s intervention in Libya in 2011 also proved effective, as air power turned the tide of the rebel war that overthrew Libya’s dictator.
With UN Security Council and Arab League backing for a no-fly zone, and European countries providing most of the combat planes, NATO rated the operation a great success.
Currently, NATO troops from a number of member countries are fighting Taliban forces in Afghanistan.
Since 2006, these forces, known as the International Security Assistance Forces , have been under NATO leadership.
Over 100,000 troops serve in the ISAF, with NATO states providing the bulk of the forces.
The decision grew in part from European military weaknesses demonstrated in the 1999 Kosovo war, in which the United States contributed the most power by far.
But NATO forces including United States soldiers remain next door in Kosovo.
Joining in 2004 were Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Romania, and Bulgaria.
In 2009, Albania and Croatia accepted membership in NATO, bringing the total number of members to 28.
Making the new members’ militaries compatible with NATO was a major undertaking, requiring increased military spending by existing and new NATO members.
NATO expansion was justified as both a way to solidify new democracies and as protection against possible future Russian aggression.
Longtime members France and GerALLIANCE OF THE STRONG many strongly opposed the war, and Turkey refused to let United States jh e |\iAT0 alliance has been the world's strongest military force since 1949; its misground forces cross into Iraq.
Here, President Kennedy the same time, United States leaders began reviews United States forces in Germany, 1963. shifting some operations (and money) to new members in Eastern Europe such as Romania—with lower prices and a location closer to the Middle East—while drawing down forces based in Germany.
Russian leaders oppose NATO’s expansion into Eastern Europe as aggressive and anti-Russian.
They view NATO expansion as reasserting dividing lines on the map of Europe, but pushed closer to Russia’s borders.
These fears strengthen nationalist and anti-Western political forces in Russia.
However, the 1999 NATO bombing of Serbia heightened Russian fears regarding NATO’s eastward expansion, as has NATO cooperation with Ukraine and Georgia, the latter of which fought a short war against Russia in 2008.
Other Alliances The second most important alliance is the U.S.-Japanese Security Treaty, a bilateral alliance.
Under this alliance, the United States maintains nearly 35,000 troops in Japan 51 Moens, Alexander, Lenard J Cohen, and Allen G Sens, eds.
Alliance Politics from the End of the Cold War to the Age of Terrorism.
The alliance was created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan.
Because of its roots in the United States military occupation of Japan after World War II, the alliance is very asymmetrical.
The United States is committed to defend Japan if it is attacked, but Japan is not similarly obligated to defend the United States.
The United States belongs to several other alliances, but Japan’s only major alliance is with the United States.
Japan’s constitution (written by United States General Douglas MacArthur after World War II) renounces the right to make war and maintain military forces, although interpretation has loosened this prohibition over time.
Japan maintains military forces, called the Self-Defense Forces, strong enough for territorial defense but not for aggression.
It is a powerful army by world standards but much smaller than Japan’s economic strength could support.
Nonetheless, some Japanese leaders believe that Japan’s formal security role should expand commensurate with its economic power.
Japanese troops participated in Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq in 2004 , and Japan seeks a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.
The UN in turn is pressing Japan to participate fully in peace keeping missions.
Defeating the Taliban in Afghanistan BACKGROUND: After the terrorist attacks in 2001, NATO member states pledged their assistance in fighting the forces of al Qaeda and its Taliban protectors in Afghanistan.
Countries formed the multinational International Security Assistance Forces , made up of mostly NATO troops deployed in Afghanistan.
The forces are trying to provide security for the fledgling Afghan government, train a new military, and build political institutions to prevent the Taliban from retaking power.
Getting an adequate force to prevail in Afghanistan is a collective good.
Providing troops and equipment for ISAF is voluntary on the part of NATO members.
Regardless of how many troops the different countries send, they share equally the benefit of defeating al Qaeda.
But if too many countries are too stingy in contributing, the overall force will be too small and the goal will not be achieved.
Pro-Taliban forces continue to carry out widespread attacks and threaten to undermine the progress made to date.
Both the Bush and Obama administrations pressured allies to send more troops and money, but with limited results.
In the 2010 “surge,” America added 30,000 troops and other NATO members only 10,000.
The allies face DOMINANCE Alliances 69 For its part, the United States has used the alliance with Japan as a base to project United States power in Asia, especially during the wars in Korea and Vietnam , when Japan was a key staging area.
The continued United States military presence in Japan symbolizes the United States commitment to remain engaged in Asian security affairs.
However, these United States forces have been drawn down somewhat in the past decade in response to high costs, reduced threats, and more American focus on the Middle East.
In 2010, the alliance became a major political issue in Japan as its prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, resigned after reneging on his promise to force the United States to renegotiate certain aspects of the treaty.
Parallel with the U.S.-Japan treaty, the United States maintains military alliances with several other states, including Australia and South Korea, where 25,000 troops are stationed under a bilateral alliance dating to the Korean War.
Close United States collaboration with militaries in other states such as Israel make them de facto United States allies.
Russia, the official successor state to the Soviet Union, is the leading member and Ukraine the second largest.
Although some military coordination takes place through the CIS, initial plans for a joint military force did not succeed.
In 2009, GeorgtlP® withdrew from the CIS, due to its 2008 military conflict with Russia.
In 2010, the Dutch government lost power when it tried to keep Dutch troops in Afghanistan.
In theory, NATO operates on reciprocity—its members are equals with all contributing to the common good.
The members also share an identity as Western democracies fighting violent religious terrorists.
But in the hard currency of boots on the ground and flag-draped coffins coming home, not enough NATO members found these reasons compelling.
The solution to the collective goods problem in this case was for the dominant power to provide the good.
NATO is not really a club of equals, but a hierarchy with one member having more military might than the others combined.
Separate Group For Females with verpcation Funeral of two Spanish soldiers killed in Afghanistan, 2010. around underlings.
Often the actors best able to stay on top of a hierarchy are those who form alliances well and use power and wealth to keep other members loyal.
Among the great powers, a close relationship has developed, but with China and Russia somewhat independent.
In the global South, many states joined a nonaligned movement during the Cold War, standing apart from the U.S.-Soviet rivalry.
This movement, led by India and Yugoslavia, was undermined by the membership of states such as Cuba that were clearly clients of one of the superpowers.
At the turn of the century, the 53-member Organization of African Unity, an IGO with few powers, re-formed as the African Union , a stronger organization with a continent-wide parliament, central bank, and court.
The African Union’s first real test came with allegations of genocide in the Darfur region of Sudan in 2004In response, the AU deployed 3,000 troops, joined by a much larger force of UN peacekeepers.
The AU has also deployed forces, mostly Ugandan, in Somalia, where they routed Islamist militants from most of the country in 2012.
The United States tended to favor the Pakistani side as well, but both U.S.-Indian and U.S.-Chinese relations have improved since the Cold War ended.
China also has a loose alliance with North Korea, whom it values as a counterweight to South Korea.
Yet, China maintains concerns about the North’s political and economic stability.
Long-standing United States friends in Asia include Japan, South Korea, the Philippines , the Chinese Nationalists on Taiwan , Singapore, and Thailand.
In the Middle East, the Arab-Israeli conflict created a general anti-Israel alignment of the Arab countries for decades, but that alignment broke down as Egypt in 1978 and then Jordan in 1994 made peace with Israel.
As the Israeli-Palestinian peace process moves forward and backward year by year, Arab countries continue to express varying degrees of solidarity with each other and opposition to Israel.
Troughs in Israeli-Arab relations came in 2006, when Israel fought a month-long war with Hezbollah guerrillas in southern Lebanon and in 2008 and 2012, when it fought Hamas militants in Gaza.
Meanwhile, Israel and Turkey formed a close military relationship that amplified Israeli power, but relations deteriorated after Israel killed Turkish protesters on a ship trying to break the blockade of Gaza in 2009.
As the Arab Spring uprisings in 2011-2013 threw the region into turmoil, Israeli-Palestinian relations went into a deep freeze.
The main conflict dynamic in the Middle East became the opposition of Shi’ite and Sunni countries, centered on Iran and Saudi Arabia, with the civil war in Syria embodying that split/ The United States has close relations with Egypt and cooperates closely with Turkey , Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco.
U.S.-Iranian relations remain chilled 30 years after the 1979 revolution.
But, oddly, Iran, with its Shi’ite population, has close ties with Iraq’s new U.S.-backed government, which is dominated by Shi’ite religious parties.
The United States had very hostile relations with Iraq before 52 Hemmer, Christopher, and Peter Katzenstein.
United States Department of Defense the 2003 war, and has faced stronger antipathy in the region thereafter.
United States relations with Libya were also hostile for decades until a 2003 agreement, and became very friendly after Libya’s U.S.-backed revolution in 2011.
It is unclear what new international alignments may emerge in the years to come.
The fluidity of alliances makes them a wild card for scholars to understand and for policy makers to anticipate.
Although several independent-minded states such as China, Russia, and France keep United States hegemony in check, little evidence exists of a coherent or formal rival power alignment emerging to challenge the United States.
Strategy Actors use strategy to pursue good outcomes in bargaining with one or more other actors.
States deploy power capabilities as leverage to influence each other’s actions.
Bargaining is interactive, and requires an actor to take account of other actors’ interests even while pursuing its own.
You Are a Presidential Advisor"" at MyPoliSciLab 5 ^North, Robert C War, Peace, Survival: Global Politics and Conceptual Synthesis.
Bargaining, Decision Making, and System Structure in International Crises.
BACKGROUND As the world's largest democracy, your country faces many challenges both at home and abroad.
In particular, in the past 50 years, you have fought wars against your two largest neighbors, China and Pakistan.
China and Pakistan have cooperated with each other in the past, including on sales of high technology military goods such as missiles.
Your generally hostile relationship with Pakistan grows from a territorial dispute over half of the region of Kashmir, which both of you claim, but India maintains control over.
The territory is coveted not only by your respective governments but by the publics in each country as well.
While there has been some cooperation between each country, tensions still run high over Kashmir.
In the aftermath of the November 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, many in your country blamed Pakistan since it is home to Islamic militant groups.
Your hostilities with China have cooled over the years, but China remains a major rival in the region and you still maintain competing claims over territory.
Like your own country, China is large economically as well as militarily, and it attempts to exert strong leadership in your region.
In the past two years, however, you have increased ties with China and you personally visited China at the beginning of 2008 to open discussions on future trade and military cooperation.
In December 2007, your armies (the two largest in the world) held joint training exercises.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Within your country, neither Pakistan nor China is a popular choice for allies.
Your population is still angered by the Chinese victory in the 1962 Sino-lndian war and the disputed border territory that gave rise to the conflict.
Yet your largely Hindu population is also angry at repeated attempts by Muslim Pakistan to gain control of Kashmir.
Your advisors also remind you that China still has a healthy relationship with Pakistan, selling large numbers of weapons and giving military assistance to Pakistan.
Indeed the main political opposition parties argue that you have been too ""soft"" on both Pakistan and China in your time as Prime Minister.
Any public backlash against your foreign policy on these issues could be widespread and bring calls for new elections that could unseat your government.
SCENARIO Imag ine the government of Pakistan begins to suffer from large-scale instability.
Islamist militants are close to overthrowing the government there, giving them control of Pakistan's nuclear weapons.
They are also calling for Muslims in Kashmirto rise up against Indian control, promising to openly assist a rebellion in that province by providing weapons and intelligence.
Power strategies are plans actors use to develop and deploy power capabilities to achieve their goals.
A key aspect of strategy is choosing the kinds of capabilities to develop, given limited resources, in order to maximize international influence.
This requires foresight because the capabilities required to manage a situation may need to be developed years before that situation presents itself.
Yet the capabilities chosen often will not be fungible in the short term.
Strategies also shape policies for when a state is willing to use its power capabilities.
Even if leaders make explicit their intention to fight over an issue, they might be bluffing.
The strategic actions of China in recent years exemplify the concept of strategy as rational deployment of power capabilities.
Taiwan’s government was set up to represent all of China in 1949, when the nationalists took refuge there after losing to the communists in China’s civil war.
Since the international community’s recognition of the Beijing government as “China,” however, Taiwan has attempted to operate more and more independently, with many Taiwanese favoring independence.
China may not have the military power to invade Taiwan successfully, but it has declared repeatedly that it will go to war if Taiwan declares independence.
So far, even though such a war might be irrational on China’s part, the threat has deterred Taiwan from formally declaring independence.
China might lose such a war, but would certainly inflict immense damage on Taiwan.
In 1996, China held war games near Taiwan, firing missiles over the sea.
The United States sent two aircraft carriers to signal to China that its exercises must not go too far.
Not risking war by declaring independence, Taiwan instead has engaged in diplomacy to gain influence in the world.
It breaks diplomatic relations with countries that recognize Taiwan, and it punishes any moves in the direction of Taiwanese independence.
Half the countries that recognize Taiwan are in the Caribbean and Central America, leading to a competition for influence in the region.
China has tried to counter Taiwanese ties with those countries by manipulating various positive and negative leverages.
For example, in Panama, where China is a major user of the Panama Canal , Taiwan has cultivated close relations, invested in a container port, and suggested hiring guest workers from Panama in Taiwan.
But China has implicitly threatened to restrict Panama’s access to Hong Kong, or to reregister China’s many Panamanian-registered ships in the Bahamas instead.
Similarly, when the Pacific microstate of Kiribati recognized Taiwan in late 2003 to gain Taiwanese aid, China broke off relations and removed a Chinese satellite-tracking station from Kiribati.
Because the tracking station played a vital role in China’s military reconnaissance and growing space program—which had recently launched its first astronaut—its dismantling underscored China’s determination to give Taiwan priority even at a cost to other key national goals.
Two of the seven vetoes China has used in the UN Security Council were to block peacekeeping forces in countries that extended recognition to Taiwan.
These vetoes 74 Chapter 2 Realist Theories AMPLIFYING POWER Coherent strategy can help a state make the most of its power.
China's foreign policy is generally directed toward its most important regional interests, above all preventing Taiwan's formal independence.
Despite conflicts with a number of its neighbors, China has had no military engagements for 25 years.
Here, China uses its veto in the UN Security Council for only the fifth time ever, to end a peacekeeping mission in Macedonia, which had just established ties with Taiwan, 1999. than it purpose of deterrence). demonstrate that if China believes its Taiwan interests are threatened, it can play a spoiler role on the Security Council.
By contrast, when its Taiwan interests are secure, China cooperates on issues of world order.
For example, although China opposed the 1991 Gulf War, it did not veto the UN resolution authorizing it.
These Chinese strategies mobilize various capabilities, including missiles, diplomats, and industrial conglomerates, in a coherent effort to influence the outcome of China’s most important international issue.
If deterrence works, its effects are almost invisible; its success is measured in attacks r n that did not occur.
Generally, advocates of deterrence believe that conflicts are more likely to escalate into war when one party to the conflict is weak.
In this view, building up military capabilities usually convinces the stronger party that a resort to military leverage would not succeed, so conflicts are less likely to escalate into violence.
Strategy 75 INTERNAL DIVISIONS One strategy used to try to compel compliance by another state is escalation —a series of negative sanctions of increasing severity applied in order to induce another actor to take some action.
In theory, the less severe actions establish credibility—showing the first actor’s willingness to exert its power on the issue—and the pattern of escalation establishes the high costs of future sanctions if the second actor does not cooperate.
These actions should induce the second actor to comply, assuming that it finds the potential costs of the escalating punishments greater than the costs of compliance.
During the Cold War, many IR scholars worried that a conventional war could lead to nuclear war if the superpowers tried to apply escalation strategies.
An arms race is a reciprocal process in which two states build up military capabilities in response to each other.
Because each wants to act prudently against a threat, the attempt to reciprocate leads to a runaway production of weapons by both sides.
The mutual escalation of threats erodes confidence, reduces cooperation, and makes it more likely that a crisis (or accident) could cause one side to strike first and start a war rather than wait for the other side to strike.
The arms race process was illustrated vividly in the U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms race, which created arsenals of tens of thousands of nuclear weapons on each side.
The unitary actor assumption holds that states make important decisions as though they were single individuals able to act in the national interest.
In truth, factions and organizations with differing interests put conflicting pressures on state leaders.
In extreme cases, weak states do not control the armed factions within them.
These Somali pirates being captured by Turkish commandos in 2009 are just one of the internal groups, ranging from autonomous territories to Islamist militants, that operate with impunity within Somalia.
Rationality in International Relations Most realists assume that those who wield power while engaging in statecraft behave as rational actors in their efforts to influence others.
Many realists assume that the actor (usually a state) exercising power is a single entity that can “think” about its actions coherently and make choices.
This is called the unitary actor assumption, or sometimes the strong leader assumption.
The assumption is a simplification, because the interests of particular politicians, parties, economic sectors, or regions of a country often conflict.
Yet realists assume that the exercise of power attempts to advance the national interest— the interests of the state itself.
Some realists simply define the national interest as maximizing material power—a debatable assumption.
Others compare power in IR with money in economics—a universal measure.
In this view, just as firms compete for money in economic markets, states compete for power in the international system.
Second, rationality implies that actors are able to perform a cost-benefit analysis— calculating the costs incurred by a possible action and the benefits it is likely to bring.
As in the problem of estimating power, one has to add up different dimensions in such a calculation.
For instance, states presumably do not initiate wars that they expect to lose, except when they stand to gain political benefits, domestic or international, that outweigh the costs of losing the war.
But it is not easy to tally intangible political benefits against the tangible costs of a war.
These assumptions about rationality and the actors in IR are simplifications that not all IR scholars accept.
But realists consider these simplifications useful because they allow scholars to explain in a general way the actions of diverse actors.
The Prisoner's Dilemma Game theory is a branch of mathematics concerned with predicting bargaining outcomes.
A game is a setting in which two or more players choose among alternative moves, either once or repeatedly.
The payoffs can be tangible items such as money or any intangible items of value.
Game theory aims to deduce likely outcomes (what moves players will make), given the players’ preferences and the possible moves open to them.
Game theory was first used extensively in IR in the 1950s and 1960s by scholars trying to understand U.S.-Soviet nuclear war contingencies.
Moves were decisions to use nuclear weapons in certain ways, and payoffs were outcomes of the war.
Strategy 77 years, especially among realists, who accept the assumptions about rationality.
To analyze a game mathematically, one assumes that each player chooses a move rationally, to maximize its payoff.
Different kinds of situations are represented by different classes of games, as defined by the number of players and the structure of the payoffs.
In a zero-sum game there is no point in communication or cooperation between the players because their interests are diametrically opposed.
But in a non-zero-sum game, coordination of moves can maximize the total payoff to the players, although each may still maneuver to gain a greater share of that total payoff.
In this situation, rational players choose moves that produce an outcome in which all players are worse off than under a different set of moves.
They all could do better, but as individual rational actors, they are unable to achieve this outcome.
The original story tells of two prisoners questioned separately by a prosecutor.
The prosecutor knows they committed a bank robbery but has only enough evidence to convict them of illegal possession of a gun unless one of them confesses.
The prosecutor tells each prisoner that if he confesses and his partner doesn’t confess, he will go free.
If neither confesses, they will be convicted on the gun charge and serve a short sentence.
The story assumes that neither prisoner will have a chance to retaliate later, that only the immediate outcomes matter, and that each prisoner cares only about himself.
Consider the decisions of India and Pakistan about whether to build sizable nuclear weapons arsenals.
Neither side can know whether the other is secretly building up an arsenal unless they reach an arms control agreement with strict verification provisions.
To analyze the game, we assign values to each possible outcome—often called a preference ordering —for each player.
If we misjudge the value a player puts on a particular outcome, we may draw wrong conclusions from the game.
The first number in each cell is India’s payoff, and the second number is Pakistan’s.
To keep things simple, 4 indicates the highest payoff, and 1 the lowest.
As is conventional, a decision to refrain from building nuclear weapons is called cooperation , and a decision to proceed with nuclear weapons is called defection.
The model seems to predict an inevitable Indian-Pakistani nuclear arms race, although both states would do better to avoid one.
In 1998, India detonated underground nuclear explosions to test weapons designs, and Pakistan promptly followed suit.
In 2002, the two states nearly went to war, with projected war deaths of up to 12 million.
A costly and dangerous arms race continues, and each side now has dozens of nuclear missiles, and counting.
Avoiding an arms race would benefit both sides as a collective good, but the IR system, without strong central authority, does not allow them to realize this potential benefit.
This example illustrates why realists tend to be pessimistic about cooperative solutions to collective goods problems such as the one that the PD game embodies.
For example, Chicken represents two male teenagers speeding toward a head-on collision.
The player who first commits irrevocably not to swerve (for example, by throwing away the steering wheel or putting on a blindfold while behind the wheel) will win.
Deterrence involves convincing another actor not to undertake an action it otherwise would.
Just as in the game of Chicken, when one driver commits to not swerving, state leaders attempt to convince others that they will respond harshly if they are attacked.
But because not swerving risks disaster for both sides, it is difficult for one side to convince the other that he or she will risk crashing if the other side decides not to swerve.
Chapter Review 79 Game theory often studies interdependent decisions —the outcome for each player depends on the actions of the other.
This chapter has focused on the concerns of realists—the interests of states, distribution of power among states, bargaining between states, and alliances of states.
The chapter has treated states as unitary actors, much as one would analyze the interactions of individual people.
The actions of state leaders have been treated as concerned with maximizing power through pursuing definable interests through coherent bargaining strategies.
But realism is not the only way to frame the major issues of international relations.
Chapter 3 reexamines these themes critically, relying less on the core principle of dominance and more on reciprocity and identity.
These simplifications are debatable but allow realists to develop concise and general models and explanations.
The Prisoner’s Dilemma game embodies a difficult collective goods problem.
Choose a recent international event and list the power capabilities that participants used as leverage in the episode.
The modern international system came into being at a time when agrarian societies relied primarily on farmland to create wealth.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview In this chapter, we noted that realists emphasize the idea of the balance of power—states may ally with one another to prevent another state from becoming too dominant.
Yet, in the current system, the United States is clearly unparalleled in military and economic power.
Some scholars argue that China will be the state that challenges the leadership position of the United States in the future.
Historically, the relationship between China and the United States has been rocky.
During the Cold War, after the United States opened the relationship with China, the two great powers cooperated against a common enemy, the Soviet Union.
After the Cold War, that cooperation has varied significantly as China has expanded economically and militarily, filling the global powervacuum left bythe collapse of the Soviet Union.
Although China is still smaller economically and less powerful militarily than the United States, if current growth continues, it will eventually surpass the United States in economic might.
Armed with such a large economy, it will not take long for China to then catch the United States militarily.
The United States and China Will Find It Difficult to Peacefully Coexist United States and Chinese allies create conflicts between them.
China's ties to North Korea, Iran, and Sudan have strengthened in the past five years.
The United States considers each of these states to be hostile, while China has courted each for economic or strategic reasons.
On the United States side, although there is no formal alliance, American friendliness to Taiwan, which China regards as a renegade province, also creates tensions.
China already promotes its interests in conflict with the United States.
China currently pegs its currency to keep its goods cheap in the United States.
Despite many protests against this policy, China persists in pegging its currency, which harms domestic manufacturers in the United States.
China is already attempting to compete with the United States as a global superpower.
China is also courting states with hostile relationships to the United States such as Venezuela and Iran.
All signs point to China attempting to compete with the United States for global supremacy.
ARGUMENT 2 The United States and China Can Peacefully Coexist The United States and China agree on many important issues.
On issues such as terrorism and nuclear proliferation, China sees eye-to-eye with the United States.
As with the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, there is room for agreement on issues of strategic importance that will allow for cooperation between the two great powers.
In addition, China's ""peaceful rise"" strategy has avoided direct conflict with the United States for 30 years.
Both states have large, credible nuclear forces that can deter the opponent from attacking.
While this may not rule out proxy wars , it does suggest that relations will remain civil and stable between the United States and China.
America depends on Chinese goods flowing in at reasonable prices, while China depends on the United States market for its export-led growth strategy.
This situation of mutual dependence will keep relations warm, since hostility would threaten to undermine these trade relationships.
Although the United States does not formally recognize Taiwan, American has signed a friendship treaty with the island.
Bergsten, C Fred, Charles Freeman, Nicholas R Lardy, and Derek J Mitchell.
To many Americans, the world seems more war-prone and violent than ever, because the country is at war on a scale not seen since Vietnam.
Yet for the world as a whole, the current period is one of the least warlike ever.
In the first half of the 20th century, world wars killed tens of millions and left whole continents in ruin.
In the second half of that century, during the Cold War, proxy wars killed millions, and the world feared a nuclear war that could have wiped out our species.
Now, in the early 21st century, wars like those in Afghanistan and Syria kill tens or even hundreds of thousands.
We fear terrorist attacks that could destroy a city, but not life on the planet.
Generation by generation, the world has moved forward, unevenly but inexorably, from tens of millions killed, to millions, to hundreds of thousands.
This is still a large number and the impacts of war are still catastrophic.
Perhaps most important, if we could understand and sustain this trend, major wars might fade away altogether, though minor wars and terrorist attacks may continue to kill thousands of people.
Events in the post-Cold War era continue this long-term trend toward smaller wars.
Most of the wars that flared up after the Cold War ended, such as in Bosnia, Kosovo, Algeria, Rwanda, Burundi, and Uganda, have also come to an end.
In 2005, the Irish Republican Army finished permanently dismantling its weaponry.
India and Pakistan began their first cease-fire in a decade, as did Burma’s government and its largest rebel militia.
Today’s most serious conflicts consist mainly of skirmishing rather than all-out battles.
The last battles between heavily armed forces on both sides (with, for example, artillery, tanks, and airplanes) were the 2003 invasion of Iraq and the 2008 RussianGeorgian war, both short and one-sided affairs.
The last sustained interstate war, between Ethiopia and Eritrea, ended in 2000.
The last great power war (with great powers fighting each other) ended more than 50 years ago.
In 2012, the world’s most destructive war was in Syria, where a rebellion and the government’s brutal suppression of it cost 60,000 lives over two years.
In Afghanistan the long war dragged on, and in Democratic Congo fighting flared again in the unstable east.
African Union troops drove Islamist militants out of much of Somalia, and in early 2013, French forces were trying to do the same in northern Mali.
Deaths caused by all types of war, including actions such as shelling, car bombs, and airstrikes , have fallen quite dramatically over the past 60 years.
While some years are higher or lower than others, there is a consistent trend downward in this graph over recent decades, suggesting an overall movement toward less war in the international system.
Among other common elements, these approaches generally are more optimistic than realism about the prospects for peace.
Although realists see the laws of power politics as relatively timeless and unchanging, liberal theorists generally see the rules of IR as slowly, incrementally evolving through time and becoming more and more peaceful.
The main theories discussed in this and the following chapter all hold that we are not doomed to a world of recurring war but can achieve a more peaceful world.
In addition, this chapter reviews liberal theories of domestic politics and foreign policy making that, unlike realism, place importance on the domestic and individual levels of analysis in explaining state behavior.
Kant and Peace Liberal theories of IR try to explain how peace and cooperation are possible.
Liberal Theories 87 reciprocity principle, was that states could develop the organizations and rules to facilitate cooperation, specifically by forming a world federation resembling today’s United Nations, This answer forms the foundation of present-day liberal institutionalism, discussed shortly.
Kant’s second answer, operating at a lower level of analysis, was that peace depends on the internal character of governments.
He reasoned that republics, with a legislative branch that can hold the monarch in check, will be more peaceful than autocracies.
This answer, along with Kant’s related point that citizens of any country deserve hospitality in any other country, is consistent with the reciprocity principle, but also relies on the identity principle.
Like the social theories discussed later in this chapter, it explains states’ preferences based on the social interactions within the state.
A variation on Kant’s answer, namely that democracies do not fight each other, is the basis of present democratic peace theory, also discussed later in this chapter.
Kant’s third answer, that trade promotes peace, relies on the presumption that trade increases wealth, cooperation, and global well-being—all while making conflict less likely in the long term because governments will not want to disrupt any process that adds to the wealth of their state.
Moreover, as trade between states increases, they will find that they become mutually dependent on one other for goods.
This mutual dependence between states is referred to as economic interdependence.
Scholars often differentiate situations of sensitivity, where one state relies on another to provide an important good but can find alternate suppliers, with vulnerability , where there are few or no alternative suppliers.
In particular, states worry about their reliance on other states for strategic minerals needed for military purposes, such as special minerals or alloys for aircraft production and uranium for atomic weapons.
Leaders worry about vulnerability giving other countries leverage over them in instances of conflict.
Realists point to the fact that arguments about interdependence and peace were common prior to World War I, yet war occurred anyway.
Liberal Institutionalism Now let us return to Kant’s first answer to the question of how peace can evolve, namely the ability of states to develop and follow mutually advantageous rules, with international institutions to monitor and enforce them.
Liberal theories treat rational actors as capable of forgoing short-term individual interests in order to further the long-term well-being of a community to which they belong—and hence indirectly their own well-being.
Indeed, in several important institutions, such as the World Trade Organization and the European Union, decisions require consensus among all members, making them all equal in governance.
To Kant, international cooperation was a more rational option for states than resorting to war.
Thus, in realist conceptions of rationality, war and violence appear rational (because they often advance short-term state interests), but in liberal theories, war and violence appear as irrational deviations that result from defective reasoning and that harm the interests of warring states.
The neoliberal approach differs from earlier liberal approaches in that it concedes to realism several important assumptions—among them, that states are unitary actors rationally pursuing their self-interests in a system of anarchy.
States achieve cooperation fairly often because it is in their interest to do so, and they can learn to use institutions to ease the pursuit of mutual gains and the reduction of possibilities for cheating or taking advantage of another state.
Despite the many sources of conflict in IR, states cooperate most of the time.
Neoliberal scholars try to show that even in a world of unitary rational states, the neorealists’ pessimism about international cooperation is not valid.
States can create mutual rules, expectations, and institutions to promote behavior that enhances cooperation.
In particular, reciprocity in IR helps international cooperation emerge despite the absence of central authority.
Through reciprocity, not a world government, norms and rules are enforced.
In international security, reciprocity underlies the gradual improvement of relations sought by arms control agreements and peacekeeping missions.
In international political economy , in which cooperation can create great benefits through trade, the threat to restrict trade in retaliation for unfair practices is a strong incentive to comply with rules and norms.
The World Trade Organization and its predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , function on this principle—states that defect on their obligations by increasing tariffs must suffer punishment by allowing other states to place tariffs on their goods.
Neoliberals argue that reciprocity can be an effective strategy for achieving cooperation in a situation of conflicting interests.
If one side expresses willingness to cooperate Liberal theories emphasize the potential for rivalries to evolve into cooperative relationships as states recognize that achieving mutual benefits is most cost effective in the long run.
For example, the United States and Soviet/Russian space programs began cooperating in the 1960s and continue today, with other countries.
Here, astronauts from the United States, Russia, Germany, and Sweden share the International Space Station, 2006.
Liberal Theories 89 and promises to reciprocate the other’s cooperative and conflictual actions, the other side has an incentive to work out a cooperative bargain.
Because reciprocity is relatively easy to interpret, the vow of future reciprocity often need not be stated explicitly.
For example, in 1969, China’s relations with the United States had been on ice for 20 years.
A United States economic embargo against China was holding back the latter’s economic development.
President Nixon decided to slightly relax the United States trade embargo against China.
Three days later, China released three United States citizens whose boat had earlier drifted into Chinese waters.
China reciprocated other United States initiatives, and in 1972, Nixon visited China in a spirit of rapprochement.
Similarly, in 2009, the Obama administration announced it would stop building a missile defense system in Europe that Russia considered provocative.
Some saw this as a move to gain Russian support for sanctions against Iran for its nuclear program.
And indeed, in the spring of 2010, the UN Security Council approved tighter sanctions on Iran, with the Russians voting in favor.
Neoliberals use the Prisoner’s Dilemma game to illustrate their argument that cooperation is possible.
Each actor can gain by individually defecting, but both lose when both defect.
Similarly, in IR, states often have a mix of conflicting and mutual interests.
The dilemma can be resolved if the game is played over and over again—an accurate model of IR, in which states deal with each other in repeated interactions.
In that case, a strategy of strict reciprocity after an initial cooperative move can bring about mutual cooperation in a repeated PD game, because the other player must conclude that any defection will merely provoke a like defection in response.
But side by side with the potential for eliciting cooperation, reciprocity contains a danger of runaway hostility.
When two sides both reciprocate but never manage to put relations on a cooperative footing, the result can be a drawn-out, nasty, tit-for-tat exchange of punishments.
This characterizes Israeli relations with Palestinian militants over the years, for instance.
Note that as one actor exhibits conflictual behavior , the other matches with negative responses.
Likewise, cooperative behavior brings reciprocated cooperation in the immediate time period.
Yet, over time, this reciprocity has done little to keep cooperation high—periods of agreement, even those reciprocated by each side, eventually give way to reciprocated conflict.
Building on the reciprocity principle, many norms mediate states’ interactions.
For example, diplomatic practices and participation in international organizations are both strongly governed by shared expectations about the rules of correct behavior.
As collective goods problems crop up in IR, states rely on a context of rules, norms, habits, and institutions that make it rational for all sides to avoid the self-defeating outcomes that would result from pursuing narrow, short-term self-interest.
Neoliberals study historical and contemporary cases in IR to see how institutions and norms affect the possibilities for overcoming dilemmas and achieving international cooperation.
Reciprocity, Triangularity, and Cooperation in the Middle East, 1979-1997.
Thus, for neoliberals the emergence of international institutions is key to understanding how states achieve a superior rational outcome that includes long-term self-interest and not just immediate self-interest.
Because of the contradictory interpretations that parties to a conflict usually have, it is difficult to resolve conflicts without a third party to arbitrate or an overall framework to set common expectations for all parties.
Regimes can help solve collective goods problems by increasing transparency— because everyone knows what everyone else is doing, cheating is riskier.
The current revolution in information technologies is strengthening regimes particularly in this aspect.
Liberal Theories 91 HEALTHY REGIME Also, with better international communication, states can identify conflicts and negotiate solutions through regimes more effectively.
The most common conception of regimes combines elements of realism and liberalism.
States are seen as autonomous units maximizing their own interests in an anarchic context.
Regimes do not play a role in issues in which states can realize their interests directly through unilateral applications of leverage.
Rather, regimes come into existence to overcome collective goods dilemmas by coordinating the behaviors of individual states.
Regimes do not substitute for the basic calculations of costs and benefits by states; they just open up new possibilities with more favorable benefit-cost ratios.
Regimes do not constrain states, except in a very narrow and short-term sense.
Rather, they facilitate and empower national governments faced with issues in which collective goods or coordination problems would otherwise prevent these governments from achieving their ends.
For realists in particular, regimes do not negate the effects of power; more often, they codify and normalize existing power relations in accordance with the dominance principle.
For example, the nuclear nonproliferation regime protects the status quo in which only a few states have nuclear weapons.
Yet, regimes do not always decline with the power of hegemons that created them.
Although hegemony may be crucial in establishing regimes, it is not necessary for maintaining them.
Once actors’ expectations converge around the rules embodied in a regime, the actors realize that the regime serves their own interests.
Working through the regime becomes a habit, and national leaders may not seriously consider breaking out of the established rules.
This persistence of regimes was demonstrated in the 1970s, when United States power declined following the decades of United States hegemony since 1945.
In part, the survival of regimes rests on their embedding in permanent institutions such as the UN, NATO, and the International Monetary Fund.
The world health regime includes states, IGOs such as the World Health Organization , nonprofit organizations such as the Gates Foundation, and others, all working with common expectations about activities to improve health and stem epidemics.
IPE is even more institutionalized, again because of the heavier volume of activity and the wealth that can be realized from cooperation.
Institutions gain greater stability and weight than do noninstitutionalized regimes.
With a staff and headquarters, an international institution can actively promote adherence to the rules in its area of political or economic life.
Important institutions in international security and IPE are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8, respectively.
Liberal institutionalism also places high value on international law, which receives its own discussion in Chapter 7.
The culmination of liberal institutionalism to date is the European Union , which receives in-depth discussion in Chapter 10.
After centuries of devastating wars, European states now enjoy a stable peace among themselves with strong international institutions to bind them.
Collective Security The concept of collective security, which grows out of liberal institutionalism, refers to the formation of a broad alliance of most major actors in an international system for the purpose of jointly opposing aggression by any actor.
Because past treaties ending great power wars had never lasted permanently, Kant proposed a federation of the world’s states.
The UN Budget BACKGROUND: Since its founding at the end of World War II, the United Nations has performed many valuable services for its members, the countries of the world.
Countries use the UN for diplomacy, peacekeeping, and humanitarian assistance, among other things.
These services are a collective good for the world’s countries because each country enjoys them regardless of whether it pays more or less of the UN budget.
The organization sets dues for its members, and each is supposed to pay on time, but not infrequently, they pay late, or later and later.
In the 1980s, the United States got into a series of conflicts with the UN about how much the United States dues should be.
By the mid-1990s, the UN members owed billions of dollars in back dues, with the United States alone owing more than a billion dollars and Russia about half a billion.
United States domestic politics contributed to the problem, as the Republican Congress did not approve of President Clinton’s budget requests for the UN, which they saw as toothless and ineffective at best, corrupt and antiAmerican at worst.
Reciprocity governs UN dues in principle, since all countries contribute according to a formula based on each individual economy’s size, but in pracLiberal Theories 93 federation, Kant proposed, the majority of states could unite to punish any one state that committed aggression, safeguarding the collective interests of all the nations while protecting the self-determination of small nations that all too easily became pawns in 14 great power games.
After the horrors of World War I, the League of Nations was formed to promote collective security.
Its membership did not include all the great powers , and its members proved unwilling to bear the costs of collective action to oppose aggression when it did occur in the 1930s, starting with Japan and Italy.
Several regional IGOs also currently perform collective security functions as well as economic and cultural ones—the Organization of American States , the Arab League, and the African Union.
When a powerful state commits aggression against a weaker one, it often is not in the immediate interest of other powerful states to go to war over the issue.
A second requisite for collective security is that enough members must agree on what constitutes aggression.
This collective security system does not work against aggression by a great power.
When the Soviet Union invaded 14 Kant, Perpetual Peace . tice, countries defected from that formula to promote their own short-term interests.
The dominance principle is of little use since the UN cannot use military force to make a country pay its dues.
The UN Foundation, founded in 1998 with a large contribution by media mogul Ted Turner, started a campaign to use the identity principle to solve the problem of United States nonpayment of dues.
This appeal to Americans’ concept of their nation as great changed the tone of debate about the UN dues.
The United States began to catch up on arrears, and in 2009, it paid up the last of its back obligations.
It was the first time since the founding of the UN that one member state had invaded, occupied, and annexed another—attempting to erase it as a sovereign state.
The invasion was so blatant a violation of Kuwaiti sovereignty and territorial integrity that the Security Council had little trouble labeling it aggression and authorizing the use of force by a multinational coalition.
The threat Iraq posed to the world’s oil supplies provided additional incentive for coalition members to contribute money or troops to solve the problem.
In 2002-2003, by contrast, the Security Council repeatedly debated Iraq’s failure to keep the agreements it had made at the end of the Gulf War, in particular the promise to disclose and destroy all its weapons of mass destruction.
But the great powers split, and a proposed U.S.-British resolution authorizing military force was withdrawn after France promised to veto it; Germany, Russia, and China had all strongly opposed it and the war.
Public opinion around the world, especially in predominantly Muslim countries, also opposed the war.
When the UN did not act, the United States, Britain, and Australia sent military forces and overthrew Saddam Hussein by force, comparing the UN to the toothless League of Nations.
However, the United States forces found no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, and then found itself in a prolonged counterinsurgency war.
In retrospect, although the world’s collective security system is creaky and not always effective, bypassing it to take military action also holds dangers.
For example, failed states have very weak control of their territory, making them potential havens for drug trafficking, money laundering, and terrorist bases.
Essentially, domestic politics looks rather like international anarchy.
In these cases, the international community has a duty to intervene, according to some approaches, to restore law and order.
The Democratic Peace Kant argued that lasting peace would depend on states’ becoming republics, with legislatures to check the power of monarchs to make war.
He thought that checks and balances in government would act as a brake on the use of military force—as compared to autocratic governments in which a single individual could make war without regard for the effect on the population.
Somewhat similarly, IR scholars have linked democracy with a kind of foreign policy fundamentally different from that of authoritarianism.
One theory they considered 15 Lepgold, Joseph, and Thomas G Weiss, eds.
The Democratic Peace and the Territorial Conflict in the Twentieth Century.
Indeed, the three most war-prone states of the past two centuries (according to political scientists who count wars) were France, Russia, and Britain.
Britain was a democracy throughout, France for part of the period, and Russia not at all.
What is true about democracies is that although they fight wars against authoritarian states, democracies almost never fight each other.
No major historical cases contradict this generalization, which is known as the democratic peace.
As there have not been many democracies for very long, the generalization could be just a coincidence, though this seems unlikely.
Or, citizens of democratic societies may simply not see the citizens of other democracies as enemies.
By contrast, authoritarian governments of other states can be seen as enemies.
Note that the peace among democracies gives empirical support to a long-standing liberal claim that, because it is rooted in the domestic level of analysis, contradicts realism’s claim that the most important explanations are at the interstate level.
Because democracies rarely fight each other, worldwide democratization might lead to lasting peace.
Here, Tunisia holds its first free election after leading the Arab Spring and reversing decades of authoritarian rule, 2011.
Military governments gave way to democratically elected civilian ones throughout most of Latin America as well as in several African and Asian countries.
South Africa, the last white-ruled African country, adopted majority rule in 1994.
In the late 1990s, democracy replaced long-standing dictatorships in Indonesia and Nigeria, both regional giants.
In 2004-2005, pro-democracy forces won victories in Ukraine, Afghanistan, Iraq, and Kyrgyzstan.
And in 2011-2012, the Arab Spring revolutions catalyzed democratic transitions in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen, with Syria potentially following suit if the government falls there.
In 2012, Burma underwent a rapid transition toward democracy after decades of harsh military rule.
However, military coups took place in Madagascar and Honduras in 2009, Niger in 2010, and Guinea-Bissau and Mali in 2012.
Iran rigged an election in 2009 and brutally cracked down on those protesting it.
We do not know where democratization will lead, but it is now conceivable that someday nearly all of the world’s states will be democratically governed.
As Kant envisaged, an international community based on peaceful relations may emerge.
However, although mature democracies almost never fight each other, a period of transition to democracy may be more prone to war than either a stable democracy or a stable authoritarian government. zu Therefore, the process of democratization does not necessarily bode well for peace in the short term.
This theory gained support in early 2006, when Iraqi elections were followed by a rise in sectarian violence, and then Palestinian elections brought to power the militant faction Hamas, which rejects Israel’s right to exist.
Finally, it is important to note that while democracy is often associated with peace and cooperation, democratic institutions can make cooperation more difficult.
For example, pressures for raising trade tariffs often arise from democratically elected legislatures.
Thus, while liberal scholars often extol the virtues of democracy, these same domestic institutions can make the process of international cooperation more complex.
Liberal theories thus provide a host of alternatives to power-based realist theories.
Nearly all liberal theories focus on solving the collective action problem using the reciprocity principle.
Whether because of international or domestic institutions, states come to expect reciprocal behavior regarding cooperation from other states.
In this way, their calculations of interests move from short-term concerns to long-term considerations.
Next, we review another set of alternatives to realism that focus on the identity principle.
Social Theories Several distinct approaches in IR theory may be grouped together as social theories, meaning that they rely on social interaction to explain individuals’ and states’ preferences.
These theories contrast with the assumption of fixed, timeless preferences in most theories 20 Mansfield, Edward D., and Jack Snyder.
Constructivism, a fast-growing approach in IR, asks how states construct their interest through their interactions with one another.
It is best described as an approach rather than a theory since, when stripped to its core, it says nothing about IR per se.
In fact, most constructivist explanations draw heavily on the identity principle to explain international behavior.
You Are the New Prime Minister"" at MyPoliSciLab Identities and Ideas Matter Constructivism is interested in how actors define their national interests, threats to those national interests, and their interests’ relationships to one another.
Realists (and neoliberals) tend to simply take state interests as given.
Thus, constructivism puts IR in the context of broader social relations.
States decide what they want based not only on material needs, but also on “social” interaction.
Just as a shopper may decide to buy a particular mp3 player because it will be perceived as cool (that is, more socially acceptable), so states may choose policies based on what they perceive will be “popular” with other states.
Yet, just as shoppers may have limits placed on which music player they can afford to buy , constructivists also recognize that power is not absent from international relations/ Constructivist research has many strands.
Realists would quickly answer that North Korea poses a bigger threat, but from a pure military power perspective, Great Britain is a far superior military force to North Korea.
Yet no one would argue that Great Britain is a threat to the United States no matter how many nuclear weapons it builds and no matter how deep disagreements about foreign policy become.
Constructivist scholars would point out the shared history, shared alliances, and shared norms that tell Americans and the British they are not a threat to one another although they are very powerful militarily.
The identity of the potential adversary matters, not just its military capabilities and interests.
This is a rejection of the realist assumption that states always want more rather than less power and wealth as well as the assumption that state interests exist independently of a context of interactions among states.
Constructivists hold that these state identities are complex and changing, and arise from interactions with other states—often through a process of socialization.
Some constructivist scholars contend that over time, states can conceptualize one another in such a way that there is no danger of a security dilemma, arms races, or the other effects of anarchy.
Culture, Social Identity, and Institutional Rationality in International Relations.
By the end of that century, war had become unthinkable, European identities are now intertwined with the European Union, not with the violent nationalism that led to two world wars.
For constructivists, power politics, anarchy, and military force cannot explain this change.
Institutions, regimes, norms, and changes in identity are better explanations.
Societies as a whole also change over time in what they consider to be threatening.
These nonstate actors invaded ports, pillaged goods, committed murder, and flaunted all international authority.
It would not be hard to consider such behavior terrorism even though the pirates had no political goals in their violence.
Even if not terrorism, no one would doubt the costs associated with piracy.
Many states, including the United States, used their navies in attempts to eradicate pirates.
Yet, despite the danger and harm historically caused by these actors, today we celebrate pirates by making them sports mascots, naming amusement rides after them, and glorifying them in movies.
Of course, one could argue that pirates are no longer a threat—even though _numerous acts of piracy still occur on the high seas.
Even apart from the high-profile pirate hijackings near Somalia in 20082009, the threat from piracy has remained high for many years.
Yet, we find it acceptable to play down the piracy threat by incorporating them into popular culture.
No doubt someone from two centuries ago would find such acceptance odd.
Constructivists are quick to point out that what societies or states consider dangerous is not universal or timeless.
Social norms and conventions change, and these changes can have tremendous implications for foreign policy.
States may also come to value and covet something like status or reputation, which are social, not material, concepts.
These theories may do better than realist or liberal approaches in explaining major changes in a state's foreign policy goals and image in the world that arise from internal changes and new self-concepts rather than external constraints or opportunities.
Examples might include the breakup of the Soviet Union and the election of Barack Obama as United States president.
Iran's identity as an Islamic revolutionary state affects its foreign policies.
Here, the morals police close a barber shop in Iran for giving Western-style haircuts, 2008.
This status as a neutral state gives Switzerland prestige and power— not a material power like money or guns—but a normative power to intervene diplomatically in important international affairs.
Similarly, Canada’s foreign policy contains its own identity-driven imperatives usually revolving around peacekeeping and humanitarian operations.
These identity-based explanations can help to explain the behavior of great powers as well.
In 1993, the UN Security Council established a war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
Its effectiveness was limited in its first years by inadequacy of funding necessary to hire investigators and translators, rent offices and phone lines, and so forth.
The contributions of the great powers to support the tribunal varied, with the United States providing the most support and Great Britain providing very little.
Liberal theorists would quickly recognize a collective goods problem in paying for the tribunal.
The world community benefits from the work of the tribunal (inasmuch as it deters future aggression and genocide), but each individual state gains this benefit—however beneficial it ends up being—regardless of its own contribution.
By this logic, Britain was being rational to free-ride because the United States and others were willing to pick up enough of the tab to make the tribunal at least minimally effective.
British leaders may not have wanted the tribunal to succeed because Britain tacitly sided with Serbia , and Serbia was not cooperating with a tribunal that had indicted the Bosnian Serb leaders as war criminals.
The same geopolitical factors that led Britain in the past to side with Serbia against Croatia were still operating.
War crimes come and go, by this reasoning, but great power interests remain fairly constant.
Both theories seem to have merit, but sometimes history provides “experiments” that, even though we do not control them, help sort out competing explanations.
In this case, in 1997, a liberal government headed by Prime Minister Tony Blair replaced the conservative government of John Major.
This change did not affect the explanatory “variables” of either theory—the nature of the collective goods problem inherent in the tribunal, and the nature of Britain’s strategic and historical interests and alliances in the Balkans.
But in fact, Blair’s government shifted its Bosnia policy dramatically, leading a raid to arrest two war crimes suspects and contributing substantial funds for the tribunal to construct a second courtroom.
Blair’s idea of Britain’s place in the international community drove the outcome of the case.
Another field of constructivist research also relies heavily on international norms and their power to constrain state action.
A constructivist explanation might 26 March, James G., and Johan Olsen.
In 2008, your predecessor had applied for NATO membership, an application that was rejected.
Although NATO left the door open for future membership, the Ukrainian public was angry over the NATO rejection.
Yet, you have continued your cooperation with NATO in several political issue areas.
Russia supplies much of your natural gas and several times has cut off supplies during political disputes, most recently in the winter of 2008-2009.
Your country has responded to these cutoffs by closing Russian oil pipelines that pass through your country en route to Western Europe.
Entering NATO could provide political support and military protection against any aggressive Russian diplomacy.
You have been much less supportive of NATO membership than your predecessor.
You have reassured Russia that, in the shortterm, Ukraine will not reapply for membership.
You have told leaders of several Western European states that you wish your country to remain neutral in international affairs.
Finally, you authored a bill passed by the legislature that removed the phrase ""NATO membership"" from the list of official national security goals.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Historically, a major source of opposition to Ukraine's entry into NATO comes from your own population.
Opinion polls show that your public opposes Ukraine's membership in NATO by a margin of nearly two to one.
Your own party's electoral base is located near the Russian border and favors better relations with Russia.
The public also supported Ukraine's successful application to the World Trade Organization.
Public opposition to NATO is not anti-Western per se, but is rooted in the NATO airstrikes against Serbia in 1999 in the war over Kosovo.
There is a general desire to reorient Ukraine's foreign policy toward the West, but so far, this desire has excluded NATO membership.
SCENARIO Imag ine that Russia again cuts off supplies of natural gas and other resources to your country.
The dispute is over your continued cooperation with NATO in political affairs.
Russia is demanding that you lessen your cooperation with the NATO alliance or face increasing political pressure and economic pressure.
Although NATO membership is not a prerequisite for EU membership, EU members would not look favorably on you abandoning an international regime to which you had committed.
In the 19th century, European powers occasionally intervened to protect Christian subjects of the Ottoman Empire from massacres, but generally ignored non-Christian victims.
However, as decolonization enshrined the principle of self-determination and as human rights became widely valued, the scope of humanitarian intervention expanded.
Although the international community does not always respond effectively to humanitarian crises, it is no longer acceptable to view only Christians as deserving protection.
The United States in this example tried to act in an appropriate fashion rather than according to the dictates of cost-benefit calculations.
Examples of this identity approach can be found in the developing world as well.
Some constructivists have argued that countries in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East have adopted or changed policies in response to international norms—not because it provided large benefits, but rather because it was perceived as the appropriate course of action.
For example, many developing states have raced to create science bureaucracies and/or begin technological modernization of their militaries.
Constructivists point out that the reason developing states choose to spend their limited resources on such projects is their desire to be perceived as “modern” by the international system.
Ironically, many states that build science bureaucracies have few scientists while many states that build advanced militaries have few enemies/ 0 Thus, constructivists emphasize that identities and norms must be used to explain this seemingly puzzling behavior.
In an age of global communication and relative ease of transportation, many possibilities exist.
Some contend that individuals, labeled norm entrepreneurs , through travel, writing, and meeting with elites change ideas and encourage certain types of norms.
Some point to broad-based social movements and nongovernmental organizations, such as the anti-apartheid movement encouraging the development of a global norm of racial equality.
Others show how international organizations can diffuse norms of what is appropriate and inappropriate behavior.
In each case, however, new ideas and norms, rather than power and self-interest, drive state behavior.
O A Research in the constructivist tradition has expanded rapidly in recent years.
Scholars have examined the role of the European Union in socializing elites in new member states 01 as well as the role of the United Nations in conferring legitimacy on the use of A A force as a source of its power.
Others have investigated how international organizations 27 Finnemore, Martha.
The United Nations Education, Scientific, and Cultural Organizations and Science Policy.
Finally, constructivist scholars have begun to investigate how notions of identity and symbolism are important for understanding terrorist movements and counterterrorism policy.
Liberals argue that some constructivist scholars pay too little attention to the formal institutions and the politics within them.
For this reason, postmodernism itself is difficult to present in a simple or categorical way.
More fundamentally, postmodernism calls into question the whole notion of states as actors.
States have no tangible reality; they are “fictions” that we (as scholars and citizens) construct to make sense of the actions of large numbers of individuals.
For postmodernists, the stories told about the actions and policies of states are just that—stories.
From this perspective, an arbitrary distinction leads bookstores to put spy novels on the fiction shelf whereas biographies and histories go on the nonfiction shelf.
None of these is an objective reality, and all are filtered through an interpretive process that distorts the 33 Barnett, Michael, and Martha Finnemore.
Symbols, Strategies, and Choices for International Relations Scholarship after September 11.
The Soviet Union, for example, was treated by realists as a single actor with a single set of objective interests.
Indeed, it was considered the second most important actor in the world.
Realists were amazed when the Soviet Union split into 15 pieces, each containing its own fractious groups and elements.
It became clear that the “unitary state” called the Soviet Union had masked (and let realists ignore) the divergent experiences of constituent republics, ethnic groups, and individuals.
Postmodernists seek to “deconstruct” such constructions as states, the international system, and the associated stories and arguments with which realists portray the nature of international relations.
To deconstruct a text—a term borrowed from literary criticism—means to tease apart the words in order to reveal hidden meanings, looking for what might be omitted or included only implicitly.
The hidden meanings not n q explicitly addressed in the text are often called the subtext/ Omissions are an aspect of subtext, as when realist theories of IR omit women and gender, for example.
In its emphasis on states, realism omits the roles of individuals, domestic politics, economic classes, MNCs, and other nonstate actors.
In its focus on the great powers, realism omits the experiences of poor countries.
In its attention to military forms of leverage, it omits the roles of various nonmilitary forms of leverage.
Realism focuses so narrowly because its aim is to reduce IR to a simple, coherent model.
To postmodernists, the realist model is none of these things; it is a biased model that creates a narrow and one-sided story for the purpose of promoting the interests of powerful actors.
Postmodernists seek to destroy this model along with any other model that tries to represent IR in simple objective categories.
Postmodernists instead want to celebrate the diversity of experiences that make up IR without needing to make sense of them by simplifying and categorizing.
This emphasis on classes—implying that the domestic and economic attributes of societies shape external relations with other states—contrasts with the realist approach to IR with its separation of domestic and international politics.
We will discuss Marxist gjj Watch the Video ""Castro's Cuba"" at MyPoliSciLab 38 Shapiro, Michael J Textualizing Global Politics.
Here we will show, briefly, how Marxist theories as social theories contrast with the realist paradigm.
Marxism is a branch of socialism, a theory that holds that the more powerful classes oppress and exploit the less powerful by denying them their fair share of the surplus they create.
The oppressed classes try to gain power in order to seize more of the wealth for themselves.
This process, called class struggle, is one way of looking at the political relationships between richer and poorer people, and ultimately between richer and poorer world regions.
In the mid-19th century, Karl Marx emphasized labor as the source of economic surplus.
At that time, the Industrial Revolution was accompanied by particular hardship among industrial workers in Europe.
Marxists still believe that the surplus created by labor should be recaptured by workers through political struggle.
Today, Marxism is most influential in countries of the global South, where capital is scarce and labor conditions are wretched.
Marx’s theories of class struggle were oriented toward domestic society in the industrializing countries of his time, not toward poor countries or international relations.
Traditional Marxists looked to the advanced industrialized countries for revolution and socialism, which would grow out of capitalism.
In their view, the third world would have to develop through its own stages of accumulation from feudalism to capitalism before taking the revolutionary step to socialism.
Proletarian workers in industrialized countries enjoyed rising standards of living and did not RICH AND POOR Disparity of wealth is a central aspect of global North-South relations.
Marxists see international relations and domestic politics alike as being shaped by a class struggle between the rich and the poor.
Meanwhile, in the backward third world countries, oppressed workers and peasants staged a series of revolutions, successful and failed.
Lenin, founder of the Soviet Union, before the Russian Revolution of 1917.
Lenin’s theory of imperialism argued that European capitalists were investing in colonies where they could earn big profits and then using part of these to buy off the working class at home.
But Lenin saw that after the scramble for colonies in the 1890s, few areas of the world remained to be colonized.
Imperialist expansion could occur only at the expense of other imperialist states, leading to interimperialist competition and wars such as World War I Seizing on Russia’s weakness during that war, Lenin led the first successful communist revolution there in 1917.
Lenin’s general idea still shapes a major approach to North-South relations—the idea that industrialized states exploit poor countries (through both formal and informal colonization) and buy off their own working classes with the profits.
Through this globalization of class relations, world accumulation concentrates surplus toward the rich parts of the world and away from the poor ones.
Many third world revolutionaries sought to break loose from exploitation by the European colonizers.
After European colonization ended, the United States as the world’s richest country (with large investments in the global South and a global military presence) became the target of revolutionaries agitating against exploitation in poor countries.
In a number of countries, imperialists were thrown out (often violently, sometimes not) and revolutionary nationalists took power.
One of the most important such revolutions was in China, where Mao Zedong’s communists took power in 1949 on a Leninist platform adapted to the largely peasant-based movement they led.
Mao declared that “China has stood up”—on its own feet, throwing off foreign domination and foreign exploitation.
In India at the same time, the movement led by Gandhi used a different means to achieve similar ends—national independence from colonialism.
According to the revolutionaries in these countries, exploitation of third world countries by rich countries takes away the economic surplus of the global South and concentrates the accumulation of wealth toward the rich parts of the world.
By breaking free of such exploitation, third world states can then retain their own surplus and begin to accumulate their own wealth.
Eventually they can generate their own self-sustaining cycles of accumulation and lift themselves out of poverty.
And within a single poor country, trade-offs arise between concentrating or distributing wealth.
For former colonies, the realities of economic development after independence have been complex.
Leon Trotsky , a Russian revolutionary, believed that after the 1917 revolution, Russia would never be able to build socialism alone and should make its top priority the spreading of revolution to other countries to build a worldwide alliance.
Marxist theories in IR entered a low-visibility phase after the collapse of the Soviet Union and China’s turn toward capitalism—events that seemed to discredit Marxist theories.
However, in the past few years, Marxists and former Marxists have taken power in a number of Latin American countries.
Venezuela and Bolivia, as a result, have become active allies of Cuba, forming an anti-American coalition.
In Nicaragua, the former communist leader whom U.S.-organized rebels fought in the 1980s won election as president in 2006.
These events, along with China’s continuing formal adherence to Marxism, suggest that Marxist theories of IR have ongoing importance in the post-Cold War era.
Peace Studies Peace studies challenges fundamental concepts behind both realism and neoliberalismV In particular, peace studies seeks to shift the focus of IR away from the interstate level of analysis and toward a broad conception of social relations at the individual, domestic, and global levels of analysis.
Peace studies connects war and peace with individual responsibility, economic inequality, gender relations, cross-cultural understanding, and other aspects of social relationships.
Most scholars of peace studies think that a good way to gain knowledge is to participate in action—not just to observe objectively.
This lack of objectivity has been criticized as normative bias because scholars impose their personal norms and values on the subject.
Scholars in peace studies respond, however, that realism itself has normative biases and makes policy prescriptions.
The development and implementation of peaceful strategies for settling conflicts— using alternatives to violent forms of leverage—are known by the general term conflict resolution.
These methods are at work, competing with violent methods, in virtually all international conflicts.
Recently, the use of conflict resolution has been increasing, becoming more sophisticated, and succeeding more often.
Most conflict resolution uses a third party whose role is mediation between two conflicting parties.
No hard-and-fast rule states what kinds of third parties mediate what kinds of conflicts.
Some regional conflicts are mediated through regional organizations, single states, or even private individuals.
Some mediation is strictly technical —a mediator may take an active but strictly neutral role in channeling communication between two states that lack other channels of communication.
For example, Pakistan secretly passed messages between China and the United States before the breakthrough in U.S.-Chinese relations in 1971.
Such a role is sometimes referred to as offering the mediator’s good offices to a negotiating process.
In facilitating communication, a mediator listens to each side’s ideas and presents them in a way the other side can hear.
In these roles, the mediator is like the translator between the two sides, or a therapist helping them work out psychological problems in their relationship. z Travel and discussion by private individuals and groups can r q serve as citizen diplomacy, to ease tensions as well.
If both sides agree in advance to abide by a solution devised by a mediator, the process is called arbitration.
In that case, both sides present their arguments to the arbitrator, who decides on a “fair” solution.
For example, when Serbian and Bosnian negotiators could not agree on who should get the city of Brcko, they turned the issue over to arbitration rather than hold up the entire 1995 Dayton Agreement.
Arbitration often uses a panel of three people, one chosen by each side unilaterally and a third on whom both sides agree.
Conflicting parties can also use confidence-building measures to gradually increase trust.
By contrast, linkage lumps together diverse issues so that compromises on one can be traded off against another in a grand deal.
This was the case, for instance, in the Yalta negotiations of 1945 among the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union.
On the table simultaneously were such matters as the terms of occupation of Germany, the Soviet presence in Eastern Europe, the strategy for defeating Japan, and the creation of the United Nations.
Peace studies scholars argue that war is not just a natural expression of power, but one closely tied to militarism in cultures.
Militarism also refers to the structuring of society around war— for example, the dominant role of a military-industrial complex in a national economy, or the dominance of national security issues in domestic politics.
Militarism may underlie the propensity of political leaders to use military force.
Historically, militarism has had a profound influence on the evolution of societies.
Not only evil acts but also exemplary acts of humanity are brought forth by war—sacrifice, honor, courage, altruism on behalf of loved ones, and bonding with a community larger than oneself.
Costa Rica has had no army for 50 years (just lightly armed forces), even during the 1980s when wars occurred in neighboring Nicaragua and Panama.
Japanese culture since World War II has developed strong norms against war and violence.
Anthropologists have tried to connect the domestic characteristics of hunter-gatherer societies with their external propensity to engage in warfare.
Some evidence shows that war occurs more frequently in societies with internal (especially gender) inequalities, with harsh child-rearing practices, and with fathers who are absent from child rearing.
By contrast, relatively peaceful societies are more likely to have open decision-making processes, relative gender equality, and permissive and affectionate child rearing.
But all these societal attributes could as well be effects of war as causes.
And because all kinds of societies seem to have the potential for warfare under some conditions , distinctions such as “warlike” are only relative.
Just as war is seen in peace studies as a pervasive aspect of society as a whole, so can peace be reconceptualized in a broader way.
Because realism assumes the normalcy of military conflicts, it recognizes only a negative kind of peace—the temporary absence of war.
By contrast, positive peace refers to a peace that resolves the underlying reasons for war—peace that is not just a cease-fire but a transformation of relationships.
Under positive peace, not only do state armies stop fighting each other, they stop arming, stop forming death squads against internal protest, and reverse the economic exploitation and political oppression that scholars in peace studies believe are responsible for social conflicts that lead to war.
Militarism in a culture, or the lack thereof, can influence foreign policy.
In societies at war, children's psychological trauma contributes to intergroup conflicts decades later.
Generations of Palestinians have grown up in a society affected by violent conflict.
This Palestinian girl, walking between Israeli troops and Palestinian stone-throwers in the West Bank in 2010, has lived around violent conflict her whole life, as have her parents and grandparents.
Some scholars define poverty, hunger, and oppression as forms of violence—which they call structural violence because it is caused by the structure of social relations rather than by direct actions such as shooting people.
Structural violence in this definition kills and harms many more people each year than do war and other forms of direct political violence.
Positive peace is usually defined to include the elimination of structural violence.
The positive peace approach seeks to change the whole system, not just one piece of it.
The creation of a world government has long been debated by scholars and pursued by rr 7 activists.
Some scholars believe progress is being made toward the eventual emergence of a world government.
Scholars in peace studies also study how to achieve the conditions for positive peace.
Most peace studies scholars share a skepticism that state leaders left to themselves would ever achieve positive peace.
Rather, they believe the practice of IR will change only as a result of pressures from individuals and groups.
The most commonly studied method of exerting such pressure is through peace movements— people taking to the streets in protest against war and militarism.
As United States president GIVE PEACE A CHANCE Peace demonstrators play a role in many conflicts.
Here, demonstrators respond to an outbreak of violence in Belfast, Northern Ireland, 2013. r n ' ' Pojman, Louis P Terrorism, Human Rights, and the Case for World Government.
Mahatma Gandhi, who led India’s struggle for independence from the British Empire before 1948, emphasized that nonviolence must be active in seeking to prevent violence, to resolve conflicts without violence, and especially to stand up against injustice enforced violently.
Gandhi organized Indians to resist the British colonial occupation without resorting to violence, even when British troops shot down unarmed Indian protesters.
Proponents of nonviolence emphasize the practical side of nonviolence in addition to its morality.
As a tool of the powerless standing up against injustices by the powerful, nonviolence is often the most cost-effective approach—because the costs of violent resistance would be prohibitive.
In the United States, the philosophy of nonviolence spread widely in the 1960s in the civil rights movement, especially through the work of Martin Luther King, Jr.
King’s example as well as specific strategies recommended by an American, Gene Sharp, whose ideas were taught to young Arab activists at earlier workshops in Europe.
These nonviolent approaches worked spectacularly in Tunisia and Egypt, ambiguously in Yemen, were swept aside by a violent rebellion in Libya, and gave way to a protracted civil war in Syria that claimed 60,000 lives in 2011-2012.
Gandhi believed that there is always a third alternative to passivity or response in kind.
Nonviolence does not always succeed when faced with violence, but then neither does violent response.
However, political leaders may believe they have done their duty if they respond violently without success, but not if they respond nonviolently without success.
Gender Theories Scholarship on gender has cut a broad swath across academic disciplines, from literature to psychology to history.
In recent years, it has made inroads in international relations, once considered one of the fields most resistant to gendered arguments.
What scholars traditionally claim to be universal often turns out to be true only of males.
Some feminist IR scholars argue that the core assumptions of realism—especially of anarchy and sovereignty—reflect the ways in which males tend to interact and to see the world.
In this view, the realist approach simply assumes male participants when discussing foreign policy decision making, state sovereignty, or the use of military force.
Because the vast majority of heads of state, diplomats, and soldiers are male, it may be realistic to study them as males.
In this view, our understanding of male actors in IR can be increased by considering how their gender identity affects their views and decision processes.
And females also influence IR (more often through nonstate channels than males do)—influences often ignored by realism.
Some feel that women scholars tend to be more interested in these roles and effects than are their male colleagues, who largely ignore gender topics.
One list of “fifty key thinkers” in IR includes four women, three of whom it lists as gender scholars, while none of the 46 males are listed as gender scholars.
Such gender roles are based in the broader construction of masculinity as suitable to public and political spaces, whereas femininity is associated with the sphere of the private and domestic.
Not long before Thucydides, the ancient Greek woman poet Sappho wrote love poems to women on the island of Lesbos.
Just before Machiavelli, the Italian-born writer Christine de Pisan praised women’s abilities to make peace.
A century after Hobbes, Mary Wollstonecraft in Britain argued for equal rights for women.
And a century before Morgenthau founded American realism, the American Susan B Anthony worked tirelessly for pacifism, abolitionism, and suffragism.
Although they are interwoven , A GUY THING Feminists from varioustheoretical traditions agreethatthe gender makeup of international summits and national governments matters.
Here, China's old and new ruling group mark the transition of power, 2012.
One strand, difference feminism, focuses on valorizing the feminine—that is, valuing the unique contributions of women as women.
Difference feminists do not think women do all things as well as men or vice versa.
Because of their greater experience with nurturing and human relations, women are seen as potentially more effective than men in conflict resolution as well as in group decision making.
Some difference feminists believe there is a core biological essence to being male or female , but most think women’s difference is more culturally than biologically determined.
Liberal feminists see the “essential” differences in men’s and women’s abilities or perspectives as trivial or nonexistent—men and women are equal.
They deplore the exclusion of women from positions of power in IR but do not believe that including women would change the nature of the international system.
A third approach combines feminism with postmodernism, discussed later in this chapter.
Postmodern feminism tends to reject the assumptions about gender made by both difference and liberal feminists.
Where difference feminists consider gender differences important and fixed, and liberal feminists consider those differences trivial, postmodern feminists find them important but arbitrary and flexible.
The Masculinity of Realism Difference feminism provides a perspective from which to reexamine the core assumptions of realism—especially the assumption of autonomy, from which flow the key realist concepts of sovereignty and anarchy.
To realists, the international system consists of autonomous actors that control their own territory and have no right to infringe on another’s territory.
Some difference feminists have argued that realism emphasizes autonomy and separation because men find separation easier to deal with than interconnection.
This view rests on a psychological theory that boys and girls grow up from a young age with different views of separateness and connection.
In this theory, because a child’s primary caretaker is almost always female in the early years, girls form their gender identity around the perception of similarity with their caretaker (and by extension the environment in which they live), but boys perceive their difference from the caretaker.
From this experience, boys develop social relations based on individual autonomy, but girls’ relations are based on connection.
As a result, women are held to be more likely than men to fear abandonment, whereas men are more likely to fear intimacy.
In moral reasoning, according to this theory, boys tend to apply abstract rules and stress individual rights, but girls pay more attention to the concrete contexts of different situations and to the responsibility of group members for each other.
In social relations, boys form and dissolve friendships more readily than girls, who are more likely to stick loyally with friends.
Such a conception of autonomy parallels the masculine psyche just described.
Thus, some feminist scholars find in realism a hidden assumption of masculinity. that realists draw between international politics and domestic politics parallels the distinction in gender roles between the public and private spheres.
By contrast, an international system based on feminine principles might give greater importance to the interdependence of states than to their autonomy, stressing the responsibility of people to care for each other with less regard for states and borders.
In the struggle between the principles of human rights and of sovereignty (noninterference in internal affairs), human rights would receive priority.
In the choice of forms of leverage when conflicts arise between states, violence might be less prevalent.
The realist preoccupation with the interstate level of analysis presumes that the logic of war itself is autonomous and can be separated from other social relationships such as economics, domestic politics, sexism, and racism.
Difference feminism, however, reveals the connections of these phenomena with war.
It suggests new avenues for understanding war at the domestic and individual levels of analysis—underlying causes that realists largely ignore.
From this difference-feminist perspective, neoliberalism has gone backward from traditional liberalism, by accepting the realist assumption of separate unitary states as the important actors and downplaying substate and transnational actors including women.
Neoliberalism’s conception of cooperation as rule-based interactions among autonomous actors also reflects masculinist assumptions.
Furthermore, the sharp distinction ROLE REVERSAL Feminist scholars emphasize the importance of gender roles in IR, especially the traditional distinction between males in the political-military roles and females in the domestic-family roles.
Here, top United States officials attend the UN General Assembly, 2010.
Here, too, many difference feminists see in realism a hidden assumption of masculinity.
They see war as not only a male occupation, but also the quintessentially male occupation.
Anthropologists have found that in all known cultures, males are the primary combatants in warfare, despite the enormous diversity of those cultures in so many other ways.
One supposed link between war and masculinity is the male sex hormone testosterone , which some biologists have connected with aggressive behavior in animals.
Thus, testosterone is a link in a complex system of relationships between the organism and the social environment.
Complex behaviors such as aggression and war cannot be said to be biologically driven or predetermined, because humanity’s most striking biological capability is flexibility.
Even some feminist scholars who see gender differences 7 7 as strictly cultural, and not biological at all, view war as a masculine construction.
Both biologically and anthropologically, no firm evidence connects women’s caregiving functions with any particular kinds of behavior such as reconciliation or nonviolence—although females have been studied less than males.
Although they rarely take part in combat, women sometimes provide logistical support to male warriors and sometimes help drive the men into a war frenzy by dancing, shaming nonparticipating males, and other activities supportive of war.
Yet in other cultures, women restrain the men from war or play special roles as mediators in bringing wars to an end.
In ancient Athens, the playwright Aristophanes speculated about how women might end the unpopular Peloponnesian War with Sparta, then in progress.
Difference feminists thought that women would vote for peace and against war, changing the nature of foreign policy, but women generally voted as their husbands did.
Nonetheless, United States public opinion on foreign policy issues since the 1930s partially vindicates difference feminists.
A gender gap in polls shows that women are about ten percentage points lower than men on average in their support for military actions.
This gender gap shrinks, however, when broad consensus on a military action exists, as when United States forces attacked terrorist supporters in Afghanistan in late 2001.
Meanwhile, feminists in recent decades have continued to organize women’s peace organizations.
In the 1980s, Women’s Action for Nuclear Disarmament opposed the nuclear arms buildup, and women encamped for years at Britain’s Greenham Common air base.
In 1995, the UN-sponsored Beijing conference on women brought together women activists from around the world, and helped deepen feminists’ engagement with global issues such as North-South inequality.
In 2000, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1325, mandating greater inclusion of women and attention to gender in UN peacekeeping and reconstruction.
But in several locations, UN peacekeepers participated in local prostitution, rape, and even sex trafficking.
In 2004, Secretary-General Annan called “shameful” the reported behavior of UN troops from several countries serving in Democratic Congo.
Investigators there found hundreds of cases of sexual crimes by UN personnel.
As a result of Resolution 1325, “gender advisors” have begun to accompany international peacekeeping and relief operations to provide practical advice on more effective operations in the context of local cultures’ gender relations.
When asked how it would be WOMAN POWER Difference feminists see women as inherently less warlike than men and more adept at making peace because of their potential and actual experiences as mothers.
In this view, women play distinct roles in wartime and also have distinct needs.
During the long civil war in Liberia in the 1990s, women organized mass protests for peace and insisted the male faction leaders end the war.
Stephenson, Carolyn M Feminism, Pacifism, Nationalism, and the United Nations Decade for Women.
As a result of this gender perspective, the bridge was redesigned to include a pedestrian walkway.
Through these various actions, difference feminists began developing a feminist practice of international relations that could provide an alternative to the masculine practice of realism.
For difference feminists, war does indeed begin in the minds of men, but the foundations for peace would better be sought in the minds of women.
Women in IR Liberal feminists are skeptical of difference-feminist critiques of realism.
They believe that when women are allowed to participate in IR, they play the game basically the same way men do, with similar results.
They think that women can practice realism—based on autonomy, sovereignty, anarchy, territory, military force, and all the rest—just as well as men can.
Liberal feminists therefore tend to reject the critique of realism as masculine.
Liberal feminism focuses on the integration of women into the overwhelmingly male preserves of foreign policy making and the military.
In most states, these occupations are typically at least 90 percent male.
For instance, in 1995, the world’s diplomatic delegations to the UN General Assembly were 80 percent male overall, and the heads of those delegations were 97 percent male.
The United States military, with one of the highest proportions of women anywhere in the world or in history, is still 85 percent male/ 0 For liberal feminists, the main effect of this gender imbalance on the nature of IR—that is, apart from effects on the status of women—is to waste talent.
Liberal feminists think that women have the same capabilities as men, so the inclusion of women in traditionally male occupations would bring additional capable individuals into those areas.
Gender equality would thus increase national capabilities by giving the state a better overall pool of diplomats, generals, soldiers, and politicians.
In support of their argument that, on average, women handle power just as men do, liberal feminists point to the many examples of women who have served in such positions.
No distinctly feminine feature of their behavior in office distinguishes these leaders from their male counterparts.
Still, they do show that individuals cannot be judged accurately using group characteristics alone.
Some have even suggested that women in power tend to be more warlike to compensate for being females in traditionally male roles.
Other states, such as Finland, Norway, New Zealand, Denmark, Brazil, Thailand, and Iceland, have had women leaders when war and peace were not major political issues in those countries.
In the United States Congress, it is hard to compare men’s and women’s voting records on foreign policy issues because there have been so few women.
Women never chaired the key foreign policy committees in the Senate or House until 2011—although Rep.
Nancy Pelosi was the first woman Speaker of the House, third in line to the presidency, in 2007-2010.
A 2008 UN report found that women comprised over 18 percent of members of parliaments across the world, up from 7 percent in 1995.
Some nations set aside a certain number of seats for females in parliament.
In Rwanda, for example, women make up over 50 percent of the lower house of parliament, even though the law requires only 30 percent female representation.
Liberal feminists also believe that women soldiers, like women politicians, have a range of skills and abilities comparable to men’s.
About 200,000 women soldiers serve in the United States military (15 percent of the total) and nearly 2 million women are veterans.
Women perform well in a variety of military roles, including logistical and medical support, training, and command.
Although women have served with distinction in military forces, they have been excluded from combat roles in most of those forces.
In some countries, military women are limited to traditional female roles such as nurses and typists.
Even when women may hold nontraditional positions such as mechanics and pilots (as in the United States), most women remain in the traditional roles.
And certain jobs still remain off-limits; for instance, women cannot serve in United States combat infantry units.
In the 15th century, Joan of Arc rallied French soldiers to defeat England, turning the tide of the Hundred Years’ War.
Women have often participated in combat in rebel forces fighting guerrilla wars in Vietnam, Nicaragua, and elsewhere, as well as in terrorist or paramilitary units in countries such as Peru, Germany, Italy, and Palestine.
Women in Eritrea’s guerrilla forces became part of that country’s regular army after independence and then served in frontline combat units during Eritrea and Ethiopia’s trench warfare in the late 1990s.
During the 1991 Gulf War, tens of thousands of United States women served, 13 were killed, and 2 were captured as prisoners of war.
In the late 1990s, women began serving on some United States Women soldiers have performed as well as men in military tasks, as predicted by liberal feminists.
But in state armies, women are barred from virtually all infantry combat units worldwide.
Guerrilla forces more often include women, and female United States military police in Iraq often participate in fighting.
Here, in 2005, a sergeant from the Kentucky National Guard receives the silver star for heroism in combat after fighting off an ambush in Iraq.
In the 2003 Iraq War, women flew all types of airplanes and helicopters, and one woman was in the first group of United States POWs captured early in the war.
During the subsequent years of war in Iraq, U.S, women military police have acquitted themselves well in numerous firefights.
All these cases suggest that women are able to hold their own in combat.
The main reason that military forces exclude women from combat seems to be fear about what effect their presence might have on the male soldiers, whose discipline and loyalty have traditionally been thought to depend on male bonding and single-minded focus.
Liberal feminists reject such arguments and contend that group bonding in military units does not depend on gender segregation.
Attacks on women in Algeria, Rwanda, Bosnia, Afghanistan, Democratic Congo, and Sudan pointed to a possible new trend toward women as military targets.
In sum, liberal feminists reject the argument that women bring uniquely feminine assets or liabilities to foreign and military affairs.
They do not critique realism as essentially masculine in nature but do criticize state practices that exclude women from participation in international politics and war.
The arguments of difference feminists and liberal feminists may seem totally at odds.
Difference feminists argue that realism reflects a masculine perception of social relations, whereas liberal feminists think that women can be just as realist as men.
Liberal feminists believe that female participation in foreign policy and the military will enhance state capabilities, but difference feminists think women’s unique abilities can be put to better use in transforming (feminizing) the entire system of international relations rather than in trying to play men’s games.
The evidence in favor of both positions can be reconciled to some extent by bearing in mind that the character and ability of an individual are not the same as that of his or her group.
Rather, the qualities of individuals follow a bell curve distribution, with many people clustered in the middle and fewer people very high or low on a given capability.
To take a simple example, a few women are physically larger than almost all men, and a few men are smaller than almost all women.
On various dimensions of capability, the women’s curve is above or below the men’s on average, but there is still much overlap.
Liberal feminist arguments emphasize the overlap of the two bell curves.
They say that individual women —most women on most relevant dimensions—are well within the male curve and thus can perform equally with the men.
Indeed, women in nontraditional gender roles may well perform better than their male counterparts, because presumably women who self-select into such roles are near the high end of the 82 Katzenstein, Mary Fainsod, and Judith Reppy, eds.
Overlapping Bell Curves Average Average man woman Capability on some dimension ^ Bell curves show that individuals differ in capabilities such as physical strength or peacemaking ability.
Although the genders differ on average, for most individuals such differences do not come into play.
Similarly, women who become state leaders are presumably more adept at foreign policy making than most women , because political processes tend to select women at the high end of the curve in terms of their affinity for realism.
Difference feminists are more interested in the shift in the two bell curves, not their overlap.
On average, in this perspective, women tend to see international relations in a somewhat different way than men do.
So although individuals selected to participate in foreign policy and the military may not differ from their male counterparts, women as a group differ.
By this logic, then, profound differences in IR—and a shift away from the utility of realism in explaining state behavior—would occur only if many women participated in key foreign policy positions.
But a world in which most politicians or soldiers were female might be a different story.
Then, instead of the selection of women for their ability to fit into men’s games, the rules of the game might themselves change to reflect the fact that “average” women would be the main actors in the traditionally important IR roles.
Of course, these theories of difference feminists have never been tested, because women have never attained predominance in foreign policy making in any country—much less in the international system as a whole.
In addition to the liberal and difference strands of feminism, the third strand, postmodern feminism, is connected with the rise of postmodernism in the social sciences.
Postmodern Feminism One line of criticism directed at realism combines feminism and postmodernism.
Feminist postmodernists agree with difference feminists that realism carries hidden meanings about gender roles but deny that there is any fixed inherent meaning in either male or female genders.
Rather, feminist postmodernists look at the interplay of gender and power in a more open-ended way.
Postmodern feminists criticize liberal feminists for trying merely to integrate women into traditional structures of war and foreign policy.
They criticize difference feminists as well, for glorifying traditional feminine virtues.
They argue that women are not just passive bystanders or victims in war, but active participants in a system of warfare tied to both genders.
Postmodern feminists reject not only realism but also some of the alternative approaches that emphasize the protection of women and other noncombatants.
Just-war doctrine is considered too abstract—a set of concepts and rules that does not do justice to the richness of each historical context and the varied roles of individual men and women within it.
The plane that dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima had female gender; it was named after the pilot’s mother.
Likewise the French atom-bomb test sites in the South Pacific were all given women’s names.
Similarly, pilots have pasted pinup photos of nude women onto conventional bombs before dropping them.
In all these cases, postmodern feminists would note that the feminine gender of vehicles, targets, or decorations amplifies the masculinity of the weapon itself.
For example, the terms power and potency refer to both state capability and male virility.
Military force depends on phallic objects—weapons designed to shoot projectiles, penetrate targets, and explode.
Female models are hired to market tanks, helicopter missiles, and other “potent” weapons to male procurement officers at international military trade shows.
The phallic character of weapons has seemingly persisted even as technology has evolved from spears to guns to missiles.
Gendered Violence, Political Order, and the European Conquest of the Americas.
Whether states’ interests reflect fixed assumptions about power and well-being or are constructed by states and substate actors based on ideas and social interactions, those interests do sometimes conflict with those of other statesSuch conflicts are the subject of the next chapter.
R REVIEW Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Wrap Up"" at MyPoliSciLab SUMMARY ■ The central claims of realism—regarding anarchy, state actors, rationality, and the utility of military force—have been challenged on a variety of grounds.
Shared norms and rules are important in getting members to pay for collective goods.
They believe that although individual women participants may not reflect this difference, the participation of large numbers of women would make the international system more peaceful.
As evidence, liberal feminists point to historical and presentday women leaders and women soldiers.
U.S.-Canadian relations seem better explained by liberal institutionalism than by realism.
Show how the contrasting tenets of realism and liberal institutionalism each applies to the relationship.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview Many countries now use gender quotas when electing legislatures.
As of 2008,59 countries legally require women to hold some number of seats in atleastone house ofthe national legislature, and 33 countries require women's representation at the regional governmental level.
The requirements range from a low of 2 percent of seats in Bangladesh (which also elected a woman to be prime minister in 2009), to nearly 50 percent of seats ofthe lower house in Rwanda.
These quotas vary not only by the number of seats reserved for women, but also by their implementation.
Some countries have amended their constitutions to require more equal representation.
Other countries pass laws (which are easier to change at a later time than a constitution) to carve out a minimum number of legislative seats for women, while still other countries place the burden on political parties.
In these latter cases, parties must nominate a certain percentage of women to run in elections.
This method does not guarantee seats to women , but does guarantee an opportunity to hold a seat.
This growing phenomenon of gender quotas has often been encouraged by Western states (especially Europe) and human rights organizations.
Legislative Quotas Are Important for Equality and Development Equal representation is important for democratic government.
A healthy democracy demands that all citizens feel invested in the political process.
Women will face discrimination and slower political acceptance without quotas.
In the United States and Europe, despite having the vote, it took years for women to be represented in significant numbers in legislatures.
Quotas will speed the acceptance of women in the political world, giving them more of a say on matters of public policy.
Moreover, the costs of economic reform often fall disproportionately on women.
Giving women more of a say in how that reform takes places is important.
ARGUMENT 2 Legislative Quotas Will Not Help Equality and Are Undemocratic Quotas could create animosity toward women.
Reserving seats for women in legislatures risks a backlash against women's rights.
Other groups may push for quotas as well, creating a hostile political environment.
The result could be political instability as various groups press their case for legally protected seats in the legislature.
The ideal of democracy is to allow anyone to serve as a representative regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, or any other personal quality.
By their very nature, gender-based quotas violate this idea, reserving certain seats for one group based on a personal quality irrespective of that person's qualifications.
The idea of individual rights is a Western-oriented concept of human rights.
Rather than encouraging gender quotas, other policies should be promoted that are more compatible with local political culture.
Women's Political Effectiveness in Contexts of Democratization and Governance Reform.
States take actions because people in governments —decision makers —choose those actions.
Decisions are carried out by actions taken to change the world, and then information from the world is monitored to evaluate the effects of these actions.
The choice may be complicated by uncertainty about the costs and benefits of various actions.
In such cases, decision makers must attach probabilities to each possible outcome of an action.
Some decision makers are relatively accepting of risk, whereas others are averse to risk.
These factors affect the importance that decision makers place on various alternative outcomes that could result from an action.
Of course, one may believe decision makers are rational, but not accept the realist assumption that states may be treated as unitary actors.
Governments are made up of individuals, who may rationally pursue their goals.
Yet, the goals of different individuals involved in making a decision may diverge, as may the goals of different state agencies.
Making Foreign Policy ■ Models of Decision Making ■ Individual Decision Makers ■ Group Psychology ■ Crisis Management Domestic Influences ■ Bureaucracies ■ Interest Groups ■ The Military-Industrial Complex ■ Public Opinion ■ Legislatures Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab FIGURE 4.
You Are the President"" at MyPoliSciLab For example, the United States secretary of state may have a different goal than the secretary of defense, just as the Central Intelligence Agency may view a situation differently than the National Security Council does.
The rational model of decision making is somewhat complicated by uncertainty and the multiple goals of decision makers.
Thus, the rational model may imply that decision making is simpler than is actually the case.
An alternative to the rational model of decision making is the organizational process model.
In this model, foreign policy decision makers generally skip the labor-intensive process of identifying goals and alternative actions, relying instead for most decisions on standardized responses or standard operating procedures.
For example, the United States State Department every day receives more than a thousand reports or inquiries from its embassies around the world and sends out more than a thousand instructions or responses to those embassies.
Most of those cables are never seen by the top decision makers (the secretary of state or the president); instead, they are handled by low-level decision makers who apply general principles—or who simply try to make the least controversial, most standardized decision.
These low-level decisions may not even reflect the high-level policies adopted by top leaders, but rather have a life of their own.
Another alternative to the rational model is the government bargaining (or bureaucratic politics) model, in which foreign policy decisions result from the bargaining process among various government agencies with somewhat divergent interests in the outcome.
The Japanese Agriculture Ministry, with an interest in the well-being of Japanese farmers, opposed the imports.
The Foreign Ministry, with an interest in smooth relations with the United States, wanted to allow the imports.
The final decision to allow imported sushi resulted from the tug-of-war between the ministries.
An Experimental Analysis of the Bureaucratic Politics Model and Poliheuristic Theory.
Individual Decision Makers Every international event is the result, intended or unintended, of decisions made by individuals.
As leader of the world’s greatest power, he had nobody to pass the buck to.
If he chose not to, the war might drag on for months with tens of thousands of United States casualties.
But for better or worse, Truman as an individual had to decide, and to take responsibility for the consequences.
Similarly, the decisions of individual citizens, although they may not seem important when taken one by one, create the great forces of world history.
The study of individual decision making revolves around the question of rationality.
But realists tend to assume that both states and individuals are rational and that the goals or interests of states correlate with those of leaders.
The most simplified rational-actor models assume that interests are the same from one actor to another.
If this were so, individuals could be substituted for each other in various roles without changing history very much.
This assumption is at best a great oversimplification; 5 individual decisions reflect the values and beliefs of the decision maker.
Individual decision makers not only have differing values and beliefs, but also have unique personalities—their personal experiences, intellectual capabilities, and personal styles of making decisions.
Some IR scholars study individual psychology to understand how personality affects decision making.
Psychoanalytic approaches hold that personalities reflect the subconscious influences of childhood experiences.
For instance, Bill Clinton drew much criticism in his early years as president for a foreign policy that seemed to zigzag.
Decision-making processes must reduce and filter the incoming information on which a decision is based; the problem is that such filtration often is biased.
Information screens are subconscious filters through which people put the information coming in about the world 5 Farnham, Barbara.
Often they simply ignore any information that does not fit their expectations.
Information is also screened out as it passes from one person to another in the decisionmaking process.
For example, prior to the September 2001 terrorist attacks, United States intelligence agencies failed to adequately interpret available evidence because too few analysts were fluent in Arabic.
Similarly, Soviet leaders in 1941 and Israeli leaders in 1973 ignored evidence of pending invasions of their countries.
Misperceptions can affect the implementation of policy by lowlevel officials as well as its formulation by high-level officials.
For example, in 1988, officers on a United States warship in the Persian Gulf shot down a civilian Iranian jet that they believed to be a military jet attacking them.
The officers were trying to carry out policies established by national leaders, but because of misperceptions, their actions instead damaged their state’s interests.
Second, the rationality of individual cost-benefit calculations is undermined by emotions that decision makers feel while thinking about the consequences of their actions—an effect referred to as affective bias.
As hard as a decision maker tries to be rational in making a decision, the decision-making process is bound to be influenced by strong feelings held about the person or state toward which a decision is directed.
Third, cognitive biases are systematic distortions of rational calculations based not on emotional feelings but simply on the limitations of the human brain in making choices.
The most important of these distortions seems to be the attempt to produce cognitive balance —or to reduce cognitive dissonance.
Here, in 2012, North Korea's new dictator Kim Jong-Un rides a roller coaster that could symbolize the West's efforts to curtail his country's nuclear weapons program.
These weapons will pose a much greater threat if Kim, who took over in 2011, is an irrational madman than if he turns out to be a shrewdly rational actor.
This is especially true in a democracy, in which politicians must face their citizens’ judgment at the polls and so do not want to admit failures.
The Vietnam War trapped United States decision makers in this way in the 1960s, After sending half a million troops halfway around the world, United States leaders found it difficult to admit to themselves that the costs of the war were greater than the benefits.
Decision makers also achieve cognitive balance through wishful thinking —an overestimate of the probability of a desired outcome.
A variation of wishful thinking is to assume that an event with a low probability of occurring will not occur.
This could be a dangerous way to think about catastrophic events such as accidental nuclear war or a terrorist attack.
A decision maker may also experience psychological projection of his or her own feelings onto another actor.
Another form of cognitive bias, related to cognitive balance, is the use of historical analogies to structure one’s thinking about a decision.
This can be quite useful or quite misleading, depending on whether the analogy is appropriate.
Because each historical situation is unique in some way, when a decision maker latches onto an analogy and uses it as a shortcut to a decision, the rational calculation of costs and benefits may be cut short as well.
In particular, decision makers often assume that a solution that worked in the past will work again—without fully examining how similar the situations really are.
For example, United States leaders used the analogy of Munich in 1938 to convince themselves that appeasement in the Vietnam War would lead to increased communist aggression in Asia.
Vietnam itself then became a potent analogy that helped persuade United States leaders to avoid involvement in certain overseas conflicts, such as Bosnia; this was called the “Vietnam syndrome” in United States foreign policy.
All of these psychological processes—misperception, affective biases, and cognitive biases—interfere with the rational assessment of costs and benefits in making a decision.
Two specific modifications to the rational model of decision making have been proposed to accommodate psychological realities.
First, the model of bounded rationality takes into account the costs of seeking and processing information.
Nobody thinks about every single possible course of action when 9 Herrmann, Richard K., and Michael P Fischerkeller.
The Use of the “Rogue State” Concept by United States Foreign Policy Elites.
The Rise, Fall, and Reprise of Soviet-Russian Military Interventionism, 1973-1996.
Instead of optimizing, or picking the very best option, people usually work on the problem until they come up with a “good enough” option that meets some minimal criteria; this is called satisficing, or finding a satisfactory solution.
The time constraints faced by top decision makers in IR—who are constantly besieged with crises requiring their attention—generally preclude their finding the very best response to a situation.
Second, prospect theory provides an alternative explanation (rather than simple rational optimization) of decisions made under risk or uncertainty.
In the editing phase, they frame the options available and the probabilities of various outcomes associated with each option.
Prospect theory holds that evaluations take place by comparison with a reference point, which is often the status quo but might be some past or expected situation.
The decision maker asks whether he or she can do better than that reference point, but the value placed on outcomes depends on how far from the reference point they are.
Individual decision making thus follows an imperfect and partial kind of rationality at best.
Not only do the goals of different individuals vary, but decision makers face a series of obstacles in receiving accurate information, constructing accurate models of the world, and reaching decisions that further their own goals.
The rational model is only a simplification at best and must be supplemented by an understanding of individual psychological processes that affect decision making.
In one respect, groups promote rationality by balancing out the blind spots and biases of any individual.
Advisors or legislative committees may force a state leader to reconsider a rash decision.
And the interactions of different individuals in a group may result in the formulation of goals that more closely reflect state interests rather than individual idiosyncrasies.
However, group dynamics also introduce new sources of irrationality into the decision-making process.
Groupthink refers to the tendency for groups to reach decisions without accurately assessing their consequences, because individual members tend to go along with ideas they think the others support.
A group of six people is asked to compare the lengths of two lines projected onto a screen.
When five of the people are secretly instructed to say that line A is longer—even though anyone can see that line B is actually longer—the sixth person is likely to agree with the group rather than believe his or her own eyes.
Also, because the group diffuses responsibility from individuals, nobody feels accountable for actions.
In a spectacular case of groupthink, President Ronald Reagan’s close friend and director of the United States Central Intelligence Agency bypassed his own agency and ran covert operations spanning three continents using the National Security Council staff in the White House basement.
The NSC sold weapons to Iran in exchange for the freedom of United States hostages held in Lebanon, and then used the Iranian payments to illegally fund Nicaraguan Contra rebels.
The Iran-Contra scandal resulted when these operations, managed by an obscure NSC aide named Oliver North, became public.
The United States war in Iraq may also provide cautionary examples to future generations about the risks of misinformation, misperception, wishful thinking, and groupthink in managing a major foreign policy initiative.
The structure of a decision-making process —the rules for who is involved in making the decision, how voting is conducted, and so forth—can affect the outcome, especially when no single alternative appeals to a majority of participants.
Experienced participants in foreign policy formation are familiar with the techniques for manipulating decisionmaking processes to favor outcomes they prefer.
Probably most important is the ability to control the agenda and thereby structure the terms of debate.
State leaders often rely on an inner circle of advisors in making foreign policy decisions.
The composition and operation of the inner circle vary across governments.
For instance, President Lyndon Johnson had “Tuesday lunches” to discuss national security policy with top national security officials.
Some groups depend heavily on informal Both individual misperception and group psychology encourage overconfidence and excessive optimism among decision makers.
This general tendency in every government especially marked the period of the United States invasion of Iraq.
Here, President Bush declares victory on an aircraft carrier, May 2003.
Conflictland could be Vietnam in 1968, Bosnia in 1994, or Iraq in 2006. consultations in addition to formal meetings.
Some leaders create a “kitchen cabinet”—a trusted group of friends who discuss policy issues with the leader even though they have no formal positions in government.
For instance, Israel’s Golda Meir held many such discussions at her home, sometimes literally in the kitchen.
Russian president Boris Yeltsin relied on the advice of his bodyguard, who was a trusted friend.
Crisis Management The difficulties in reaching rational decisions, both for individuals and for groups, are heightened during a crisis.
Crisis decision making is harder to understand and predict than is normal foreign policy making.
In a crisis, decision makers operate under tremendous time constraints.
Communications become shorter and more stereotyped, and information that does not fit a decision maker’s expectations is more likely to be discarded, simply because there is no time to consider it.
In framing options decision makers tend to restrict the choices, again to save time, and tend to overlook creative options while focusing on the most obvious ones.
Even the president’s communication with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was rerouted through Kennedy’s brother Robert and the Soviet ambassador, cutting out the State Department.
Recognizing the danger of groupthink, Kennedy left the room from time to time—removing the authority figure from the group—to encourage free discussion.
Through this and other means, the group managed 17 Brecher, Michael, and Jonathan Wilkenfeld.
Sometimes leaders purposefully designate someone in the group to object to ideas.
Decision makers tend to overestimate the hostility of adversaries and to underestimate their own hostility toward those adversaries.
More and more information is screened out in order to come to terms with decisions being made and to restore cognitive balance.
Sleep deprivation sets in within days as decision makers use every hour to stay on top of the crisis.
Unless decision makers are careful about getting enough sleep, they may make vital foreign policy decisions under shifting perceptual and mood changes.
Because of the importance of sound decision making during crises, voters pay great attention to the psychological stability of their leaders.
Before Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin won election in 1992, he faced charges that he had suffered a one-day nervous breakdown when he headed the armed forces just before the 1967 war.
Not so, he responded; he was just smart enough to realize that the crisis had caused both exhaustion and acute nicotine poisoning, and he needed to rest up for a day in order to go on and make good decisions.
Crisis management takes a high toll psychologically and physiologically.
President Eduard Shevardnadze of Georgia seems to show this strain in 1992—just the beginning of years of civil war and perpetual crisis in that country.
Shevardnadze, formerly a Soviet foreign minister, had returned to lead his native Georgia when the Soviet Union dissolved.
Their decisions are shaped by the government and society in which they work.
Foreign policy is constrained and shaped by substate actors such as government agencies, political interest groups, and industries.
Domestic Influences Watch the Video ""David Cameron on Corporate Social Responsibility"" at MyPoliSciLab The remainder of this chapter considers other liberal theoretical approaches that, like the democratic peace, operate at the domestic level of analysis.
These approaches, in contrast to realism, see international outcomes as the result of processes within states rather than just those among states.
The actions of a state in the international arena result from individual human choices—by citizenry, political leaders, diplomats, and bureaucrats—aggregated through the state’s internal structures.
The rest of this chapter looks at the state from the inside out, trying to understand the processes and structures within states that make them behave as they do.
Bureaucracies Of the many substate actors that influence states’ actions in the international arena, those closest to the action are the bureaucratic agencies that states maintain for developing and carrying out foreign policy.
Different states maintain different foreign policy bureaucracies but share some common elements.
Diplomats Virtually all states maintain a foreign service of diplomats working in embassies in foreign capitals , as well as diplomats who remain at home to help coordinate foreign policy.
States appoint ambassadors as their official representatives to other states and to international organizations.
Others are career diplomats who come up through the ranks of the foreign service and tend to outlast changes in administration.
Diplomats provide much of the information that goes into making foreign policies, but their main role is to carry out rather than create policies.
Nonetheless, foreign ministry bureaucrats often make foreign relations so routine that top leaders and political appointees can come and go without greatly altering the country’s relations.
The national interest is served, the bureaucrats believe, by the stability of overall national goals and positions in international affairs.
Tension is common between state leaders and foreign policy bureaucrats.
Politicians struggle to exercise power over the formal bureaucratic agencies because the latter can be too “bureaucratic” (cumbersome, routinized, conservative) to easily control.
Also, these agencies are often staffed (at lower levels) mostly by career officials who may not owe loyalty to political leaders.
The NSC chief traditionally briefs the president every morning on international security issues.
Sometimes state leaders appoint a close friend or key advisor to manage the foreign policy bureaucracy.
President George W Bush did this in his second term with his former NSC chief and confidante Condoleezza Rice.
Chinese leader Mao Zedong put his loyal ally Zhou Enlai in charge of foreign policy.
At other times, state leaders may appoint rivals with differing views of foreign policy—as President Barack Obama did with his former political rival Hillary Clinton.
At times, frustration with the bureaucracy leads politicians to bypass normal channels of diplomacy.
Interagency Tensions Interagency tension also affects the formulation of foreign policy.
Certain agencies traditionally clash, and an endless tug-of-war shapes the foreign policies that emerge.
In an extreme example of interagency rivalry, the United States State Department and the CIA backed opposite sides in a civil war in Laos in 1960.
In the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, the defense ministry was usually more hawkish and the foreign ministry or State Department more dovish , with the president or premier holding the balance.
In general, bureaucracies promote policies under which their own capabilities will be effective and their power will increase.
One can often predict just from the job titles of participants how they will argue on a policy issue.
The government bargaining model pays special attention to the interagency negotiations that result from conflicts of interest between agencies of the same government.
For example, after Americans were taken hostage in Iran in 1979, military and CIA officials pushed President Carter to attempt a military rescue, while the State Department vehemently opposed such a mission.
After days of debate, the president decided to go ahead with the rescue mission , but did not invite the secretary of state to the meeting where the final decisions were made.
Although representatives of bureaucratic agencies usually promote the interests of their own bureaucracies, sometimes heads of agencies try to appear loyal to the state leader by forgoing the interests of their own agencies.
Also, the preferences of leaders of bureaucratic agencies cannot always be predicted given the goal of their institution.
In many countries, the different military services pull in somewhat different directions, even if they ultimately unite to battle the foreign ministry.
Bureaucrats working in particular units or projects become attached to them.
Officials responsible for a new weapon system lose bureaucratic turf, and perhaps their jobs, if the weapon’s development is canceled.
Of special concern in many poor states is the institutional interest that military officers have in maintaining a strong military.
These issues were factors in attempted military coups in the Philippines, Venezuela, and Paraguay in the 1990s.
Such rivalries suggest that a state does not have any single set of goals—a national interest—but that its actions may result from the bargaining of subunits, each with its own set of goals.
Furthermore, such a perspective extends far beyond bureaucratic agencies because other substate actors have their own goals, which they seek to advance by influencing foreign policy.
Interest Groups Foreign policy makers operate not in a political vacuum but in the context of the political debates in their society.
In all states, societal pressures influence foreign policy, although these are aggregated and made effective through different channels in different societies.
In pluralistic democracies, interested parties influence foreign policy through interest groups and political parties.
Thus foreign policies adopted by states generally reflect some kind of process of domestic coalition formation.
Of course, international factors also have strong effects on domestic politics.
Interest groups are coalitions of people who share a common interest in the outcome of some political issue and who organize themselves to try to influence the outcome.
The farmers exert political pressure on the French government through longestablished and politically sophisticated associations and organizations.
They lobby for desired legislation and contribute to politicians’ campaigns.
More dramatically, when their interests have been threatened—as during a U.S.-European trade dispute in 1992— French farmers have turned out in large numbers across the country to block roads, stage violent street demonstrations, and threaten to grind the national economy to a halt unless the government adopts their position.
Similarly , interest groups form around businesses, labor unions, churches, veterans, senior citizens, members of an occupation, or citizens concerned about an issue such as the environment.
Lobbying is the process of talking with legislators or officials to influence their decisions on some set of issues.
Three important elements that go into successful lobbying are the ability to gain a hearing with busy officials, the ability to present cogent arguments for one’s case, and the ability to trade favors in return for positive action on an issue.
These favors—legal and illegal—range from campaign contributions to dinners at nice restaurants, trips to golf resorts, securing illicit sexual liaisons, and paying bribes.
In many states, corruption is a major problem in governmental decision making , and interest groups may induce government officials by illegal means to take certain actions.
Ethnic groups within one state often become interest groups concerned about their ancestral nation outside that state.
Many members of ethnic groups feel strong emotional ties to their relatives in other countries; because the rest of the population generally does not care about such issues one way or the other, even a small ethnic group can have considerable influence on policy toward a particular country.
Such ethnic ties are emerging as a powerful foreign policy influence in various ethnic conflicts in poor regions.
For example, Cuban Americans organize to influence United States policy toward Cuba, as do Greek Americans on Greece, Jewish Americans on Israel, and African Americans on Africa.
In a 1996 United States Senate election in South Dakota, one candidate raised large contributions from the Pakistani-American community and the other candidate from the rival Indian-American community.
As with bureaucratic agencies, the view of the state as a unitary actor can be questioned.
Defenders of interestgroup politics argue that various interest groups tend to push and pull in different directions, with the ultimate decisions generally reflecting the interests of society as a whole.
But according to Marxist theories of international relations, the key domestic influences on foreign policy in capitalist countries are rich owners of big businesses.
For instance, European imperialism benefited banks and big business, which made huge profits from exploiting cheap labor and resources in overseas colonies.
This is the official view (if not always the operative one) of the Chinese government toward Western industrialized states.
During the Cold War, Marxists argued that Western foreign policies were driven by the profit motive of arms manufacturers.
Foreign policies are affected by the pulling and tugging of various domestic interest groups.
Legislatures respond to these groups, constituencies, lobbyists, and media.
These interested parties pack the United States Senate confirmation hearing for the new secretary of state, John Kerry, in 2013.
The Military-Industrial Complex A military-industrial complex refers to a huge interlocking network of governmental agencies, industrial corporations, and research institutes, working together to supply a nation’s military forces.
The military-industrial complex was a response to the growing importance of technology and of logistics in Cold War military planning.
Because of the domestic political clout of these actors, the 22 Smith, Tony.
States at war have long harnessed their economic and technological might for the war effort.
But during the Cold War, military procurement occurred on a massive scale in “peacetime,” as the superpowers raced to develop new high-technology weapons.
This race created a special role for scientists and engineers in addition to the more traditional role of industries that produce war materials.
In response to the Soviet satellite Sputnik in 1957, the United States increased spending on research and development and created new science education programs.
By 1961, President Dwight Eisenhower warned in his farewell speech that the military-industrial complex was gaining “unwarranted influence” in United States society and that militarization could erode democracy in the United States.
The size of the complex gave it more political clout than ordinary citizens could muster.
Yet its interest in the arms race conflicted with the interest of ordinary citizens in peace.
The complex encompasses a variety of constituencies, each of which has an interest in military spending.
Corporations that produce goods for the military profit from government contracts.
So do military officers whose careers advance by building bureaucratic empires around new weapons systems.
And so do universities and scientific institutes that receive military research contracts—a major source of funding for scientists in Russia and the United States.
Subcontractors and parts suppliers for big United States weapons projects are usually spread around many states and congressional districts, so that local citizens and politicians join the list of constituents benefiting from military spending.
Early funding for the Strategic Defense Initiative was given to each military service branch, the Department of Energy, NASA, and hundreds of private contractors.
An End to 60+ Years of Violent Conflict BACKGROUND: Since the founding of Israel in 1948 in the wake of World War II, Jews and Arab Palestinians have been fighting over the land.
After several destructive wars, Israel and its main neighbors, Egypt and Jordan, arrived at a durable peace.
The Israelis and Palestinians, however, have yet to reach a peace agreement based on a Palestinian state in lands occupied by Israel in the 1967 war—the West Bank and the Gaza Strip—and Palestinian recognition of Israel’s right to exist.
In many rounds of negotiations over the years, the two sides have gotten closer.
At the end of 2000, negotiators nearly reached agreement on the parameters for a Palestinian state side by side with Israel.
The effort fell short, however; new governments took power in both Israel and America, and a new wave of violence ensued.
Israeli-Palestinian peace is a collective good that would benefit each side regardless of whether it or the other side made the concessions that led to an agreement.
In 2010, the United States administration launched a new round of Israeli-Palestinian talks to try to reach a comprehensive agreement within a year.
These talks faced great challenges as a result of the domestic politics on each side.
In Israel, the parliamentary ruling coalition included parties opposed to concessions toward Palestine, so the Israeli government lacked maneuvering room to make concessions even if it wanted to.
Executives in military industries, who best understand their industries, are often appointed as government officials responsible for military procurement decisions and then return to their companies again—a practice called the revolving door.
In democracies, military industries also influence public opinion through advertising that ties their products to patriotic themes.
United States military industries also give generous campaign contributions to national politicians who vote on military budgets, and sometimes bribes to Pentagon officials as well.
Public opinion has greater influence on foreign policy in democracies than in authoritarian governments.
It must persuade people to accept its policies, because in the end, policies are carried out by ordinary people—soldiers, workers, and bureaucrats.
Because of the need for public support, even authoritarian governments spend great effort on propaganda —the public promotion of their official line—to win support for 2 ^Der Derian, James.
Jones, Christopher M Roles, Politics, and the Survival of the V-22 Osprey.
In these ways, foreign policy processes even in democracies can constrain each side’s ability to make peace.
Reciprocity, a strong norm in IsraeliPalestinian relations over the decades, is basic to the negotiation of peace agreements.
Yet it has not sufficed, in part because domestic constraints make it harder for governments to have cooperation based on reciprocity.
To get around these domestic constraints, the dominance principle helps.
Most analysts agree that the peace talks can succeed only if the United States applies strong leadership (including pressure and inducements) to get the two parties to make concessions.
Opponents on each side can then blame the United States rather than their own leaders, who thus gain maneuvering room to compromise.
If an IsraeliPalestinian peace agreement is ever to occur, American leadership of the process will likely play a key role in reaching it.
Journalists serve as the gatekeepers of information passing from foreign policy elites to the public.
The media and government often conflict because of the traditional role of the press as a watchdog and critic of government actions and powers.
The media try to uncover and publicize what the government wants to hide.
Foreign policy decision makers also rely on the media for information about foreign affairs.
Yet the media also depend on government for information; the size and resources of the foreign policy bureaucracies dwarf those of the press.
These advantages give the government great power to manipulate journalists by feeding them information in order to shape the news and influence public opinion.
Government decision makers can create dramatic stories in foreign relations—through summit meetings, crises, actions, and so forth.
Bureaucrats can also leak secret information to the press in order to support their own point of view and win bureaucratic battles.
Finally, the military and the press have a running battle about journalists’ access to military operations, but both sides gained from the open access given to journalists “embedded” with United States forces in Iraq in 2003.
In democracies, where governments must stand for election, an unpopular war can force a leader or party from office, as happened to United States President Lyndon Johnson in 1968 during the Vietnam War.
Or a popular war can help secure a government’s mandate to continue in power, as happened to Margaret Thatcher in Britain after the 1982 Falkland Islands War.
United States soldiers were sent to Somalia to assist in relief efforts in 1992 after TV news showed the heartrending results of civil war and famine there.
But after TV news showed an American soldier’s body being dragged through the streets by members of a Somali faction after a deadly firefight that killed 18 United States soldiers, public opinion shifted quickly against the Somalia operation.
Even in the most open democracies, states do not merely respond to public opinion.
Decision makers enjoy some autonomy to make their own choices, and they are pulled in various directions by bureaucracies and interest groups, whose views often conflict with the direction favored by public opinion at large.
Furthermore, public opinion is seldom unified on any policy, and sophisticated polling can show that particular segments of the population often differ in their perceptions of foreign policy issues.
So a politician may respond to the opinion of one constituency rather than the whole population.
Public opinion varies considerably over time on many foreign policy issues.
States use propaganda or try to manipulate the media to keep public opinion from diverging too much from state policies.
In democracies, public opinion generally has less effect on foreign policy than on domestic policy.
National leaders traditionally have additional latitude to make decisions 25 Rourke, John T., Richard P Hiskes, and Cyrus Ernesto Zirakzadeh.
Since the end of the Korean War in 1953, relations with your neighbor to the west.
Military tensions have persisted as North Korea has made and then broken several agreements regarding its nuclear program.
North Korea tested nuclear weapons in 2006 and 2009, and it has also test fired short-range ballistic missiles directly over Japan in an effort to intimidate your country.
In late 2012, it also tested a new long-range rocket in defiance of international warnings.
You won election in 2012 on a hawkish platform, calling for large increases in defense spending and the deployment of anti-missile weapons to protect your country from a North Korean launch.
Japan has refused such reparations in the past, but has provided limited aid in an attempt to encourage North Korea to denuclearize.
In the summer of 2008, the United States removed North Korea from its list of states that sponsor terrorism.
This angered many in your country, who see this as giving in to North Korean demands for more aid in exchange for giving up its nuclear program.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Public opinion in Japan is very sensitive to relations with North Korea.
In 2002, North Korea admitted to secretly abducting Japanese citizens in the 1970s and 1980s, transporting them to North Korea, and using them to train North Korean spies.
North Korea claims that all 13 abductees have either returned to Japan or died, but many in Japan are skeptical of this claim.
Many in Japan suspect more than 13 were abducted and have even demanded that North Korea return the bodies of the deceased.
These abductions are an extremely sensitive issue in Japanese public opinion, and past Japanese governments have demanded a resolution to the abduction issue before opening formal diplomatic relations with North Korea.
SCENARIO Now imagine that the United States is negotiating a new nuclear weapons agreement with North Korea.
The United States asks that Japan contribute extensive foreign aid to North Korea to help ensure that a deal is reached.
The United States is placing extensive pressure on your government to provide what it feels is critical aid.
This derives from the special need of states to act in a unified way to function effectively in the international system, as well as from the traditions of secrecy and diplomacy that remove IR from the realm of ordinary domestic politics.
Repeatedly, these efforts have been slowed or rebuffed by strong public opinion against the military.
In Japan, people remember the horrible consequences of militarism in the 1930s and World War II, culminating in the nuclear bombings of 1945.
They are thus suspicious of any increase in the size or role of military forces, and are set against Japan’s having nuclear weapons.
In this case, public opinion constrains the state’s conduct of foreign policy and has slowed the pace of change.
The attentive public in a democracy is the minority of the population that stays informed about international issues.
This segment varies somewhat from one issue to another, but there is also a core of people who care in general about foreign affairs and follow them closely.
The most active members of the attentive public on foreign affairs constitute a foreign policy elite —people with power and influence who affect foreign policy.
This elite includes people within governments as well as outsiders such as businesspeople, journalists, lobbyists, and professors of political science.
Public opinion polls show that elite opinions sometimes differ considerably from those of the gen9 A eral population, and sometimes from those of the government as well/ Governments sometimes adopt foreign policies for the specific purpose of generating public approval and hence gaining domestic legitimacy.
Citizens who would readily criticize their government’s policies on education or health care often refrain from criticism when the government is at war and the lives of the nation’s soldiers are on the line.
Unfortunately, it is always difficult to tell whether a state adopts a foreign policy to distract the public, because leaders would never admit to trying to divert public attention.
However, wars that go on too long or are not successful can turn public opinion against the government and even lead to a popular uprising to overthrow the government.
In Argentina, the military government in 1982 led the country into war with Britain over the Falkland Islands.
At first Argentineans rallied around the flag, but after losing the war they rallied around the cause of getting rid of the military government, and they replaced it with a new civilian government that prosecuted the former leaders.
In 2006, President Bush’s popularity, which had soared early in the Iraq War, deflated as the war dragged on 26 Page, Benjamin I., and Marshall M Bouton.
The Impact of Public Opinion on United States Foreign Policy Since Vietnam.
The ""Rally 'Round the Flag"" Syndrome War in Afghanistan Attack President Bush's approval rating demonstrates the ""rally 'round the flag"" syndrome, in which war triggers a short-term boost in public approval.
By the 2008 elections, his party had lost control of the Senate, House, and presidency—all of which the Republicans had held at the beginning of the Iraq War in 2003.
Legislatures One conduit through which interest groups and public opinion may wield influence is legislatures.
In these systems, legislatures play a direct role in making foreign policy by passing budgets, regulating bureaucratic rules, creating trade law, even controlling immigration policy.
Although executives may attend summits and talks, any agreement they sign must n o be approved by their domestic legislature.
Although few would argue that legislatures in presidential democracies do not influence foreign policy generally, different rules may apply to the use of military force.
Some contend that legislatures, like public opinion, rally around the flag during times of international crises.
For example, three days after the September 11, 2001, attacks, the United States Congress voted to give President Bush full authority to prosecute a war in Afghanistan.
In October 2002, Congress passed a resolution authorizing the use of force in Iraq.
Thus, legislatures rarely if ever challenge an executive on important military matters.
Others point to a different dynamic in which legislatures do stand up to executive power regarding military force.
For example, because legislatures hold the “purse strings” , they have the ability to stop a war in its 28 Milner, Helen.
In the United States, the War Powers Act, enacted during the close of the Vietnam War, requires the president to notify Congress when United States troops are deployed for combat.
After this notification, the president has 60 days (plus a possible 30-day extension) to recall the troops unless Congress explicitly approves the military action.
During the 2011 Libya air campaign, the Obama administration claimed that the War Powers Act did not apply because the action was not a war.
In parliamentary systems, such as Great Britain, executives (for example, prime ministers) are chosen by the political parties that hold a dominant position in the legislative bodies.
Often parliamentary executives do not need to submit treaties or policies for formal approval by the legislature.
Yet legislatures in parliamentary systems still hold power regarding foreign policy.
In Great Britain, for example, Parliament is not required to vote on international agreements negotiated by the prime minister, but it must approve any change to British laws that such agreements entail.
Because most international agreements do involve these types of changes, Parliament effectively exercises a right of ratification over international agreements.
In many parliamentary systems, if a policy is particularly controversial, parties that do not have a majority in the legislature can attempt to call elections—meaning that the country votes again on which parties will hold seats in the legislature.
If a different group of parties wins a majority of seats, a new executive is appointed.
Thus, in parliamentary systems, legislatures play a key role in designing and implementing foreign policy.
Making Foreign Policy Foreign policies are the strategies governments use to guide their actions in the international arena.
Foreign policies spell out the objectives state leaders have decided to pursue in a given relationship or situation.
But in general, IR scholars are less interested in specific policies than in the foreign policy process —how policies are arrived at and implemented/ States establish various organizational structures and functional relationships to create and carry out foreign policies.
IR scholars are especially interested in exploring whether certain kinds of policy processes lead to certain kinds of decisions—whether certain processes produce better outcomes than do others.
States vary greatly among each other and even within a single state over time.
Some political scientists have tried to interpret particular states’ foreign policies in terms of each one’s political culture and history.
For example, the Soviet Union experienced repeated, devastating land invasions over the centuries (culminating in World War II) while the United States experienced two centuries of safety behind great oceans.
Thus the military might of the Soviet Union, and its control of buffer states in Eastern Europe, seemed defensive in nature to Soviet leaders but appeared aggressive to United States leaders.
Foreign policy outcomes result from multiple forces at various levels of analysis, The outcomes depend on individual decision makers, on the type of society and government they are working within, and on the international and global context of their actions.
The study of foreign policy processes runs counter to realism’s assumption of a unitary state actor.
Because the study of foreign policy concentrates on forces within the state, its main emphasis is on the individual and domestic levels of analysis.
The differences in the foreign policy process from one state to another are also influenced by a state’s type of government, such as military dictatorship, communist party rule, one-party rule, and various forms of multiparty democracy.
In practice, most states lie along a spectrum with some mix of democratic and authoritarian elements.
The attempt to explain foreign policy in a general and theoretical way has met only limited success.
This is one reason why realists continue to find simple unitary-actor models of the state useful; the domestic and individual elements of the foreign policy process add much complexity and unpredictability.
One area of foreign policy in which knowledge stands on a somewhat firmer basis is the descriptive effort to understand how particular mechanisms of foreign policy formation operate in various states.
To summarize, foreign policy is a complex outcome of a complex process.
It results from the struggle of competing themes, competing domestic interests, and competing government agencies.
No single individual, agency, or guiding principle determines the outcome.
States form foreign policy on an issue or toward a region; it is not just an incoherent collection of decisions and actions taken from time to time.
Out of the turbulent internal processes of foreign policy formation come relatively coherent interests and policies that states pursue.
Foreign policy outcomes result from processes at several levels of analysis, including the roles of individuals.
All these levels were in play in 2011-2013 as Syria went from protest to civil war.
In 2012, this father chose, like many other individuals, to take up arms and join rebel fighters.
The country's future will be decided in no small part by the aggregation of many such individual decisions.
The foreign policy process is the set of procedures and structures that states use to arrive at foreign policy decisions and to implement them.
By contrast, in the organizational process model, decisions result from routine administrative procedures; in the government bargaining model, decisions result from negotiations among governmental agencies with different interests in the outcome.
During crises, the potentials for misperception and error are amplified.
Executives and legislators may differ on how to best achieve a state’s national interest.
Uncertainty about costs and benefits of an action can complicate foreign policy decision making.
Sometimes aggressive international actions are attributed to a “madman” such as Iraq’s Saddam Hussein or Nazi Germany’s Adolf Hitler.
Traditionally, foreign policy elites have faced only sporadic pressure from mass public opinion.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview In nearly all democracies, there are debates about the best way to conduct foreign policy.
One particularly controversial issue involves using military force—for example, initiating a war.
Executives usually claim the right to initiate the use of force as commanders of their militaries.
Yet legislatures (Congress or parliaments) may object that they should have a say in whether a country goes to war.
In the United States, the president is the Commander in Chief of the military and thus has the power to order the deployment of American military forces.
This has led to extensive debates in the United States about who has the ultimate authority to undertake military action.
While the president has extensive advantages in terms of military intelligence and analysis (because the foreign policy bureaucracy reports to the president, not Congress), Congress must authorize funds to pay for military action.
Legislatures Should Not Play a Role un Deciding Whether to Use Military Force Legislatures are slow to act in times of crisis.
Because legislatures are made up of hundreds of members, it is difficult to get agreement among all members on what constitutes a threat to national security.
Discussions over whether to use military force can thus be long, drawn-out affairs, which can limit the ability of a country to respond to dangers.
Debates over the appropriateness of military force show open divisions within a country that can encourage adversaries to remain stubborn in bargaining.
If an adversary feels a country is too divided to use military force against it, it will not treat threats to use force as credible.
Most legislators are elected to serve local constituent interests rather than invest their time and energy in foreign affairs.
Legislators have little incentive to become highly knowledgeable about foreign affairs, thus making their decisions about whether to engage in military force less informed.
ARGUMENT 2 Legislatures Should Play a Role in Deciding Whether to Use Military Force More input regarding military force leads to more careful policy.
Having an effective legislative debate over the potential use of military force can lead to better policy, avoiding some of the psychological pitfalls associated with small-group decision making such as groupthink.
Because a state's citizens will bear the brunt of the costs of war, it is appropriate that their representative bodies have a say in whether the country's men and women should be sent to fight.
Open debates in a legislature better allow the public's voice to be heard.
Executives need checks and balances, especially with regard to decisions about war.
Because of the weight of a decision to initiate military conflict, it is important to have a checks and balances system to stop hasty wars.
In the United States, the Constitution specifically grants Congress the power to declare war for this reason.
All but Colombia are in a zone of active fighting spanning parts of Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia.
Some of the countries in these zones still face difficult postwar years with the possibility of sliding back into violence, as Yemen did in 2009 after a 1999 ceasefire.
Types of War The Wars of the World ■ Types of War ■ Theories of the Causes of War Conflicts of Ideas ■ Nationalism ■ Ethnic Conflict ■ Genocide ■ Religious Conflict ■ Ideological Conflict Conflicts of Interest ■ Territorial Disputes ■ Control of Governments ■ Economic Conflict Many different activities are covered by the general term war.
Consequently, it is not easy to say how many wars are going on in the world at the moment.
But most lists of wars set some minimum criteria—for instance, a minimum of a thousand battle deaths—to distinguish war from lower-level violence such as violent strikes or riots.
Wars arise from different situations and play different roles in bargaining over conflicts.
Starting from the largest wars, we may distinguish the following main categories.
This class of wars is also known as world war, global war, general war, or systemic war.
Largely because of the power of modern weaponry, this kind of war probably cannot occur any longer without destroying civilization.
Total war began with the massively destructive Napoleonic Wars, which introduced large-scale conscription and geared the entire French national economy toward the war effort.
The practice of total war evolved with industrialization, which further integrated all of society and economy into the practice of war.
In total war, with the entire society mobilized for the struggle, the entire society of the enemy is considered a legitimate target.
For instance, in World War II Germany attacked British civilians with V-2 rockets, while British and United States strategic bombing killed 600,000 German civilians and hundreds of thousands of Japanese.
Limited war includes military actions carried out to gain some objective short of the surrender and occupation of the enemy.
For instance, the U.S.-led war against Iraq in 1991 retook the territory of Kuwait but did not go on to Baghdad to topple Saddam Hussein’s government.
Raids are limited wars that consist of a single action—a bombing run or a quick incursion by land.
In 2007, Israeli warplanes bombed a facility in Syria that Israel believed to be a nuclear research facility in order to stop Syria from making progress on nuclear weapons.
Raids fall into the gray area between wars and nonwars because their destruction is limited and they are over quickly.
Raiding that is repeated or fuels a cycle of retaliation usually becomes a limited war or what is sometimes called low'intensity conflict.
The United States Civil War of the 1860s is a good example of a secessionist civil war, as is the war of Eritrea province in Ethiopia (now the internationally recognized state of Eritrea) in the 1980s.
People fighting their fellow citizens act no less cruelly than those fighting people from another state.
The 50,000 or more deaths in the civil war in El Salvador, including many from massacres and death squads, were not based on ethnic differences.
Of course, many of today’s civil wars emerge from ethnic or clan conflicts as well.
In Chad, for example, a rebel group composed of rival clans to the president’s nearly overthrew the government in 2007.
Sustaining a civil war usually requires a source of support for rebels, from neighboring states, diaspora ethnic communities, or revenue from natural resources or illegal drugs.
Guerrilla war, which includes certain kinds of civil wars, is warfare without front lines.
Irregular forces operate in the midst of, and often hidden or protected by, civilian populations.
The purpose is not to directly confront an enemy army but rather to harass and punish it so as to gradually limit its operation and effectively liberate territory from its control.
United States military forces in South Vietnam fought against Vietcong guerrillas in the 1960s and 1970s, with rising frustration.
Efforts to combat a guerrilla army—counterinsurgency—are discussed in Chapter 6.
In guerrilla war, without a fixed front line, there is much territory that neither side controls; both sides thus exert military leverage over the same places at the same time.
Often the government controls a town by day and the guerrillas by night.
Thus, guerrilla wars are extremely painful for civilians, who suffer most when no military force firmly controls a location, opening the door to banditry, personal vendettas, sexual violence, and other such lawless behavior.
Warfare increasingly is irregular and guerrilla-style; it is less and less often an open, conventional clash of large state armies, although the latter still occurs occasionally.
In all types of war, the abstractions and theories of IR scholars hardly capture the horrors experienced by those on the scene, both soldiers and civilians.
War suspends basic norms of behavior and, especially over time, traumatizes participants and bystanders.
You Are a Strategic Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab 3 Collier, Paul, and Nicholas Sambanis, eds.
Civilians experience terror, violence, and rape; they lose loved ones and homes; they too often live with trauma afterward.
The violence of war does not resemble war movies, but instead creates a nearly psychotic experience of overwhelming confusion, noise, terror, and adrenaline.
Soldiers in professional armies train to keep functioning in these conditions—but still have an incredibly difficult job— whereas those in irregular forces and civilian populations caught in civil wars have little hope of coping.
The horrors of all wars are magnified in cases of genocide and massacre, of child soldiers, and of brutal warfare that continues over years.
Scholars and policy makers are paying more attention in recent years to the difficult transitions from war to peace around the world—postwar reconciliation, conflict resolution, transitional governments representing opposing factions, economic reconstruction, and so forth.
These efforts often address collective goods problems among the parties, as when Somali clan elders in 2007 agreed that all would be better off by giving up their guns to the new central government but none wanted to go first.
After the shooting stops, international peacekeepers and NGOs focus on Security Sector Reform to create professional military and police forces instead of warlord militias.
The process of Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration deals with the common problem of what to do with irregular forces after civil wars end.
In several countries where long internal wars in the 1990s had led to dehumanization and atrocities—notably in South Africa—new governments used truth commissions to help the society heal and move forward.
The commission’s role was to hear honest testimony from the period, to bring to light what really happened during these wars, and in exchange to offer most of the participants asylum from punishment.
However, human rights groups objected to a settlement in Sierra Leone in 1999 that brought into the government a faction that had routinely cut off civilians’ fingers as a terror tactic.
Thus, after brutal ethnic conflicts give way to complex political settlements, most governments try to balance the need for justice and truth with the need to keep all groups on board.
Experts have debated how much truth and reconciliation are necessary after long conflicts.
Some now argue that in some circumstances, tribunals and government-sponsored panels to investigate past crimes could lead to political instability in transitional states.
Other experts disagree, noting that the work of such panels can be essential to building trust that is important for democracy.
GIVING UP THE GUNS Once armed groups stop shooting, a long process of postwar transition ensues.
Disarming and demobilizing militias is the most critical aspect of this transition, but also the most difficult because it leaves disarmed groups vulnerable.
Here, a major armed group turns in weapons under an amnesty in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, 2009.
Conflict itself is ever present in the international system—the condition against which bargaining takes place.
In conflict bargaining, states develop capabilities that give them leverage to obtain more favorable outcomes than they otherwise would achieve.
Whether fair or unfair, the ultimate outcome of the bargaining process is a settlement of the particular conflict.
The question of when conflict becomes violent can be approached in different ways.
Descriptive approaches, favored by historians, tend to focus narrowly on specific direct causes of the outbreak of war, which vary from one war to another.
For example, one could say that the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in 1914 “caused” World War I More theoretical approaches, favored by many political scientists, tend to focus on the search for general explanations, applicable to a variety of contexts, about why wars break out.
For example, one can see World War I as caused by shifts in the balance of power among European states, with the assassination being only a catalyst.
One way to organize the many theories offered by political scientists to explain why wars begin is to use the levels of analysis concept from Chapter 1.
Using this framework reminds us that most important events in IR have multiple causes at different levels of analysis.
One theory, consistent with realism, holds that the use of war and other violent means of leverage in international conflicts is normal and reflects rational decisions of national leaders.
These potentials were discussed in Chapter 4—information screens, cognitive biases, groupthink, and so forth.
A related theory holds that the education and mentality of whole populations of individuals determine whether conflicts become violent.
In this view, public nationalism or ethnic hatred—or even an innate tendency toward violence in human nature—may pressure leaders to solve conflicts violently.
Some wars clearly reflect rational calculations of national leaders, whereas others clearly were mistakes and cannot be considered rational.
Certainly some individual leaders seem prone to turn to military 8 Seneca, Hercules Furens.
But a maker of war can become a maker of peace, as did Egypt’s Anwar Sadat, for example.
Individuals of many cultural backgrounds and religions lead their states into war, as do both male and female leaders.
The Domestic Level The domestic level of analysis draws attention to the characteristics of states or societies that may make them more or less prone to use violence in resolving conflicts.
During the Cold War, Marxists frequently said that the aggressive and greedy capitalist states were prone to use violence in international conflicts, whereas Western leaders claimed that the expansionist, ideological, and totalitarian nature of communist states made them especially prone to using violence.
Likewise, rich industrialized states and poor agrarian ones both use war at times.
In fact, anthropologists have found that a wide range of preagricultural hunter-gatherer societies were much more prone to warfare than today’s societies.
Thus the potential for warfare seems to be universal across cultures, types of society, and time periods—although the importance and frequency of war vary greatly from case to case.
Some argue that domestic political factors shape a state’s outlook on war and peace.
For example, the democratic peace suggests that democracies almost never fight other democracies , although both democracies and authoritarian states fight wars.
Others claim that domestic political parties, interest groups, and legislatures play an important role in whether international conflicts become international wars.Few useful generalizations can tell us which societies are more prone or less prone to war.
For example, Japan was prone to using violence in international conflicts before World War II, but averse to such violence since then.
Kung bush people in Angola and Political scientists do not agree on a theory of why great wars like World War II occur and cannot predict whether they could happen again.
The city of Stalingrad was decimated during Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, 1943.
Domestic Political Audiences and the Escalation of International Disputes.
Yet anthropologists in the 1920s had observed them engaging in murderous intergroup violence.
If there are general principles to explain why some societies at some times are more peaceful than others and why they change, political scientists have not yet identified them.
The Interstate Level Theories at the interstate level explain wars in terms of power relations among major actors in the international system.
For example, power transition theory holds that conflicts generate large wars at times when power is relatively equally distributed and a rising power is threatening to overtake a declining hegemon in overall position.
Deterrence, as we have seen, is supposed to stop wars by building up power and threatening its use.
But the theory of arms races holds that wars are caused, not prevented, by such actions.
No general formula has been discovered to tell us in what circumstances each of these principles holds true.
Some political scientists study war from a statistical perspective, analyzing data on types of wars and the circumstances under which they occurred.
Of the several variations on the idea that major warfare in the international system is cyclical, one approach links large wars with long economic waves (also called Kondratieff cycles) in the world economy, of about 50 years’ duration.
These cycle theories at best can explain only general tendencies toward war in the international system over time.
An opposite approach in some ways is the theory of linear long-term change—that war as an outcome of conflict is becoming less likely over time due to the worldwide development of both technology and international norms.
Some IR scholars argue that war and military force are becoming obsolete as leverage in international conflicts because these means of influence are not very effective in today’s highly complex, interdependent world.
A parallel line of argument holds that today’s military technology is too powerful to use in most conflicts; this is especially applicable to nuclear weapons.
Advocates of these theories make historical analogies to the decline of the practices of slavery, dueling, and cannibalism—once considered normal but now obsolete.
These approaches have a strong empirical basis , but no consensus has emerged regarding the best explanation for this trend.
For these reasons, political scientists cannot yet predict with any confidence which of the world’s many international conflicts will lead to war.
We can gain insight, however, by studying various types of conflicts to understand better what states are fighting about.
The first three are conflicts over ideas, the last three conflicts over interests.
These six types of conflict are not mutually exclusive, and they overlap considerably in practice.
For example, the conflicts between Russia and Ukraine after the 1991 Soviet breakup were complex.
Ethnic Russians living in Ukraine, and ethnic Ukrainians in Russia, experienced conflict.
There are also religious differences between Ukrainian and Russian forms of Christianity.
In addition, the two new states had a territorial dispute over the Crimean peninsula, which Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had transferred to Ukraine in the 1950s.
The two states also had economic conflicts over trade and money after the Soviet breakup, which created new borders and currencies.
These multiple conflicts did not lead to the use of military force, however.
Then-Russian president Vladimir Putin, who had campaigned for the incumbent party in Ukraine, protested vigorously but did not seriously consider military force.
So the types of conflict discussed here come into play in combination rather than separately.
We will look first at the most difficult types of conflict, in which intangible elements such as ethnic hatred, religious fervor, or ideology come into play—conflicts of ideas.
These identity-based sources of international conflict today have been shaped historically by nationalism as the link between identity and internationally recognized statehood.
Therefore, we will briefly review the development of nationalism before examining the three types of conflicts of ideas.
Nationalism Nationalism—devotion to the interests of one’s own nation over the interests of other states—may be the most important force in world politics in the past two centuries.
A nation is a population that shares an identity, usually including a language and culture.
To some degree, the extension of political control over large territories such as France created the commonality necessary for nationhood—states created nations.
At the same time, however, the perceived existence of a nation has often led to the creation of a corresponding state as a people win sovereignty over their own affairs—nations created states.
Aroundd.00, countries such as France and Austria began to bring entire nations together into single states.
These new nation-states were very large and powerful and overran smaller neighbors.
Over time, they conquered and incorporated many small territorial units.
Eventually the idea of nationalism itself became a powerful force and 20 Gellner, Ernest.
The principle of self-determination implies that people who identify as a nation should have the right to form a state and exercise sovereignty over their affairs.
But it is generally secondary to the principles of sovereignty (noninterference in other states’ internal affairs) and territorial integrity, with which it frequently conflicts.
Self-determination does not give groups the right to change international borders, even those imposed arbitrarily by colonialism, in order to unify a group with a common national identity.
Generally, though not always, self-determination has been achieved by violence.
When the borders of nations do not match those of states, conflicts almost inevitably arise.
Today such conflicts are widespread—in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Sudan, and many 'j -i other places/ The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic.
The struggle over control of the Netherlands was a leading cause of the Thirty Years’ War , and in that war states mobilized their populations for war in new ways.
For instance, Sweden drafted one man out of ten for long-term military service, while the Netherlands used the wealth derived from global trade to finance a standing professional army.
This process of popular mobilization intensified greatly in the French Revolution and the subsequent Napoleonic Wars, when France instituted a universal draft and a centrally run “command” economy.
Its motivated citizen armies, composed for the first time of Frenchmen rather than mercenaries, marched longer and faster.
Their nation-state embodied their aspirations and brought them together in a common national identity.
The United States meanwhile had followed the example of the Netherlands by declaring independence from Britain in 1776.
Latin American states gained independence early in the 19th century, and Germany and Italy unified their nations out of multiple political units later in that century.
Before World War I, socialist workers from different European countries had banded together as workers to fight for workers’ rights.
In that war, however, most abandoned such solidarity and instead fought for their own nation; nationalism thus proved a stronger force than socialism.
Before World War II, nationalism helped Germany, Italy, and Japan build political orders based on fascism —an extreme authoritarianism girded by national chauvinism.
And in World War II, it was nationalism and patriotism (not communism) that rallied the Soviet people in order to sacrifice by the millions to turn back Germany’s invasion.
In the past 50 years, nations by the dozens have gained independence and statehood.
Jews worked persistently in the first half of the 20th century to create the state of Israel, and Palestinians aspired in the second half to create a Palestinian state.
While multinational states such as the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia have fragmented in recent years, ethnic and territorial units such as Ukraine, Slovenia, and East Timor have established themselves as independent nation-states.
Others, such as Montenegro and Kurdistan, seek to do so and already run their own affairs.
It affects several of the main types of conflict that occupy the rest of this chapter.
In most such cases they aspire to have their own state with its formal international status and territorial boundaries/ Territorial control is closely tied to the aspirations of ethnic groups for statehood.
Any state’s borders deviate to some extent from the actual location of ethnic communities.
Members of the ethnic group are left outside its state’s borders, and members of other ethnic groups are located within the state’s borders.
The resulting situation can be dangerous, with part of an ethnic group controlling a state and another part living as a minority within another state controlled by a rival ethnic group.
Frequently the minority group suffers discrimination in the other state, and the “home” state tries to rescue or avenge them.
Kurds share a culture, and many of them aspire to create a state of Kurdistan.
In the 1990s, rival Kurdish guerrilla armies fought both 22 Gurr, Ted Robert.
Ethnic Conflict Ethnic conflict is quite possibly the most important source of conflict in the numerous wars now occurring throughout the world.
Although conflicts between ethnic groups often have material aspects— notably over territory and government control—ethnic conflict itself stems from a dislike or hatred that members of one ethnic group systematically feel toward another ethnic group.
Not all ethnic groups identify as nations; for instance, within the United States various ethnic groups coexist with a common national identity as Americans.
But in locations where millions of members DRIVING OUT THE OUT-GROUP Ethnic conflicts play a role in many international conflicts.
Ethnocentrism based on an in-group bias can promote intolerance and ultimately dehumanization of an out-group, as in genocides in Darfur , Rwanda, and Bosnia; South African apartheid; the persecution of Jews and other minorities in Nazi Germany; and slavery in the United States.
In 2008, after decades of peace and tolerance, Kenya erupted in bloody ethnic violence after a disputed presidential election.
Here, a mob from one ethnic group attacks and drives away all members of a rival ethnic group from a formerly mixed town.
Repeatedly in the late 1990s, Turkey sent large military forces into northern Iraq to attack Kurdish guerrilla bases, and smaller clashes continue into 2013.
Kurds enjoyed autonomy in part of northern Iraq under United States protection in the 1990s and maintained a quasi-autonomous status in post-Saddam Iraq.
The Kurds’ success in the 2010 Iraqi elections gave them a strong position to retain this status.
In the Syrian civil war in 2011-2013, Kurdish areas gained considerable autonomy while straddling the fence politically between the government and the rebels.
When ethnic populations are minorities in territories controlled by rival ethnic groups, they may even be driven from their land or systematically exterminated.
By driving out the minority ethnic group, a majority group can assemble a more unified, more contiguous, and larger territory for its nation-state, as ethnic Serbs tried to do through ethnic cleansing after the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s.
Similarly, ethnic conflict between majority Kyrgyz and minority Uzbeks in 2010 in Kyrgyzstan (Central Asia) displaced hundreds of thousands of people, another example of the potency of such identity conflicts.
Outside states often worry about the fate of “their people” living as minorities in neighboring states.
But as Kosovo moved toward independence from Serbia, Serbia worried about the minority of ethnic Serbs living in Kosovo.
Similar problems have fueled wars between Armenia and Azerbaijan and between India and Pakistan.
The dangerous combination of ethnic conflict and territorial disputes could lead to more wars in the future.
Often there are long-standing historical conflicts over specific territories or natural resources, or over one ethnic group’s economic exploitation or political domination of another.
The ethnic group is a kind of extended kinship group—a group of related individuals sharing some ancestors.
Even when kinship relations are not very close, a group identity makes a person act as though the other members of the ethnic group were family.
For instance, African American men who call each other “brother” express group identity as kinship.
Likewise, Jews around the world treat each other as family even though each community has intermarried over time and shares more ancestors with local non-Jews than with distant Jews.
Perhaps as technology allows far-flung groups to congregate in cyberspace, there will be less psychological pressure to collect ethnic groups physically in a territorial nation-state.
Ethnocentrism, or in-group bias, is the tendency to see one’s own group in favorable terms and an out-group in unfavorable terms.
Some scholars believe that ethnocentrism has roots in a biological propensity to protect closely related individuals, though this idea is controversial/ More often, in-group bias is understood in terms of social psychology.
Just as the reciprocity principle has its negative side , so does the identity principle.
The same forces that allow sacrifice for a group identity, as in the European Union, also allow the formation of in-group bias.
No minimum criterion of similarity or kin relationship is needed to evoke the group identity process, including in-group bias.
In psychological experiments, even trivial differentiations can evoke these processes.
If people are assigned to groups based on a known but unimportant characteristic , before long the people in each group show in-group bias and find they don’t much care for the other group’s members.
All too easily, an out-group can be dehumanized and stripped of all human rights.
This dehumanization includes the common use of animal names— pigs, dogs, and so forth—for members of the out-group.
United States propaganda in World War II depicted Japanese people as apes.
The restraints on war that have evolved in regular interstate warfare, such as not massacring civilians , are easily discarded in interethnic warfare.
Experience in Western Europe shows that over time, education can overcome ethnic animosities between traditionally hostile nations, such as France and Germany.
After World War II, these states’ governments rewrote the textbooks that a new generation would use to learn its people’s histories.
Previously, each state’s textbooks had glorified its own past deeds, played down its misdeeds, and portrayed its traditional enemies in unflattering terms.
In a continent-wide project, new textbooks that gave a more objective and fair rendition were created.
By contrast, present-day Japanese textbooks that gloss over Japan’s crimes in World War II continue to inflame relations with both China and Korea.
The existence of a threat from an out-group promotes the cohesion of an in-group, thereby creating a somewhat self-reinforcing process of ethnic division.
However, ethnocentrism also often causes members of a group to view themselves as disunited (because Glad, Betty, ed.
Your election in the spring of 2006 as the first woman president in Africa was hailed as a breakthrough for Liberia.
The election ended decades of political violence that devastated your own country as well as your neighbors Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone.
Most recently, the violence ended when former Liberian president Charles Taylor went into exile in Nigeria.
Tens of thousands of people lost their lives or were subject to human rights abuses, including torture and mutilation, in the wars begun under Taylor's rule.
Recently, however, there is optimism within your country and from the international community.
Rebel groups have remained quiet, and Charles Taylor was arrested in 2006 and faces trial in a war crimes tribunal established by the UN forthe brutal war in Sierra Leone.
Economic aid has begun to stream into your country to assist in development.
Your country is resource rich and has the potential to become a middle-income country owing to its vast natural agricultural and mineral resources.
Economically, your country is underdeveloped, with years of civil war leading to increases in corruption and economic stagnation.
Many of the powerful economic actors in your country benefit from the corruption and graft, which you have pledged to end.
Unemployment is very high, with hundreds of thousands of young men unemployed.
Until recently, roving bands of fighters controlled pockets of territory.
SCENARIO Now imagine that a group that was involved in the civil war begins to reopen the war.
The group has taken refuge in Sierra Leone and now begins to make cross-border raids against your country.
You also suspect they are sending weapons and funds to rebels within Liberia.
Although Sierra Leone does not support the group, its government is experiencing its own political instability and has limited resources to devote to the issue.
Negotiations could lead to peace, but might require power sharing in your government that could derail your attempts to lessen corruption.
But international donors would discourage you from endangering the fragile peace in Liberia, with the implicit threat of an aid cutoff if you are perceived to be too hardline.
Thus, a military offensive against the rebels would have financial risks.
In addition, the reemergence of a civil war would make your proposed democratic and economic reforms more difficult to implement.
Your military is not well trained and you are very uncertain about the possibility of success against the rebels.
A strong military response to the rebels, however, could discourage future aggression and establish that you are a tough leader who is serious about enforcing the peace.
In the ArabIsraeli conflict, Israelis tend to see themselves as fragmented into dozens of political parties and diverse immigrant communities pulling in different directions, while they see “the Arabs” as a monolithic bloc united against them.
Meanwhile, Arab Palestinians see themselves as fragmented into factions and weakened by divisions among the Arab states, while “the Israelis” appear monolithic to them.
Ethnic groups are only one point along a spectrum of kinship relations—from nuclear families through extended families, villages, provinces, and nations, up to the entire human race.
For instance, experts said that of all the African countries, Somalia was surely immune from ethnic conflicts because Somalis were all from the same ethnic group, spoke the same language, and shared the same religion.
Then in 1991-1992, a ruinous civil war erupted between members of different clans (based on extended families), leading to mass starvation, the intervention of foreign military forces, and two decades of near-anarchy and nonstop violence.
It is unclear why people identify most strongly at one level of group identity.
In Somalia, loyalties are to clans; in Serbia, they are to the ethnic group; in the United States and elsewhere, multiethnic nations command people’s primary loyalty.
States reinforce their citizens’ identification with the state through flags, anthems, pledges of allegiance, patriotic speeches, and so forth.
Perhaps someday people will shift loyalties even further, developing a global identity as humans first and members of states and ethnic groups second.
Genocide In extreme cases, governments use genocide—systematic extermination of ethnic or religious groups in whole or in part—to try to destroy scapegoated groups or political rivals.
Under its fanatical policies of racial purity, Nazi Germany exterminated 6 million Jews and millions of others, including homosexuals, Roma, and communists.
The mass murders, now known as the Holocaust, along with the sheer scale of war unleashed by Nazi aggression, are considered among the greatest crimes against humanity in history.
The pledges of world leaders after that experience to “never again” allow genocide have been found wanting as genocide recurred in the 1990s in Bosnia and Rwanda, and most recently in Darfur, Sudan.
In 1994, in Rwanda, where the Hutu group is the majority and the Tutsi group the minority, a Hutu-nationalist government carried out the most deadly genocide of recent decades.
The minority Tutsis had earlier held power over the Hutus, and Belgian colonialism had exploited local rivalries.
In 1994, ethnic Hutu extremists in the government gave orders throughout the country to kill ethnic Tutsis and those Hutus who had opposed the government.
In short order, an estimated 800,000 men, women, and children were massacred, mostly by machete, and their bodies dumped into rivers; thousands at a time washed up on lakeshores in neighboring Uganda.
It might be tempting to view Hutu-Tutsi hatred as part of a pattern of age-old ethnic hatreds that cropped up in the post-Cold War era, especially in “backward” areas such as Africa.
If killings based on age-old hatreds are inevitable, then inaction by the rest of the world might 28 Krause, jiii, and Neil Renwick, eds.
However, explaining genocide as a result of backwardness does not work well, because one of the world’s most civilized, “advanced” states, Germany, exterminated its Jews even more efficiently than Rwanda did its Tutsis—the difference being that the “advanced” society could kill with industrial chemicals instead of at knifepoint.
Social psychology theories treat the Rwandan genocide as pathological—a deviation from both rationality and social norms.
Such feelings can be whipped up by politicians pursuing their own power.
A key threshold is crossed when the out-group is dehumanized; norms of social interaction, such as not slitting children’s throats, can then be disregarded.
As the genocide in Rwanda unfolded, the international community stood by.
A weak UN force there had to withdraw, although its commander later estimated that with 5,000 more troops he could have changed the outcome.
The weak international response to this atrocity reveals how frail international norms of human rights are compared to norms of noninterference in other states’ internal affairs—at least when no strategic interests are at stake.
The Hutu ultranationalists quickly lost power when Tutsi rebels defeated the government militarily, but the war spread into Democratic Congo, where the ultranationalists took refuge and where sporadic fighting continues 18 years later.
Top United States officials, including President Clinton, later apologized for their inadequate response, but the damage was done.
Worse yet, renewed vows of “never again” proved wanting once more in the next case, Darfur.
In Sudan, the warring sides in a decades-long civil war signed a peace agreement in 2003, ending a war that had killed more than a million people.
The agreement called for withdrawing government forces from the south of the country, establishing a power-sharing transitional government and army, and holding a referendum in the rebel areas in six years.
These processes led to the successful independence of South Sudan in 2011.
But following this peace agreement, rebels in the western Darfur region began to protest their exclusion from the peace agreement.
In response, the government helped Arab militias raid black African Darfur villages, wantonly killing, raping, and burning.
In late 2004, the government and some of the Darfur rebels reached a tentative peace agreement, and the African Union and United Nations sent in a joint peacekeeping mission in 2007.
After years of Sudanese government delays and other frustrations, the force had 23,000 uniformed personnel on the ground by 2011.
The international community’s ineffective response to the mass murders in Darfur, like that in Rwanda in 1994, shows the limited r\ reach of international norms in today’s state-based international system/ In cases of both genocide and less extreme scapegoating, ethnic hatreds do not merely bubble up naturally.
Rather, politicians provoke and channel hatred to strengthen their own power.
Often, in ethnically divided countries, political parties form along ethnic lines, and party leaders consolidate their positions in their own populations by exaggerating the dangers from the other side.
The Cold War, with its tight system of alliances and authoritarian communist governments, seems to have helped keep ethnic conflicts in check.
In the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia—multinational states—the existence of a single strong state (willing to 29 Power, Samantha.
After the fall of communism, most of the numerous ethnic rivalries in the former Soviet Union did not lead to warfare, and in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere, ethnic relations were relatively peaceful after the fall of communism.
Religious Conflict One reason ethnic conflicts often transcend material grievances is that they find expression as religious conflicts.
Because religion is the core of a community’s value system in much of the world, people whose religious practices differ are easily disdained and treated as unworthy or even inhuman.
When overlaid on ethnic and territorial conflicts, religion often surfaces as the central and most visible division between groups.
For instance, most people in Azerbaijan are Muslims; most Armenians are Christians.
Nothing inherent in religion mandates conflicts—in many places members of different religious groups coexist peacefully.
But religious differences hold the potential to make existing conflicts more intractable, because religions involve core values, which are held as absolute truth.
This is increasingly true as fundamentalist movements have gained strength in recent decades.
Members of these movements organize their lives and communities around their religious beliefs; many are willing to sacrifice, kill, and die for those beliefs.
Fundamentalist movements have become larger and more powerful in recent decades in Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, and other religions.
In India, for example, Hindu fundamentalists have provoked violent clashes and massacres that have reverberated internationally.
In 2002, a frenzy of burning, torturing, and raping by Hindu nationalist extremists killed nearly a thousand Muslims in India’s Gujarat state, where the Hindu nationalist party controls the state government.
In Israel, Jewish fundamentalists have used violence, including the assassination of Israel’s own prime minister in 1995, to derail Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations.
Fundamentalist movements challenge the values and practices of secular political organizations—those created apart from religious establishments.
As transnational belief systems, religions often are taken as a higher law than state laws and international treaties.
Iranian Islamist fundamentalists train and support militias in other states such as Iraq and Lebanon.
Jewish fundamentalists build settlements in Israeli-occupied territories and vow to cling to the land even if their government evacuates it.
Christian fundamentalists in the United States persuade their government to withdraw from the UN Population Fund because of that organization’s views on family planning and abortion.
Each of these actions runs counter to the norms of the international system and to the assumptions of realism/ Some have suggested that international conflicts in the coming years may be generated by a “clash of civilizations”—based on the differences among the world’s major 31 Appleby, R Scott.
The idea has been criticized for being overly general, and for assuming that cultural differences naturally create conflict.
In fact, although religious and ethnic conflicts receive tremendous attention in the media, most ethnic and religious groups living together in states do not fight.
Islamist Movements Currently, violent conflicts are being prosecuted in the name of all the world’s major religions.
But special attention is due to conflicts involving Islamic groups and states.
In addition, the United States “war on terror’’ is directed against a network of Islamic terror groups.
Its divergent populations include Sunni Muslims (the majority), Shi’ite Muslims (concentrated in Iran, southern Iraq, southern Lebanon, and Bahrain), and many smaller branches and sects.
Many international conflicts around this zone involve Muslims on one side and non-Muslims on the other, as a result of geographical and historical circumstances including colonialism and oil.
These groups vary greatly in the means they employ to pursue this goal.
Some are violent—militias and terrorist networks/ * * 3 In the 1990s, Islamic parties gained ground in Turkey—a secular state in which the military has intervened repeatedly to prevent religious politics—and a former Islamist leader has been prime minister since 2003, making Turkey an important model of moderate Islam in the region.
Islamist parties have also played leading roles in Iraq’s government since 2003 and played central roles in the Arab Spring countries, winning elections in Tunisia and Egypt.
Islamist politics may lead to different foreign policies, but the more important answer is that some Islamist movements have become a transnational force shaping world order and global North-South relations in important ways.
RELIGIOUS DIFFERENCES Religious intolerance can exacerbate tensions between groups, sometimes increasing violence, with international implications.
The most salient religious conflict today is between Shi'ite and Sunni branches of Islam, centered in Iran and Saudi Arabia.
In several countries, Islamists reject Western-oriented secular states in favor of governments more explicitly oriented to Islamic values.
These movements reflect long-standing anti-Western sentiment in these countries—against the old European colonizers who were Christian—and are in some ways nationalist movements expressed through religious channels.
In some Middle Eastern countries with authoritarian governments, religious institutions have been the only available avenue for political opposition.
Religion has therefore become a means to express opposition to the status quo in politics and culture.
These anti-Western feelings in Islamic countries came to a boil in 2006 after a Danish newspaper published offensive cartoons depicting 36 Binder, Leonard.
In 2012, an anti-Muslim YouTube video produced by an Egyptian in the United States led to further rioting and triggered an armed attack on a United States consulate in Libya, killing the United States ambassador.
In five Western industrialized countries, about 40 to 80 percent thought Muslims were “fanatical,” and 60 to 80 percent thought they did not respect women.
But in three of five Muslim countries, more than 60 percent thought non-Muslims were “fanatical,” and in four of those five countries, a majority thought non-Muslims did not respect women.
Fanatical Spain Germany France Great Britain United States 43% *No irrelevant text/pic Islamic pic/videos *No Smiley No Pm otherwise Removed + Blocked ^Personal text w/o Mutual consent Consider harassment.
Fanatical Jordan Turkey Egypt Indonesia Pakistan Not respectful of women Source: Pew Global Attitudes Survey, 2005 and 2010.
They reject Western political conceptions of the state (based on individual autonomy) in favor of a more traditional Islamic orientation based on community.
Some aspire to create a single political state encompassing most of the Middle East, as existed in the caliphate ofd.0-1200.
Such a development would create a profound challenge to the present international system—particularly to its current status quo powers—and would therefore be opposed at every turn by the world’s most powerful states.
Islamists in Middle Eastern countries, like revolutionaries elsewhere, derive their main base of strength from championing the cause of the poor masses against rich elites.
Like other revolutionaries throughout the global South, Islamist movements in countries such as Turkey, Egypt, and Lebanon draw their base of support from poor slums, where the Islamists sometimes provide basic services unmet by the government.
In a public opinion poll in 2006 in Egypt, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan, a plurality of respondents identified primarily as Muslims, more than identified primarily as citizens of their states or as Arabs.
But in Lebanon and the UAE, the pattern was reversed, with large majorities identifying primarily as citizens of their states.
Islamist movements tap into the public’s identification with issues that may not materially affect them but affect their identities as Muslims, across national borders—especially the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The public in Muslim countries also cared about wars in the 1990s in Bosnia, Azerbaijan, and Chechnya, where Christian armed forces attacked Muslim civilians.
Islamists see all these conflicts as part of a broad regional struggle of Islam against Western, Christian imperialism—a struggle dating back to the Crusades almost a thousand years ago.
From the perspective of some outsiders, the religious conflicts boiling and simmering at the edges of the Islamic world look like an expansionist threat to be contained.
The view from within looks more like being surrounded and repressed from several directions.
The Iraq War since 2003 greatly inflamed anti-American feeling and helped radicalize politics across the Muslim world, especially in Arab countries that saw the United States invasion as a humiliation to Arab dignity.
Initially, the presidency of Barack Hussein Obama, whose middle name reflects Muslim family roots in Kenya and who grew up partly in Muslim Indonesia, began to alter this anti-American dynamic.
Favorability ratings of America climbed in Bahrain, Jordan, and Egypt, in part due to President Obama’s speech on America’s relations with Muslim states in Cairo in June 2009, where Obama called for a “new beginning” to those relationships.
By 2010, though, many of those numbers had begun to fall again as the Arab world began to express frustration in the Middle East peace process and the United States decision to stay in Afghanistan.
Armed Islamist Groups Anti-American and anti-Western sentiments in predominantly Islamic countries have accelerated the growth of violent Islamist groups as well.
Although they are in the minority, they have disproportionate effects on IR and receive the most public attention.
In particular, divisions between the Sunni and Shi’ite wings of Islam have led to violence.
This split played out prominently in Iraq, where Saddam Hussein was a Sunni ruling over a Shi’ite majority (brutally repressing their rebellion after the 1991 Gulf War) and earlier fighting a long deadly war against Shi’ite Iran.
After the U.S.led overthrow of Saddam in 2003, Shi’ite parties took power and Shi’ite militias exacted revenge, while some Sunnis waged a relentless insurgency that turned into deadly waves of sectarian violence.
The violence in Iraq has since diminished, but the Sunni-Shi’ite relationship there remains unsettled.
Major Armed Islamist Groups Group Country Branch of Islam Actions Islamic Republic of Iran Iran Shi'ite Only Islamic revolution to successfully control a state ; held off secular Iraq in 1980s war; now attempting to build nuclear weapons.
Mahdi Army Iraq Shi'ite Clashed with United States forces in Iraq; major faction in Iraqi government.
Ansar Dine Mali Sunni Controlled north of country in 2012; took hostages in Algeria in 2013.
Various Iraq Sunni Insurgent forces inflicted many casualties on United States forces in Iraq.
Hamas Palestine Sunni Forces have killed hundreds of Israeli civilians and fought a war against Israel in 2008.
Controls Gaza Strip. al Shabab Somalia Sunni Controlled most of country in 2007-2012.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front Philippines Sunni Forces have fought for independence of certain regions in the Muslim-populated southern Philippine Islands. al Qaeda World Sunni 9/11 attacks and European bombings.
Taliban Afghanistan Sunni Major insurgent group fighting foreign forces; controlled country in 1996-2001.
Islamist guerrilla fighters/terrorists are also active in Chechnya , Kashmir , Central Asia, Indonesia, and Europe.
United States Department of Defense Since 2011, the Sunni-Shi’ite divide has centered on Syria, where the ruling family is Alawite and the majority of the population is Sunni.
Civil war there has also taken on sectarian overtones, reinforced by outside backers—Shi’ite Iran for the government along with the Shi’ite Lebanese militia Hezbollah, and Sunni Turkey and Arab Gulf states for the rebels.
Regionally, Iran and Saudi Arabia represent the split, facing each other over the Persian Gulf and engaged in a major arms race, with the Saudis stocking in jets and missiles while the Iranians race to build a nuclear weapon.
Russia tends to support the Iranian-Shi’ite side while the United States and its allies support the SaudiSunni side.
However, neither side gets along with Israel, lending a triangular aspect to the conflict.
In Iran, a popular uprising in 1979 overthrew the U.S.-backed shah and installed an Islamic government in which the top religious leaders can overturn the laws passed by the parliament.
The rejection of international norms by some Islamists was dramatically illustrated when Iran refused to protect United States diplomats in 1979.
Defying the UN Security Council, Iran is currently developing nuclear technology that could produce nuclear weapons within a few years.
In 2009, a disputed presidential election led to the harsh repression of protesters.
Iran strongly supports—with money, arms, and training—the Hezbollah militia in Lebanon and the government in Syria.
Hezbollah runs hundreds of schools, hospitals, and other charities, but is also included on the United States list of terrorist organizations.
Hezbollah fought Israel for years, winning popular support throughout the Arab world, even among Sunnis.
Hezbollah took a leading role in Lebanon’s government in 2011, despite a UN tribunal’s indictment of its members for the 2005 assassination of Lebanon’s prime minister.
On the Sunni side, the major militant Islamist groups, as well as some less violent ones, are Salafis.
They adhere to some version of Wahhabism, a fundamentalist interpretation of Islamic law with roots in Saudi Arabia.
The most important center of this fundamentalist movement currently is in Afghanistan and the next-door tribal areas of western Pakistan.
Militants following the same philosophy are also active across Northern Africa in 2013, notably in Nigeria, Mali, Libya, and Somalia.
In Egypt, a nonviolent Salafi party did well in 2012 elections, although they lost the presidential election to an Islamist who follows a less stringent interpretation of Islam.
Rival Islamic factions then continued the war with even greater intensity for several years.
By 1997, a faction called the Taliban had taken control of most of Afghanistan and imposed an extreme interpretation of Islamic law.
With beatings and executions, the regime forced women to wear head-to-toe coverings, girls to stay out of school, and men to grow beards, among other repressive policies.
The incendiary mixture in Afghanistan in the 1990s—unending war, grinding poverty, Islamic fundamentalism, and an ideologically driven government—allowed Afghanistan to become a base for worldwide terrorist operations, culminating in the September 11, 2001, attacks.
In response, the United States exerted its power to remove the Taliban from power in Afghanistan and disrupt the al Qaeda terrorist network headquartered there.
Despite United States and NATO successes, the Taliban continues to attack NATO forces.
The Taliban’s defeat in Afghanistan in 2001 led its members, with like-minded Pakistani militants, to establish bases in the lawless “tribal areas” of western Pakistan, a much larger neighbor with nuclear weapons.
Pakistan’s intelligence service is widely believed to use Islamist militants to exert influence in both Afghanistan and in Kashmir, a territory Pakistan and India dispute.
Pro-democracy forces ousted Pakistan’s military ruler and installed an elected government in 2008, though not until after the movement’s leader, Benazir Bhutto, had been assassinated.
The war in Afghanistan has strained relations between Pakistan and the United States and its NATO allies.
These strains worsened in 2011 when United States forces found and killed Osama bin Laden in a Pakistani city.
Pakistanis objected to the intrusion that violated their sovereignty, while Americans wondered whether the Pakistani military had colluded in hiding bin Laden.
In 2004, bombings of trains in Madrid killed hundreds and apparently tipped an election against the pro-American Spanish government—thus inducing Spain to pull its troops out of Iraq.
In Saudi Arabia—home to the world’s largest oil reserves, Islam’s holiest sites, and the roots of Wahhabism—al Qaeda has long hoped to overthrow the monarchy.
In 1979, Islamist militants briefly seized control of the Grand Mosque in Mecca.
Yemen is the poorest country in the Middle East and has suffered from decades of civil conflict.
The United States operates a vigorous campaign of drone attacks to combat the Yemeni militants.
Somalia’s al Shabab fighters, affiliated with al Qaeda, were ousted from most cities and towns in 2012 by an African Union force, but not before taking revenge on Ethiopia and Uganda, which had contributed troops to support the Somali government.
Al Shabab carried out deadly bombings in Uganda during the 2010 World Cup finals.
In 2011, although the African Union force in Somalia pushed al Shabab out of the capital, a terrible famine caused by drought and war gripped the Shabab-held areas of the country and forced refugees into Kenya.
In response, Kenya also sent military forces into Somalia to attack al Shabab.
In Libya, the overthrow of dictator Muammar Quadaffi in 2011 (with NATO assistance) empowered armed Islamist groups that had formerly been repressed.
They killed the United States ambassador in 2012, and they joined up with ethnic rebels from Mali, who had been fighting as mercenaries for Quadaffi, to seize northern Mali, using large quantities of weapons they brought from Libya.
The Islamists swept aside the ethnic rebels and took power for themselves, but by 2013 were ousted by a military intervention by France and neighboring African countries to return control to the government of Mali.
In Palestine, the radical Islamist faction Hamas is another important Sunni Islamist militia, although not connected with al Qaeda or the Taliban.
Centered in the Gaza Strip, Hamas sent suicide bombers who killed hundreds of Israelis after 2000, then won of al Qaeda-affiliated fighters who THE POLITICS OF ISLAM In some Muslim-populated countries, Islam is a political rallying point—especially in authoritarian countries in which the mosque is a rare permitted gathering point.
Islamist politicians are developing new models of government, mixing democracy and Islamic tradition, especially in the countries most affected by the Arab Spring protests, which frequently peaked after Friday prayers.
Here, Egyptians pray during a Friday protest against the authoritarian president early in 2011.
However, Palestine remains divided, with the Palestinian Authority controlling the West Bank and Hamas controlling Gaza.
The two great powers to face Islamist violence within their borders are Russia in its far south and China in its far west.
The predominantly Sunni Muslim republic of Chechnya, a Russian province, tried to split away from Russia in the early 1990s after the Soviet Union collapsed.
After destructive wars in 1994-1995 and 1999-2000, the threat abated, although Chechen guerrillas then turned to airline hijackings, hostage taking, and suicide bombings.
In 2004, hundreds of children died after Chechen terrorists took over a school and held them hostage.
In 2005, Russian forces killed the Chechen separatist leader they held responsible, and political violence in Chechnya is now sporadic.
Overall, conflicts involving Islamist movements are more complex than simply religious conflicts; they concern power, economic relations, ethnic chauvinism, and historical empires as well.
Ideologies have a somewhat weaker hold on core values and absolute truth than religions do, so they pose somewhat fewer problems for the international system.
For realists, ideological differences among states do not matter much, because all members of the international system pursue their national interests in the context of relatively fluid alliances.
For example, the Cold War was a global ideological struggle between capitalist democracy and communism.
But the alliances and military competitions in that struggle were fairly detached from ideological factors.
The two communist giants—the Soviet Union and China—did not stay together very long.
India, a democracy and capitalist country, chose not to ally with the United States.
Over the long run, even countries that experience revolutions based on strong ideologies tend to lose their ideological fervor—be it Iran’s Islamic fundamentalism in 1979, China’s Maoist communism in 1949, Russia’s Leninist communism in 1917, or even United States democracy in 1776.
In each case, the revolutionaries expected that their assumption of power would dramatically alter their state’s foreign policy, because in each case their ideology had Ideology plays only a limited role in most international conflicts.
After revolutions, ideologies such as Marxism may affect foreign policy, but over the following decades, countries such as China or the Soviet Union typically revert to a foreign policy based more on national interests than ideology.
Nonetheless, ideological clashes still occur, as between the freedomloving United States and authoritarian North Korea.
Yet within a few decades, each of these revolutionary governments turned to the pursuit of national interests above ideological ones.
Sometimes even self-proclaimed ideological struggles are not really ideological.
In Angola in the 1980s, the United States backed a rebel army called UNITA against a Soviet-aligned government—supposedly a struggle of democracy against Marxism.
The rebels who used democratic rhetoric to get United States support had earlier received Chinese support and mouthed Maoist rhetoric.
When the government won UN-sponsored elections, the “democratic” UNITA refused to accept the results and resumed fighting.
This conflict, which finally ended in 2002, really had nothing to do with ideology.
It was a power struggle between two armed, ethnically based factions fighting to control Angola’s oil, diamonds, and other wealth.
In the short term, revolutions do change international relations—they make wars more likely—but not because of ideology.
Rather, the sudden change of governments can alter alliances and change the balance of power.
With calculations of power being revised by all parties, it is easy to miscalculate or to exaggerate threats on both sides.
Conflicts of Interest If conflicts of ideas can be intractable because of psychological and emotional factors, conflicts about material interests are somewhat easier to settle based on the reciprocity principle.
In theory, given enough positive leverage—a payment in some form—any state should agree to another state’s terms on a disputed issue.
Consider first differences over where borders between two states should be drawn—that is, who controls a disputed piece of land.
States seldom yield territory in exchange for money or any other positive reward.
For example, in 2002, Bolivian public opinion opposed a gas export pipeline through Chile to the sea because Chile had seized the coastline from Bolivia in 1879.
The goal of regaining territory lost to another state is called irredentism.
This form of nationalism often leads directly to serious interstate conflicts.
Because of their association with the integrity of states, territories are valued far beyond any inherent economic or strategic value they hold.
The two states finally submitted the issue for binding arbitration, and Egypt ended up in possession.
For Egypt, regaining every inch of territory was a matter of national honor and a symbol of the sovereignty and territorial integrity that defined Egyptian statehood.
The value states place on home territory seems undiminished despite the apparent reduction in the inherent value of territory as technology has developed.
Historically, territory was the basis of economic production—agriculture and the extraction of raw materials.
Winning and losing wars meant gaining or losing territory, which meant increasing or decreasing wealth.
Today, however, much more wealth derives from trade and technology than from agriculture.
The costs of most territorial disputes appear to outweigh any economic benefits that the territory in question could provide.
Exceptions exist, however, such as the capture of diamond-mining areas in several African countries by rebels who use the diamond revenues to finance war.
Secession Efforts by a province or region to secede from an existing state are a special type of conflict over borders—not the borders of two existing states but the efforts to draw international borders around a new state.
Dozens of secession movements exist around the world, of varying sizes and political effectiveness, but they succeed in seceding only rarely.
The existing state almost always tries to hold on to the area in question.
For example, in the 1990s, the predominantly Albanian population of the Serbian province of Kosovo fought a war to secede from Serbia.
Peaceful Relations Among Latin American States BACKGROUND: Of all the world regions, Latin America is one of the most peaceful.
This is despite civil wars and numerous border disagreements between states in the region.
The stable peace is a collective good enjoyed by all countries in the region, even though countries that violate it might gain territory or wealth by using military force.
Despite years of relatively peaceful interstate relations in the region, persistent conflicts still exist between some states.
Colombia and Venezuela trade accusations over Venezuela’s support of rebels fighting in Colombia.
Rival countries have linguistic differences, ideological differences, territorial disputes, economic competition, and a range of other conflicts.
With the countries having sizable armies and navies at the ready, the potential for war is always present.
The solution can be found in both the reciprocity and identity principles.
Most of the Kosovo population wants to secede and become an internationally recognized state, but Serbians argue that Kosovo is historically and presently under Serbian sovereignty.
While the UN and the great powers negotiated over the future of Kosovo, with Russia insisting there be no promise of independence, Kosovars took matters into their own hands.
Several countries, including the United States and the largest EU states, recognized Kosovo’s independence, angering Serbia, Russia, and China.
In 2011, South Sudan successfully gained independence with UN membership and the support of Sudan.
Wars of secession can be large and deadly, and they can easily spill over international borders or draw in other countries.
This spillover is particularly likely if members of an ethnic or a religious group span two sides of a border, constituting the majority group in one state and a majority in a nearby region of another state, but a minority in the other state as a whole.
In the Kosovo case, Albanian Muslims are the majority in Albania and in Kosovo but the minority in Serbia.
The same pattern occurs in Bosnia-Serbia, MoldovaRussia, and India-Pakistan.
In some cases, secessionists want to merge their territories with the neighboring state, which amounts to redrawing the international border.
The strong international norms of sovereignty and territorial integrity treat secession movements as domestic problems of little concern to other states.
Thus, Russia and China opposed the secession of Kosovo from Serbia because of its implications for Chechnya and Taiwan, respectively.
In August of 2008, after fighting broke out between the Georgian military and the Georgian province of South Ossetia, Russia intervened militarily on behalf of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, resulting in a brief war between states are members of the Organization of American States, which promotes reciprocity and negotiation when political disputes arise.
In this way, even when some fighting occurs, conflicts do not escalate and become long, large-scale military conflicts.
This negotiation process has succeeded in settling many of the existing disputes, even the Peru-Ecuador dispute, three years after their border war.
A dispute between any two states is perceived as a threat to all states in the region.
Each state thinks broadly about its own interests to include the continuation of peace in the region.
Messy border problems can result when multinational states break up into pieces.
In such cases, borders that had been internal become international; because these borders are new, they may be more vulnerable to challenge.
In the former Yugoslavia, ethnic groups had intermingled and intermarried, leaving mixed populations in most of the Yugoslav republics.
When Yugoslavia broke up in 1991-1992, several republics declared their independence as separate states.
Two of these, Croatia and Bosnia, contained minority populations of ethnic Serbs.
Serbia seized effective control of significant areas of Croatia and Bosnia that contained Serbian communities or linked such populations geographically.
NonSerbian populations in these areas were driven out or massacred— euphemistically called ethnic cleansing.
Then, when Croatia reconquered most of its territory in 1995, Serbian populations in turn fled.
Ethnic nationalism, whipped up by opportunistic politicians, proved stronger than multiethnic tolerance in both Serbia and Croatia.
Czechoslovakia split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in a cooperative manner.
The norm against forceful redrawing of borders does not apply to cases of decolonization.
Only the territorial integrity of existing, recognized states is protected by international norms.
Colonies and other territorial possessions historically had value only as property to be won, lost, sold, or traded in political deals and wars.
From neither perspective do the views of the inhabitants carry much weight.
Increasingly, autonomy for a region has become a realistic compromise between secession and full control by a central government.
In 2005, spurred partly by the devastating tsunami a year earlier, separatists in Aceh province, Indonesia, disbanded, giving up on independence and instead participating in regional elections in 2006.
The Indonesian government withdrew its 24,000 troops from Aceh and offered the province limited self-rule along with 70 percent of the oil, gas, and mineral wealth earned there.
WE WANT OUT Efforts by a region to secede from a state are a frequent source of international conflict, but international norms generally treat such conflicts as internal matters unless they spill over borders.
Here, 1. million citizens in Barcelona demand independence from recession-wracked Spain for the region of Catalonia, 2012.
Because of the norm of territorial integrity, few important border conflicts remain among longestablished states.
However, this kind of wholesale redrawing of borders has not occurred among established states for 50 years.
For instance, when Iraq attacked Iran in 1980, one objective was to control the Shatt-al-Arab waterway because of its commercial and strategic value.
But ten years and a million deaths later, the Iran-Iraq border was back where it started.
Furthermore, when territorial disputes do occur between established states, they can be settled peacefully, especially when the disputed territory is small compared with the states disputing it.
In 1994, a panel of Latin American judges settled a century-long border dispute between Argentina and Chile over some mountainous terrain that both claimed.
The 3-to-2 ruling, after the countries submitted the dispute for judicial arbitration, awarded the territory to Argentina and provoked howls of protest from Chile—and even a hair-pulling fight between the Chilean and Argentine contestants in the Miss World beauty contest two months later.
But despite the strong feelings evoked by the loss of territory, Argentina and Chile settled 22 of 24 remaining border disputes peacefully after nearly going to war in 1978 over disputed islands.
The possibility of peaceful resolution of territorial disputes was highlighted in 2006 with the withdrawal of Nigerian troops from the potentially oil-rich Bakassi Peninsula, which Nigeria ceded to Cameroon’s sovereignty.
The resolution of the dispute, dating from colonial times, followed more than a decade of painstaking progress through the World Court, the personal mediation of the UN secretary-general when Nigeria initially rejected the Court’s decision, and the promise of outside powers to monitor implementation of the agreement.
Doing so would seem to run counter to the predictions of realism in particular and the dominance principle in general.
Nigeria acted in its own self-interest, because turning the dispute over to the World Court and bringing in the UN to assist with implementation brought the kind of stability needed for foreign investment to develop Nigeria’s own resources, primarily oil.
Lingering Disputes Today, the few remaining interstate border disputes generate important international conflicts.
The 1948 cease-fire lines resulting from Israel’s war of independence expanded in the 1967 war.
Israel returned the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt, but the remaining territories occupied in 1967—the West Bank near Jordan, the Gaza Strip near Egypt, and the Golan Heights of Syria—are central to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
In particular, Israel’s ongoing construction of Jewish settlements in the West Bank, bitterly opposed by Palestinians and considered illegal by most international actors, remains a contentious sticking point.
Israeli-Palestinian agreements since 1993 tried to move toward Palestinian autonomy in ^°The CIA’s World Factbook provides a comprehensive list of minor border and other international disputes.
However, that effort completely stalled in the 21st century, notwithstanding the 2012 upgrading of Palestine’s UN status to nonmember “state,” a symbolic gesture.
Another serious border dispute is in the Kashmir area where India, Pakistan, and China intersect.
The Indian-held part of Kashmir is predominantly inhabited by Muslims, a group that is the majority in Pakistan but a minority in India.
Pakistan accuses India of oppressing Kashmiris and thwarting an international agreement to decide Kashmir’s future by a popular referendum.
India accuses Pakistan of aiding and infiltrating Islamic radicals who carry out attacks in Indianoccupied Kashmir.
The two countries went to war twice over the issue, and nearly did so again in 2002—that time armed with nuclear-armed missiles.
A cease-fire took hold in 2003 and stopped most of the incessant low-level fighting along the Line of Control, although sporadic skirmishes continue, such as those that killed several soldiers on each side in early 2013.
Many of the world’s other remaining interstate territorial disputes—and often the most serious ones—concern the control of small islands, which often provide strategic advantages, natural resources , or fishing rights.
Disputed Islands The Spratly Islands exemplify contemporary conflicts over territory and natural resources around islands.
All or part of the Spratlys are claimed by China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei, the Philippines, and Taiwan.
Recently, multiple encounters between various navies have raised tensions over the contested sea.
About half of the world’s trade tonnage passes through it, including Persian Gulf oil and other key resources headed for Japan, China, South Korea, and Taiwan.
In 2012, China and the Philippines had a monthsdong standoff at a tiny shoal, but ended it peacefully.
Japan and China also dispute tiny islands elsewhere, as do Japan and South Korea.
These disputes involve low economic stakes, but have become a focus of nationalist sentiments on both sides, fueled partly by memories of World War II, when Japan occupied China and Korea.
The most serious is over small islands in the East China Sea that Japan controls but China claims, and which would give Chinese submarines a clear route to the Pacific.
The two navies and air forces confronted each other there repeatedly in 2012, though without violence, and in early 2013, the United States (bound by treaty to defend Japan in a war) called on “cooler heads” to prevail.
In the Middle East, Iran and the United Arab Emirates dispute ownership of small islands near the mouth of the Persian Gulf.
In 2002, Spain sent soldiers to oust a handful of Moroccan troops from islands off Morocco’s coast.
In South America, Argentina and Britain still dispute control of the Falkland Islands , over which they fought a war in 1982.
And the major bone of contention in Russian-Japanese relations is the ownership of the strategically located Kuril Islands, occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945.
With islands now bringing control of surrounding economic zones, international conflicts over islands will undoubtedly continue in the coming years.
Territorial Waters States treat territorial waters near their shores as part of their national territory.
Waters within three miles of shore have traditionally been recognized as territorial, but beyond that there are disputes about how far out national sovereignty extends and for what purposes.
In 2010, Russia and Norway agreed to divide portions of the Arctic Ocean into EEZs for the purposes of oil and gas extraction, ending a 40-year dispute between those states.
Because of the EEZs, sovereignty over a single tiny island can now bring with it rights to as much as 100,000 square miles of surrounding ocean.
But these zones overlap greatly, and shorelines do not run in straight lines; thus numerous questions of interpretation arise about how to delineate territorial and economic waters.
For example, Libya claims ownership of the entire Gulf of Sidra, treating it as a bay; the United States treats it as a curvature in the shoreline and insists that most of it is international waters.
In 1986, the United States sent warships into the Gulf of Sidra to make its point.
United States planes shot down two Libyan jets that challenged the United States maneuvers.
A dangerous maritime dispute flared in 2010 when a South Korean warship sank in disputed waters in the Yellow Sea.
International investigators concluded that a North Korean torpedo sank the vessel, although North Korea denied involvement.
The two countries have never formally ended the Korean War by signing a peace treaty.
Airspace Airspace above a state is considered the territory of the state.
To fly over a state’s territory, an airplane must have that state’s permission.
For example, in a 1986 raid on Libya, United States bombers based in Britain had to fly a long detour over the Atlantic Ocean because France would not grant permission for United States planes to use its airspace during the mission.
Outer space, by contrast, is considered international territory like the oceans.
International law does not define exactly where airspace ends and outer space begins.
However, orbiting satellites fly higher than airplanes, move very fast, and cannot easily change direction to avoid overflying a country.
Because satellites have become useful to all the great powers as intelligence-gathering tools, and because all satellites are extremely vulnerable to attack, a norm of demilitarization of outer space has developed.
In 2007, however, China rattled nerves by successfully destroying one of its own satellites with an antisatellite missile, strewing high-speed debris around orbital space.
Control of islands, and of the large exclusive economic zone that surrounds them under the law of the sea, has created a number of complicated interstate conflicts.
Japan claims Okinotori, shown here in 2005, as an island with an EEZ, but China calls it merely a ""rock"" without surrounding economic rights.
Control of Governments Despite the many minor border disputes that continue to plague the world, most struggles to control territory do not involve changing borders.
Rather, they are conflicts over which governments will control entire states.
In theory, states do not interfere in each other’s governance, because of the norm of sovereignty.
In practice, however, states often have strong interests in the governments of other states and use a variety of means of leverage to influence who holds power in those states.
These conflicts over governments take many forms, some mild and some severe, some deeply entwined with third parties, and some more or less bilateral.
Sometimes a state merely exerts subtle influences on another state’s elections; at other times, a state supports rebel elements seeking to overthrow the second state’s government.
During the Cold War, both superpowers actively promoted changes of government in countries of the global South through covert operations and support of rebel armies.
The civil wars in Angola, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua are good examples.
The election divided the largely Russian-speaking, Eastern Orthodox part of Ukraine to the east from the Ukrainian-speaking, Catholic, western part of the country.
The pro-Russian incumbent carried the eastern region and was declared the winner after an election that international monitors declared unsound.
Russian president Vladimir Putin had personally campaigned with him, and strongly opposed letting Ukraine—a former part of the Soviet Union—come under the influence of the West.
Meanwhile, the pro-Western candidate was poisoned during the campaign, but survived.
His supporters took to the streets in late 2004 demanding new elections, which the top Ukrainian court eventually ordered and which the opposition won.
Occasionally, one state invades another in order to change its government.
The Soviet Union did this in Czechoslovakia in 1968; the United States did so in Iraq in 2003.
People generally resent having foreigners choose their government for them—even if they did not like the old government—and the international community frowns on such overt violations of national sovereignty.
International conflicts over the control of governments—along with territorial disputes—are likely to lead to the use of violence.
They involve core issues of the status and integrity of states, the stakes tend to be high, and the interests of involved actors are often diametrically opposed.
By contrast, economic conflicts among states are more common but far less likely to lead to violence.
Economic Conflict Economic competition is the most pervasive form of conflict in international relations because economic transactions are pervasive.
Every sale made and every deal reached across international borders entails a resolution of conflicting interests.
Costa Rica wants the price of coffee, which it exports, to go up; Canada, which imports coffee, wants the price to go down.
Angola wants foreign producers of Angolan oil to receive fewer profits from oil sales; those companies’ home states want them to take home more profits.
In a global capitalist market, all economic exchanges involve some conflict of interest.
The use of violence would for the most part interrupt and diminish such profit by more than could be gained as a result of the use of violence.
Thus, economic conflicts do not usually lead to military force and war.
Economic conflict seldom leads to violence today because military forms of leverage are no longer very effective in economic conflicts.
With the tight integration of the world economy and the high cost of military actions, the use of force is seldom justified to solve an economic issue.
Even if an agreement is not ideal for one side in an economic conflict, rarely is what can be gained by military force worth the cost of war.
Thus, most economic ^Owen, John M The Foreign Imposition of Domestic Institutions.
But economic conflicts do still bear on international security in some ways.
Because a trade surplus confers an advantage in international security affairs over the long run, trade conflicts have implications for international security relations.
Second, the theory of lateral pressure also connects economic competition with security concerns.
As great powers expand their economic activities outward, their competition leads to conflicts and sometimes to war.
There is a world trade in such items, but national governments try to keep control of such production—to try to ensure that national interests take priority over those of manufacturers and that the state is militarily self-sufficient in case of war.
The transfer of knowledge about high-tech weaponry and military technologies to potentially hostile states is a related concern.
A different kind of economic conflict revolves around the distribution of wealth within and among states.
As discussed in Chapter 12, the tremendous disparities in wealth in our world create a variety of international security problems with the potential for violence—including terrorist attacks on rich countries by groups in poor countries.
Revolutions in poor countries are often fueled by disparities of wealth within the country as well as its poverty relative to other countries.
These revolutions in turn frequently draw in other states as supporters of one side or the other in a civil war.
Marxist approaches to international relations, discussed in Chapters 4 and 12, treat class struggle between rich and poor people as the basis of interstate relations.
According to these approaches, capitalist states adopt foreign policies that serve the interests of the rich owners of companies.
Conflicts and wars between the global North and South—rich states versus poor states—are seen as reflections of the domination and exploitation of the poor by the rich—imperialism in direct or indirect form.
For example, most Marxists saw the Vietnam War as a United States effort to suppress revolution in order to secure continued United States access to cheap labor and raw materials in Southeast Asia.
Many Marxists portray conflicts among capitalist states as competition over the right to exploit poor areas.
Lenin portrayed World War I as a fight over the imperialists’ division of the world.
The Sino-Soviet-American Triangle and the Modern Security Problematique.
Drug trafficking also has become linked with security concerns because military forces participate regularly in operations against the heavily armed drug traffickers.
Conflicts over drugs generally concern states on one side and nonstate actors on the other.
But other states can be drawn in because the activities in question cross national borders and may involve corrupt state officials.
These international ramifications are evident in the efforts of the United States government to prevent cocaine cartels based in Colombia from supplying cocaine to United States cities.
Such cocaine derives mostly from coca plants grown by peasants in mountainous areas of Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia itself.
Processed in simple laboratories in the jungle, the cocaine moves from Colombia through other countries such as Panama before arriving in the United States.
In each of these countries , the drug smugglers have bribed some corrupt officials, including military or police officers, to stay clear.
But other state officials in each country are working with United States law enforcement agencies and the United States military to crack down on the cocaine trade.
In 2005, Bolivians elected as president an anti-American former coca farmer who supports farming coca though not the production of cocaine.
Segments of the populations in several of these countries, especially in cocaineproducing regions, benefit substantially from the drug trade.
For poor peasants, the cocaine trade may be their only access to a decent income.
More importantly for international security, rebel armies in 2 of the world’s 14 active wars—Afghanistan and Colombia— fund their operations primarily through control of the trade in illicit drugs.
Afghanistan, the central front in the West’s struggle against Islamist extremism (specifically the Because drug trafficking crosses national borders and involves lots of guns and money, it is a source of interstate conflict.
Afghanistan supplies most of the opium used to make heroin worldwide, and this illicit trade funds the Taliban in its fight against NATO and the Afghan government.
Here, a poor Afghan farmer, dependent on opium poppies to make a living, checks his crop, 2007.
In Latin America, the long history of United States military intervention makes state cooperation with United States military forces a sensitive political issue.
In some countries, governments have faced popular criticism for allowing the “Yankees” to “invade” in the drug war.
In 1989, United States forces invaded Panama; arrested its leader, dictator Manuel Noriega; and convicted him in United States courts of complicity in drug trafficking through Panama.
Just as there are many possible outcomes of conflict, many types of war, and varied propensities for violence among different states, so too is there great diversity in how force is used if conflict leads to violence.
States develop a wide array of military forces, which vary tremendously in their purposes and capabilities.
These vary greatly in size and character, from guerrilla wars and raids to hegemonic war for leadership of the international system.
Along this spectrum of uses of violence, the exact definition of war is uncertain.
Contradictory theories have been proposed at each level of analysis and, with two exceptions, none has strong empirical support.
Thus, political scientists cannot reliably predict the outbreak of war.
It is hard to explain why people’s loyalties are sometimes to their ethnic group and sometimes to a multiethnic nation.
State leaders can use ideologies to justify whatever actions are in their interests.
With a few exceptions, however, almost all the world’s borders are now firmly fixed and internationally recognized.
European textbooks were revised after World War II to reduce ethnic and national stereotypes and to give a fairer portrayal of Europe’s various nations.
The rise of fundamentalism among the world’s major religions challenges traditional notions of state sovereignty.
Suppose that you were the mediator in negotiations between two states, each claiming the same piece of land.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview When the Cold War ended in the years between 1989 and 1991, observers hoped for a new age of U.S.-Russian cooperation.
Russia threatened to veto UN Security Council resolutions concerning Iraq in the 1990s and 2000s.
The United States arrested several high-profile spies who were continuing to operate in America long after the end of the Cold War.
American withdrawal from the AntiBallistic Missile Treaty in 2001 spurred Russian fears that the United States would engage in another arms race.
During the lead-up to the 2003 Iraq War, Russia consistently opposed American efforts to gain UN Security Council approval, threatening to veto any resolution proposed by the United States.
Although no one believes Russia and the United States will engage in war with one another, many do wonder if a new Cold War will emerge between these former rivals.
A New Cold War Will Emerge Between the United States and Russ a Russia and the United States have major differences in key policy areas.
On several important issues, Russia and the United States do not see eye-to-eye.
In particular, the United States is committed to NATO expansion, which Russia considers a direct threat to its security.
In addition, the United States is committed to deploying antiballistic missiles in Europe, which Russia opposes.
Democracy in Russia is imperfect at best, creating additional tensions with the United States.
Opposition leaders are jailed, corruption is extensive, and the press is threatened when it investigates wrongdoing.
The United States has hinted that future aid will be based on Russia's improving these weak democratic institutions, angering Russian leaders.
Russia reaches out to United States enemies and confronts United States allies.
Russia has recently conducted joint military exercises with Venezuela and has a cordial relationship with Iran.
Russia has recently gone to war with Georgia over disputed territory and continues to threaten Ukraine over natural gas prices.
ARGUMENT 2 No New Cold War Will Emerge Between the United States and Russi a Russia depends on Western aid and acceptance.
Russia greatly values its membership in key IGOs such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
It also covets membership in the World Trade Organization, which it hopes to join.
There are no major ideological differences between the United States and Russia.
Unlike during the Cold War, there are no major ideological divides between these two great powers.
While Russian democracy may be imperfect, Russia is unlikely to re-embrace communism or abandon its experiment with capitalism.
Where their interests converge, as in the war against Islamic extremists in Afghanistan, U.S.-Russian cooperation works smoothly.
During the Cold War, Europe was divided into two camps, each supported by one of the superpowers.
Now, Europe is united and can serve as a mediator between the United States and Russia.
Europe has strong economic and political interests in continued cooperation with both sides and will work to ensure tensions do not spiral out of hand.
Revolutions, Rigged Elections; and Pipeline Politics in the Former Soviet Union.
These levers set armies marching, suicide bombers blowing up, or missiles flying.
Evidence also shows that the utility of military force relative to nonmilitary means is slowly declining over time.
Yet most states still devote vast resources to military capabilities compared to other means of influence.
Because of the security dilemma , states believe they must devote large resources to military capabilities if other states are doing so.
Beyond defending their territories, states develop military capabilities for several other purposes.
They may also hope to compel other states to behave in certain ways, by threatening an attack if the state does not comply.
United States Department of Defense 1 Art, Robert J., and Kenneth N Waltz, eds.
You Are a Military Commander"" at MyPoliSciLab assistance after disasters, for peacekeeping, for surveillance of drug trafficking, and for repression of domestic political dissent, among other missionsThe sizes and types of military forces reflect these missions.
Together, they account for about two-thirds of world military spending, a third of the world’s soldiers, a third of the weapons, 98 percent of nuclear weapons, and 90 percent of arms exports.
Controlling Territory Whatever their ultimate causes and objectives, most wars involve a struggle to control territory.
Territory holds a central place in warfare because of its importance in the international system, and vice versa.
Borders define where a state’s own military forces and rival states’ military forces are free to move.
Military logistics makes territoriality all the more important because of the need to control territories connecting military forces with each other.
An army’s supplies must flow from home territory along supply lines to the field.
Thus the most fundamental purpose of conventional forces is to take, hold, or defend territory.
Military forces with armed foot soldiers can occupy a territory militarily.
Although inhabitants may make the soldiers’ lives unhappy through violent or nonviolent resistance, generally only another organized, armed military force can displace occupiers.
They use assault rifles and other light weapons as well as heavy artillery of various types.
In open terrain, such as desert, mechanized ground forces typically combine armor, artillery, and infantry.
In close terrain, such as jungles and cities, however, foot soldiers are more important.
For this reason, the armies of industrialized states have a greater advantage over poor armies in open conventional warfare, such as in the Kuwaiti desert.
In jungle, mountain, or urban warfare, however—as in Afghan mountains and Iraqi cities—such advantages are eroded, and a cheaper and more lightly armed force of motivated foot soldiers or guerrillas may ultimately prevail over an expensive conventional army.
The superiority of conventional armed forces to irregular forces in open battle was graphically demonstrated in Somalia at the end of 2006.
An Islamist militia had taken control of most of the country and the capital, leaving a transitional government near Ethiopia’s border, backed by Ethiopia’s large conventional military.
The Islamists closed schools and sent teenagers with rifles in pickup trucks to attack the provisional government.
They were no match for the Ethiopian army, which then ousted them from the whole country in two weeks.
The Islamists, like most irregular forces, then had to fall back to guerrilla attacks rather than taking and holding territory.
Here, in turn, the conventional Ethiopian military proved no match, and the Islamists gained ground steadily 'Worley, D Robert.
Author's estimates based on data provided by the following sources: a 2011 data from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. foil data from Institute for International and Strategic Studies.
After their departure, Somali Islamist groups captured most of the country’s territory, overpowering Somali government forces and fighting peacekeepers from the African Union.
Somalia’s government incorporated moderate Islamist factions but continued to fight more radical Islamist groups.
By 2010, the African Union had voted to send reinforcements to battle the Islamist forces.
Counterinsurgency has received growing attention in recent years because of Iraq and Afghanistan, but it is central to all 14 wars currently in progress worldwide.
Counterinsurgency warfare often includes programs to try to “win the hearts and minds” of populations so that they stop sheltering the guerrillas.
In some ways, because counterinsurgency warfare is as much about political gains as military strategy, it is the most complex type of warfare.
While battling armed factions of an insurgency, a government must essentially conduct a public relations campaign to persuade the population to abandon the movement, while providing public services to show a government’s responsiveness to the population.
A government must be strong militarily, but cannot be too brutal in the application of force, lest more of the population begin to support the guerrillas.
United States military forces conducted counterinsurgency campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan for years.
The campaigns included the use of lethal military force, payments to key tribal leaders to support American efforts, assisting the formation of local government, and training new police and military forces to combat the insurgency.
These types of activities place tremendous stress on militaries, which are usually trained only to fight wars, not undertake rebuilding distant governments.
For example, the United States Army’s counterinsurgency manual suggests deploying 20 troops for every 1,000 citizens to be protected from insurgents.
Indeed, even including allied forces, the United States never reached such a ratio of troops-to-population in Iraq or Afghanistan.
A common tool of guerrillas, insurgents, and the governments fighting them are land mines, which are simple, small, and cheap containers of explosives with a trigger activated by contact or sensor.
These mines were a particular focus of public attention in the 1990s because in places such as Angola, Afghanistan, Cambodia, and Bosnia, they were used extensively by irregular military forces that never disarmed them.
Long after such a war ends, land mines continue to maim and kill civilians who try to reestablish their lives in former war zones.
Public opinion and NGOs have pressured governments to restrict the use of land mines.
Russia and Japan signed on shortly afterward, but not WINNING HEARTS AND MINDS Counterinsurgency warfare has become central to the missions of uniformed military forces worldwide.
The United States military rewrote its counterinsurgency manual and changed its tactics in Iraq and Afghanistan to emphasize political and economic activities and positive relations with civilian populations.
Here, in the capital of Somalia, a Ugandan soldier with the African Union force works on befriending local children after the AU ousted Islamist militants from the city, 2012.
Controlling the Seas Navies are adapted primarily to control passage through the seas and to attack land near coastlines.
Navies can also blockade enemy ports, as, for example, Israel does to control sea access to Hamas-ruled Gaza.
In 2008-2012, navies of the Western powers responded to the rapid growth of piracy in three of the world’s vital shipping lanes—off Somalia south of the Suez Canal; the Straits of Malacca in Indonesia connecting the Indian Ocean with East Asia; and, more recently, the waters off West Africa.
The Somali pirates, taking advantage of near-anarchy in that country, established safe havens onshore and ventured out to capture dozens of ships, holding the vessels, cargoes, and crews for ransom.
Shipping companies generally paid up, millions of dollars per ship, rather than lose valuable goods and people.
The pirates pushed the limits by capturing first a Ukrainian freighter loaded with tanks and weapons and then a huge Saudi oil tanker with $100 million of oil.
Racing to ships in very small, fast boats, armed with automatic rifles and grenade launchers, they toss up grappling hooks, climb the sides, and subdue the crew, typically within about ten minutes.
The world’s navies patrolled the area to deter piracy , but with incomplete success because of the sheer size of the oceans.
In 2008, the UN Security Council unanimously called for international cooperation in fighting the surge in hijackings.
Many states responded, including the five permanent members of the Security Council.
United States Special Forces killed the hijackers of one American ship in 2009, European Union attack helicopters raided an onshore pirate base in 2012, and a Somali rescue freed a ship in late 2012.
All these measures led to a sharp decline in Somali hijackings in 2012.
A notorious pirate leader, “Big Mouth,” who had once seized the Ukrainian ship full of tanks, announced his disarmament and retirement in 2013.
Aircraft carriers—mobile platforms for attack aircraft—are instruments of power projection that can attack virtually any state in the world.
Aircraft carriers are extremely expensive and typically require 20 to 25 supporting ships for protection and supply.
Only the United States operates large carriers, known as supercarriers—11 of them, costing more than $5 billion each.
In 2015, the United States Navy plans to launch a newly designed supercarrier, costing $14 billion.
China has acquired and renovated one carrier, which it uses for training.
Eight other countries (France, India, Russia, Spain, Brazil, Italy, Thailand, and the United Kingdom) maintain smaller carriers that use helicopters or small airplanes.
Because the ranges of small missiles now reach from dozens to hundreds of 4 Keegan, John.
UNOSAT map, October 2,2008. miles, naval warfare emphasizes detection at great distances without being detected oneself—a cat-and-mouse game of radar surveillance and electronic countermeasures.
Marines are also useful for great power intervention in distant conflicts where they can insert themselves quickly and establish local control.
Controlling the Skies Air forces serve several purposes—strategic bombing of land or sea targets; “close air support” ; interception of other aircraft; reconnaissance; and airlift of supplies, weapons, and troops.
Missiles—whether fired from air, land, or sea—are increasingly important.
Air forces have developed various means to try to fool such missiles, with mixed results.
In the Soviet war in Afghanistan, the U.S.-made portable Stinger missiles used by guerrillas took a heavy toll on the Soviet air force.
In 2003, the threat from shoulder-fired missiles kept the Baghdad airport closed to commercial traffic for more than a year after United States forces arrived.
Traditionally, and still to some extent, aerial bombing resembles artillery shelling in that it causes great destruction with little discrimination.
Other bombs use GPS navigation to hit targets through clouds, smoke, or sandstorms.
Most of the bombing in the 1991 Gulf War was highaltitude saturation bombing using large numbers of dumb bombs.
In typical wars, such as Russia’s 1995 Chechnya War, bombing of cities causes high civilian casualties.
But in the 2003 Iraq War, the massive air campaign early in the war entirely used smart bombs, hitting far more targets with fewer bombs.
Even so, thousands of civilians have apparently died in United States airstrikes in Iraq since 2003.
Israel found, however, that Lebanese guerrillas were able to jam some of its radar systems with rudimentary electronic devices, creating difficulties for the Israeli military.
The increasing sophistication of electronic equipment and the high-performance requirements of attack aircraft make air forces expensive—totally out of reach for some states.
Despite the expense, air superiority is often the key to the success of ground operations, especially in open terrain.
The United States bombings of Iraq , Serbia , and Afghanistan demonstrated a new effectiveness of air power, applied not against the morale of enemy populations , but directly targeted from afar at battlefield positions.
The United States ability to decimate distant military forces while taking only very light casualties is historically unprecedented.
The 2003 attack on Iraq demonstrated the usefulness of air power, but also its limits.
A massive precision bombing raid on Baghdad a few days into the war destroyed hundreds of targets of value to Saddam Hussein’s government.
However, United States forces still had to fight it out on the ground to get to Baghdad.
Aircraft carriers are used for power projection in distant regions, such as in the Afghanistan and Iraq campaigns.
The United States continues to invest heavily in its own air force, creating new technologies to stay ahead of Chinese advances.
And while air power may be less useful in small-scale warfare, states continue to build their air forces in the event of more largescale conflicts.
Military logistics is a huge operation, and in most armed forces the majority of soldiers are not combat troops.
Global-reach capabilities combine long-distance logistical support with various power-projection forces/ These capabilities allow a great power to project military power to distant corners of the world and to maintain a military presence in most of the world’s regions simultaneously.
Britain and France are in a distant second place, able to mount occasional distant operations of modest size such as the Falklands War.
Space forces are military forces designed to attack in or from outer space.
Only the United States and Russia have substantial military capabilities in space.
China put an astronaut in orbit in 2003, successfully tested an antisatellite missile, and launched a lunar orbiter in 2007, but it has fewer space capabilities overall.
United States Department of Defense 7 Harkavy, Robert E Bases Abroad: The Global Foreign Military Presence.
The far more common uses of space by the military are for command and coordination purposes.
Satellites are used extensively for military purposes, but these purposes thus far do not include attack.
Satellites perform military surveillance and mapping, communications, weather assessment, and early warning of ballistic missile launches.
Satellites also provide navigational information to military forces—army units, ships, planes, and even guided missiles in flight.
Handheld receivers are available commercially, so the military forces of other countries can free-ride on these satellite navigation beacons.
Poorer states can buy satellite photos—including high-resolution pictures that Russia sells for hard currency.
In fact, access to such information has diffused to the point that the terrorists who attacked Mumbai, India, in 2008 planned their attack using satellite images available through Google Earth, and coordinated it in real time from Pakistan using satellite phones.
In the 2006 war between Hezbollah and Israel in Lebanon, Hezbollah forces used GPS jammers to complicate Israeli air support and targeting operations.
But generally, in outer space great powers have advantages over smaller or poorer states.
Intelligence gathering also relies on various other means such as electronic monitoring of telephone lines and other communications, reports from embassies, and information in the open press.
Some kinds of information are obtained by sending agents into foreign countries as spies.
They use ingenuity to penetrate walls of secrecy that foreign governments have constructed around their plans and capabilities.
For example, in 1999 a Russian spy taped conversations from a listening device planted in a high-level conference room at the United States State Department.
The 2001 terrorist attacks showed a weakness in United States “human intelligence” capabilities, in that the United States had not penetrated a large terrorist network based in Afghanistan and operating globally.
The largest United States military intelligence agency is the National Security Agency , whose mission is encoding United States communications and breaking the codes of foreign communications.
The NS A intercepts truly massive amounts of information from such sources as undersea phone cables, then sifts through it to find significant conversations.
The NS A employs more mathematics Ph.D.s than anyone in the world, is the second largest electricity consumer in the state of Maryland, has a budget larger than the CIA’s, and is believed to have the most powerful computer facility in the world.
Altogether, the budgets of United States intelligence agencies, although officially secret, were revealed in 2005 to be around $44 billion a year.
Clearly these operations taken together are very large and are growing in importance as the information revolution proceeds and as the war on terror makes their mission more central.
Evolving Technologies Technological developments have changed the nature of military force in several ways.
First, the resort to force in international conflicts now has more profound costs and consequences.
Great powers in particular can no longer use force to settle disputes among themselves without risking massive destruction and economic ruin.
BACKGROUND As a presidential candidate in 2012, you publicly promised to continue and accelerate the American troop withdrawal from Afghanistan.
There is now a timetable set for international forces (including United States troops) to leave Afghanistan by next year.
This removal of international forces comes despite the fact that large parts of Afghanistan are still relatively unstable afterthe 12-year-long war.
The Haqqani network—a group of antiUnited States fighters allied to the Taliban—continue to attack United States forces.
This network has significant ties to the security forces in neighboring Pakistan, where Haqqani fighters take refuge after raids in Afghanistan.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Although the economy is the major issue for your administration, terrorism and the war in Afghanistan are still key issues in United States public opinion.
The American public has grown quite weary of the war in Afghanistan, and after the death of Osama bin Laden, growing numbers question the continued military presence there.
Public opinion polls showed strong support for your decision to establish a firm date for withdrawal from that conflict.
SCENARIO Imagine that as international forces withdraw from Afghanistan, attacks against American troops increase significantly.
The Taliban, with help from the Haqqani network, reemerges as a major political actor and threatens to defeat the Afghan government in several key provinces.
Pakistan's government is divided— some Pakistani officials push to help the Afghan government, while other key officials support the pro-Taliban forces.
That would likely stop the Taliban advances, but perhaps put off the inevitable when United States troops do leave.
That would be popular at home, but risk the reemergence of antiUnited States forces that America intervened to topple after the 9/11 attacks.
These technological advances undermine the territorial basis of war and the “hard shell” of the state itself.
In recent years, this trend has accelerated with the use of unmanned drone aircraft, including drones armed with missiles, in United States military efforts in Pakistan, Yemen, and Libya.
In addition to America’s 7,000 drones in 2011, other countries have been rapidly acquiring them.
Britain and Israel have used drones for attacks, but most drones worldwide are used for surveillance.
United States underwater sea drones for mine clearing, produced by Germany, were sent to the Persian Gulf in 2012 as tensions with Iran escalated.
Electronic warfare refers to the uses of the electromagnetic spectrum in war, and is critical to all technologically advanced military forces.
Strategies for cyberwar —disrupting enemy computer networks to degrade command and control, or even hacking into bank accounts electronically—may figure prominently in future wars, although they have not yet.
The United States decided against using cyberattacks to disable Libya’s air defenses in 2011 out of fear of the precedent such an action could set.
In the future, terrorist attacks also could target computer networks, including the Internet and critical infrastructure such as electric grids.
In 2010, the U.S.-Israeli Stuxnet virus targeted Iran’s nuclear centrifuges, and in 2012, the Flame virus was found on thousands of computers across the Middle East, mostly in Iran.
It could grab screenshots and keystrokes, and remotely turn on computer microphones to help the creators spy on operations in the Iranian nuclear program.
A few months later, probably in response, a virus deleted files on the computers of a major Saudi oil company, replacing them with an image of a burning American flag.
Stealth technology uses special radar-absorbent materials and unusual shapes in aircraft, missiles, and ships to scatter enemy radar.
However, stealth is expensive (the B-2 stealth bomber costs about $2 billion per plane) and prone to technical problems.
These periods usually combine innovative applications of new technology with changes in military doctrine, organization, or operations.
Such revolutions may arise from innovations in organization, as when revolutionary France first mobilized an entire nation into a war machine two centuries ago.
Or they may arise from new military doctrine as when Germany used the “blitzkrieg” to overwhelm Poland and France at the outset of World War II, or from technology alone as with the invention of nuclear weapons.
Many military analysts consider the present period, starting with the 1991 Gulf War, a revolution in military affairs, especially in United States forces.
Two centuries ago, the German military strategist Carl von Clausewitz described as a “fog of war” the confusion and uncertainty that greatly reduces the effectiveness of armies in battle.
Today’s United States forces are piercing that fog for themselves while thickening it for their enemies.
As the fog of 10 Herz, John H International Politics in the Atomic Age.
The revolutionary potentials were first apparent in the lopsided 1991 victory over Iraq’s large but not technologically advanced army, and the 1999 Kosovo campaign was notable in achieving its war aims without loss of a single United States life to hostile fire.
Small groups of lightly armed United States special forces, inserted across the country, used lasers to illuminate targets for smart bombs dropped by high-flying aircraft.
The integration of these diverse forces using information-rich battle management systems resulted in a stunningly effective bombing campaign that destroyed the Taliban as an effective army and handed victory to the smaller anti-Taliban armies, all with just a handful of United States casualties.
The 2003 invasion of Iraq seemed to continue this success, but then the postinvasion security situation in Iraq unraveled over several years despite the revolutionary technologies of United States forces.
A more unsettling thought is that the revolution in military affairs may work for terrorists as well as states.
The September 2001 attackers used information technology, such as encrypted Internet communications, to coordinate forces while keeping United States authorities in the dark.
They carried out precision strikes over long distances with very small, dispersed units.
As a result, 19 attackers killed nearly 3,000 people, and an expenditure of under $1 million caused tens of billions of dollars in damage.
The information revolution is making smaller weapons and smaller dispersed units more potent.
A ""revolution in military affairs"" is driving changes in United States military strategy, including the expanding use of unmanned drones.
This insect-size drone shown in 2011 could collect real-time intelligence in complex urban environments.
Terrorism Watch the Video ""Bin Laden Killed in Pakistan"" at MyPoliSciLab The United States State Department listed 45 foreign terrorist organizations in 2010.
In Chapter 5 we discussed conflicts involving armed Islamist militias and terrorist networks.
Since September 2001, governments and ordinary people have paid much more attention to terrorism than ever before.
More than guerrilla warfare, terrorism is a shadowy world of faceless enemies and irregular tac1 T tics marked by extreme brutality.
Traditionally, the purpose of terrorism is to demoralize a civilian population in order to use its discontent as leverage on national governments or other parties to a conflict.
Related to this is the aim of creating drama in order to gain media attention for a cause.
When the IRA planted bombs in London in the 1960s and 1970s, it hoped to make life miserable enough for Londoners that they would insist their government settle the Northern Ireland issue.
The bombing also sought to keep the issue of Northern Ireland in the news, in the hope that the British government would then be pressured to concede terms more favorable to the IRA than would otherwise be the case.
Terrorism is seldom mindless; rather, it is usually a calculated use of violence as leverage.
However, motives and means of terrorism vary widely, having in common only that some actor is using violence to influence other actors.
In part, the effectiveness of terrorism in capturing attention is due to the dramatic nature of the incidents, especially as shown on television news.
Although only a few dozen people may be injured by a bomb left in a market, millions of people realize “It could have been me,” because they, too, shop in markets.
Attacks on airplanes augment this fear because many people already fear flying.
Terrorism thus amplifies a small amount of power by its psychological effect on large populations; this is why it is usually a tool of the weak.
However, al Qaeda’s attacks follow a somewhat different pattern, planned less to create fear than simply to kill as many Americans and their allies as possible—and ultimately to touch off apocalyptic violence that al Qaeda’s followers believe will bring about God’s intervention.
Indeed, terrorist attacks in general have become more deadly over the past 50 years as terrorist tactics have increasingly employed more violent means to injure or kill civilians.
The psychological effect is aimed at Muslim populations worldwide rather than at Americans.
In the shockingly destructive attack on the World Trade Center, tangible damage was far greater than in previous terrorist attacks—reaching into thousands of lives and tens of billions of dollars.
The psychological impact was even stronger than the physical damage—changing the United States political and cultural landscape instantly.
And the same terrorist network was trying to obtain nuclear weapons with which to kill not thousands, but hundreds of thousands of Americans.
The classic cases of terrorism—from the 1970s to the 2001 attacks—are those in which a nonstate actor uses attacks against civilians by secret nonuniformed forces, operating across international borders, as a leverage against state actors.
Radical political factions or separatist groups hijack or blow up airplanes or plant bombs in cafes, clubs, or other crowded places.
For example, Chechen radicals seized a school in Beslan, a small city in the Caucasus region in 2004For three days, they held nearly 1,200 children, parents, and teachers without food or water.
For example, the bombing of the Boston Marathon in 2013 was an unsophisticated attack by two brothers, yet it preoccupied news media for weeks afterwards.
Often terrorism is used by radical factions of movements that have not been able to get attention or develop other effective means of leverage.
It is often a tactic of desperation, and it almost always reflects weakness in the power position of the attacker.
For instance, Palestinian radicals in 1972 had seen Arab states defeated by Israel in war and could not see a way to gain even a hearing for their cause.
By capturing media attention worldwide with dramatic incidents of violence—even at the cost of rallying world public opinion against their cause—the radicals hoped to make Palestinian aspirations an issue that Western governments could not ignore when deciding on policies toward the Middle East.
Yet, the persistence of terrorism is in some ways puzzling because the tactic has a mixed record of success.
Suicide bombers were arguably effective at convincing the United States to leave Lebanon in 1983, but the Chechen terrorists’ 2004 school attack marked their end as a serious force in Chechnya.
A1 Qaeda affiliates in Iraq so alienated the Sunni tribes that had sheltered them that the tribes turned against them.
In addition, even large numbers of suicide bombers have yet to be effective at gaining a state for the Tamils in Sri Lanka or providing leverage for Hamas or Islamic Jihad against Israel.
Some research has attempted to systematically analyze when particular types of terrorism, such as suicide bombings, are effective at achieving the goals of terrorist organizations.
In particular, they occur most frequently against democracies rather than autocracies, presumably because democracies are thought to be strongly influenced by public opinion.
Still, this same study concludes that this terror tactic has not been particularly successful at achieving significant goals.
Terrorists are more willing than states are to violate the norms of the international system because, unlike states, they do not have a stake in that system.
Conversely, when a political group gains some power or legitimacy, its use of terrorism usually diminishes.
This was true of the Palestine Liberation Organization during the peace process in 1993-2000 as well as the Irish Republican Army starting in 1995.
States themselves carry out acts designed to terrorize their own populations or those of other states, but scholars tend to avoid the label “terrorism” for such acts, preferring to call it repression or war.
In fact, no violent act taken during a civil or international war—by or toward a warring party—can necessarily fit neatly into the category of terrorism.
Of course, because war is hard to define, so is terrorism; warring parties often call each other terrorists.
The narrowest definition of terrorism would exclude acts either by or against uniformed military forces rather than civilians.
It would also exclude the bombing of German cities in World War II although the purpose was to terrorize civilians.
But in today’s world of undeclared war, guerrilla war, civil war, and ethnic violence, a large gray zone surrounds clear cases of terrorism.
Disagreements about whether terrorism included Palestinian attacks 15 Pape, Robert.
State-sponsored terrorism refers to the use of terrorist groups by states—usually under control of the state’s intelligence agency—to achieve political aims.
Combing the fields for debris, investigators found fragments of a tape recorder that had contained a sophisticated plastic explosive bomb.
The United States and British governments identified the Libyan intelligence agents responsible, and in 1992, backed by the UN Security Council, they demanded that Libya turn over the agents for trial.
When Libya refused, the UN imposed sanctions including a ban on international flights to or from Libya.
In 1999, Libya turned over the suspects for trial—two received life in prison while a third was acquitted—and the UN suspended its sanctions.
In 2003, Libya formally took responsibility for the bombing, struck a multibillion-dollar compensation deal with the victims’ families, and regained a normal place in the international community.
However, these kinds of unilateral United States sanctions are of limited effect.
North Korea was removed from the list in 2008 in exchange for promises to halt its nuclear weapons program.
Counterterrorism Just as the methods used by terrorists have become more diverse over the past decades, so have the policies implemented to prevent terrorist incidents.
Debates over how to best prevent terrorist attacks are often heated since there are also debates about why individuals engage in terrorist attacks in the first place.
Policies to combat terrorism can be placed along a spectrum involving more or less force in confronting terrorism and terrorist organizations.
On the nonviolent end of the spectrum are calls for economic development.
Advocates of these programs point out that in very poor states, people will be especially vulnerable to recruitment by terrorist organizations.
With no bright future ahead of them and little opportunities to better themselves, people will naturally lose hope, become angry, and undertake seemingly irrational acts since they feel they have nothing to lose.
And although there is little direct evidence that factors like poverty correlate directly with terrorist activities, it is clear that very poor states with weak central governments have served as recruiting grounds for international terrorist organizations.
These involve efforts by domestic police, usually in cooperation with other countries’ police forces, to apprehend or kill terrorists while breaking up terrorist organizations.
In one famous example of effective counterterrorist policing, the government of Peru, using an elite investigative team of the national police force, arrested the leader of the Shining Path movement, which at one point controlled over 20,000 well-armed militia members and had assassinated several Peruvian political leaders.
The police arrested the movement’s leader after staking out a dance studio and digging through trash from the studio to find clues.
At the other end of the counterterrorism spectrum is organized military conflict.
States may undertake smallor large-scale conflicts to counter terrorist organizations.
In 1998, the United States launched cruise missile strikes against a plant in Sudan believed to be producing chemical weapons for al Qaeda, but turned out to be making infant formula.
In addition, the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan was a response to the 9/11 attacks on the United States.
Of course, nearly every state that undertakes counterterrorism policies uses some combination of these methods.
In the United States, for example, foreign aid is often justified in terms of assisting development and economic growth to decrease the possibility that the poor and uneducated can be easily drafted into terrorist organizations.
The FBI and local law enforcement cooperate with many international partners to track and Terrorist attacks often reflect the weakness of the perpetrators and their lack of access to other means of leverage.
Terror can sometimes amplify a small group's power and affect outcomes.
Al Qaeda's September 11, 2001, attacks, staged by a relatively small nonstate actor, ultimately led to the withdrawal of United States troops from Saudi Arabia, drew the United States into a counterinsurgency war in Iraq, and brought al Qaeda itself a surge of recruits for new attacks worldwide.
Finally, the war in Afghanistan was a large war undertaken against the Taliban government that had protected al Qaeda.
They are distinguished from conventional weapons by their enormous potential lethality, given their small size and modest costs, and by their relative lack of discrimination in whom they kill.
When deployed on ballistic missiles, they can potentially be fired from the home territory of one state and wreak great destruction on the home territory of another state.
But the mere threat of such an action undermines the territorial integrity and security of states in the international system.
Of central concern today are the potentials for proliferation—the possession of weapons of mass destruction by more and more states.
Weapons of mass destruction serve different purposes from conventional weapons.
With a few exceptions, their purpose is to deter attack (especially by other weapons of mass destruction) by giving state leaders the means to inflict great pain against a would-be conqueror or destroyer.
For middle powers, these weapons also provide destructive power more in line with that of the great powers, thus serving as symbolic equalizers.
For terrorists, potentially, their purpose is to kill a great many people.
Watch the Video ""Iran's Nuclear Ambitions"" at MyPoliSciLab Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons are, in sheer power, the world’s most destructive weapons.
To understand the potentials for nuclear proliferation, one has to know something about how nuclear weapons work.
When a fission weapon explodes, one type of atom is split, or fissioned, into new types with less total mass.
In fact, the fission bomb that destroyed Nagasaki, Japan, in 1945 converted to energy roughly the amount of mass in a single penny.
Two elements can be split in this way, and each has been used to make fission weapons.
These elements—known as fissionable material—are uranium-235 and plutonium.
Fission weapons were invented 60 years ago by United States scientists in a secret World War II science program known as the Manhattan Project.
In 1945, one uranium bomb and one plutonium bomb were used to destroy Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing 100,000 civilians in each city and inducing Japan to surrender unconditionally.
But they are the kind of weapon that might be built by a poor state or a nonstate actor.
The No-Nonsense Guide to Nuclear, Chemical and Biological Weapons Today.
In the simplest design, one piece of uranium is propelled down a tube (by conventional explosives) into another piece of uranium.
A more efficient but technically demanding design arranges high explosives precisely around a hollow sphere of plutonium so as to implode the sphere and create a critical mass.
Although these designs require sophisticated engineering, they are well within the capabilities of many states and some private groups.
U-235, which can be used in the simplest bomb designs, is especially difficult to obtain.
Natural uranium has less than 1 percent U-235, mixed with nonfissionable uranium.
Extracting the fissionable U-235, referred to as enriching the uranium up to weapons grade , is slow, expensive, and technically complex—a major obstacle to proliferation.
But North Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Libya all built the infrastructure to do so in Nuclear weapons were invented during World War II and used on two Japanese cities in 1945.
Obtaining fissionable materials is the main difficulty in making nuclear weapons.
Here, in 1999, a United States congressman displays a mock-up of the Soviet-built nuclear ""suitcase bomb"" that, in the wrong hands, could kill hundreds of thousands of people. proliferation.
Plutonium is also used in commercial breeder reactors, which Japan and other countries have built recently—another source of fissionable material.
North Korea tested a plutonium bomb in 2006, achieving fission although with a low yield.
Fusion weapons are extremely expensive and technically demandrecent years.
It made progress in this direction in 2007-2008, albeit behind schedule.
Plutonium is more easily produced from low-grade uranium in nuclear power reactors—although extracting the plutonium requires a separation plant.
Here two small atoms fuse together into a larger atom, releasing energy.
Weapons designers use fission weapons to create these high energies and trigger an explosive fusion reaction.
In the post-Cold War era, megaton weapons have become irrelevant, since they are too powerful for any actor to use productively and too difficult for terrorists or small states to build.
The effects of nuclear weapons include not only the blast of the explosion, but also heat and radiation.
Radiation creates radiation sickness, which at high doses kills people in a few days and at low doses creates long-term health problems, especially cancers.
Radiation is most intense in the local vicinity of a nuclear explosion, but some is carried up into the atmosphere and falls in more distant locations as nuclear fallout.
Nuclear weapons also create an electromagnetic pulse that can disrupt and destroy electronic equipment.
Inasmuch as nuclear warheads can be made quite small—weighing a few hundred pounds or even less—they are adaptable to a wide variety of delivery systems.
During the Cold War, nuclear delivery systems were divided into two categories.
In the Cold War years, both superpowers integrated tactical nuclear weapons into their conventional air, sea, and land forces using a variety of delivery systems—gravity bombs, artillery shells, short-range missiles, land mines, depth charges, and so forth.
However, the tens of thousands of nuclear warheads integrated into superpower conventional forces posed dangers such as theft or accident.
Their actual use would have entailed grave risks of escalation to strategic nuclear war, putting home cities at risk.
Thus, both superpowers phased out tactical nuclear weapons almost entirely when the Cold War ended.
The main strategic delivery vehicles are ballistic missiles; unlike airplanes, they are extremely difficult to defend against.
Ballistic missiles carry a warhead up along a trajectory and let it drop on the target.
A trajectory typically rises out of the atmosphere—at least 50 miles high—before descending.
The longest-range missiles are intercontinental ballistic missiles , with ranges of more than 5,000 miles.
Of special interest today are short-range ballistic missiles , with ranges of well under 1,000 miles.
The modified Scud missiles fired by Iraq at Saudi Arabia and Israel during the Gulf War were SRBMs.
In regional conflicts, the long range of more powerful missiles may not be necessary.
Short-range and some medium-range ballistic missiles are cheap enough to be obtained and even home-produced by small middle-income states.
Many short-range ballistic missiles, including those used by Iraq during the Gulf War, are highly inaccurate but still very difficult to defend against.
With nuclear, chemical, or biological warheads, however, these missiles could be deadlier.
The accuracy of delivery systems of all ranges improves as one moves to great powers, especially the United States.
After traveling thousands of miles, the best United States missiles can land within 50 feet of a target half of the time.
The trend in the United States nuclear arsenal has been toward less powerful warheads but more accurate missiles, for flexibility.
The cruise missile is a small winged missile that can navigate across thousands of miles of previously mapped terrain to reach a target, with the help of satellite guidance.
Cruise missiles can be launched from ships, submarines, airplanes, or land.
The United 19 Postol, Theodore A Lessons of the Gulf War Experience with Patriot.
List of potential targets includes both hostile and friendly states, and is suggestive rather than comprehensive.
Saudi range is for a two-ton payload; South Korean range is for a half-ton payload.
Through the Missile Technology Control Regime, industrialized states try to limit the flow of missile-relevant technology to states in the global South, but with limited success.
Shortand mediumrange missiles apparently are being developed by Iran, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, India, North Korea, and possibly Argentina and Brazil.
In 2009, Iran alarmed the West by testing a missile that could reach Egypt, Israel, and parts of Europe.
In 2012, North Korea, evidently in cooperation with Iran, successfully tested a long-range missile capable of transcontinental distances.
Small states or terrorists that may acquire nuclear weapons in the future could deliver them through innovative means.
Because nuclear weapons are small, one could be smuggled into a target state by car, by speedboat, or in diplomatic pouches.
Since 2001, the United States has run a container security initiative aimed at preventing weapons of mass destruction from reaching United States shores in seaborne shipping containers.
But doing so without impeding the prosperity-inducing flow of international trade is a daunting challenge—nearly 8 million shipping containers pass through United States ports every year.
Chemical and Biological Weapons A chemical weapon releases chemicals that disable and kill people/ 1 The chemicals vary from lethal ones such as nerve gas to merely irritating ones such as tear gas.
Different chemicals interfere with the nervous system, blood, breathing, or other body functions.
Some persist in the target area long after their use; others disperse quickly.
It is possible to defend against most chemical weapons by dressing troops in protective clothing and gas masks and following elaborate procedures to decontaminate equipment.
But protective suits are hot, and antichemical measures reduce the efficiency of armies.
In addition, Civilians are much less likely to have protection against chemicals than are military forces.
Mustard gas, which produces skin blisters and lung damage, was widely used in artillery shells in World War I After the horrors of that war, the use of chemical weapons was banned in the 1925 Geneva protocol, still in effect today.
In World War II, both sides were armed with chemical weapons but neither used them, for fear of retaliation.
Since then , only Iraq has violated the treaty—against Iran in the 1980s.
Unfortunately, Iraq’s actions not only breached a psychological barrier against using chemical weapons, but showed such weapons to be cheap and effective against human waves of attackers without protective gear.
This example stimulated dozens more poor states to begin acquiring chemical weapons.
Chemical weapons are a cheap way for states to gain weapons of mass destruction.
Chemical weapons can be produced using processes and facilities similar to those for pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and other civilian products, which makes it difficult to find 20 Mistry, Dinshaw.
Strategic Technology, Security Regimes, and International Cooperation in Arms Control.
The 1925 treaty did not ban the production or possession of chemical weapons, only their use, and several dozen states built stockpiles of them.
The United States and the Soviet Union maintained large arsenals of chemical weapons during the Cold War but have reduced them greatly in the past decade.
The 1992 Chemical Weapons Convention to ban the production and possession of chemical weapons has been signed by all the great powers and nearly all other states, with a few exceptions including Egypt, Syria, and North Korea.
The new treaty includes strict verification provisions and the threat of sanctions against violators including (an important extension) nonparticipants in the treaty.
Several states (including India, China, South Korea, France, chemical weapons programs, which are now being dismantled under international oversight.
Russia still faces very costly and long-term work to destroy a 44,000-ton arsenal of chemical weapons built during the Cold War.
Biological weapons resemble chemical ones, but use deadly microorganisms or biologically derived toxins.
Some use viruses or bacteria that cause fatal diseases, such as smallpox, bubonic plague, and anthrax.
Others cause nonfatal, but incapacitating, diseases or diseases that kill livestock.
Theoretically, a single weapon could spark an epidemic in an entire population, but this would pose too great a danger, so less contagious microorganisms are preferred.
The superpowers destroyed their stocks of biological weapons and had to restrict their biological weapons complexes to defensive research rather than the development of weapons.
However, because the treaty makes no provision for inspection and because biological weapons programs are, like chemical ones, relatively easy to hide, several states remain under suspicion of having biological weapons.
UN inspections of Iraq in the mid-1990s uncovered an active biological weapons program.
Evidence surfaced after the collapse of the Soviet Union that a secret biological weapons program had been under way there as well.
In 2001, the United States pulled out of talks to strengthen the 1972 treaty, declaring the proposed modifications unworkable. and Britain) admitted to having secret VULNERABLE Civilians are more vulnerable to chemical weapons than soldiers are.
Here, Israeli kindergarteners prepare against a chemical warfare threat from Iraqi Scud missiles during the Gulf War, 1991.
Proliferation Proliferation is the spread of weapons of mass destruction—nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, and chemical or biological weapons—into the hands of more actors.
The implications of proliferation for international relations are difficult to predict but profound.
Ballistic missiles with weapons of mass destruction remove the territorial protection offered by state borders and make each state vulnerable to others.
Some realists, who believe in the rationality of state actions, are not so upset by this prospect, and some even welcome it.
They reason that in a world where the use of military force could lead to mutual annihilation, there would be fewer wars—just as during the arms race of the Cold War the superpowers did not blow each other up.
Other IR scholars who put less faith in the rationality of state leaders are much more alarmed by proliferation.
They fear that with more and more nuclear actors, miscalculation or accident— or fanatical terrorism—could lead to the use of weapons of mass destruction on a scale unseen since 1945.
They have tried to restrict the most destructive weapons to the great powers.
Proliferation erodes the great powers’ advantage relative to middle powers.
Evidence captured during the 2001 war in Afghanistan showed that the al Qaeda organization was trying to obtain weapons of mass destruction and would be willing to use them.
Lax security at the vast, far-flung former Soviet nuclear complex increased fears that fissionable 9 S materials could reach terrorists/ Nuclear proliferation could occur simply by a state or nonstate actor’s buying (or stealing) one or more nuclear weapons or the components to build one.
The means to prevent this include covert intelligence, tight security measures, and safeguards to prevent a stolen weapon from being used.
In 2007, two teams of armed assailants broke into the South African nuclear facility where atomic bombs had once been designed and produced.
After reaching the control room and shooting one guard, they were repelled, leaving a mystery along with doubts about the security of such nuclear facilities.
As broader political unrest occurs in other nuclear states, notably Pakistan, thoughts often turn 9 A toward the safety of nuclear weapons and materials.
Lax Nuclear Security in Russia Is Cited as Way for bin Laden to Get Arms.
North Korea tested weapons in 2006 and 2009, and negotiations over its program continue.
South Africa reported after the fact that it had built several nuclear weapons but then dismantled them in the 1980s before white minority rule ended.
In the 1990s, Pakistan’s top nuclear scientist sold bomb kits with lowgrade uranium, enrichment centrifuges, and bomb designs to Libya, Iran, and North Korea.
Libya gave its up, North Korea negotiated but remained coy about its uranium program , and Iran continues to enrich uranium.
Israel has never officially admitted it has nuclear weapons but is widely believed to have a hundred or more.
Israel wants these capabilities to convince Arab leaders that military conquest of Israel is impossible.
To prevent Iraq from developing nuclear weapons, Israel carried out a bombing raid on the main facility of the Iraqi nuclear complex in 1981.
In 2007, Israeli warplanes destroyed a site in Syria thought to be a nuclear reactor of North Korean design.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 created a framework for controlling the spread of nuclear materials and expertise.
The International Atomic Energy Agency , a UN agency based in Vienna, is charged with inspecting the nuclear power industry in member states to prevent secret military diversions of nuclear materials.
In 2006, a deal between the United States and India to share nuclear technology led many states to question the NPT, because those benefits were supposedly reserved for only signatories.
Nonetheless the deal received final United States and Indian approval in 2008.
North Korea withdrew from the IAEA in 1993, then bargained with Western leaders to get economic assistance, including safer reactors, in exchange for freezing its nuclear program.
Iran's enrichment of uranium could give that country nuclear bombs within the decade.
Fueling Western suspicions, Iran has not been forthcoming with international inspectors.
Iran bulldozed this large site and removed its topsoil in 2004 before letting inspectors in.
In 2006 and 2007, the UN Security Council applied mild sanctions against Iran over its refusal to stop enriching uranium.
Then in 2002, the United States confronted North Korea with evidence of a secret uranium enrichment program, which the North Koreans then admitted to having.
North Korea then pulled out of the agreement and out of the IAEA, restarted its nuclear reactor, and apparently turned its existing plutonium into a half-dozen bombs within months, one of which it tested in 2006.
North Korea again agreed to give up its program in 2008, yet after another nuclear test in 2009, it began processing nuclear material again.
Since 2003, Iran first agreed to suspend its uranium enrichment program and allow surprise IAEA inspections, then restarted enrichment, suspended it again, and restarted it again.
In 2005, U.S.-backed efforts by Europe to offer Iran economic incentives to dismantle its program, and by Russia to enrich Iran’s uranium on Russian soil with safeguards, both faltered.
In 2006, the UN Security Council condemned Iran’s actions and imposed mild sanctions.
Iran insisted on its right to enrich uranium for what it called peaceful purposes.
In 2008, Iran’s behavior led to further UN Security Council sanctions, and in 2009, after a secret underground processing facility was discovered, Iran was engaged in talks over the program with Western powers.
A number of middle powers and two great powers have the potential to make nuclear weapons but have chosen not to do so.
The reasons for deciding against “going nuclear” include norms against using nuclear weapons, fears of retaliation, and practical constraints including cost.
Limiting Nuclear Arsenals BACKGROUND: After the creation of nuclear weapons in World War II, the two superpowers built large arsenals of them during the decades of the Cold War.
These nuclear weapons posed a grave danger that miscalculation or accident could lead to truly catastrophic consequences.
Limiting and controlling nuclear arms, to avoid this catastrophic outcome, is a collective good.
Both sides benefited if nuclear war was avoided, regardless of which side gave up however many weapons in a negotiated agreement.
Arms races represent the dark side of the reciprocity principle, a downward spiral of relations in which each reciprocates the other’s hostile actions— in this case, deploying more nuclear weapons.
Ever since the 1960s, the two sides have used negotiated agreements to try to control the arms race.
For decades the effort merely channeled and illuminated the steady buildup of arms on both sides.
Nuclear Strategy and Arms Control The term nuclear strategy refers to decisions about how many nuclear weapons to deploy, what delivery systems to put them on, and what policies to adopt regarding the circumstances in which they would be used.
The reason for possessing nuclear weapons is almost always to deter another state from a nuclear or conventional attack by threatening ruinous retaliation.
This should work if state leaders are rational actors wanting to avoid the huge costs of a nuclear attack.
But it will work only if other states believe that a state’s threat to use nuclear weapons is credible.
The search for a credible deterrent by two or more hostile states tends to lead to an ever-growing arsenal of nuclear weapons.
Then India would not attack—that is, unless it could prevent Pakistan from using its missile.
Then the Pakistani missile, rather than deter India, would merely spur India to destroy the missile before any other attack.
An attack intended to destroy—largely or entirely—a state’s nuclear weapons before they can be used is called a first strike.
Each side has matched the other’s reductions in weapons, governed by a series of formal, verifiable treaties.
In 2010, the United States and Russian presidents signed a new nuclear arms control treaty.
Over seven years it will cut strategic nuclear warheads by almost onethird, from 2,200 to 1,550 for each side.
Each side also agrees to extensive monitoring to ensure that the other side is living up to its bargain.
Using the reciprocity principle, the former superpowers have used step-by-step measures, each side matching the other, to first limit and then to greatly reduce their stockpiles of nuclear weapons.
The United States and Russian presidents sign thick arms control treaty, 2010.
It could also build more nuclear missiles so that even if some were destroyed in an Indian first strike, some would survive with which to retaliate.
Weapons that can take a first strike and still strike back give a state second-strike capabilities.
Possession of second-strike capabilities by both sides is called mutually assured destruction because neither side can prevent the other from destroying it.
The term implies that the strategy, though reflecting “rationality,” is actually insane because deviations from rationality could destroy both sides.
If India could not assuredly destroy Pakistan’s missile, it would undoubtedly deploy its own nuclear missile to deter Pakistan from using its missile.
In theory, India could launch a nonnuclear attack on Pakistan, knowing that rational Pakistani leaders would rather lose such a war than use their nuclear weapons and bring on an Indian nuclear response.
Defense has played little role in nuclear strategy because no effective defense against missile attack has been devised.
However, the United States is spending billions of dollars a year to try to develop defenses that could shoot down incoming ballistic missiles.
It originated in President Ronald Reagan’s 1983 call for a comprehensive shield that would make nuclear missiles obsolete.
After the Cold War the mission shifted again, to protecting United States territory from a very limited missile attack (at most a few missiles), such as might occur in an unauthorized launch, an accident, or an attack by a small state.
Japan is spending $1 billion a year to build a U.S.-designed missile defense system, which it tested successfully in late 2007.
As of 2010, the United States is deploying a multilayer system with 24 ground-based interceptor missiles in Alaska and California , The nuclear arms race between the superpowers during the Cold War led to strategies and arms control agreements that helped develop norms and expectations about nuclear weapons and missiles.
India and Pakistan have followed a similar arms race, leading to mutual deterrence.
Recently, defense against missiles has begun to enter the strategic calculus.
Here, Israel's new ""Iron Dome"" system shoots down short-range missiles from Gaza in 2012.
In 2012, Israel used a new “Iron Dome” defense system to shoot down short-range missiles fired by Hamas in large numbers.
In addition to the technical challenges of stopping incoming ballistic missile warheads, such as distinguishing warheads from decoys, a true strategic defense would also have to stop cruise missiles , airplanes, and more innovative delivery systems.
If a rogue state or terrorist group struck the United States with a nuclear weapon, it would probably not use an ICBM to do so.
During the Cold War, the superpowers’ nuclear forces grew and technologies developed.
Those evolving force structures were codified by a series of arms control agreements.
Arms control is broader than just nuclear weapons—for instance, after World War I the great powers negotiated limits on sizes of navies—but in the Cold War nuclear weapons were the main focus of arms control.
Arms control agreements typically require long, formal negotiations with many technical discussions, culminating in a treaty.
The 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty prevented either side from using a ballistic missile defense as a shield from which to launch a first strike.
However, to allow full-scale testing of missile-defense technologies, the United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty with six months’ notice in 2002.
The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties in the 1970s put formal ceilings on the growth of both sides’ strategic weapons.
More recent arms control agreements regulated the substantial reduction of nuclear forces after the end of the Cold War.
The United States arsenal peaked in the 1960s at more than 30,000 warheads; the Soviet arsenal peaked in the 1980s at more than 40,000.
Meanwhile the 2002 SORT treaty called for further reductions to 2,200 each by 2012, but relies on START mechanisms for verification.
In March 2010, the sides signed a treaty that will lower the number of warheads to 1,550 and also creates additional verification mechanisms for both sides.
The reciprocity principle that helped fuel the arms race also enables its step-by-step reversal.
China, France, and Britain each have several hundred weapons—France’s and Britain’s mostly on submarine-launched missiles and China’s mostly on long-range bombers and intermediate-range missiles.
A Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty to halt all nuclear test explosions was signed in 1996 after decades of stalemate.
Here, United States B-52 bombers are being chopped up, under the eye of Russian satellites, to bring force levels down. of nuclear weapons.
However, the treaty does not take effect until signed and ratified by all 44 states believed capable of building at least a crude nuclear weapon.
India did not sign the CTBT and defied it in 1998 with five nuclear tests.
All the weapons of mass destruction are relatively difficult and expensive to build, yet provide only specialized capabilities that are rarely if ever actually used.
This is why most states that could technically acquire them have decided not to do so.
Such cost-benefit thinking also applies more broadly to states’ decisions about the acquisition of all kinds of military forces.
This question confronts all states but they answer it in different ways.
People once believed in the United States that “war is good for the economy” because, seemingly, military spending had helped end the Great Depression in the late 1930s.
If this were true, state leaders would not face difficult choices in setting military budgets.
Unfortunately for state leaders, allocating economic resources for military purposes deprives the rest of the economy and reduces its long-term growth.
Both the longand short-term effects of military spending are magnified by actual warfare.
Another potential benefit is the acquisition of territory / 0 Serbian ultranationalists made fortunes off the plunder of Bosnians whom they “ethnically cleansed,” and Congolese militia leaders enriched themselves with minerals exported during the civil war.
Another potential economic benefit of war is to stir up a population’s patriotism so that it will work harder for less pay.
But overall, the economic costs of war usually far surpass any benefits.
States vary widely in military spending, from Costa Rica, with virtually no military spending at all, to North Korea, which devotes 20 percent or more of GDP to military purposes.
If military budgets are too low, states may be unprepared to meet a security threat; in the worst case, they may even be overrun and conquered militarily.
But if leaders set military budgets too high, they will overburden and stifle the national economy.
World military spending is about 2. percent of the total goods and services in the world economy—about $1. trillion every year, or roughly $1 million every 20 seconds.
Most is spent by a few big states, nearly half by the United States alone.
World military spending is a vast flow of money that could, if redirected to other purposes, change the world profoundly and improve major world problems/ Of course, “the world” does not spend this money or choose how to direct it; states do.
In recent decades, about half of these arms imports have been in the Middle East, but lately India and China have taken a growing share.
The great majority of international arms exports come from the United States, with Russia, France, and Britain also ranking.
In the immediate post-Cold War era, global arms sales fell, but have since climbed back to near-Cold War levels.
Activists have called attention to the sales of small arms, especially assault rifles, to unstable conflict zones where irregular armies commit brutalities.
The United States, by far the largest exporter of small arms, blocked proposals to restrict sales of military weapons to rebel movements and to civilians.
In the fall of 2009, the UN General Assembly voted nearly unanimously to begin work on an Arms Trade Treaty.
The treaty passed the General Assembly in 2013 with only Iran, North Korea, and Syria voting no.
The Effect of Arms Transfers in War Outbreak, Involvement, and Outcomes.
During the Cold War, about half of all military spending in the United States budget—and of world military spending—was directed toward the East-West conflict in Europe.
Now other missions such as intervention in regional conflicts and counterinsurgency are more important.
Control of Military Forces One cannot take for granted the ability of a state leader to make military forces take desired actions.
At best, military forces are large and complex institutions, operating in especially difficult conditions during wartime.
Sometimes, the state leader appears to exert only incomplete control over the military.
States control military forces through a chain of command running from the highest authority through a hierarchy spreading out to the lowest-level soldiers.
The highest authority, or commander in chief, is usually the top political leader.
The importance of this military hierarchy is illustrated by a story from ancient China in which a king was thinking of hiring Sun Tzu as an advisor.
Sun Tzu divided them into two units, commanded by the king’s two favorites.
Sun Tzu then had the two “officers” executed on the spot and put the next most senior concubines in their places.
Thus, military hierarchy and discipline make armed forces function as instruments of state power—at the price of brutality and loss of individual freedom.
In actual battle conditions, controlling armed forces is especially difficult because of complex operations, rapid change, and the fog of war created by the gap between battlefield activity and command-level information.
They are called on to perform actions that may run against basic instincts as well as moral norms— killing people and risking death.
It is difficult to coordinate forces effectively in order to carry out overall plans of action.
Insubordination, mutiny, or deserting are serious offenses punishable by prison or death.
But discipline depends not only on punishment but also on patriotism and professionalism on the part of soldiers.
Officers play to nationalist sentiments, reminding soldiers that they fight for their nation TAKING OVER Through a hierarchical chain of command, states control the actions of millions of individual soldiers, creating leverage in the hands of state leaders.
Here, soldiers in Mali stage a coup that unwittingly sparked an Islamist takeover of half the country and then a French military intervention.
Combat, logistics, communication, and command all depend on individual performance; motivation matters.
Abstractions such as nationalism, patriotism, and religious fervor are important, but loyalty to the immediate group (along with a survival instinct) is a stronger motivator.
Recent debates about participation of women in the United States armed forces revolve around whether their presence disrupts group solidarity.
Finally, officers and political leaders need accurate intelligence to make good decisions.
Of course, even the most advanced intelligence systems cannot stop human error.
In late 2001, United States special forces were traveling with Hamid Karzai, believed at the time to be the only person who could lead a united, U.S.-allied Afghan government.
As a United States soldier called in airstrikes on an enemy position, the battery in his GPS unit needed changing, and the unit’s coordinates defaulted to its own position.
A United States warplane dropped a bomb right on that target, killing three United States soldiers and five Afghan allies and nearly killing Karzai himself.
Civil-Military Relations Beyond overcoming chaos and complexity, state leaders sometimes must confront challenges from within their own military ranks as well.
This is the idea that civilian leaders are at the top of the chain of command.
Civilians, not military officers, decide when and where the military fights.
The officers, by contrast, are supposed to control how the military fights.
This division of labor between civilians and militaries inevitably leads to tensions.
The interaction of civilian with military leaders—called civil-military relations—is an important factor in how states use force.
Military leaders may undermine the authority of civilian leaders in carrying out foreign policies, or they may even threaten civilian supremacy if certain actions are taken in international conflicts.
Military officers also want autonomy of decision once force is committed, in order to avoid the problems created in the Vietnam War when President Johnson sat in the White House situation room daily picking targets for bombing raids.
Worse yet, in NATO’s 1999 bombing of Serbia, specific targets had to be approved by politicians in multiple countries.
In 2010, the commanding American general in Afghanistan lost his job after publicly questioning President Obama’s Afghanistan policies.
Even outside of the context of ongoing warfare, differences between civilian and military leaders can lead to tensions.
In the United States, opinion surveys consistently show that military officers, on average, maintain different opinions than civilians on issues such as the use of force as a tool of leverage.
In Turkey, tensions have grown between the Islamic government and its military.
Historically, Turkey’s military has intervened numerous times to take control from elected leaders when military officers felt the government was threatening the secular nature of Turkey.
Recently, however, the civilian government has been aggressive at arresting officers who they believe were plotting a coup.
In the 2011 Arab Spring, the Egyptian military refused to fire on protesters, whereas Syrian forces did use lethal fire.
If tensions become too sharp between a civilian leadership and their military forces, a coup d’etat can result.
A coup is the seizure of political power by domestic military forces—a change of political power outside the state’s constitutional order.
If most or all of the military go along with the coup, civilian leaders are generally helpless to stop it.
But if most of the military officers follow the existing chain of command, the coup is doomed.
In the Philippines in the late 1980s, the top general, Fidel Ramos, remained loyal to the civilian president, Corazon Aquino, in seven coup attempts by subordinate officers.
In each case, the bulk of the Philippine military forces stayed loyal to Ramos, and the coups failed.
International pressures, such as sanctions, may also convince military leaders to step down.
In late 2009, military leaders took power in Honduras after deposing its president.
The international community, including the Organization of American States, pressured Honduras after the 2009 coup.
Elections were held in the fall of 2009, restoring a democratic government, but Hondurans remain divided over the legitimacy of the new government.
If a coup is successful, military forces themselves control the government.
These military governments tend to be the most common in poor countries, where the military may be the only large modern institution in the country.
Ironically, the disciplined central command of military forces, which makes them effective as tools of state influence, also lets the state lose control of them to military officers.
Soldiers are trained to follow the orders of their commanding officers, not to think about politics.
Several thousand such operations were mounted during the Cold War, when the CIA and its Soviet counterpart, the KGB, waged an ongoing worldwide secret war.
CIA covert operations in the 1950s overthrew unfriendly foreign governments—in Iran and Guatemala—by organizing coups against them.
CIA covert activities were sharply scaled back after congressional hearings in the 1970s revealed scandals.
After September 2001, the executive branch enjoyed greater authority in conducting covert operations with less congressional scrutiny.
Overall, states face complex choices regarding the configuration of their military forces in the post-Cold War era.
Not only have the immediate contingencies and threats changed drastically, but the nature of threats in the new era is unclear.
Perhaps most important, world order itself is evolving even as military technologies do.
The next chapter discusses the evolving structures and norms governing international political relations and how they are changing the nature of world order.
Conventional warfare requires different kinds of forces than those needed to threaten the use of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons.
The role of satellites is expanding in communications, navigation, and reconnaissance.
The attacks forced dramatic changes in United States and worldwide security arrangements and sparked United States military intervention in Afghanistan to overthrow the Taliban regime and destroy the al Qaeda bases there.
But no state has ever attacked another with weapons of mass destruction mounted on ballistic missiles.
Weapons deployments are guided by nuclear strategy based on the concept of deterrence.
Arms control helped build confidence between the superpowers during the Cold War.
Military spending tends to stimulate economic growth in the short term but reduce growth over the long term.
Suppose that Iran turned out to have obtained three tactical nuclear warheads from the former Soviet arsenal and was keeping them in unknown locations.
Imagine a world in which most of the states, rather than just a few, had nuclear weapons and long-range ballistic missiles.
Most of the great powers are reconfiguring their military forces in the post-Cold War era.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview For over a decade, North Korea has defied the international community and proceeded with its nuclear program.
Several times, North Korea has agreed to give up its nuclear program, only to renege on that promise.
North Korea clearly possesses the knowledge, resources, and ability to produce nuclear weapons.
In 2007, an agreement was reached in which North Korea promised to halt its nuclear program in exchange for international assistance, including fuel and food aid.
It then destroyed part of its nuclear processing facilities, but restarted its program when the United States delayed removing North Korea from its list of terror-supporting states.
Once North Korea was removed from the list in the fall of 2008, it promised to allow nuclear inspectors to verify the stopping of its program.
When the time came to formalize the agreement in writing, however, North Korea refused.
Then, in 2010, North Korea sank a South Korean warship and shelled an island, killing four people, greatly increasing tensions between the two countries.
Based on this history of failed agreements and tense negotiations, some have suggested ending negotiations with North Korea over its nuclear program.
Others point to the potential danger posed by a North Korean nuclear program and urge continuation of the talks.
The United States Should Continue to Pursue North Korean Talks United States allies favor negotiations.
Although they are concerned that North Korea not be rewarded for its bad behavior, South Korea and Japan both would like negotiations to continue.
While these United States allies do not want to reach an agreement at any cost, because any conflict with North Korea would be exceedingly costly to one or both of them, they would prefer a diplomatic solution to this problem.
North Korea's economy is crumbling, and it can no longer count on Russia or China for assistance.
To preserve its bargaining position, North Korea uses its nuclear weapons development program as leverage to get U.S., Japanese, and South Korean aid.
In exchange for an attractive aid package, North Korea may well give up its program.
The most likely scenario for North Korean leadership to actually use their nuclear arsenal would be a time when they feel backed into a corner.
Walking away from negotiations to leave them in isolation would accomplish exactly that goal.
They could lash out militarily at South Korea or Japan, two important United States allies.
ARGUMENT 2 The United States Should Give Up Its Quest for a North Korean Deal North Korea has never kept its promises.
After its rejection of the NPT in the 1990s, North Korea has not only refused to honor many of the commitments but also actively cheated on them to continue its nuclear weapons program.
Even if an agreement were reached, there would be no guarantee North Korea would not cheat.
North Korean leaders do not care about the welfare of citizens and care even less about international reputation.
While North Korea may rely on international aid to stay afloat, it could extract even more aid if it had a more successful nuclear program.
As long as the current regime is in power, nothing will change in North Korea.
Without fuel and food aid from the United States or nearby countries, the regime may collapse more quickly.
Those unilateral steps could include more sanctions, war, or, on the other extreme, massive flows of financial aid to pay North Korea for giving up its nuclear arsenal.
Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Roles of International Organizations Most international conflicts are not settled by military force.
Despite the anarchic nature of the international system based on state sovereignty, the security dilemma does not usually lead to a breakdown in basic cooperation among states.
Unfortunately, the day-to-day cooperative activities of international actors often are less newsworthy than their conflicts.
States work together by following rules they develop to govern their interactions.
Over time, the rules become more firmly established and institutions grow up around them.
States then develop the habit of working through those institutions and within the rules.
International norms are the expectations actors hold about normal international relations.
The invasion of Kuwait by Iraq not only was illegal, but was widely viewed as immoral— beyond the acceptable range of behavior of states.
Political leaders in the United States and around the world drew on moral norms to generate support for a collective response to Iraq.
Some norms, such as sovereignty and respect for treaties, are widely held; they shape expectations about state behavior and set standards that make deviations stand out.
Constructivist scholars in IR emphasize the importance of these global norms and standards.
The attempt to define international norms follows a centuries-long philosophical tradition.
Philosophers such as Kant argued that it was natural for autonomous individuals to cooperate for mutual benefit because they could see that pursuing their narrow individual interests would end up hurting all.
Thus, sovereign states could work together through structures and organizations (such as Kant’s proposed world federation) that would respect each member’s autonomy, and not create a world government over them.
In the 19th century, such ideas were embodied in practical organizations in which states participated to manage specific issues such as international postal service and control of traffic on European rivers.
State leaders become used to behaving in a normal way and stop calculating, for each action, whether violating norms would pay off.
For example, at the turn of the 19th century, United States war planners had active war plans for the possibility of a major naval conflict between the United States and Great Britain.
Legitimacy and habit explain why international norms can be effective even when they are not codified and enforced.
The power of international norms and standards of morality, however, may vary when different states or world regions hold different expectations of what is normal.
To the United States, it was a moral imperative to remove Saddam Hussein from power.
In cases of diverging norms, morality can be a factor for misunderstanding and conflict rather than a force of stability.
Rather, realists point out, many of the accepted norms were shaped by the powerful states in the system (the dominance principle), and these same powerful states are often responsible for their interpretation.
Yet constructivist scholars point out that even if international norms are violated, states (even the United States) go to tremendous lengths to justify behaviors that violate the norms.
This suggests that strong norms do exist and are recognized by even the most powerful states.
Especially in times of change, when shared norms and habits may not suffice to solve international dilemmas and achieve mutual cooperation, institutions play a key role.
They are concrete, tangible structures with specific functions and missions.
These institutions have proliferated rapidly in recent decades, and continue to play an increasing role in international affairs.
International organizations include intergovernmental organizations such as the UN, and nongovernmental organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Liberals point out that, contrary to realists or constructivists, it is the codification of international norms in institutions that gives norms their power.
As discussed in Chapter 3, these institutions create incentives to reciprocate behavior encouraged by a norm , while also constraining the behavior of powerful states through rules that govern behavior.
Liberals point to the large and growing number of international institutions as evidence of their power and importance.
This weaving together of people across national boundaries through specialized groups reflects interdependence / NOT THE NORM International norms are evolving in such areas as humanitarian intervention and human rights.
One of their areas of concern is the use of child soldiers, like this tenyear-old Libyan rebel in 2011.
Another concern, the protection of civilians from slaughter, inspired NATO intervention in the Libya conflict.
The Correlates of War 2 International Governmental Organizations Data Version 2.0.
Some are general in their purposes; others have specific functional purposes.
IGOs hold together because they promote the national interests of their member states—not because of vague ideals.
Among regional IGOs, the European Union encompasses some of the most important organizations , but it is not the only example.
Other important regional IGOs are the Association of South East Asian Nations , the Southern Cone Common Market , and the African Union.
The functional roles of IOs are important to their overall effect on international relations, but those roles are taken up in Chapter 10 on international integration.
Here we will rely on the more general theoretical discussion of international institutions begun in Chapter 3.
Global IGOs usually have functional purposes involving coordinating actions of some set of states around the world.
The IGO called Intelsat, for example, is a consortium of governments and private businesses that operates communications satellites.
Members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries are major oil producers who meet periodically in Vienna to set production quotas for members in an effort to keep world oil prices high and stable.
Note that although the key members of IGOs are states, NGOs, businesses, or individuals can have important advisory and consulting roles in IGOs.
For instance, someone wanting to meet political scientists from other countries can join the International Political Science Association.
The International Air Transport Association coordinates the work of airline companies.
Other NGOs have global political purposes—for example, Amnesty International for human rights and Planned Parenthood for reproductive rights and family planning.
Still others have cultural purposes—for example, the International Olympic Committee.
A web of international organizations of various sizes and types now connects people in all countriesThe rapid growth of this network, and the increasingly intense communications and interactions that occur within it, indicate rising international interdependence.
These organizations in turn provide the institutional mesh to hold together some kind of world order even when leaders and contexts come and go, and even when norms are undermined by sudden changes in power relations.
At the center of that web of connection stands the most important international organization today, the United Nations.
The United Nations ^ Watch the Video ""UN Aid in Somalia"" at MyPoliSciLab The UN and other international organizations have both strengths and weaknesses in the anarchic international system.
State sovereignty creates a real need for such organizations on a practical level, because no central world government performs the function of coordinating the actions of states for mutual benefit.
However, state sovereignty also severely limits the power of the UN and other IOs, because governments reserve power to themselves and are stingy in delegating it to the UN or anyone else.
The UN System The UN is a relatively new institution, just over 60 years old.
Even newer is the more prominent role that the UN has played in international security affairs since the end of the Cold War.
Purposes of the UN The UN is the closest thing to a world government that has ever existed, but it is not a world government.
Its members are sovereign states that have not empowered the UN to enforce its will within states’ territories except with the consent of those states’ governments.
Thus, although the UN strengthens world order, its design acknowledges the realities of international anarchy and the unwillingness of states to surrender their sovereignty.
Within these limits, the basic purpose of the UN is to provide a global institutional structure through which states can sometimes settle conflicts with less reliance on the use of force.
The Charter also lays out the structure of the UN and the methods by which it operates.
The UN does not exist because it has power to force its will on the world’s states; it exists because states have created it to serve their needs.
A state’s membership in the UN is essentially a form of indirect leverage.
It is also a forum where states promote their views and bring their disputes.
And it is a mechanism for conflict resolution in international security affairs.
The UN also promotes and coordinates development assistance and other programs of economic and social development in the global South.
These programs reflect the belief that economic and social problems—above all, poverty—are an important source of international conflict and war.
Finally, the UN is a coordinating system for information and planning by hundreds of internal and external agencies and programs, and for the publication of international data.
Despite its heavy tasks, the UN is still a small and fragile institution.
Every year, the world spends almost $2 trillion on the military, and about $2 billion on the UN regular budget.
The whole budget of UN operations, peacekeeping, programs, and agencies combined is less than 3 percent of world military spending.
Each United States citizen pays more than $2,000 a year for United States military spending but only about $15 a year for United States payments of UN dues, assessments, and voluntary contributions to UN programs and agencies combined.
The UN deals with the issues that are perhaps the most difficult in the world.
If groups of states could easily solve problems such as ethnic conflicts, human rights, refugees, and world hunger themselves, they most likely would have done so.
Instead, states turn many of these difficult problems over to the UN and hope it can take care of them.
The General Assembly coordinates a variety of development programs and other autonomous agencies through the Economic and Social Council MAKING PROGRESS The United Nations has very limited powers and resources, yet the world places great hopes in the UN when national governments cannot solve problems.
Sometimes the UN seems to need an assist, like this vehicle in 2010 in Western Sahara, where the peace process itself has been stuck for many years.
Parallel to the General Assembly is the UN Security Council, in which five great powers and ten rotating member states make decisions about international peace and security.
They have diplomatic status in the United States, which as host country also assumes certain other obligations to facilitate the UN’s functioning.
A major strength of the UN structure is the universality of its membership.
Virtually every territory in the world is either a UN member or formally a province or colony of a UN member.
Formal agreement on the Charter, even if sometimes breached, commits all states to a set of basic rules governing their relations.
The old League of Nations, by contrast, was flawed by the absence of several important actors.
One way the UN induced all the great powers to join was to reassure them that their participation in the UN would not harm their national interests.
Recognizing the role of power in world order, the UN Charter gave five great powers each a veto over substantive decisions of the Security Council.
The UN Charter establishes a mechanism for collective security —the banding together of the world’s states to stop an aggressor.
Chapter 7 of the Charter explicitly authorizes the Security Council to use military force against aggression if the nonviolent means called for in Chapter 6 have failed.
The 2011 authorization of a no-fly zone in Libya, for instance, was taken under Chapter 7.
However, because of the great power veto, the UN cannot effectively stop aggression by a great power.
As often happens with the dominance principle, this structure creates resentments by smaller powers.
History of the UN The UN was founded in 1945 in San Francisco by 51 states.
It was the successor to the League of Nations, which had failed to effectively counter aggression in the 1930s.
Like the League, the UN was founded to increase international order and the rule of law to prevent another world war.
A certain tension has long existed between the UN and the United States as the world’s most powerful state.
The UN in some ways constrains the United States by creating the one coalition that can rival United States power—that of all the states.
A certain isolationist streak in United States foreign policy runs counter to the UN concept.
However, the UN amplifies United States power when the United States leads the global UN coalition.
And, as a great trading nation, the United States benefits from the stability and order that the UN helps create.
In the 1950s and 1960s, the UN’s membership more than doubled as colonies in Asia and Africa won independence.
This expansion changed the character of the General Assembly, in which each state has one vote regardless of size.
The new members had different concerns from those of the Western industrialized countries and in many cases resented having been colonized by Westerners.
During the UN’s first two decades, the General Assembly had regularly sided with the United States, and the Soviet Union was the main power to use its veto in the Security Council to counterbalance that tendency.
But as newly independent states began to predominate, the United States found itself in the minority on many issues, and by the 1970s and 1980s it had become the main user of the veto.
The exclusion of communist China was an exception to the UN principle of universal membership, and in 1971, the Chinese seat was taken from the nationalists and given to the communist government.
Throughout the Cold War, the UN had few successes in international security because the U.S.-Soviet conflict prevented consensus.
The UN appeared somewhat irrelevant in a world order structured by two opposing alliance blocs.
A few notable exceptions exist, such as defending South Korea during the Korean War and agreeing to station peacekeeping forces in the Middle East, but the UN did not play a central role in solving international conflicts.
States in the global South also used the UN as a forum to criticize rich countries in general and the United States in particular.
By the 1980s, the United States government showed its displeasure with this trend by withholding United States dues to the UN (eventually more than $1 billion), paying up only years later after UN reforms.
After the Cold War, the great powers could finally agree on measures regarding international security.
In this context, the UN moved to center stage in international security affairs.
The UN had several major successes in the late 1980s in ending violent regional conflicts while introducing peacekeepers to monitor the cease-fires.
In Namibia, a UN force oversaw independence from South Africa and the nation’s first free elections.
By the 1990s, the UN had emerged as the world’s most important tool for settling international conflicts.
Between 1987 and 1993, Security Council resolutions increased from 15 to 78, peacekeeping missions from 5 to 17, peacekeepers from 12,000 to 78,000, and countries sending troops from 26 to 76.
Inadequate funding and management problems undermined peacekeeping efforts in Angola, Somalia, and Cambodia.
In response to these problems , the UN scaled back peacekeeping operations in 1995-1997 and carried out reductions and reforms in the UN Secretariat and UN programs.
For years the United States failed to pay its bills, even though a new secretary-general shrank budgets and jobs as the United States had demanded.
Finally, after criticism from allies, the United States agreed to pay up, but under renegotiated terms for the future.
After reaching consensus to insist on Iraqi disarmament and send back UN weapons inspectors, the Security Council split on whether to authorize force against Iraq—the United States and Britain in favor; France, Russia, and China against.
When France threatened to veto a UN resolution authorizing war, a U.S.-British coalition toppled the Iraqi government without explicit UN backing.
The UN sent a team to Iraq to help with reconstruction, but suicide truck bombers destroyed it, killing the chief of the mission and dozens of others.
The UN withdrew its staff from Iraq in 2003 and found itself largely sidelined in the world’s most prominent international conflict.
To further aggravate U.S.-UN tensions, documents recovered during the Iraq War showed that high-ranking UN, French, Chinese, and Russian officials (and American oil companies) illegally profited from the UN’s $64 billion oil-for-food program for Iraq, which was supposed to ease the civilian suffering caused by economic sanctions in the 1990s.
In 2005, an independent investigation cleared Annan of personal wrongdoing, but found the program corrupt and heavily criticized the UN for mismanagement and poor oversight of the program.
Currently, the UN follows a principle of “three pillars”—security, economic development, and human rights—which are considered mutually necessary for any of them to succeed.
At the end of 2006, the outgoing and incoming secretaries-general both referred to this principle.
In a postwar conflict situation, in particular, the three reinforce each other.
The UN is in some ways just beginning to work as it was originally intended to, through a concert of great powers and universal recognition of the Charter.
However, as states turned increasingly to the UN after the Cold War, its modest size and resources became seriously overburdened, leading to contraction of missions and funding.
Today, the UN is more important than ever, yet still in danger of failing.
In the coming few years the UN must continue to grapple with the challenges of its evolving role in a unipolar world, the limitations of its budget, and the continuing strength of state sovereignty.
Since 1945, the Council has passed more than 2,000 resolutions, with new ones added every week.
These resolutions represent the great powers’ blueprints for resolving the world’s various security disputes, especially in regional conflicts.
The five permanent members of the Council—the United States, Britain, France, Russia, and China—are the most important.
In 2008, after the Security Council failed to decide whether the Serbian province of Kosovo should be independent, Kosovars unilaterally declared their independence from Serbia.
Angry Serbians rejected Kosovo’s declaration and blamed the Western powers for encouraging it.
In 2010, the World Court held Kosovo’s declaration to be legal, but its substantive status remains bitterly disputed.
Security Council resolutions require 9 votes from among the 15 members.
But a “no” vote by any permanent member defeats the resolution—the veto power.
Many resolutions have been vetoed by the permanent members, and many more have never been proposed because they would have faced certain veto.
However, since the mid-1990s the use of the veto has dropped abruptly, to just 27 vetoes—13 by the United States, and 7 each by Russia and China.
The Council’s ten nonpermanent members rotate onto the Council for two-year terms.
Nonpermanent members are elected by the General Assembly from a list prepared by informal regional caucuses.
Usually there is a mix of regions and country sizes, though not by any strict formula.
Often, countries lobby vigorously for a seat on the Council, producing books, advertisements, and memos to gain votes from other members of the regional caucuses.
In 2006, Venezuela campaigned for the upcoming Latin American seat on the Council, seeking a platform to lead a growing, virulently anti-American coalition.
Its president, in his speech to the General Assembly, called the United States president “the devil” and said the room still smelled of sulfur from his speech the previous day.
In the General Assembly, neither country could achieve the required two-thirds majority for election to the Council.
After voting 47 times, the Assembly finally gave the seat to Panama as a compromise.
In 2008, Iran campaigned for a seat, but gained only a handful of votes, while Turkey was voted onto the Council for the first time in more than 45 years.
The system of nomination by regional caucuses has worked to keep the regional balance on the Council fairly constant as individual states come and go.
Major regional actors tend to rotate onto the Council more often than do less important states.
Members can abstain on resolutions, an option that some permanent members use to register misgivings about a resolution without vetoing.
China regularly abstains when its own security is not directly affected, and the United States has abstained several times to register a middle position on resolutions critical of Israel.
The Security Council meets irregularly upon request of a UN member—often a state with a grievance regarding another state’s actions.
Because international security continues to be troublesome in many regions and because these troubles often drag on for months or years, meetings of the Council are frequent.
The Security Council’s power is limited in two major ways; both reflect the strength of state sovereignty in the international system.
The ambassadors who represent those states cannot change a Council resolution without authorization from their governments.
Second, although Security Council resolutions in theory bind all UN members, member states in practice often try to evade or soften their effect.
A Security Council resolution can be enforced in practice only if enough powerful states care about it.
Military forces responding to aggression under the auspices of Security Council resolutions remain under national command.
For example, neither United States forces in the Gulf War charged with enforcing UN resolutions, nor United States soldiers sent to Somalia in late 1992 to restore humanitarian relief efforts disrupted by civil war, displayed UN insignia or flags.
As global trading powers, Japan and Germany have huge stakes in the ground rules for international security affairs and would like seats at the table.
But including Japan and Germany as permanent Security Council members would not be simple.
If Germany joined, three of the seven permanent members would be European, giving that region unfair weight.
The three European seats could be combined into one , but this would water down the power of Britain and France, which can veto any such change in the Charter.
Possible new permanent members could include Germany, Japan, India, Brazil, Egypt, and either Nigeria or South Africa.
Any overhaul of the Security Council would require a change in the UN Charter, and a change in membership would reduce the power of the current five permanent members, any of which could veto the East Timor, operate under their national flags but their missions are authorized by UN resolution.
Even when the Security Council cannot agree on means of enforcement, its resolutions shape the way disputes are seen and ultimately how they are resolved.
COUNCIL OF POWER Collective security rests with the UN Security Council, which has authorized such military interventions as the Gulf War and the 2001 campaign in Afghanistan.
Military actions not approved by the Council—such asthe 1999 bombing of Serbia and the 2003 U.S.-British invasion of Iraq—tend to be controversial.
Here, Serbia's president objects to Kosovo's claim of independence from Serbia, 2008.
With the permanent members split on the issue—Russia and China backed Serbia while the United States, Britain, and France recognized Kosovo— the Council did not take action.
Divergent Interests on the UN Security Council *Problemia could be Kurdish Iraq in 1991 or Darfur, Sudan, in 2007.
In late 2004, an expert panel appointed by Annan recommended expanding the Security Council to 24 members under either of two formulas, neither changing veto powers.
These proposals were debated in 2005 but no agreement was reached and the issue was put on hold.
Peacekeeping Forces Peacekeeping forces are not mentioned in the UN Charter.
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold in the 1960s joked that they were allowed under “Chapter Six and a Half”— somewhere between the nonviolent dispute resolution called for in Chapter 6 of the Charter and the authorization of force provided for in Chapter 7.
In practice, when the UN has authorized force to reverse aggression—as in the Gulf War in 1990— the forces involved have been national forces not under UN command.
The UN’s own forces—borrowed from armies of member states but under the flag and command of the UN—have been peacekeeping forces to calm regional conflicts, playing a neutral role between warring forces.
Peacekeeping Missions The secretary-general assembles a peacekeeping force for each mission, usually from a few states totally uninvolved in the conflict, and puts it under a single commander.
Peacekeeping forces serve at the invitation of a host government and must leave if that government orders them out.
Authority for peacekeeping forces is granted by the Security Council, usually for a period of three to six months that may be renewed—in some cases for decades.
In one early case, the Suez crisis in 1956, the General Assembly authorized the forces under the “Uniting for Peace” resolution, which allowed the General Assembly to take up security matters when the Security Council was deadlocked.
But today the Security Council firmly controls peacekeeping operations.
Funds must be voted on by the General Assembly, and lack of funds is today the single greatest constraint on the use of peacekeeping forces.
Special assessments against member states pay for peacekeeping operations.
With the expansion of peacekeeping since 1988, the expenses of these forces are several times larger than the regular UN budget.
In the Congo mission, 20,000 peacekeepers monitored a ceasefire and protected civilians after a civil war.
In 2012, these UN peacekeepers proved weak when a rebel movement in the unstable east of the country went on the attack, displacing civilians.
A decade after the main war ended, such recurrent attacks proved vexing for UN forces.
The secretary-general has called for thousands of additional troops for Democratic Congo, and in 2013 the Security Council approved an intervention brigade prepared for combat with rebels in eastern Congo.
In 2007, the Security Council approved a nearly 20,000-troop peacekeeping force for the Darfur region in Sudan, after several years of resistance from the Sudanese government.
The UN troops joined an already-deployed (but small) African Union contingent.
It took several more years for all of the authorized troops to arrive, owing to numerous objections from Sudan and attacks on civilians continued despite their presence.
In 2012, fighting between government and rebel forces drove 25,000 civilians out of one refugee camp.
The Darfur mission is in addition to 7,000 UN troops enforcing a cease-fire between Sudan and newly independent South Sudan, focused on the disputed town of Abyei.
The largest recent missions reflect the resurgence of UN peacekeeping after a shakeout in the mid-1990s.
In the 1990s, the UN had several spectacular failures in peacekeeping, in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Angola, and Somalia.
In Cambodia, 15,000 peacekeepers worked with a large force of UN administrators who largely took over the Cambodian government after a long and devastating civil war.
Despite many difficulties, the UN held elections in 1993 and helped stabilize Cambodian politics to some extent.
The lessons learned in Cambodia helped the UN accomplish a similar mission in Mozambique.
A peace agreement ended a long and devastating civil war there, setting up mechanisms for disarmament, the integration of military forces, and the holding of internationally supervised elections for a new government.
Missions in El Salvador and Namibia were also early successes for post-Cold War UN peacekeeping.
These experiences helped the UN respond more effectively after civil wars in Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast, and Liberia in 2002-2003.
In an effort to provide longer-term support after wars, in 2005 the UN created a Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate reconstruction, institution building, and economic recovery efforts after peacekeeping missions end.
With the UN watching, the parties to a conflict are often less likely to break a cease-fire.
Observers can monitor various aspects of a country’s situation—ceasefires, elections, respect for human rights, and other areas.
UN peacekeepers often try to negotiate with military officers on both sides.
This channel of communication can bring about tactical actions and understandings that support a cease-fire.
But the UN forces in a war zone cannot easily get from one side’s positions to those of the other to conduct negotiations.
Peacekeeping is much more difficult if one side sees the UN forces as being biased toward the other side.
Israel feels this way about UN forces in southern Lebanon, for example.
On occasion, Israeli forces have broken through UN lines to attack enemies, and they allegedly have targeted UN outposts on occasion.
In Cambodia and the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, one party deliberately attacked UN forces many times, causing a number of deaths.
In general, when cease-fires break down, UN troops get caught in the middle.
Many countries contribute their national military forces to UN peacekeeping missions.
Some states feel that by contributing to a common good, they are advancing the interest of peace, while simultaneously projecting the image of a strong military power.
Alternatively, some states find contributing to these missions financially beneficial, since peacekeeping forces are paid by UN contributions.
In a few countries such as Nepal and Sierra Leone, sending military forces out of the country for peacekeeping is useful for domestic political stability after a civil war.
In some conflicts, peacekeepers organized outside the UN framework have been used instead of UN-commanded forces.
Some 3,500 French peacekeepers—not under UN command—serve in Ivory Coast alongside 11,000 UN peacekeepers, monitoring a 2003 cease-fire.
When government airstrikes killed nine French soldiers in 2004, the French forces retaliated robustly, destroying the government’s air force.
In 2011, after the incumbent president lost an election but refused to leave, UN and French troops helped the winner dislodge him by force.
Peacekeeping forces have generally been unable to make peace, only to keep it.
To go into a shooting war and suppress hostilities requires military forces far beyond those of past UN peacekeeping missions.
Thus, peacekeepers are usually not sent until a cease-fire has been arranged, has taken effect, and has held up for some time.
Wars may simmer along for years, taking a terrible toll, before the UN gets its chance.
To address this problem, the secretary-general in 1992 proposed the creation of UN peace-making units that would not only monitor a cease-fire but 10 Lindley, Dan.
The secretary-general called for member states to make available, on a rapid deployment basis, 1,000 soldiers each—specially trained volunteers—to create a standby UN army that could respond quickly to crises.
Not only did the member states refuse the request for soldiers, they shot down the idea of peacemaking altogether.
Since then, the UN has authorized member states to provide real military forces, not peacekeepers, when fighting may be required.
In 2005, Pakistani peacekeepers killed 50 militia fighters after nine peacekeepers from Bangladesh were killed in an ambush.
In the late 1990s, seven countries—Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Poland, the Netherlands, Austria, and Canada—formed a 4,000-troop UN Standby High Readiness Brigade.
Headquartered in Denmark and available to deploy to conflict areas in two to four weeks rather than months, the brigade is controlled by the Security Council.
In early 2005, the brigade deployed to Sudan to support a peace agreement between northern and southern regions after a long civil war.
The Secretariat The secretary-general of the UN is the closest thing to a “president of the world” that exists.
But the secretary-general represents member states—not the world’s 7 billion people.
Where the great powers do not have consensus, it is hard for the secretary-general to make anything happen.
The secretary-general is nominated by the Security Council—requiring the consent of all five permanent members—and must be approved by the General Assembly.
Past secretaries-general have come from various regions of the world, but never from a great power.
His predecessor, Kofi Annan, served ten years and helped reinvigorate the UN, winning the lOOth-anniversary Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.
DIPLOMATIC MOVES The UN secretary-general has a lofty mission but limited power and resources.
Ban Ki-moon, here learning some dance moves from fellow South Korean PSY in 2012, faces daunting tasks, serving multiple bosses with a tight budget.
It is a bureaucracy for administering UN policy and programs, just as the State Department is a bureaucracy for United States foreign policy.
In security matters, the secretary-general personally works with the Security Council; development programs in poor countries are coordinated by a second-in-command, the director-general for Development and International Economic Co-operation.
The Secretariat is divided into functional areas, with undersecretaries-general and assistant secretaries-general.
The UN staff in these areas includes administrative personnel as well as technical experts and economic advisors working on various programs and projects.
The staff numbers about 15,000 people, and the total number of employees in the UN system (including the World Bank and IMF) is 80,000.
One purpose of the UN Secretariat is to develop an international civil service of diplomats and bureaucrats whose loyalties lie at the global level, not with their states of origin.
The UN has been fairly successful in this regard; the secretary-general is most often seen as an independent diplomat thinking about the whole world’s interests, not as a pawn of any state.
But in the early 1990s the UN bureaucracy came under increasing criticism for both inefficiency and corruption.
These criticisms, coming especially from the United States, which saw itself as bearing an unfair share of the costs, led to a reform program.
By the late 1990s, UN staff was reduced by one-quarter compared to a decade earlier, and budgets were scaled back year by year.
Since then, the situation has improved, but money remains extremely tight.
He (it has not yet been a she) is a visible public figure whose personal attention to a regional conflict can move it toward resolution.
The Charter allows the secretary-general to use the UN’s “good offices” to serve as a neutral mediator in international conflicts—to bring hostile parties together in negotiations.
The secretary-general also works to bring together the great power consensus on which Security Council action depends.
The secretary-general has the power under the Charter to bring to the Security Council any matter that might threaten international peace and security, and so to play a major role in setting the UN’s agenda in international security affairs.
Still, the secretary-general experiences tensions with the Security Council.
If the secretary-general asks for $10 million, he might get $5 million.
Thus the secretary-general remains, like the entire UN system, constrained by state sovereignty.
It usually meets every year, from late September through January, in plenary session.
State leaders or foreign ministers, including the United States president, generally come through one by one to address this assemblage.
This global town hall is a unique institution and provides a powerful medium for states to put forward their ideas and arguments.
Presiding over it is a president elected by the Assembly—a post without much power.
The Assembly convenes for special sessions every few years on general topics such as economic cooperation.
The Assembly has met in emergency session in the past to deal with an immediate threat to international peace and security, but this has haphas now become uncommon.
For instance, in 1971, the delegation of the People’s Republic of China was given China’s seat in the UN (including on the Security Council) in place of the nationalists in Taiwan.
For decades, neither North Korea nor South Korea became members of the UN (because both claimed the whole of Korea), but they finally took seats as separate delegations in 1991.
The General Assembly’s main power lies in its control of finances for UN programs and operations, including peacekeeping.
It also can pass resolutions on various matters, but these are purely advisory and at times have served largely to vent frustrations of the majority of poor countries.
Finally, the Assembly coordinates UN programs and agencies through its own system of committees, commissions, councils, and so forth.
The Assembly coordinates UN programs and agencies through the Economic and Social Council , which has 54 member states elected by the General Assembly for three-year terms.
ECOSOC manages the overlapping work of a large number of programs and agencies.
Its regional commissions look at how UN programs work together in a particular region; its functional commissions deal with global topics such as population growth, narcotics trafficking, human rights, and the status of women; and its expert bodies pened only nine times and ASSEMBLY OF EQUALS The universal membership of the United Nations is one of its strengths.
All member states have a voice and a vote in the General Assembly, where state leaders rotate through each autumn.
Here, the president of Palestine, which hopes to join the UN as soon as the Security Council allows it, addresses the Assembly in 2011.
Outside ECOSOC, the General Assembly operates many other specialized committees.
Standing committees ease the work of the Assembly in issue areas such as decolonization, legal matters, and disarmament.
Many of the activities associated with the UN do not take place under tight control of either the General Assembly or the Security Council.
They occur in functional agencies and programs that have various amounts of autonomy from UN control.
UN Programs Through the Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly oversees more than a dozen major programs to advance economic development and social stability in poor states of the global South.
The programs are funded partly by General Assembly allocations and partly by contributions that the programs raise directly from member states, businesses, or private charitable contributors.
The degree of General Assembly funding, and of operational autonomy from the Assembly, varies from one program to another.
Each UN program has a staff, a headquarters, and various operations in the field, where it works with host governments in member states.
It provides technical assistance to member states, monitors environmental conditions globally, develops standards, and recommends alternative energy sources.
UNICEF is the UN Children’s Fund, which gives technical and financial assistance to poor countries for programs benefiting children.
Unfortunately, the needs of children in many countries are still urgent, and UNICEF is kept busy.
Financed by voluntary contributions, UNICEF has for decades organized United States children in an annual Halloween fund drive on behalf of their counterparts in poorer countries.
UNHCR coordinates efforts to protect, assist, and eventually repatriate the many refugees who flee across international borders each year to escape war and political violence.
The UN Development Program , funded by voluntary contributions, coordinates all UN efforts related to development in poor countries.
With about 5,000 projects operating simultaneously around the world, UNDP is the world’s largest international agency for technical development assistance.
The UN also runs several developmentrelated agencies for training and for promoting women’s role in development.
Many poor countries depend on export revenues to finance economic development, making them vulnerable to fluctuations in commodity prices and other international trade problems.
The UN Conference on Trade and Development negotiates international trade agreements to stabilize commodity prices and promote development.
These programs play a crucial role in the international assistance after disasters and wars.
In 2006, the UN created a new Human Rights Council, replacing a Human Rights Commission notorious for includ^ ing human rights abusers as member statesThe new council has expanded powers and more selective membership.
Other UN programs manage problems such as disaster relief, food aid, housing, and population issues.
Throughout the poorer countries, the UN maintains an active presence in economic and social affairs.
Autonomous Agencies In addition to its own programs, the UN General Assembly maintains formal ties with about 20 autonomous international agencies not under its control.
Most are specialized technical organizations through which states pool their efforts to address problems such as health care and labor conditions.
The only such agency in international security affairs is the International Atomic Energy Agency , headquartered in Vienna, Austria.
The IAEA was responsible for inspections in Iraq in 2002-2003, which found no evidence of a secret nuclear weapons program.
It is involved in monitoring Iran’s nuclear program to the extent Iran allows.
In the area of health care, the Geneva-based World Health Organization provides technical assistance to improve conditions and conduct major immunization campaigns in poor countries.
In the 1960s and 1970s, WHO led one of the great public health victories of all time—the worldwide eradication of smallpox.
In agriculture, the Food and Agriculture Organization is the lead agency.
UNESCO —the UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization —facilitates international communication and scientific collaboration.
The UN Industrial Development Organization promotes industrialization in the global South.
The longest-established IOs, with some of the most successful records, are specialized agencies dealing with technical aspects of international coordination such as aviation and postal exchange.
For instance, the International Telecommunications Union allocates radio frequencies.
The International Civil Aviation Organization sets binding standards for international air traffic.
The International Maritime Organization facilitates international cooperation on shipping at sea.
Finally, the World Meteorological Organization oversees a world weather watch and promotes the exchange of weather information.
Overall, the density of connections across national borders, both in the UN system and through other IOs, is increasing year by year.
In a less tangible way, people are also becoming connected across international borders through the meshing of ideas, including norms and rules.
International Law Watch the Video Global Governance and the ICC"" at MyPoliSciLab International law, unlike national laws, derives not from actions of a legislative branch or other central authority, but from tradition and agreements signed by states.
It also differs in the difficulty of enforcement, which depends not on the power and authority of central government but on reciprocity, collective action, and international norms.
Sources of International Law Laws within states come from central authorities—legislatures or dictators.
Because states are sovereign and recognize no central authority, international law rests on a different basis.
The declarations of the UN General Assembly are not laws, and most do not bind the members.
No body of international law has been passed by a national legislative body.
Treaties and other written conventions signed by states are the most important source.
States violate the terms of treaties they have signed only if the matter is very important or the penalties for such a violation seem very small.
In the United States, treaties duly ratified by the Senate are considered the highest law of the land, equal with acts passed by Congress.
Treaties and other international obligations such as debts are binding on successor governments whether the new government takes power through an election, a coup, or a revolution.
For example, after the revolutions in Eastern Europe around 1990, newly democratic governments were held responsible for debts incurred by their communist predecessors.
Even when the Soviet Union broke up, Russia as the successor state had to guarantee that Soviet debts would be paid and Soviet treaties honored.
Although revolution does not free a state from its obligations, some treaties have built-in escape clauses 13 Shaw, Malcolm N International Law.th ed.
For example, the United States in 2001 invoked the six-month opt-out provision of the ABM treaty.
Because of the universal commitment by all states to respect certain basic principles of international law, the UN Charter is one of the world’s most important treaties.
Its implications are broad and far-reaching, in contrast to more specific treaties such as a fishery management agreement.
However, the specialized agreements are usually easier to interpret and more enforceable than broad treaties such as the Charter.
Another key treaty in international law is the 1949 Geneva Conventions (expanding an 1864 convention) defining the laws of war regarding the protection of civilians and prisoners, among related issues.
If states behave toward each other in a certain way for long enough, their behavior may become generally accepted practice with the status of law.
Western international law tends to be positivist in this regard—it draws on actual customs, the practical realities of self-interest, and the need for consent rather than on an abstract concept of divine or natural law.
Actions such as theft and assault recognized in most national legal systems as crimes tend to have the same meaning in an international context.
Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait was illegal under treaties signed by Iraq and under the custom Iraq and Kuwait had established of living in peace as sovereign states.
Beyond treaty or custom, the invasion violated international law because of the general principle that one state may not overrun its neighbor’s territory and annex it by force.
Only the writings of the most highly qualified and respected legal figures can be taken into account, and then only to resolve points not resolved by the first three sources of international law.
Often international law lags behind changes in norms; law is quite tradition-bound.
Certain activities such as espionage are technically illegal but are so widely condoned that they cannot be said to violate international norms.
Other activities are still legal but have come to be frowned upon and seen as abnormal.
For example, China’s shooting of student demonstrators in 1989 violated international norms but not international law.
Enforcement of International Law Although these sources of international law distinguish it from national law, an even greater difference exists as to the enforcement of the two types of law.
Enforcement of international law depends on the power of states themselves, individually or collectively, to punish transgressors.
States follow international law most of the time because they want other states to do so.
The reason neither side in World War II used chemical weapons was not that anyone could enforce the treaty banning use of such weapons.
A state that breaks international law may face a collective response by a group of states, such as the imposition of sanctions —agreements among other states to stop trading with the violator, or to stop some particular commodity trade as punishment for its violation.
Over time, a sanctioned state can become a pariah in the community of nations, cut off from normal relations with others.
This is very costly in today’s world, in which economic well-being everywhere depends on trade and economic exchange in world markets.
Libya suffered for decades from its isolated status in the international community, and decided in 2003 to make a clean break and regain normal status.
Libya admitted responsibility for past terrorism, began to compensate victims, and agreed to disclose and dismantle its nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons programs.
Even the world’s superpower constrains its behavior, at least some of the time, to adhere to international law.
For example, in late 2002 a North Korean freighter was caught en route to Yemen with a hidden load of 15 Scud missiles.
The United States, fighting the war on terrorism, had an evident national interest in preventing such proliferation, and had the power to prevent it.
But when United States government lawyers determined that the shipment did not violate international law, the United States backed off and let the delivery continue.
International law enforcement through reciprocity and collective response has one great weakness—it depends entirely on national power.
Reciprocity works only if the aggrieved state has the power to inflict costs on the violator.
Collective response works only if the collective cares enough about an issue to respond.
Without common expectations regarding the rules of the game and adherence to those rules most of the time by most actors, power alone would create great instability in the anarchic international system.
International law, even without perfect enforcement, creates expectations about what constitutes legal behavior by states.
Because violations or divergences from those expectations stand out, it is easier to identify and punish states that deviate from accepted rules.
When states agree to the rules by signing treaties , violations become more visible and clearly illegitimate.
In most cases, although power continues to reside in states, international law establishes workable rules for those states to follow.
The resulting stability is so beneficial that usually the costs of breaking the rules outweigh the short-term benefits that could be gained from such violations.
The World Court As international law has developed, a general world legal framework in which states can pursue grievances against each other has begun to take shape.
The rudiments of such a system now exist in the World Court (formally called the International Court of Justice), although its jurisdiction is limited and its caseload light.
Only states, not individuals or businesses, can sue or be sued in the World Court.
When a state has a grievance against another, it can take the case to the World Court for an impartial hearing.
For example, the 2010 Court ruling declaring Kosovo’s declaration of independence legal was an advisory opinion requested by the General Assembly.
The World Court is a panel of 15 judges elected for nine-year terms by a majority of both the Security Council and General Assembly.
It is customary for permanent members of the Security Council to have one of their nationals as a judge at all times.
Ad hoc judges may be added to the 15 if a party to a case does not already have one of its nationals as a judge.
The great weakness of the World Court is that states have not agreed in a comprehensive way to subject themselves to its jurisdiction or obey its decisions.
Almost all states have signed the treaty creating the Court, but only about a third have signed the optional clause in the treaty agreeing to give the Court jurisdiction in certain cases—and even many of those signatories have added their own stipulations reserving their rights and limiting the degree to which the Court can infringe on national sovereignty.
Colombia withdrew in 2012 after the Court awarded disputed territorial waters to Nicaragua.
Similarly, Iran refused to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Court when sued by the United States in 1979 over its seizure of the United States embassy in Iran.
In such a case, the Court may hear the case anyway and usually rules in favor of the participating side—but has no means to enforce the ruling.
In 2007, the Court issued a ruling against Bosnia’s case accusing Serbia of genocide, after 14 years of preliminary maneuvering.
In one of its most notable successes, the World Court in 1992 settled a complex border dispute between El Salvador and Honduras dating from 1861.
In 2002, the World Court settled a long-standing and sometimes violent dispute over an oil-rich peninsula on the Cameroon-Nigeria border.
It gave ownership to Cameroon, and Nigeria (which is more powerful) pulled troops out in 2006.
A main use of the World Court now is to arbitrate issues of secondary importance between countries with friendly relations overall.
The United States has settled commercial disputes with Canada and with Italy through the Court.
Because security interests are not at stake, and because the overall friendly relations are more important than the particular issue, states have been willing to submit to the Court’s jurisdiction.
In 2004, the court ordered the United States to review death sentences of Mexican nationals to see if ALL RISE The World Court hears international disputes but with little power to enforce judgments.
Here, in 2004, the judges rule in favor of Mexico's complaint that the United States death penalty against Mexican citizens violated a 1963 treaty.
World Court Case of Argentina Uruguay Argentina and Uruguay signed a treaty in 1975 governing the river on their border.
The United States had often failed to do so despite demanding this right for Americans abroad.
The World Court suggested that United States courts add relevant language to the Miranda warning for cases when police arrest foreign nationals.
International Cases in National Courts Most legal cases concerning international matters—whether brought by governments or by private individuals or companies—remain entirely within the legal systems of one or more states.
A party with a dispute that crosses national boundaries gains several advantages by pursuing the matter through the national courts of one or more of the relevant states, rather than through international channels.
The party that wins a lawsuit in a national court can collect from the other party’s assets within the state.
Second, individuals and companies can pursue legal complaints through national courts , whereas in most areas of international law, states must themselves bring suits on behalf of their citizens.
Third, there is often a choice of more than one state within which a case could legally be heard; one can pick the legal system most favorable to one’s case.
Each state’s court system must decide whether it has jurisdiction in a case , and courts tend to extend their own authority with a broad interpretation.
Traditionally, a national court may hear cases concerning any activity on its national territory, any actions of its own citizens anywhere in the world, and actions taken toward its citizens elsewhere in the world.
Noncitizens can use the national courts to enforce damages against citizens, because the national court has authority to impose fines and, if necessary, to seize bank accounts and property.
The United States is a favorite jurisdiction within which to bring cases for two reasons.
Second, because many people and governments do business in the United States, it is often possible to collect damages awarded by a United States court.
For these reasons, United States courts in recent years have ruled on human rights cases brought by Chinese dissidents over the 1989 Tiananmen massacre, Cuban exiles against the Cuban government, and a Paraguayan doctor suing a Paraguayan police official for torturing the doctor’s son.
In 2003, United States courts ordered large payments by Iraq and Iran to United States victims of terrorism and torture.
Belgium’s national courts are a favorite venue for international human rights cases because a 1993 law gives them jurisdiction over any violation of the Geneva Conventions.
In 2001, four people accused of war crimes in Rwanda in 1994 were sent to prison by a Belgian jury.
In 2005, Belgium indicted a former leader of Chad accused of 40,000 political murders in Chad in the 1980s, and Senegal (where he lived) asked the African Union to rule on whether it should extradite him.
There are important limits to the use of national courts to resolve international disputes, however.
Most important is that the authority of national courts stops at the state’s borders, where sovereignty ends.
A court in Zambia cannot compel a resident of Thailand to come and testify; it cannot authorize the seizure of a British bank account to pay damages; it cannot arrest a criminal suspect except on Zambian soil.
To take such actions beyond national borders, states must persuade other states to cooperate.
In 2012, a United States hedge fund that had lost $370 million in Argentina’s 2002 debt default convinced Ghana to seize a visiting Argentinean ship to pay the debt, but Ghana released the ship after a ruling by a UN maritime tribunal.
To bring a person outside a state’s territory to trial, the state’s government must ask a second government to arrest the person on the second state’s territory and hand him or her over for trial.
Called extradition , this is a matter of international law because it is a legal treaty arrangement between states.
If no such treaty exists, the individual generally remains immune from a state’s courts by staying off its territory.
Some United States allies do not usually extradite to the United States suspects who would face the death penalty.
The war on terrorism since 2001, however, has expanded international legal and law enforcement cooperation.
In one high-profile debate about extradition, the former Chilean military dictator Augusto Pinochet was arrested in England in 1999 on a Spanish warrant, based on crimes committed against Spanish citizens in Chile during Pinochet’s rule.
His supporters claimed that he should have immunity for acts taken as head of state, but because he was not an accredited diplomat in England (where he had gone for medical treatment) and no longer head of state, the British courts held him on Spain’s request to extradite him.
However, the British government eventually let him return to Chile, citing his medical condition, and a Chilean court suspended his case on health grounds.
Gray areas exist in the jurisdiction of national courts over foreigners.
If a government can lure a suspect onto the high seas, it can nab the person without violating another country’s territoriality.
More troublesome are cases in which a government obtains a foreign citizen from a foreign country for trial without going through extradition procedures.
In a famous case in the 1980s, a Mexican doctor was wanted by United States authorities for allegedly participating in the torture and murder of a United States drug agent in Mexico.
The United States government paid a group of bounty hunters to kidnap the doctor in 18 Liptak, Adam.
The United States Supreme Court gave the United States courts jurisdiction in the case—showing the tendency to extend state sovereignty wherever possible—although international lawyers and Mexican officials objected strongly.
The United States government had to reassure the Mexican government that it would not kidnap Mexican citizens for trial in the United States in the future.
The doctor returned home after the case was thrown out for lack of evidence.
In late 2004, Colombia arranged the abduction of a leading Colombian rebel living in Venezuela, provoking Venezuelan protests about the violation of sovereignty.
When people cross a border into a new country, the decision about whether they can remain there, and under what conditions, is up to the new state.
Many other legal issues are raised by people traveling or living outside their own country—passports and visas, babies born in foreign countries, marriages to foreign nationals, bank accounts, businesses, taxes, and so forth.
Practices vary from country to country, but the general principle is that national laws prevail on the territory of a state.
Despite the continued importance of national court systems in international legal affairs and the lack of enforcement powers of the World Court, it would be wrong to conclude that state sovereignty is supreme and international law impotent.
Rather, a balance of sovereignty and law exists in international interactions.
Law and Sovereignty The remainder of this chapter discusses particular areas of international law, from the most firmly rooted and widely respected to newer and less-established areas.
In each area, the influence of law and norms runs counter to the unimpeded exercise of state sovereignty.
This struggle becomes more intense as one moves from long-standing traditions of diplomatic law to recent norms governing human rights.
Watch the Video ""The Uncertain Status of Enemy Combatants"" at MyPoliSciLab Laws of Diplomacy The bedrock of international law is respect for the rights of diplomats.
The standards of behavior in this area are spelled out in detail, applied universally, and taken very seriously.
The ability to conduct diplomacy is necessary for all other kinds of relations among states, except perhaps all-out war.
Since the rise of the international system five centuries ago, it has been considered unjustifiable to harm an emissary sent from another state as a means of influencing the other state.
Such a norm has not always existed; it is natural in some ways to kill the messenger who brings an unpleasant message, or to use another state’s official as a hostage or bargaining chip.
But today, this kind of behavior is universally condemned, though it still happens from time to time.
The status of embassies and of an ambassador as an official state representative is explicitly defined in the process of diplomatic recognition.
Diplomats are accredited to each other’s governments , and thereafter the individuals so defined enjoy certain rights and protections as foreign diplomats in the host country.
Diplomats have the right to occupy an embassy in a host country, within which the host country’s laws may not be enforced without the consent of the embassy’s country.
For this reason, embassies occasionally shelter dissidents who take refuge there from their own governments.
This fundamental principle, like others in international law, is ultimately enforced through reciprocity.
When the founder of Wikileaks took refuge in the Ecuadorian embassy in London to avoid extradition to Sweden, the British government considered coming in and taking him, but thought better of it.
Here, after six months in residency, he delivers a speech from the embassy balcony, 2012.
A flagrant violation of the sanctity of embassies occurred in Iran after Islamic revolutionaries took power in 1979.
Iranian students seized and occupied the United States embassy compound, holding the United States diplomats hostage for more than a year.
The Iranian government did not directly commit this act but did condone it and did refuse to force the students out of the embassy.
Diplomats enjoy diplomatic immunity even when they leave the embassy grounds.
The right to travel varies from one country to another; diplomats may be restricted to one city or free to roam about the countryside.
Alone among all foreign nationals, diplomats are beyond enforcement of the host country’s national courts.
If they commit crimes, from jaywalking to murder, they may be shielded from arrest.
All the host country can do is take away a diplomat’s accreditation and expel the person from the host country.
However, strong countries sometimes pressure weaker ones to lift immunity so that a diplomat may face trial for a crime.
This happened twice in 1997, for example, when the United States and France were allowed to prosecute diplomats from Georgia and Zaire, respectively, for reckless driving that killed children.
Given this immunity, delegates simply tear up thousands of parking tickets each year, for example.
The parking ticket issue has become a sensitive political issue, as the State Department now reserves the right to revoke driver’s licenses, license plates, and even reduce foreign aid based on outstanding parking tickets.
Because of diplomatic immunity, espionage activities are commonly conducted through the diplomatic corps, out of an embassy.
Spies are often posted to low-level positions in embassies, such as cultural attache, press liaison, or military attache.
If the host country catches them spying, it cannot prosecute them, so it merely expels them.
If a spy operates under cover of being a businessperson or tourist, then no immunity applies; the person can be arrested and prosecuted under the host country’s laws.
Such was the case in 2010, when the United States government arrested ten Russian spies who were leading lives as ordinary citizens in America.
A diplomatic pouch is a package sent between an embassy and its home country.
As the name implies, it started out historically as a small and occasional shipment, but today a large and steady volume of such shipments travel all over the world.
To break diplomatic relations means to withdraw one’s diplomats from a state and expel that state’s diplomats from one’s own state.
This tactic is used to show displeasure with another government; it is a refusal to do business as usual.
When a revolutionary government comes into power, some countries may withdraw recognition.
And when small states recognize Taiwan diplomatically, China withdraws recognition of them.
When two countries lack diplomatic relations, they often do business through a third country willing to represent a country’s interests formally through its own embassy.
Thus, the practical needs of diplomacy can overcome a formal lack of relations between states.
For instance, United States interests are represented by the Swiss embassy in Cuba, and Cuban interests are represented by the Swiss embassy in the United States.
In practice, these interests sections are located in the former United States and Cuban embassies and staffed with United States and Cuban diplomats.
States register lower levels of displeasure by recalling their ambassadors home for some period of time; diplomatic norms call for a trip home “for consultations’’ even when everyone knows the purpose is to signal annoyance.
Usually the complaining government does so in its own capital city, to the other’s ambassador.
Because states care so much about the sanctity of diplomats, the diplomats make a tempting target for terrorists, and because terrorist groups do not enjoy the benefits of diplomatic law , they are willing to break diplomatic norms and laws.
An attack on diplomats or embassies is an attack on the territory of the state itself—yet can be carried out far from the state’s home territory.
In late 2004, terrorists stormed a United States consulate in Saudi Arabia, killing several guards, and in 2012, they burned the United States consulate in Benghazi, Libya, killing the ambassador.
Just War Doctrine After the law of diplomacy, international law regarding war is one of the most developed areas of international law.
Today, the legality of war is defined by the UN Charter, which outlaws aggression.
Above and beyond its legal standing, just war doctrine has become a strong international norm, not one that all states follow but an important part of the modern intellectual tradition governing matters of war and peace that evolved in Europe.
Tanks swarming across the border constitute aggression, but so do tanks massing at the border if their state has threatened to invade.
But for a threat to constitute aggression , it must be a clear threat of using force, not just a hostile policy or general rivalry.
States have the right to respond to aggression in the only manner thought to be reliable—military force.
Responses can include both repelling the attack itself and punishing the aggressor.
Responses can be made by the victim of aggression or by other states not directly affected—as a way of maintaining the norm of nonaggression in the international system.
The collective actions of UN members against Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait are a classic case of such a response.
Response to aggression is the only allowable use of military force according to just war doctrine.
The just war approach thus explicitly rules out war as an instrument to change another state’s government or policies, or in ethnic and religious conflicts.
In fact, the UN Charter makes no provision for “war” but rather for “international police actions” against aggressors.
The analogy is with law and order in a national society, enforced by police when necessary.
Because only aggression justifies military force, if all states obeyed the law against aggression, there would be no international war.
For a war to be morally just, it must be more than a response to aggression; it must be waged for the purpose of responding to aggression.
A state may not take advantage of another’s aggression to wage a war that is essentially aggressive.
Although the U.S.-led war effort to oust Iraq from Kuwait in 1991 was certainly a response to aggression, critics found the justness of the war to be compromised by the United States interest in obtaining cheap oil from the Middle East—not an allowable reason for waging war.
It is thus harder to identify an aggressor in such situations, and harder to balance the relative merits of peace and justice.
Human Rights One of the newest areas of international law concerns human rights—the rights of human 9 1 beings against certain abuses of their own governments/ 20 Johnson, James Turner.
Thus, a consensus on what are the most important human rights is difficult to reach.
No matter where a person resides, no matter his or her ethnic nationality, and no matter his or her local religious, ethnic, or clan traditions, that person has certain rights that must be respected.
According to this idea, local traditions and histories should be given due respect, even if this means limiting rights that others outside that local context find important.
This charge puts human rights law on shaky ground and reflects a more relativist stance.
The concept of human rights arises from at least three sourcesA The first is religion.
Nearly every major world religion has at its foundation the idea that humans were created in an image of a higher power and that therefore all humans are to be afforded the dignity and respect that are due that higher power.
Second, political and legal philosophy for centuries has discussed the idea of natural law and natural rights.
From Aristotle, to John Locke, to Immanuel Kant, to Jean-Jacques Rousseau, political philosophers have developed the idea that a natural law exists that grants all humans the right to life, liberty, property, and happiness.
Finally, political revolutions in the 18th century, such as the American and French Revolutions, translated the theory of natural law and natural rights into practice.
In America, the Declaration of Independence, and in France, the Declaration of the Rights International norms concerning human rights conflict with state sovereignty, causing friction in relationships such as that of Burma with the international community.
Here, in 2008, Buddhist monks in Burma's capital lead huge demonstrations against the repressive military government, which cracked down harshly within days.
Western powers apply economic sanctions against Burma because of its human rights record.
Of course, criticisms of these ideas of human rights exist, on both a theoretical and a practical level.
Theoretically, relativists point out that much of the origin and development of human rights ideas are Western in origin.
Non-Western societies have different philosophical traditions and may choose to emphasize group or family rights, for example, over individual ones.
At a practical level, many critics are quick to point out that even after the 18thcentury revolutions in Europe and America, rights were still not universal.
Women, children, and usually nonwhites were not assumed to enjoy the same rights as landholding white males, making the very idea of universal rights misleading.
Civil-political rights are sometimes referred to as “negative rights” and include what are considered traditional Western rights such as free speech, freedom of religion, equal protection under the law, and freedom from arbitrary imprisonment.
These are rights generally thought to be best guaranteed by limiting the power of governments over their people.
Economic-social rights are referred to as “positive rights” and include rights to good living conditions, food, health care, social security, and education/ 3 These rights are often held to be best promoted by the expansion of governments to provide minimal standards to their people.
No state has a perfect record on any type of human rights, and states differ as to which areas they respect or violate.
Likewise, communist states encouraged the development of the latter rights, while ignoring calls for the former.
Overall, despite the poor record of the world’s states on some points, progress has been made on others.
Horrified by Nazi Germany’s attempt to exterminate the Jewish population and by Japanese abuses of Chinese citizens, many scholars and practitioners began to suggest that there were limits to state sovereignty.
States could not claim to be sovereign and above interference if they attempted to massacre their own people.
In the aftermath of World War II and the creation of the United Nations, some of the most significant international attempts to codify and enforce human rights began.
In the next section, we examine some of these agreements and institutions.
The declaration roots itself in the principle that violations of human rights upset international order and in the fact that the UN Charter commits states to respect fundamental freedoms.
The declaration proclaims that “all human beings are born free and equal” without regard to race, sex, language, religion, political affiliation, or the status of the territory in which they were born.
It goes on to promote norms in a wide variety of areas, including banning torture, guaranteeing religious and political freedom, and ensuring the right of economic well-being.
Unlike the UDHR, these treaties are legally binding contracts signed by states.
Of course, international law is only as good as the enforcement mechanisms behind it.
Yet these seven treaties are important in outlining the basic protections for individuals expected by the international community.
These two treaties, both of which entered into force in 1976, codify the promises of the UDHR while dividing the list of rights in the UDHR into civil-political and economic-social rights, respectively.
These two covenants, along with the UDHR, are often referred to as the International Bill of Human Rights/ 0 The remaining treaties each deal with a particular group that the international community considers vulnerable.
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination , enacted in 1969, bans discrimination against individuals based on race, ethnicity, religion, or national origin.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women , however, fills this void by banning discrimination against women.
The Convention against Torture , instituted in 1987, bans dehumanizing, degrading, and inhumane treatment of individuals even in times of war.
Finally, the most recent UN human rights treaty is the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families , which entered into force in 2003.
Equally important as these UN treaties themselves are the optional protocols that are attached to several of the treaties.
These protocols can be thought of as addendums to the treaties as they contain additional protections not included in the original documents.
In general, far fewer states sign these optional protocols since the protections contained in them were too controversial for the original document.
In addition, some of the optional protocols contain stronger enforcement mechanisms, such as giving individuals in signatory states the right to go to the UN monitoring bodies without the approval of their governments.
States that are not party to the original treaty may sign them, as is the case with the United States, which has not signed the CRC, but has signed its two optional protocols.
Besides the UN-related human rights treaties, several regional IOs have promoted the protection of human rights.
In Latin America as well, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights has had some success in promoting human rights, yet it has also been limited by state refusal to abide by its decisions.
Finally, the African Union helps support the African Human Rights Commission, but the commission has been hampered by its lack of monetary and political support from African states.
In the past decade, developed states have begun to use other international organizations to pressure developing states to improve human rights conditions.
Free trade agreements frequently contain provisions that condition trade benefits on the respect for human rights, especially workers’ rights. u Because these treaties provide policies beneficial to the developing states, they create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse their citizens.
Others argue, however, that limiting economic benefits to countries harms their economic development, which is likely only to make the human rights situation worse.
Today, NGOs play a key role in efforts to win basic political rights in authoritarian countries—including a halt to the torture, execution, and imprisonment of those expressing political or religious beliefs.
The leading organization pressing this struggle is Amnesty International, an NGO that operates globally to monitor and try to rectify glaring abuses of human rights. z Amnesty International has a reputation for impartiality and has criticized abuses in many countries, including the United States.
Yet, such measures keep those suffering from human rights abuses in the global spotlight, drawing more attention to their plight.
The most effective method yet discovered is a combination of publicity and pressure.
Publicity entails digging up information about human rights abuses, as Amnesty International does.
Through a process some scholars have dubbed “naming and shaming,” supporters of human rights hope that publicity will embarrass the regime and change its o C ___ behavior.
The publicity also serves to alert those traveling to or doing business with offending regimes to the conditions in those countries.
Human rights activists hope this negative attention will convince individuals to stop their interactions with the state in question, putting further economic pressure on it.
The pressure of other governments, as well as private individuals and businesses, consists of threats to punish the offender in some way through nonviolent means.
But because most governments seek to maintain normal relations with each other most of the time, this kind of intrusive punishment by one government of another’s human rights violations is rare—and not reliably successful.
Also rare are humanitarian interventions using military force to overcome armed resistance by local authorities or warlords and bring help to civilian victims of wars and disasters.
However, international norms have increasingly shifted against sovereignty and toward protecting endangered civilians.
The UN-authorized NATO campaign in Libya in 2011 followed from the R2P concept.
Yet the people of Syria did not get protection in 2011-2013 as tens of thousands were slaughtered by their government.
The United States State Department has actively pursued human rights since the late 1970s.
An annual United States government report assesses human rights in states around the world.
In states where abuses are severe or becoming worse, United States foreign aid has been withheld.
Since the Nazi murders of civilians did not violate German law, the Nuremberg tribunal treated them as a new category, crimes against humanity, conceived as inhumane acts and persecutions against civilians on a vast scale in the pursuit of unjust ends.
Stopping Atrocities Against Civilians BACKGROUND: The international system based on sovereignty has historically treated serious human rights abuses as domestic problems of no concern to outside countries.
Over the years, however, a norm has developed that treats the most serious atrocities as matters of concern for all of humanity.
For instance, after the horrors of the Nazi Holocaust during World War II, the world’s countries signed the Genocide Convention in 1948.
Signatories pledge to “prevent and punish” genocide in both war and peacetime.
Many scholars of international law interpret this as a commitment by states to intervene in recognized cases of genocide to stop the killing.
The concept that the international community must stop abuses by governments against their own people has gained momentum over the years since then, with various treaties and practices moving in this direction.
The International Criminal Court and several international war crimes tribunals have tried individuals accused of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
The international community should try prevention and diplomacy first, but ultimately must use military intervention as a last resort if necessary to stop mass atrocities.
Everyone agrees that the world would be better off without atrocities, which degrade humanity and undermine norms of peaceful politics.
These ideals, however, are a collective good, enjoyed by all countries regardless of which ones put money and lives on the line.
Mass atrocities continue to occur despite the Genocide Convention, the human rights treaties, the tribunals, and the R2P concept.
In 1994 in Rwanda, ultranationalists seized power and slaughtered more than half a million ethnic minority members and political opponents.
Similar tribunals were later established for genocide in Rwanda and Sierra Leone.
The tribunal on the former Yugoslavia, headquartered in The Hague, the Netherlands, issued indictments against the top Bosnian Serb leaders and other Serbian and Croatian officers, and in 1999 against Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic for his expulsion of Albanians from Kosovo.
The tribunal was hampered by lack of funding and by its lack of power to arrest suspects who enjoyed the sanctity of Serbia and Croatia.
After Milosevic lost power in Serbia, the new Serbian government turned him over to the tribunal in 2001, and he died in custody in 2006.
In 2008 and 2011, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs and their top military commander were arrested after more than a decade in hiding.
They are currently on trial, charged with massacring and shelling civilians and destroying property, including places of worship.
By 2011, no Bosnia war criminals remained at large, and at the end of 2012 the Rwanda tribunal also completed all of its 71 cases.
In 2003, it indicted the sitting state leader in next-door Liberia, Charles Taylor, for his role in the war’s extreme brutality.
He fled to Nigeria shortly afterward but was captured there, turned over to the tribunal in 2006, and convicted in 2012.
In these and other cases, no states intervened effectively to stop the atrocities.
But in 2011, outsiders did halt an imminent slaughter by Libya’s dictator.
Human rights organizations rely on the identity principle to try to spur action by the international community.
They publicize crises and goad the governments of democracies to act in the name of humanity.
In the case of Darfur, a wellfunded campaign with plentiful popular support called for strong action to stop the Sudanese government.
These appeals, however, have brought meager results, as Western governments do not want to spend blood and treasure to intervene in messy foreign conflicts.
The reciprocity principle has also come up short, as the ICC, which the world’s countries are supposed to mutually support, has been unable to arrest the president of Sudan after indicting him for war crimes.
When great powers see action Rwandan survivor visits memorial on tenth anniversary of the 1994 genocide. as in their national interest, they act.
Until the world’s strong military powers decide to act against mass atrocities, the provision of the collective good embodied by R2P will continue to fall short.
In 2008, the ICC began its first trial, of a militia leader from Democratic Congo accused of drafting children under 15 and killing civilians.
The United States has refused to ratify the ICC agreement and shows little interest in doing so.
In addition, the United States has pressured many ICC member states to sign immunity agreements (known as Bilateral Immunity Agreements or BIA) to protect American soldiers serving in those countries from prosecution.
In 2005, after several ICC members refused to sign a BIA, Congress voted to cut foreign aid to those states.
United States leaders are concerned that American soldiers, serving in peacekeeping missions or in NATO allies, will fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC rather than under the American military’s own justice system.
In 2009, the ICC indicted the sitting Sudanese president, Omar al-Bashir, on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity, and issued a warrant for his arrest.
The indictment angered the Sudanese government, which then expelled humanitarian organizations from Darfur.
In 2011, the ICC quickly indicted Libya’s dictator and several others, but he was killed before facing justice.
What makes the ICC different is the idea of universal jurisdiction — that the court has the ability to prosecute individuals of any nation.
This distinguishes the ICC from the World Court, which has only states as complainants and defendants.
Under the ICC, individuals can be prosecuted for their roles in violations of human rights.
The most notorious war crime in Europe in recent decades was the massacre of more than 7,000 men and boys by Serbian forces who overran the UN ""safe area"" of Srebrenica, Bosnia, in 1995.
Schabas, William A An Introduction to the International Criminal Court.nd ed.
Third, the UN Security Council can begin proceedings even against individuals from nonsignatory states.
It is not illegal, however, to target military forces knowing civilians will be killed.
Even then, the amount of force used must be proportional to the military gain, and only the necessary amount of force can be used.
To help separate combatants from civilians, soldiers must wear uniforms and insignia, such as a shoulder patch with a national flag.
This provision is frequently violated in guerrilla warfare, making that form of warfare particularly brutal and destructive of civilian life.
If one cannot tell the difference between a bystander and a combatant, one is likely to kill both when in doubt.
By contrast, in a large-scale conventional war it is much easier to distinguish civilians from soldiers, although the effort is never completely successful.
When United States special forces in Afghanistan made friends with local fighters by operating out of uniform and with bushy beards, humanitarian-aid agencies complained and the Pentagon ordered the soldiers back into uniform.
In the Iraq War, insurgents have repeatedly targeted civilians and attacked in civilian clothes, from hospitals and schools, and after feigning surrender—all against the laws of war.
And a 2007 report from Human Rights Watch accused the presidential guard unit in the Central African Republic of dozens of summary executions of civilians.
In recent years, the unprecedented rise in the use of private military forces in wars, especially in Iraq, has challenged the laws of war.
In Iraq, the United States government had granted a waiver to these companies to ensure that they could not be prosecuted for violations of international law, only local law.
But because there was no formal Iraqi government, no one could enforce violations of domestic law committed by these companies.
Several high-profile incidents (including abuses at the Abu Ghraib prison and several shootings of civilians) led Congress, the UN, and Iraq to hold private forces accountable.
A 2008 IraqiUnited States agreement on the status of American military forces ended the legal waiver for private contractors beginning in 2009.
They give up their weapons and their right to fight, and earn instead the right not to be targeted.
POWs may not be killed, mistreated, or forced to disclose information beyond their name, rank, and serial number.
The ICRC provides practical support—such as medical care, food, and letters from home—to civilians caught in wars and to POWs.
In the current war on terrorism, the United States does not consider the “enemy combatants” it detains to be POWs, but has granted the ICRC access to most of them.
More controversial is the United States policy called “extraordinary rendition,” which lets terrorist suspects captured overseas be transferred to other countries, including some that use torture, for questioning.
The laws of warfare impose moral responsibility on individuals in wartime, as well as on states.
The Nuremberg Tribunal established that participants can be held accountable for war crimes they commit.
German officers defended their actions as “just following orders,” but this was rejected; the officers were punished, and some executed, for their war crimes.
For example, laws of war limit the use of force against civilians to what is necessary and proportional to military objectives.
In World War II, the German army besieged the Russian city of Leningrad for two years, and civilians in the city were starving.
Sieges of this kind are permitted under international law if an army cannot easily capture a city.
Changing Context The laws of warfare have been undermined by the changing nature of war.
Conventional wars by defined armed forces on defined battlegrounds are giving way to irregular and “low-intensity” wars fought by guerrillas and death squads in cities or jungles.
The lines between civilians and soldiers blur in these situations, and war crimes become more commonplace.
In the Vietnam War, one of the largest problems faced by the United States was an enemy that seemed to be everywhere and nowhere.
This led frustrated United States forces to attack civilian villages seen as supporting the guerrillas.
In today’s irregular warfare, frequently inflamed by ethnic and religious conflicts, the laws of war are increasingly difficult to uphold.
Another factor undermining laws of war is that states rarely issue a declaration of war setting out whom they are warring against and the cause of their action.
Ironically, such declarations are historically the exception, not the rule.
This trend continues today because declarations of war bring little benefit to the state declaring war and incur obligations under international law.
In many cases, such as revolutionary and counterrevolutionary civil wars, a declaration would not even be appropriate, because wars are declared only against states, not internal groups.
BACKGROUND For six years, fighting has raged in the western Sudanese province of Darfur.
It is estimated that 2. million people have been forced from their homes and perhaps 300,000 have died.
While some of the violence in Darfur is between warring rebel groups, the Sudanese government has been accused of arming one set of militias and encouraging the violence.
Although Sudan is not a member of the ICC, because the Security Council referred the Darfur case to the ICC you may choose to begin a case against anyone in the Sudan.
The ICC has already issued two arrest warrants for war crimes related to Darfur.
In 2009, your predecessor obtained an indictment and arrest warrant against Sudan's president, Omar al-Bashir, on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Such a move to prosecute a sitting president of a country in the middle of a civil war was unprecedented.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS While human rights groups applauded the decision to pursue criminal charges against the Sudanese president, many countries opposed the move.
China and Russia, both of which maintain diplomatic ties with Sudan, have expressed disapproval and pressed the ICC to stop prosecutions.
Many African Union countries, which currently deploy peacekeepers in Darfur, have opposed the move, warning that it could lead to a breakdown of the peace process.
In fact, after the ICC announced plans to indict al-Bashir, violence did increase in Darfur, including attacks against AU peacekeepers, and after the indictment was announced, Sudan expelled humanitarian NGOs from Darfur, gravely imperiling the population there.
The AU has called for the ICC to suspend all ICC proceedings relating to Darfur, and the Arab League has condemned the indictment of al-Bashir.
The United States and the major European countries support efforts to bring members of the Sudanese government to justice.
And while Russia and China have suggested revoking ICC authority to prosecute cases related to Darfur, the United States, France, or Britain could use their Security Council vetoes to stop such an effort.
Supporters of the ICC have argued that Darfur represents a crucial case for the future of the legitimacy of the Court.
This case will set important precedents as to the power of this relatively new body.
SCENARIO Imag ine that the Chinese government approaches you and asks you to suspend the indictment of al-Bashir.
In return, China agrees to press Sudan to both end violence in Darfur and allow more peacekeepers to be deployed there.
China has no direct control over Sudan, however, so China's promises may bring little change in behavior on the part of Sudan.
On the other hand, China does have some pull with the Sudanese leadership.
The United States and its allies would be likely to support such a move if it resulted in a stable cease-fire.
For example, the principle of free passage on the open seas is now formally established in international law.
But at one time warships from one state did not hesitate to seize the ships of other states and make off with their cargoes.
This practice was profitable to the state that pulled off such raids, but of course, their own ships could be raided in return.
Such behavior made long-distance trade itself more dangerous, less predictable, and less profitable.
So, over time, a norm developed around the concept of freedom of navigation on the high seas.
It became one of the first areas of international law developed by the Dutch legal scholar Hugo Grotius in the mid-1600s—a time when the Dutch dominated world trade and could benefit most from free navigation.
Dutch power, then, provided the backbone for the international legal concept of freedom of the seas.
Later, when Britain was dominant, it enforced the principle of free seas through the cannons of its warships.
As the world’s main trading state, Britain benefited from a worldwide norm of free shipping and trade.
And with the world’s most powerful navy, it was in a position to define and enforce the rules for the world’s oceans.
But in truth the world is too large for any single state—even a hegemon—to police effectively.
Rather, the world’s states usually go along with the rules established by the most powerful state without constant policing.
In this way, although states do not yield their sovereignty, they vest some power and authority in international institutions and laws and generally work within that framework.
New expectations are emerging in such areas as human rights, UN peacekeeping, humanitarian interventions, Russia’s and China’s roles as great powers, and the United States role as a superpower.
However, core norms and stable institutions shape international political economy—the subject of the remaining chapters of this book— with more stability than in international security.
We return to the pinnacle of international organization, the EU, in Chapter 10.
These rules operate through institutions , with the UN at the center of the institutional network.
In part because of its deference to state sovereignty, the UN has attracted virtually universal membership of the world’s states, including all the great powers.
The five permanent members of the Security Council are the United States, France, Great Britain, China, and Russia.
Their main role is to monitor compliance with agreements such as cease-fires, disarmament plans, and fair election rules.
They were scaled back dramatically in 1995— 1997, then grew rapidly since 1998.
Sometimes national troops operate under their own flag and command to carry out UN resolutions.
It is an increasingly useful avenue for arbitrating relatively minor conflicts.
Taking over from two UN tribunals, it hears cases of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.
However, human rights law is problematic because it entails interference by one state in another’s internal affairs.
This would reduce state sovereignty a bit and increase supranational authority.
Collective security against aggression depends on states’ willingness to bear the costs of fighting wars to repel and punish aggressors.
Sometimes great powers have been willing to bear such costs; at other times they have not.
Give examples of situations (actual or potential) that would and would not merit the intervention of great powers to reverse aggression.
Although international norms concerning human rights are becoming stronger, China and many other states continue to consider human rights an internal affair over which the state has sovereignty within its territory.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview Since the adoption of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights over 60 years ago, states have been committed to advancing human rights.
Seven different UN treaties, signed by the majority of the world's states, guarantee the protection and advancement of human rights in several areas including the rights of women, the rights ofthe child, the rights of migrant workers, and protection from torture.
Numerous other regional treaties and protocols promote economic well-being, protect dueprocess rights, and endorse self-determination.
State leaders consistently tout the importance of human rights in promoting fairness, justice, and equality.
In rhetoric, the importance of promoting and protecting human rights does seem universal.
Yet, violations of all of these treaties still occur and indeed, at times, seem commonplace.
No matterthe scale ofthe violations, all show a brazen disregard for the importance of human rights.
States Make Few Efforts to Promote and Protect Human Rights Most UN treaties concerning human rights are not enforced.
The core UN human rights treaties have little, if any, enforcement attached to them.
In fact, some of the worst violators of human rights are often the first to sign these documents because they know there will be no enforcement of the rules.
When push comes to shove, states will ignore human rights abuses to achieve other political goals.
Whether it is the United States ignoring political repression in China, China ignoring genocide in Sudan, or South Africa ignoring a crackdown in Zimbabwe, states of all types will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses if it serves their purposes.
When attention is paid to human rights violations, it is done so unevenly.
More often than not, violations are brought to light only against states that are considered enemies or politically unimportant.
Meanwhile, similar violations are ignored in allied or politically powerful states.
ARGUMENT 2 States Do Help to Promote Human Rights Emerging norms of democracy are promoting human rights.
The growing number of democratic countries around the globe is serving to increase respect for human rights.
Many Western countries have expanded their support for young democracies, which will help human rights worldwide.
NGOs such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch continue to provide information to states and their citizens concerning human rights abuses.
While states do not act on all of these instances, they do respond to some of these grassroots efforts to improve global respect for human rights.
NGOs are thus important agents for states wanting to advance the cause of human rights.
Many states are beginning to condition foreign aid and free trade policies on human rights behavior.
The European Union requires all signatories to trade agreements to abide by certain human rights standards, while the United States requires all free trade partners to acknowledge workers' and children's rights.
These requirements, embedded in economically important treaties, are more likely to be enforced.
About $19 trillion of goods and services cross international borders each year.
The great volume of international trade reflects the fact that trade is profitable.
The role of trade in the economy varies somewhat from one nation to another, but overall, it is at least as important in the global South as in the industrialized North.
It crosses statedefined borders, is regulated by states that are pressured by interest groups, and occurs within trade regimes maintained by and negotiated among states.
Most scholars of IPE focus on the industrialized regions of the world, where most of the world’s economic activity occurs.
Although these issues overlap with international security matters, they all deal primarily with political bargaining over economic issues and thus fit within IPE broadly defined.
States are the most important actors in IPE, but are not as important as in international security.
Actors in IPE, as in security affairs, tend to act in their own interests.
Murphy, Craig N International Organization and Industrial Change, Global Governance Since 1850.
You Are a Trade Expert"" at MyPoliSciLab create a framework for mutual gains.
In addition, mercantilism holds that the importance of economic transactions lies in their implications for the military.
States worry about relative wealth and trade because these can be translated directly into military power.
Thus, although military power is generally not useful in economic negotiations, mercantilists believe that the outcome of economic negotiations matters for military power.
It matters little to liberals whether one state gains more or less than another—just whether the state’s wealth is increasing in absolute terms.
Liberalism and mercantilism are theories of economics and also ideologies that shape state policies.
Marxist approaches are attuned to economic exploitation as a force that shapes political relations.
We will explore Marxist theories in depth in Chapter 12, as they find their greatest explanatory power in North-South relations.
Most international economic exchanges contain some element of mutual interests—joint gains that can be realized through cooperation—and some element of conflicting interests.
For example, in the game of Chicken , the two drivers share an interest in avoiding a head-on collision, yet their interests diverge in that one can be a hero only if the other is a chicken.
Liberalism emphasizes the shared interests in economic exchanges, whereas mercantilism emphasizes the conflicting interests.
The terms of an exchange are defined by the price at which goods are traded.
Often the bargaining space —the difference between the lowest price a seller would accept and the highest price a buyer would pay—is quite large.
For example, Saudi Arabia would be willing to sell a barrel of oil (if it had no better option) for as little as, say, $10 a barrel, and industrialized countries are willing to pay more than $100 a barrel for the oil.
Joint benefits are maximized at the Pareto-optimal frontier, but the distribution of those benefits, as between points B and C , is a matterfor bargaining.
Liberalism is more concerned with joint benefits, mercantilism more with the relative distribution.
When there are multiple buyers and sellers of a good (or equivalent goods that can be n substituted for it), prices are determined by market competition/ In practice, free markets are supposed to produce stable patterns of buying and selling at a fairly uniform price.
At this market price, sellers know that an effort to raise the price would drive the buyer to seek another seller, and buyers know that an effort to lower the price would drive the seller to seek another buyer.
Thus, in liberal economics, bilateral relations between states are less important than they are in security affairs.
For example, United States sanctions on Iran, a major oil exporter, invited European companies to fill the void in recent years.
In IPE, then, power is more diffuse and involves more actors at once than in international security.
Buyers vary in the value they place on an item ; if the price rises, fewer people are willing to buy it, and if the price drops, more people are willing to buy it.
If the price rises, more sellers are willing to supply the item to buyers; if the price drops, fewer sellers are willing to supply the item.
In a free market, the price at which the supply and demand curves cross is the equilibrium price.
At this price, sellers are willing to supply the same number of units that buyers are willing to purchase.
The supply and demand system does not always produce stability, however.
The price of a barrel of oil has fluctuated radically over recent years.
Each time world economic growth accelerates, demand for oil rises and so does its price.
But each time oil prices spike up, Western economies go into recession because high prices for this key commodity undermine the whole economy.
The amount of economic activity may vary by only 5 or 10 percent, but the price of oil doubles or triples, then drops in half.
The most recent case of this cycle, in 2007-2008, saw spectacular, unprecedented (and unsustainable) increases in oil prices from around $70 a barrel to $140 a barrel, driven by new demand in fast-growing Asian economies, among other factors.
The world economy then entered a spectacular, unprecedented recession, and oil prices dropped in just a few months back to $40 a barrel.
This kind of instability in the price of a key commodity is terrible for the world economy, and creates a big incentive for governments to take political actions rather than rely entirely on market forces.
Politics, in this view, should serve the interests of economic efficiency.
Because of the benefits of free trade among countries, liberals disdain realists’ obsession with international borders, because borders constrain the maximum efficiency of exchange.
Trade-based wealth depends on international political cooperation, and violence usually does not work well in pursuing such wealth.
Because power is relative, trade is desirable only when the distribution of benefits favors one’s own state over rivals.
The terms of exchange shape the relative rates at which states accumulate power and thus shape the way power distributions in the international system change over time.
Mercantilism achieved prominence several hundred years ago, and Britain used trade to rise in relative power in the international system around the 18th century.
At that time mercantilism meant specifically the creation of a trade surplus in order to stockpile money in the form of precious metal , which could then be used to buy military capabilities in time of war.
It returned as a major approach in the period between World War I and World War II, when liberal global trading relations broke down.
With the global recession in 2009, world leaders eyed each other warily to see if mercantilism would again make a comeback.
China's Growing Trade Surplus Mercantilists’ preferred means of making trade serve a state’s political interests— even at the cost of some lost wealth that free markets might have created—is to create a favorable balance of trade.
The balance of trade is the value of a state’s imports relative to its exports.
A state that exports more than it imports has a positive balance of trade, or trade surplus.
China has run a large trade surplus for years, passing $250 billion per year.
Since the late 1990s, the United States trade deficit has grown steadily to hundreds of billions of dollars per year, approaching $1 trillion, with about a quarter accounted for by China and another quarter by oil imports.
It is tracked financially through the system of national accounts In the short term, a state can trade for a few years at a deficit and then a few years at a surplus.
In recent years, to balance its trade deficit, the United States has “exported” currency to China, Japan, Europe, and other countries, which use the dollars to buy such things as shares of United States companies, United States Treasury bills, or United States real estate.
Economists worry that if foreigners lose their taste for investments in the United States, the United States economy could suffer.
This is one reason why mercantilists favor national economic policies to create a trade surplus.
Balance of Trade Reserves with a crisis or fight a war, the state sits on a pile of money representing potential power.
Such a strategy is attuned to realism’s emphasis on relative power and is an example of the dominance principle.
States differ in their abilities to produce certain goods because of differences in natural resources, labor force characteristics, technology, and other such factors.
In order to maximize the overall creation of wealth, each state should specialize in producing the goods for which it has a comparative advantage and then trade for goods that another state produces best.
Of course, the costs of transportation and of processing the information in the trade must be included in the costs of producing an item.
But increasingly, as globalization proceeds, both of these are low relative to the differences in the cost of producing items in different locations.
It is much cheaper to produce oil in Saudi Arabia than in Japan, and much cheaper to produce cars in Japan than in Saudi Arabia.
A state need not have an absolute advantage (that is, be the most efficient producer in the world) in producing one kind of good in order to make specialization pay.
It need only specialize in producing goods that are relatively lower in cost than other goods.
Imagine that Japan discovered a way to produce synthetic oil using the same mix of labor and capital that it now uses to produce cars, and that this synthetic oil could be produced a bit more cheaply than what it costs Saudi Arabia to produce oil, but that Japan could still produce cars much more cheaply than Saudi Arabia.
It might seem intuitive that Japan should produce synthetic oil rather than pay extra for Saudi oil.
The extra profits Japan would make from exporting more cars would more than compensate for the slightly higher price it would pay to import oil.
Free trade allocates global resources to states that have the greatest comparative advantage in producing each kind of commodity.
As a result, prices are both lower overall and more consistent worldwide.
The economic benefits of trade, however, come with some political drawbacks.
When a state begins to import goods that it had been producing domestically, its economy may be disrupted; workers may need to retrain and find new jobs, and capital may not be easy to convert to new uses.
For example, if a United States manufacturing company moves its factory to Mexico to take advantage of cheaper labor there and exports its goods back to the United States, the workers at the old United States factory lose their jobs, but United States consumers enjoy cheaper goods.
The costs of such a move fall heavily on a few workers, but the benefits are spread thinly across many consumers.
By the same logic, protectionist measures benefit a few people greatly, and cost many people a bit.
By one estimate, a 20 percent steel tariff enacted by the Bush administration in 2002-2003 cost consumers $7 billion and saved 7,300 United States jobs—a pricey $326,000 per job. iJ Yet those 7,300 workers benefit greatly, whereas the roughly $20 cost per United States citizen goes unnoticed.
This kind of unequal distribution of costs and benefits often creates political problems for free trade even when the overall economic benefits outweigh the costs.
Political Interference in Markets A free and efficient market requires many buyers and sellers with fairly complete information about the market.
Also, the willingness of participants to deal with each other should not be distorted by personal preferences but should be governed only by price and quality considerations.
Deviations from these conditions, called market imperfections , reduce efficiency.
Most political intrusions into economic transactions are market imperfections.
United States Trade Panel Backs Putting Hefty Duties on Imported Steel.
No world government owns industries, provides subsidies, or regulates prices.
When states are the principal actors in international economic affairs, the number of participants is often small.
When there is just one supplier of an item—a monopoly —the supplier can set the price quite high.
For example, the South African company De Beers produces 40 percent of the world supply and controls two-thirds of the world market for uncut diamonds.
An oligopoly is a monopoly shared by just a few large sellers—often allowing for tacit or explicit coordination to force the price up.
For example, OPEC members agree to limit oil production to keep prices up.
To the extent that companies band together along national lines, monopolies and oligopolies are more likely.
Another common market imperfection in international trade is corruption; individuals may receive payoffs to trade at nonmarket prices.
Politics provides a legal framework for markets—ensuring that participants keep their commitments, contracts are binding, buyers pay for goods they purchase, counterfeit money is not used, and so forth.
In the international economy, lacking a central government authority, rules are less easily enforced.
Taxes are used both to generate revenue for the government and to regulate economic activity by incentives.
For instance, a government may keep taxes low on foreign companies in hopes of attracting them to locate and invest in the country.
Sanctions Political interference in free markets is most explicit when governments apply sanctions against economic interactions of certain kinds or between certain actors.
Political power then prohibits an economic exchange that would otherwise have been mutually beneficial.
In 2011, the United States had trade restrictions on 15 states in response to those states’ political actions, such as human rights violations.
Enforcing sanctions is always a difficult task, because participants have a financial incentive to break the sanctions through black markets or other means.
Without broad, multilateral support for international sanctions, they generally fail.
For instance, in 2012, India—Iran’s top oil customer—sent a trade delegation to Iran to take advantage of openings created by Western sanctions.
The difficulty of applying sanctions reflects a more general point made earlier—that power in IPE is more diffused among states than it is in security affairs.
In the case of Iran, it took quite a few years to get European and other major powers on board with the United States to apply sanctions that hurt Iran’s economy.
A self-reliant state pays a very high cost to produce goods for which it does not have a comparative advantage.
As other states cooperate among themselves to maximize their joint creation of wealth, the relative power of the autarkic state in the international system tends to fall.
States that have relied on a policy of autarky have indeed lagged behind others.
A classic case in recent decades was the small SANCTIONS BITE state of Albania in southeast Europe.
A communist state that split from both the Soviet Union and China, Albania for decades did not participate in world markets but relied on a centrally planned economy designed for self-sufficiency.
Few foreigners could visit, little trade took place, and Albania pursued autarky to prevent outsiders from gaining power over it.
When this curtain of isolation finally fell in 1991, Albania was as poor as decades earlier and had missed out on the prosperity that came to the rest of Europe.
China’s economic isolation in the 1950s and 1960s, resulting from an economic embargo imposed by the United States and its allies, deepened during its Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s when it broke ties with the Soviet Union as well.
When China opened up to the world economy in the 1980s, the pattern reversed.
The rapid expansion of trade, along with some market-oriented reforms in its domestic economy, resulted in rapid economic growth.
By contrast, North Korea maintained a policy of self-reliance and isolation even after the Cold War, and experienced mass starvation in the 1990s.
Economic sanctions, such as the current international restrictions on trade and business with Iran, are among the most obvious ways that politics interferes in markets.
Sanctions are hard to enforce, especially when not all countries participate, because doing business is profitable.
Once Europe and the United States coordinated tough sanctions on Iran, they caused major economic disruption there, triggering a decline in Iran's currency by about half.
Protectionism Although few states pursue strategies of autarky, many states try to manipulate international trade to strengthen one or more domestic industries and shelter them from world markets.
Such policies are broadly known as protectionism—protection of domestic industries from international competition.
Although this term encompasses a variety of trade policies arising from various motivations, all are contrary to liberalism in that they seek to distort free markets to gain an advantage for the state (or for substate actors within it), generally by discouraging imports of competing goods or services.
Often governments simply cater to the political demands of important domestic industries and interests, regardless of the overall national interest.
States often attempt to protect an infant industry as it starts up in the state for the first time, until it can compete on world markets.
For instance, when South Korea first developed an automobile industry, it was not yet competitive with imports, so the government gave consumers incentives to buy Korean cars.
Eventually the industry developed and could compete with foreign producers and even export cars profitably.
In a number of poor states, the textile trade has been a favored infant industry (adding value without heavy capital requirements) that governments have protected.
Protection of infant industry is considered a relatively legitimate reason for protectionism.
Another motivation for protection is to give a domestic industry breathing room when market conditions shift or new competitors arrive on the scene.
Sometimes domestic industry requires time to adapt and can emerge a few years later in a healthy condition.
When gas prices jumped in the 1970s, United States auto producers were slow to shift to smaller cars, and smaller Japanese cars gained a great advantage in the United States market.
The United States government used a variety of measures, including import quotas and loan guarantees, to help the United States industry through this transition.
Government also protects industries considered vital to national security.
In the 1980s, United States officials sought to protect the United States electronics and computer industries against being driven out of business by Japanese competitors, because those industries were considered crucial to military production.
Autarky may not pay in most economic activities, but for military goods, states will sacrifice some economic efficiency for the sake of self-sufficiency, to reduce vulnerability in the event of war.
Protectionism uses various means to keep foreign imports from competing with domestic products.
Agricultural producers in the global South complain that subsidies and other protectionist measures in Europe and the United States prevent poor farmers in developing countries from exporting to world markets.
Most often these efforts entail dumping products in foreign markets at prices below the minimum level necessary to make a profit.
Within a domestic economy, the government can use antitrust laws to break up an impending monopoly, but because no such mechanism exists in IR, governments try to restrict imports in such situations to protect their state’s industries.
Such restrictions are recognized as legitimate, although great disagreements exist about whether a given price level is predatory or merely competitive.
Dumping complaints are usually lodged by particular industries that feel they have been harmed by foreign competitors.
They must first convince their own governments that they have been unfairly targeted.
In 2007, the WTO ruled against the United States in a complaint brought by Japanese manufacturers who claimed they had been unfairly accused of dumping industrial goods on the American market.
Ironically, rather than denying that Japan had dumped goods on the American market, the WTO criticized how the United States had computed the tariff on Japanese goods, ruling that it was set too high to create a level playing field.
The United States was then forced to review how it proceeds with dumping complaints because of the WTO ruling.
Just as there are several motivations for protectionism, so too governments use several tools to implement this policy.
The simplest is a tariff or duty —a tax imposed on certain types of imported goods as they enter the country.
Tariffs not only restrict imports but also can be an important source of state revenues.
Most states maintain a long and complex schedule of tariffs based on thousands of categories and subcategories of goods organized by industry.
Quotas are ceilings on how many goods of a certain kind can be imported; they are imposed to restrict the growth of such imports.
The United States government used quotas to restrict the number of Japanese-made cars that could enter the United States in the 1980s, when the United States automobile industry was losing ground rapidly to Japanese imports.
Most of those quotas were voluntary in that Japan and the United States negotiated a level that both could live with.
The two nontariff barriers that are the most fought about in the WTO are subsidies and regulation.
Subsidies are payments by a government to a domestic industry that allow it to lower its prices without losing money.
Such subsidies are extensive in, but not limited to, state-owned industries.
Subsidies to an industry struggling to get established or facing strong foreign competition include tax breaks, loans on favorable terms, and high guaranteed prices paid by governments.
Subsidies to farmers have been the major sticking point between rich and poor countries in the Doha Round trade talks.
In 2010, the United States and Brazil settled a WTO case over American subsidies to cotton growers.
Prior to the settlement, Brazil was set to begin imposing nearly $830 million in sanctions against the United States.
Subsidies outside the agricultural sector can also be sensitive politically.
Thus, subsidies have moved from an issue in trade policy to the security area as well.
Imports can also be restricted by restrictions and regulations that make it hard to distribute and market a product even when it can be imported.
In marketing United States products in Japan, United States manufacturers complain of complex bureaucratic regulations and a tight system of corporate alliances funneling the supply of parts from Japanese suppliers to Japanese manufacturers.
Environmental and labor regulations can function as nontariff barriers as well.
This has caused great controversy in the WTO , such as when Europe banned genetically modified crops that happened to come mostly from the United States.
Finally, when a state nationalizes an entire industry, such as oil production or banking, foreign competition is shut out.
Sometimes a country’s culture, rather than state action, discourages imports.
For example, United States citizens sometimes ignore the advice of liberal economists to buy the best products at the best price, and instead “buy American” even if it means paying more for an equivalent product.
Although such a bias reduces the overall efficiency of world production, it does benefit United States workers.
Protectionism has both positive and negative effects on an economy, most often helping producers but hurting consumers.
Another problem with protectionism is that domestic industry may use protection to avoid needed improvements and may therefore remain inefficient and uncompetitive—especially if protection continues over many years.
Still, temporary protectionism can have a stabilizing effect under certain conditions.
When United States motorcycle manufacturer Harley-Davidson lost half its United States market share in just four years, the United States government imposed tariffs on imported Japanese motorcycles.
The tariffs started at 45 percent in 1983 and were to decline each year for five years and then be eliminated.
With the clock running, Harley scrambled to improve efficiency and raise quality.
As a result, Harley regained its market share, and the tariffs were lifted a year early.
In the late 1980s, a reinvigorated Harley expanded its market share and began exporting to Japan.
Protectionism worked in this case because it was short term and straightforward.
The World Trade Organization The World Trade Organization is a global, multilateral IGO that promotes, monitors, and adjudicates international trade.
The WTO is the successor organization to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , which was created in 1947 to facilitate freer trade on a multilateral basis.
The GATT was more of a negotiating framework than an administrative institution.
Before the GATT, proposals for a stronger institutional agency had been rejected because of United States fears that overregulation would stifle free trade.
In addition to its main role as a negotiating forum, the GATT helped arbitrate trade disputes, clarifying the rules and helping states observe them.
In 1995, the GATT became the WTO, which incorporated the GATT agreements on manufactured goods and extended the agenda to include trade in services and intellectual property.
The WTO has some powers of enforcement and an international bureaucracy that monitors trade policies and practices in each member state and adjudicates disputes among members.
The WTO wields some power over states, but as with most international institutions, this power is limited.
An ongoing public backlash against free trade reflects uneasiness about the potential power of a foreign and secretive organization to force changes in democratically enacted national laws.
But the WTO is the central international institution governing trade and therefore one that almost all countries want to participate in and develop.
More than 25 states are seeking admission, the most important of which are Iran and Iraq.
The United States and other countries usually demand, as a condition of membership, liberalization of the trading practices of would-be members.
The WTO framework rests on the principle of reciprocity—matching states’ lowering of trade barriers to one another.
It also uses the concept of nondiscrimination, embodied in the most-favored nation concept, which says that trade restrictions imposed by a WTO member on its most-favored trading partner must be applied equally to all WTO members.
If Australia applies a 20 percent tariff on auto parts imported from France, it must not apply a 40 percent tariff on auto parts imported from the United States.
Thus, the WTO does not get rid of barriers to trade altogether but equalizes them in a global framework to create a level playing field for all member states.
States are not prevented from protecting their own industries but cannot play favorites among their trading partners.
An exception to the MFN system is the Generalized System of Preferences , dating from the 1970s, by which rich states give trade concessions to poor ones to help their economic development.
These detailed and complex agreements specify commitments to lower certain trade barriers by certain 18 Hoekman, Bernard, and Michel Kostecki.
Almost every commitment entails domestic political costs, because domestic industries lose protection against foreign competition.
Even when other states agree to make similar commitments in other areas, lowering trade barriers is often hard for national governments.
Among the five rounds of GATT negotiations from 1947 to 1995, the Kennedy Round in the 1960s—so called because it started during the Kennedy administration—paid special attention to the growing role of European integration, which the United States found somewhat threatening.
The Tokyo Round in the 1970s had to adjust rules to new conditions of world interdependence when, for instance, OPEC raised oil prices and Japan began to dominate the automobile export business.
A successful conclusion to the round would add more than $100 billion to the world economy annually.
But that money was a collective good, to be enjoyed both by states that made concessions in the final negotiations and by states that did not.
Agreement was finally reached in late 1994The United States had pressured Europe to reduce agricultural subsidies and states in the global South to protect intellectual property rights.
In the end, the United States got some, but not all, of what it wanted.
For example, France held out adamantly and won the right to protect its film industry against United States films.
From 1947, the GATT encouraged states to use import tariffs rather than nontariff barriers to protect industries, and to lower those tariffs over time.
Agricultural trade is politically more sensitive than trade in manufactured goods (see 138) and came into play only in the Uruguay Round.
Such trade exceeded onefifth of the total value of world trade in 2012.
In 1997, 70 states negotiating through the WTO agreed on a treaty to allow telecommunications companies to enter each other’s markets.
The problems in expanding into these and other sensitive areas became obvious at a 1999 Seattle WTO conference, where trade ministers had hoped to launch a new, postUruguay round of trade negotiations.
Environmental and labor activists, joined by window-smashing anarchists, staged street protests that delayed the conference opening by a day.
Recovering from Seattle, in 2001 trade ministers meeting in Doha, Qatar, agreed to launch a new round of trade negotiations, the Doha Round.
At the 2003 meeting in Cancun, Mexico, states from the global South walked out after the shutting out poor countries’ agricultural exports.
At the 2005 Hong Kong meeting, wealthy states agreed to end the export subsidies, but tough negotiations continued over tariffs on manufactured goods, protection of intellectual property, and opening financial sectors.
The main obstacle remains the resistance of the industrialized West to cut agricultural subsidies as demanded by countries in the global South, In explaining the difficulty in wrapping up a major trade agreement such as the Doha Round, game theorists might look to the game of Chicken as an explanatory model.
In most trade disputes, each state would rather get to a deal, even on terms that somewhat favor the other state if need be.
Similarly, in a game of Chicken, each player wants to avoid a head-on collision, and being a hero or a chicken is a secondary consideration.
In trade negotiations, both states hold out for their own terms for as long as possible, then come to agreement only when faced with an imminent collision—the expiration of a deadline beyond which there will be no deal at all.
In Chicken, there is no incentive to give ground before the last minute.
The Doha Round of WTO negotiations stretched from 2001 to 2013 without conclusion.
In 2007, participants tried to use a key deadline—expiration of the United States Congress’s fast-track authorization, after which United States approval of a new WTO agreement would become difficult—to inspire a final agreement.
For instance, before the November 2008 summit in Washington, D.C., that grappled with a growing financial crisis, some leaders suggested just wrapping up the Doha Round over that weekend, before the change in United States administrations.
As each such deadline passed, it became harder to believe that the next deadline was real, that the head-on collision loomed if states did not “swerve” in time.
One drawback of the model, however, is that it does not predict the outcomes, because the game is inherently unstable.
A conference of trade ministers in December 2005 tried to regain momentum for the stalled Doha Round, with mixed success.
Here, WTO head Pascal Lamy opens the conference with the tool he hopes will bring success—a magic wand.
States try to change the rules in their favor during negotiations and between rounds they may evade the rules in minor ways.
But the overall benefits are too great to jeopardize by nonparticipation or frequent trade wars.
Bilateral and Regional Agreements Although the WTO provides an overall framework for multilateral trade in a worldwide market, most international trade also takes place under more specific international political agreements—bilateral trade agreements and regional free trade areas.
Bilateral Agreements Bilateral treaties covering trade are reciprocal arrangements to lower barriers to trade between two states.
A sweeping agreement, such as that between Canada and India in 2007, generally contains mind-numbing levels of detail concerning specific industries and products.
As with most agreements based on the reciprocity principle, trade treaties involve great complexity and constant monitoring.
United States free trade deals with South Korea, Panama, and Colombia took effect in 2011.
A Doha Round WTO Agreement BACKGROUND: Over the decades, the world has substantially lowered trade barriers and enjoyed rising prosperity as a result of trade.
Negotiating through the World Trade Organization , countries have concluded successive “rounds” of trade agreements, in which each state reciprocates the concessions of other states.
These negotiations require every single member—almost all the world’s major trading powers—to agree before any can enjoy the benefits of an agreement.
A new WTO agreement is a collective good because all the member states profit from relaxing trade restrictions regardless of which of them made the concessions needed to reach a deal.
For example, in the previous Uruguay Round, the entire deal was held up while France and the United States fought about French restrictions on United States films.
Whether France or the United States hung tough to win on this issue, both would benefit overall from the deal.
But if both hung tough, the entire deal would break down and the collective good would not be provided.
They have the advantages of reducing the collective goods problem inherent in mub 'l 1 tilateral negotiations and facilitating reciprocity as a means to achieve cooperation/ When WTO negotiations bog down, bilateral agreements can keep trade momentum going.
Because most states do most of their trading with a few partners, a few bilateral agreements can go a long way in structuring a state’s trade relations.
The number of bilateral agreements has grown substantially in the past decade and their numbers far overwhelm all other types of agreements combined.
Free Trade Areas Regional free trade areas also matter in the structure of world trade.
In such areas, groups of neighboring states agree to remove most or all trade barriers within their area.
Beyond free trade areas, states may reduce trade barriers and adopt a common tariff toward states that are not members of the agreement.
If members of a customs union decide to coordinate other policies such as monetary exchange, the customs union becomes a common market.
The creation of a regional trade agreement allows a group of states to cooperate in increasing their wealth without waiting for the rest of the world.
The most important free trade area is in Europe; it is connected with the European Union but has a somewhat larger membership.
Until the participants find agreement on these pesky remaining issues, nobody can enjoy the economic boost that a new WTO agreement will bring. tl Only reciprocity can solve this dilemma.
And the entire structure of world trade relies on the formal equality of all participants, so dominance does not play a major role.
Certainly, military force cannot resolve trade disputes as it might have done centuries ago.
Consistent with reciprocity solutions generally, trade agreements have great complexity, fine-level detail, and considerable effort to monitor compliance.
The United States, Canada, and Mexico signed the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994, following a U.S.-Canadian free trade agreement in 1988.
Initially, Mexico’s currency dropped drastically relative to the dollar in 1994-1995.
United States opponents of NAFTA, including various United States labor unions, criticized the low wages and poor labor laws in Mexico, which they feared would drag down United States labor standards.
But over 15 years, neither the great benefits predicted by NAFTA supporters nor the disasters predicted by opponents materialized.
To empower him to do so, President Clinton asked Congress in 1997 to reinstate fast-track legislation.
But Democrats in Congress defeated the measure, demanding that free trade agreements include requirements for labor and environmental standards for other countries—points on which they found NAFTA’s record wanting.
President Bush had more success winning fast-track authority from Congress, and FTAA negotiations began in 2003 with a target date of 2005.
The 2001 recession and post-September 11 security measures reduced trade; China provided United States companies with a better source of cheap labor; and left-leaning governments, wary of liberal economic advice, came to power in most of the Latin American countries.
Those countries cared most about tariff-free trade, while the United States position emphasized a range of other issues such as services, intellectual property, and financial openness.
In late 2005, trade talks failed at a summit meeting in Argentina, where one participant, Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez, led a 25,000-person anti-American rally in the streets.
Currently, the FTAA talks remain in hibernation, and the weight of trade negotiations fall to the Doha Round.
Meanwhile, however, the United States reached free trade agreements with several Latin American countries.
Efforts to create a free trade area in Asia began in the late 1980s but moved slowly.
Unlike the European and North American arrangements, an Asian bloc would include very different kinds of states—rich ones such as Japan; poor ones such as the Philippines; and democracies, dictatorships, and communist states.
But despite these problems, in 2007 the ten ASEAN countries met with China, Japan, India, Australia, and New Zealand to begin negotiating an East Asian free trade area.
The group, unlike some other Asia-Pacific IGOs, does not include the United States, but it does include half the world’s population and some of its most dynamic economies.
You were recently elected and are expected to continue the policies of your predecessor.
Brazil is now the tenth-largest economy in the world and in 2010, growth was around 5 percent, up from -0. percent in 2003.
Your country's export-led growth strategy is an important piece of this economic picture.
Exports to industrialized countries are at an all-time high, and in 2005, you ran a current account surplus for the first time since 1992.
The United States, Argentina, China, the Netherlands, and Germany are your key export partners.
The United States alone accounts for 11 percent of your exports and about 16 percent of your imports.
EU states combine to account for more than 23 percent of your exports, but far less of your imports.
You have been pressured extensively by the United States to join a Free Trade Area of the Americas , but have refused to do so.
Your goal for the FTAA is that developed countries lower their agricultural subsidies and increase their quotas for Brazilian farm products.
To date, America has largely turned down your demands in the agricultural realm.
Given United States bargaining power, this may be a difficult concession to extract in future negotiations.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Domestically, you are being pressured to ensure continued market access for your industrial and agricultural products in international markets.
You recently pushed to bring several other Latin American states into Mercosur as associate members to hedge your bets against a collapse in the FTAA negotiations.
Unfortunately, you cannot rely on your Mercosur partners alone to absorb your export production.
For example, your three full partners in Mercosur (Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay) have a combined total GDP smaller than Canada's.
SCENARIO Now imagine that the EU offers a free trade agreement with better terms (especially concerning agricultural goods) than a potential FTAA agreement.
Because several EU states are key trading partners, this is an attractive offer.
In order for your exports to continue to grow, your market opportunities must expand.
This would provide such an opportunity while satisfying those exportoriented industries.
If the United States then completed an FTAA without you, this would be costly to your economy because any similar goods produced by your neighbors would have preferential access to United States markets, making them more attractive than Brazilian goods to United States businesses and consumers.
After the Soviet Union collapsed, the members scrambled to join up with the world economy.
It was previously a free trade zone by virtue of being part of a single state with integrated transportation, communication, and other infrastructure links.
The Southern Cone Common Market began in the early 1990s with Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, and Paraguay, which opposed letting Venezuela in.
After Paraguay’s president was hastily impeached in 2012, Brazil engineered Paraguay’s suspension from Mercosur for ten months, during which Venezuela was admitted.
Chile, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru have joined as associate members.
Mercosur members trade more with the United States than they do with each other, but played a leading role in blocking a proposed free trade area of North and South America.
A Caribbean common market was created in 1973, but the area is neither large nor rich enough to make regional free trade a very important accelerator of economic growth.
In 1969, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia created a group now known as the Andean Community of Nations, which had modest successes and counts the Mercosur members as associate members.
Finally, in 2008, a single continent-wide Union of South American Nations began taking shape, to merge Mercosur and the Andean Community in an effort to follow the example of the European Union.
If regional free trade areas such as now exist in Europe and in North America gain strength and new ones arise, the WTO may be weakened.
Furthermore, the overlap of WTO rules and regional agreements can create confusion/^ For example, in 2006, a WTO panel upheld United States duties on Canadian softwood lumber while a NAFTA panel overturned the duties and ordered refunds to Canada.
Ultimately, regional agreements might divide the world into three competing trading blocs, each internally integrated but not very open to the other two blocs.
Regional free trade areas in Europe and the Americas, and perhaps in Asia in the future, raise the possibility of trading zones practicing liberalism inwardly and mercantilism outwardly.
Cartels A cartel is an association of producers or consumers, or both, of a certain product—formed to manipulate its price on the world market.
Most often producers and not consumers form cartels, because there are usually fewer producers than consumers, and it seems possible for them to coordinate to keep prices high.
Cartels can use a variety of means to affect prices; the most effective is to coordinate limits on production by each member so as to lower the supply, relative to demand, of the good.
At OPEC’s peak of strength in the 1970s, the proportion was even higher.
OPEC maintains a headquarters in Vienna, Austria, and holds negotiations several times a year to set quotas for each country’s production of oil in order to keep world oil prices in a target range.
OPEC illustrates the potential that a cartel creates for collective goods problems.
Individual members of OPEC can cheat by exceeding their production quotas while still enjoying the collective good of high oil prices.
OPEC may work as well as it does only because one member, Saudi Arabia, has enough oil to unilaterally manipulate supply enough to drive prices up or down—a form of hegemonic stability within the cartel.
Saudi Arabia can take up the slack from some cheating in OPEC and keep prices up.
Or if too many OPEC members are cheating on their quotas, it can punish them by flooding the market with oil and driving prices down until the other OPEC members collectively come to their senses.
OPEC Members and Oil Production, December 2012 Member State Millions of Barrels/Day Saudi Arabia 9.
Percent of World 40% Ecuador re-joined OPEC in 2007 after suspending its membership in 1992.
Major oil exporters not in OPEC include Russia, Kazakhstan, Mexico, China, Britain, and Norway.
The United States, until several decades ago a major oil exporter, is now a major importer.
However, in response to OPEC, the major oil-importing states formed their own organization, the International Energy Agency , which partly functions as a cartel.
The IEA coordinates the energy policies of major industrialized states—such as the maintenance of oil stockpiles in case of a shortage on world markets—in order to keep world oil prices low and stable.
Considering the importance of oil to the world economy, and the existence of both producer and consumer cartels, the price of oil has been surprisingly unstable, with prices fluctuating from about $20 per barrel in 1998 to over $140 and back to $40 in 2008.
For a few commodities that are subject to large price fluctuations on world markets— detrimental to both producers and consumers—joint producer-consumer cartels have been formed.
In order to keep prices stable, producing and consuming states use the cartel to coordinate the overall supply and demand globally.
Such cartels exist for coffee, several minerals, and some other products.
NGOs introduced Fair Trade Certified coffee, and later chocolate and other products, guaranteeing farmers a price above their production costs through the price booms and busts.
More than a million farmers in 70 countries benefit from these arrangements.
In general, the idea of cartels runs counter to liberal economics because cartels deliberately distort free markets.
Industries that are advanced and competitive in world markets try to influence their governments to adopt free trade policies.
This strategy promotes a global free trade system in which such industries can prosper.
By contrast, industries that lag behind their global competitors tend to seek protection.
Means to influence foreign economic policy include lobbying, forming interest groups, paying bribes, and even encouraging coups.
Actors include industry-sponsored groups, companies, labor unions, and individuals.
Within an industry, such efforts usually work in a common direction because, despite competition among companies and between management and labor, all share common interests regarding the trade policies.
For instance, some United States industries supported the North American Free Trade Agreement ; others opposed it.
In many countries, government not only responds to industry influence, but works actively with industries to promote their growth and tailor trade policy to their needs.
United States labor unions do not want companies to use NAFTA to avoid paying high wages.
However, Mexican American citizens’ groups in the United States tend to support NAFTA because it strengthens ties to relatives in Mexico.
Several industries are particularly important in trade negotiations currently.
Although such security concerns have now faded somewhat, farmers are wellorganized and powerful domestic political actors in Europe, the United States, Japan, and other countries.
For instance, Japanese farmers argue that Japan’s rice-centered culture demands self-sufficiency in rice production.
In the Doha Round of WTO negotiations, agricultural subsidies were a key sticking point.
The talks collapsed in 2003 in Cancun, Mexico, over the subsidies, but were revived the next year by United States promises to cut farm subsidies 20 percent.
At the 2005 Hong Kong talks, wealthy countries agreed to end all farm export subsidies by 2013.
A second important focus in recent years has been the textile and garment sector.
As of 2005, textile quotas worldwide were dropped as a part of previously negotiated WTO deals.
At the same time, China began dominating world clothing exports, with whole cities specializing in one type of garment produced for mass export to giant retailers/ With vast pools of cheap and disciplined labor, China threatened to drive United States textile and clothing producers out of business and give stiff new competition to exporters such as Pakistan and Bangladesh, where textiles make up 70 percent of exports.
Later in 2005, the European Union and the United States each reached bilateral agreements with China to reimpose textile quotas for a few years.
Now, countries such as Vietnam have begun to take textile business away from China by providing even lower production costs.
Intellectual property rights are a third contentious area of trade negotiations.
Intellectual property rights are the rights of creators of books, films, computer software, and similar products to receive royalties when their products are sold.
The United States has a major conflict with some states over piracy of computer software, music, films, and other creative works—products in which the United States has a strong comparative advantage globally.
It is technically easy and cheap to copy such works and sell them in violation of COMPETING WITH BIG CORN Agriculture is at the top of the agenda of international trade negotiations, as developing countries push richer onesto end farm subsidies.
Here, Mexican farmers protest the full opening of Mexico's markets to imported United States corn under NAFTA, 2008.
Because United States laws cannot be enforced in foreign countries, the United States government wants foreign governments to prevent and punish such violations.
Countries that reportedly pirate large amounts of computer software and music and entertainment products include China, Taiwan, India, Thailand, Brazil, and the former Soviet republics.
The Russian government estimated in 2002 that more than 80 percent of films sold in Russia on video and DVD were produced illegally.
Infringement of intellectual property rights is widespread in many third world countries, on products such as DVDs and prescription drugs.
Most states have signed an important 1994 patent treaty and a 1996 copyright treaty.
Most industrialized countries prefer to use TRIPS rules because these rules are stronger than WIPO safeguards and can be relaxed only if all WTO members agree.
The 2001 WTO meeting at Doha led to a declaration that states could exempt certain drugs from TRIPS rules to deal with serious domestic health crises, such as an HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Although procedures were established for these exceptions, only a few developing countries have used them.
For several years these disputes slowed the effective distribution of medicines to millions of Africans with AIDS, though progress picked up after 2004.
Companies trying to protect intellectual property in an international context cannot rely on the same enforcement of rules as in domestic contexts.
Instead, they need to bring their own state’s government to bear, as well as use their own resources.
Because of state sovereignty in legal matters, private international economic conflicts easily become gov27 ernment-to-government issues.
Intellectual property rights have been an important focus of recent trade negotiations.
In many countries, pirated copies of videos, music, and software sell on the street with no royalty payments.
Here, the United States Trade Representative holds a pirated DVD from China as she filed a copyright complaint against China in the World Trade Organization, 2007.
This sector includes many services, especially those concerning information, but the key focus in international trade negotiations is on banking, insurance, and related financial services.
United States companies, and some in Asia, enjoy a comparative advantage in these areas because of their information-processing technologies and experience in financial management.
In general, as telecommunications becomes cheaper and more pervasive, services offered by companies in one country can be efficiently used by consumers in other countries.
United States consumers phoning customer service at United States companies and connecting to India or another English-speaking developing country engage in a longdistance trade in services.
Another especially important industry in international trade is the arms trade, which operates largely outside the framework of normal commercial transactions because of its national security implications.
Governments in industrialized countries want to protect their domestic arms industries rather than rely on imports to meet their weapons needs.
Governments usually participate actively in the military-industrial sector of the economy, even in countries such as the United States that lack industrial policy in other economic sectors.
For example, fighter jets are a product in which the United States enjoys a global comparative advantage.
In the 1990s, the United States arms industry, like the tobacco industry, looked overseas for new customers to offset declining demand at home.
The Middle East has been the leading arms-importing region of the global South, with India and China increasing recently.
A different problem is presented by the “industry” of illicit trade, or smuggling.
No matter what restrictions governments put on trading certain goods, someone is usually willing to risk punishment to make a profit in such trade.
Illegal goods, and legal goods imported illegally, often are sold in black markets—unofficial, sometimes secret markets.
The extent of illicit trade varies from one country and industry to another, depending on profitability and enforcement.
Drugs and weapons are most profitable, and worldwide illegal trade networks exist for both.
International black markets for weapons trade, beyond government controls, are notorious.
A state with enough money can buy— although at premium prices—most kinds of weapons.
If one state protects its industries, or puts tariffs on the goods of other states, or violates the copyright on works produced in other countries, the main resort that other states have is to apply similar measures against the offending state.
The use of reciprocity to enforce equal terms of exchange is especially important in international trade, in which states often negotiate complex agreements—commodity by commodity, industry by industry—based on reciprocity.
Large bureaucracies monitor international economic transactions and develop detailed policies to reciprocate any other state’s deviations from cooperation.
States generally decide which practices of other states they consider unfair and then take retaliatory actions to punish those practices.
However, if the other state does not agree that its practices are unfair, the retaliatory actions may themselves seem unfair and call for retaliation.
To prevent this, states often negotiate agreements regarding what practices they consider unfair.
In some cases, third-party arbitration can also be used to resolve trade disputes.
In addition, some regional trade agreements establish mechanisms to hear and resolve complaints as well.
Retaliation for unfair trade practices usually tries to match the violation in type and extent.
But the retaliatory measures do not necessarily need to stay in the same sector.
For instance, in 2013, Antigua and Barbuda received permission to punish the United States for blocking its online gambling sites, costing the tiny Caribbean country $21 million a year.
The WTO said Antigua and Barbuda could steal $21 million annually in United States intellectual property by, for example, putting movies and TV shows online without paying for United States copyrights.
The political strategy seemed to be to provoke the United States entertainment industry to lobby the government to allow online gambling.
In cases of dumping, retaliation aims to offset the advantage enjoyed from goods imported at prices below the world market.
In 2001, the weakened United States steel industry pleaded for United States government protection from cheap foreign steel, under an antidumping rationale.
Before such tariffs are imposed, a United States government agency, the International Trade Commission , decides whether the low-priced imports have actually hurt the United States industry.
The ITC ruled that United States steelmakers had indeed been hurt, and the United States government imposed 30 percent tariffs in 2002.
But the WTO ruled against the United States in 2003, and gave other countries the right to impose $2 billion in retaliatory tariffs.
By making the cost of tariffs higher than the benefits, the WTO effectively changed United States policy—an indication of the WTO’s growing power.
This example also shows how closely international trade connects with domestic politics.
The efficient operation of markets depends on a stable political framework such as hegemony can provide.
Political power can protect economic exchange from the distorting influences of violent leverage, of unfair or fraudulent trade practices, and of uncertainties of international currency rates.
A hegemon can provide a world currency in which value can be universally calculated.
It can punish the use of violence and can 29 Hansen, Wendy L The International Trade Commission and the Politics of Protectionism.
Because its economy is so large and dominating, the hegemon can threaten to break off trade ties even without resorting to military force.
For example, to be denied access to U.S, markets today would seriously hurt export industries in many states, United States hegemony thus helped create the major norms and institutions of international trade in the post-1945 era.
Now that United States hegemony seems to be giving way to a more multipolar world—especially in economic affairs among the great powers—institutions are even more important for the success of the world trading system.
States have found it worthwhile to expand trade steadily, using a variety of regimes and institutions to do so—the WTO, free trade areas, bilateral agreements, and cartels.
Overall, despite some loss of state sovereignty as a result of growing interdependence, these efforts have benefited participating states.
Stable political rules governing trade allow states to realize the great economic gains that can result from international exchange.
Economic Globalization We introduced the process of globalization in Chapter 1 in general terms, and will now consider some specifically economic aspects of globalization.
The expansion of trade is a central aspect of globalization in the international political economy, but hardly the only one.
Globalization is transforming not only trade but money, business, integration, communication, environmental management, and the economic development of poor countries—the subjects of the remaining chapters of this book.
Today’s accelerating pace of economic activity grows out of a long history of world economic o 1 expansion, which serves as the foundation for globalization.
This accomplishment is due to industrialization— the use of energy to drive machinery and the accumulation of such machinery along with the products created by it.
By around 1850, the wooden sailing ships of earlier centuries had given way to larger and faster coal-powered iron steamships.
Coal-fueled steam engines also drove factories producing textiles and other commodities.
These developments not only increased the volume of world production and trade, but also tied distant locations more closely together economically.
The day trip across France by railroad contrasted with the same route a hundred years earlier, which took three weeks to complete.
In this period of mechanization, however, factory conditions were extremely harsh, especially for women and children operating machines.
Because Britain’s economy was the most technologically advanced in the world, its products were competitive worldwide.
In addition to its central role in world trade, Britain served as the financial capital of the world, managing an increasingly complex world market in goods and services in the 19th century.
The British currency, pounds sterling (silver), became the world standard.
International monetary relations were still based on the value of precious metals, as they had been in the 16th century when Spain bought its armies with Mexican silver and gold.
By the outset of the 20th century, however, the world’s largest and most advanced economy was no longer Britain but the United States.
The industrialization of the United States economy was fueled by territorial expansion throughout the 19th century, adding vast natural resources.
The United States economy attracted huge pools of immigrant labor from Europe as well.
The United States led the world in converting from coal to oil and from horse-drawn transportation to motor vehicles.
New technical innovations, from electricity to airplanes, also helped push the United States economy into a dominant world position.
In the 1930s, the United States and world economies suffered a severe setback in the Great Depression.
The protectionist Smoot-Hawley Act adopted by the United States in 1930, which imposed tariffs on imports, contributed to the severity of the depression by provoking retaliation and reducing world trade.
Following World War II, the capitalist world economy was restructured under United States leadership.
Today’s international economic institutions, such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , date from this period.
The United States provided massive assistance to resuscitate the Western European economies (through the Marshall Plan) as well as Japan’s economy.
World trade greatly expanded, and the world market became ever more closely woven together through air transportation and telecommunications.
Electronics emerged as a new leading sector, and technological progress accelerated throughout the 20th century.
Standing apart from this world capitalist economy, the economies of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe followed communist principles of central planning and state ownership.
In a centrally planned economy , political authorities set prices and decide on quotas for production and consumption of each commodity according to a long-term plan, and international trade occurs at government-controlled prices.
The proponents of central planning claimed that it would make economies both more rational and more just.
By controlling the economy, governments could guarantee the basic needs of citizens and could mobilize the state fully for war if necessary.
The Soviet economy had some notable successes in rapidly industrializing the country in the 1930s, surviving the German assault in the 1940s, and developing world-class aerospace and military production capability in the 1950s and 1960s.
The Soviet Union launched the world’s first satellite in 1957, and in the early 1960s its leaders 33 Markwell, Donald.
Instead, the Soviet-bloc economies stagnated under the weight of bureaucracy, ideological rigidity, environmental destruction, corruption, and high military spending.
Now the former Soviet republics and Eastern Europe are transitional economies, changing over to a market-based economy connected to the world capitalist economy.
In the first half of the 1990s, the total GDP of the region shrank by about 35 percent—a depression worse than the Great Depression the United States experienced in the early 1930s.
In Boris Yeltsin’s administration , Russia’s economy remained dysfunctional, owing to depression, corruption, tax delinquency, and the vast differences between the old communist and new capitalist models.
President Vladimir Putin brought new energy to economic reform, and high prices for crude oil, a major Russian export, buoyed its economy in the new century, but Putin’s centralization of political power could choke off capitalist growth.
China, whose government continues to follow a Marxist political line (central control by the Communist party), has shifted substantially toward a market economy.
This transition has dramatically increased China’s economic growth ever since the 1980s.
Today, the world’s economic activity follows the principles of free markets more than central planning but often falls somewhere between the extremes.
Many states own industries thought to be vital for the national economy—state-owned industries such as oil production companies or national airlines.
And the government sector of the economy (military spending, road building, Social Security, and so on) makes up a substantial fraction of the industrialized countries’ economies.
Because they contain both some government control and some private ownership, the economies of the industrialized West are often called mixed economies/ Today there is a single integrated world economy that almost no country can resist joining.
At the same time, the imperfections and problems of that world economy are evident in periodic crises and recessions and in the sharpening of disparities between the richest and poorest world regions.
At no time have these imperfections been more glaring than during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis and ensuing world recession.
Starting with the sub-prime mortgage collapse in the United States, economic troubles quickly spread to Europe as major banks and investment companies lost hundreds of billions of dollars.
These losses led to a global slowdown in consumer spending and production that caused large job losses in countries like the United States, China, and India.
In addition, the material dislocations caused by globalization directly affect the self-interests of certain segments of countries’ populations.
Workers in industrialized countries in industries that face increasing competition from low-wage countries in the global South—such as steel, automobiles, electronics, and clothing—are among the most adversely affected by free trade.
Inevitably, the competition from low-wage countries holds down wages in those industries in the industrialized countries.
It also creates pressures to relax standards of labor regulation, such as those protecting worker safety, and it can lead to job losses if manufacturers close down plants in high-wage countries and move operations to the global South.
Not surprisingly, labor unions have been among the strongest political opponents of unfettered trade expansion.
Human rights NGOs have joined labor unions in pushing for trade agreements to include requirements for low-wage countries to improve working conditions such as minimum wages, child labor, and worker safety.
The United States bans imports of goods made by South Asia’s 15 million indentured child laborers.
Companies stung by criticism of conditions in their Asian factories have adopted voluntary measures to end the worst abuses, as Apple Computer did in 2012 after its Chinese supplier Foxconn faced worker protests and media attention over working conditions.
They are about 5 percent of 5to 14-yearolds in Latin America, 20 percent in Asia, and 25 percent in Africa.
In Ivory Coast, world’s largest exporter of cocoa , tens of thousands of children work for low wages, or even as slaves, on cocoa plantations.
For example, United States regulations require commercial shrimp boats to use devices that prevent endangered species of sea turtles from drowning in shrimp nets.
Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Pakistan, whose shrimp exports to the United States were blocked because they do not require the use of such devices, filed a complaint with the World Trade Organization, arguing that the United States regulation unfairly discriminated against them.
In 1996, Brazil and Venezuela took the United States to the WTO and forced a change in United States environmental rules regarding CHEAP LABOR Labor, environmental, and human rights organizations have all criticized unrestricted free trade.
They argue that free trade agreements encourage MNCs to produce goods under unfair and unhealthy conditions, including the use of child labor.
In general, unrestricted trade tends to force countries to equalize their regulations in a variety of areas not limited to labor and environmental rules.
For example, the WTO ruled in 1997 that Europeans’ fears about the use of growth hormones in beef were not scientifically warranted, and therefore EU regulations could not be used to exclude United States beef containing hormones.
When the European Union persisted, the United States was allowed to retaliate by imposing high tariffs on a list of EU exports such as French cheeses.
Similarly, in 2006 the WTO ruled that European restrictions on imports of genetically modified food from the United States violated trade rules.
These examples illustrate the variety of sources of backlash against free trade agreements.
Labor, environmental, and consumer groups all portray the WTO as a secretive bureaucracy outside democratic control that serves the interests of big corporations at the expense of ordinary people in both the global North and South.
More fundamentally, these critics distrust the corporate-driven globalization , of which the WTO is just one aspect.
Recent United States surveys show a drop in the belief that trade is good for the economy.
According to a June 2008 survey, 34 percent believe free trade is good for the United States, while 36 percent say it is not—down from 59 percent just two years earlier.
Support was especially high in export-dependent economies— above 90 percent in China, India, South Korea, and Lebanon, for example.
The United O O States ranked near the bottom in the survey, with 65 percent supporting trader The benefits of free trade, as noted earlier, are much more diffuse than the costs.
United States consumers enjoy lower prices on goods imported from low-wage countries.
The consumers may therefore spend more money on other products and services, eventually employing more United States workers.
This is small comfort, however, if you are the one who just lost your job.
In the era of globalization, a significant amount of international trade is conducted through multinational corporations.
The next chapter takes up these two issues in the context of the global economy.
This may make them more peaceful, but can also introduce new insecurities and sources of conflict.
The worldwide economic turmoil starting in 2008 sharpened some trade conflicts, while WTO negotiations remained stalled.
This ship that ran aground off New Zealand in 2011 seemed to embody the precarious state of trade relations.
Mercantilists favor trade policies that produce a trade surplus for their own state.
Such a positive trade balance generates money that can be used to enhance state power.
However, sanctions are difficult to enforce unless all major economic actors agree to abide by them.
Selfreliance, like central planning, has been largely discredited as a viable economic strategy.
Such policies tend to slow down the global creation of wealth but do help the particular industry in question.
Protectionism can be pursued through various means, including import tariffs (the favored method), quotas, subsidies, and other nontariff barriers.
The GATT was institutionalized in 1995 with the creation of the WTO, which expanded the focus on manufactured goods to consider agriculture and services.
The Uruguay Round of the GATT, completed in 1994, added hundreds of billions of dollars to the global creation of wealth.
The most visible example in recent decades has been the oil producers’ cartel, OPEC, whose members control more than half the world’s exports of a vital commodity, oil.
Governments in many states develop industrial policies to guide their efforts to strengthen domestic industries in the context of global markets.
Political conflicts among states concerning trade in these sectors are frequent.
Although it leads to trade wars on occasion, reciprocity has achieved substantial cooperation in trade.
Almost all these states are now in transition toward market-based economies, which more efficiently generate wealth.
Suppose your state had a chance to reach a major trade agreement by making substantial concessions.
China seems to be making a successful transition to market economics and is growing rapidly.
The proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas would join Canada and the United States with Latin American countries, where wages are lower and technology is less developed.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview In the past two decades, the number of bilateral and multilateral free trade agreements has skyrocketed.
There are several reasons offered for the recent explosion of these arrangements.
Some attribute the popularity of the neoliberal economic model and its emphasis on free trade as a source of motivation for these agreements.
Others point to the near-collapse of the Doha Round of the WTO negotiations.
Finally, some point to business pressure to join these arrangements because under an FTA, an MNC with factories in multiple states can ship goods between those factories tariff free.
As discussed in this chapter, because free trade brings diffuse benefits but concentrated costs, there are always opponents to these agreements within member states.
Economists are also divided on whether FTAs are beneficial, since states may be less likely to cooperate to achieve global free trade (the best outcome for economists) if they are happy with free trade among their key trading partners.
Yet others contend they are acceptable ""stepping stones"" to a world of global free trade.
Several studies in economics have shown that free trade areas do increase the amount of trade between countries.
This trade can be beneficial to consumers and producers, and helps increase economic growth.
Given the slow rate of progress at the WTO talks, other solutions are needed to increase trade.
Once tariffs are removed from goods, these goods may be sold at a cheaper price.
In extreme cases, FTAs can lower tariffs that effectively exclude goods from entering a market, giving consumers more choice in the products they buy.
Because FTAs eliminate or lower trade barriers, they encourage companies located in states outside the FTAs to locate new factories within the FTAs in order to take advantage of lower tariffs.
Some research has shown that FTAs lure increased foreign investment to member states—an important way to increase economic growth, especially in poor countries.
ARGUMENT 2 FTAs Are Harmful to the Global Economy FTAs hinder the advancement of global free trade.
Once states have secured their best trading partners in an FTA, they have no incentive to advance the WTO process.
By definition, FTAs provide lower tariffs for only a small number of states.
They do not address tariffs levied against nonmembers, and states may have incentives to increase tariffs against nonmembers to encourage trade within the FTA and discourage imports from outside of it.
Because FTAs make it easier for goods to cross borders, companies can locate in other member states where labor costs or environmental standards are lower, in order to cut their production costs.
This means fewer jobs in some member states and can lead to further degradation of the natural environment.
So far, we have discussed how globalization has influenced global security and international trade relations.
Globalization has had its most profound influence in the way states, businesses, and individuals deal with financial markets.
Today, global financial markets are as integrated as they have ever been.
Investors in one country buy and sell assets or exchange currency with a few clicks of a mouse.
Banks’ investment portfolios often contain millions of dollars in assets (real estate, land, stocks) located in other countries.
Nearly a trillion and a half dollars a day is exchanged on currency markets as investors need various currencies to do business in other countries, but also to bet on the rise and fall of currencies, which we discuss momentarily.
It offers investors and businesses access to overseas markets to spur economic growth.
It allows for the possibility of better returns on investment for individuals investing for college tuition or retirement.
But as we have witnessed in the past two years, financial integration also carries risks.
An economic crisis in one state can quickly spread to another, then another.
The spread of economic difficulties can quickly lead to a global economic crisis affecting small and large economies alike.
As an economic downturn began in the United States, many Americans who had taken out loans on their homes found themselves unable to pay these loans back.
At the same time, the value of their homes began to fall, so that even if banks were to reclaim them, the banks could not recover the money they had loaned.
Moreover, these loans had been resold by the banks to other businesses as investments, often in other countries.
Several large United States banks then announced that they were on the verge of failing because they had too much money tied up in these bad home loans.
This was a problem not only for the banks and the individuals who could not pay for their homes, but also for those businesses who had purchased these loans as investments.
Given the global integration of financial markets, this housing crisis led quickly to a global banking crisis.
The United States government responded with a rescue package of $800 billion to help shore up failing banks.
The entire banking sector of Iceland was taken over by the government, and Iceland, a prosperous country, needed a loan from the International Monetary Fund to rescue the government from bankruptcy.
Global stock markets tumbled dramatically as a result of this financial crisis, by a third, a half, and even two-thirds in the case of China.
What began as trouble in the United States housing market ended as a global financial meltdown.
The world economy recovered in the years after 2008, but soon faced the ripple effects of a debt crisis in Europe.
The financial problems there, which began in Greece and spread to Spain, Portugal, and even giant Italy, threatened the European Union as a whole while holding back growth in the United States and China, dramatically illustrating the financial interdependence of today’s world.
You Are a Foreign Market Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab Nearly every state prints its own moneyThe ability to print one’s own currency is one of the hallmarks of state sovereignty.
Yet, in a globalized system of trade and finance, businesses and individuals often need other states’ currencies to do business.
About Money Because of the nature of state sovereignty, the international economy is based on national currencies, not a world currency.
One of the main powers of a national government is to create its own currency as the sole legal currency in the territory it controls.
The national currencies are of no inherent value in another country, but can be exchanged one for another.
Traditionally, for centuries, the European state system used precious metals as a global currency, valued in all countries.
These metals had inherent value because they looked pretty and were easily molded into jewelry or similar objects.
They were relatively rare, and the mining of new gold and silver was relatively slow.
These metals lasted a long time, and they were difficult to dilute or counterfeit.
Over time, gold and silver became valuable because they were a world currency— because other people around the world trusted that the metals could be exchanged for future goods—and this overshadowed any inherent functional value of gold or silver.
Bars of gold and silver were held by states as a kind of bank account denominated in an international currency.
Gold has long been a key power resource with which states could buy armies or other means of leverage.
In recent years the world has not used such a gold standard but has developed an international monetary system divorced from any tangible medium such as precious metals.
Even today, some private investors buy stocks of gold or silver at times of political instability, as a haven that would reliably have future value.
But gold and silver have now become basically like other commodities, with unpredictable fluctuations in price.
The change in the world economy away from bars of gold to purely abstract money makes international economics more efficient; the only drawback is that without tangible backing in gold, currencies may seem less worthy of people’s confidence.
International Currency Exchange Today, national currencies are valued against each other, not against gold or silver.
Each state’s currency can be exchanged for a different state’s currency according to an exchange rate— defining, for instance, how many Canadian dollars are equivalent to one United States dollar.
These exchange rates affect almost every international economic transaction— trade, investment, tourism, and so forth/ Most exchange rates are expressed in terms of the world’s most important currencies— the United States dollar, the Japanese yen, and the EU’s euro.
Thus, the rate for exchanging Danish kroner for Brazilian reals depends on the value of each relative to these world currencies.
Exchange rates that most affect the world economy are those within the largest economies— United States dollars, euros, yen, British pounds, and Canadian dollars.
The relative values of currencies at a given point in time are arbitrary; only the changes in values over time are meaningful.
For instance, the euro happens to be fairly close to the United States dollar in value, whereas the Japanese yen is denominated in units closer to the United States penny.
In itself this disparity says nothing about the desirability of these currencies or the financial positions of their states.
A strong currency makes imports more affordable, while a weak currency makes exports more competitive.
The holder of such money has no guarantee of being able to trade it for another currency.
Such is the case in states cut off from the world capitalist economy, such as the former Soviet Union.
In practice, even nonconvertible currency can often be sold, in black markets or by dealing directly with the government issuing the currency, but the price may be extremely low.
Some currencies are practically nonconvertible because they are inflating so rapidly that holding them for even a short period means losing money.
Inflation reduces a currency’s value relative to more stable (more slowly inflating) currencies.
The industrialized West has kept inflation relatively low— mostly below 5 percent annually—since 1980.
Most dramatically, in Russia and other former Soviet republics, inflation rates of more than 1,000 percent came down to 8 percent.
Extremely high, uncontrolled inflation—more than 50 percent per month, or 13,000 percent per year—is called hyperinflation.
Even just moderately high inflation causes money to lose value weekly, making it hard to conduct business.
For example, a Chinese computer producer can export its products and receive payment in dollars, euros, or another hard currency, which it can use to pay for components it needs to import from abroad.
But a Chinese farmer paid in Chinese currency for rice could not simply use that currency to buy imported goods.
Rather, the exchange for foreign currency would be controlled by the Chinese government at rates the government set.
In a few countries, such as Cuba, two versions of currency circulate, one convertible to foreign Money has value only because people trust its worth.
Inflation erodes a currency's value if governments print too much money or if political instability erodes public confidence.
Constant minor adjustments set currencies' values; this Russian exchange in 2006 offers 0.01 rubles less per United States dollar than the one in the background.
Cubans complain that needed goods are available only at stores taking the hard version , whereas their salaries are paid in the soft version.
Generally, as economies develop and join the global marketplace, their currencies also develop, from the shaky versions based on beer cans or prone to hyperinflation, to the much more stable versions such as China’s today, and eventually to the fully convertible model.
National currencies are now backed by hard-currency reserves, not gold.
The industrialized countries have financial reserves roughly in proportion to the size of their economies.
Here governments decide, individually or jointly, to establish official rates of exchange for their currencies.
Floating exchange rates are now more commonly used for the world’s major currencies.
Rates are determined by global currency markets in which private investors and governments alike buy and sell currencies.
There is a supply and demand for each state’s currency, with prices constantly adjusting in response to market conditions.
Just as investors might buy shares of Apple or Wal-Mart stock if they expected its value to rise, so they would buy a pile of Japanese yen if they expected that currency’s value to rise in the future.
Through short-term speculative trading in international currencies, exchange rates adjust to changes in the longer-term supply and demand for currencies.
Such government intervention to manage the otherwise free-floating currency rates is called a managed float system.
The leading industrialized states often, but not always, work together in such interventions.
If the price of the United States dollar, for instance, goes down too much relative to other important currencies , governments step into the currency markets, side by side with private investors, and buy dollars.
With this higher demand for dollars, the price may then stabilize and perhaps rise again.
Such interventions usually happen quickly, in one day, but may be repeated several times within a few weeks in order to have the desired effect.
Liberals point to such cooperation as evidence that states recognize their long-term interest in a mutually beneficial international economy.
In their interventions in international currency markets, governments are at a disadvantage because even acting together, they control only a small fraction of the money moving on such markets; most of it is privately owned.
However, governments have one advantage in that they can work together to have enough impact on the market to make at least modest changes in price.
Governments can also operate in secret, keeping private investors in the dark regarding how much currency governments may eventually buy or sell, and at what price.
Only after a coordinated multinational intervention into markets does the public find out about it.
Note that this is an area where states have a common interest (making sure a large economy does not collapse) aligned against transnational actors, investors who are trying to make money at the expense of states.
A successful intervention can make money for governments at the expense of private speculators.
If, for example, the G20 governments step in to raise the price of United States dollars by buying them around the world , and if they succeed, the governments can then sell again and pocket a profit.
However, if the intervention fails and the price of dollars keeps falling, the governments lose money and may have to keep buying and buying in order to stop the slide.
In fact, if investors become aware of such moves, they may interpret this action as a signal that the currency being bought is weak, which could depress the price even further.
In extreme cases, the governments may run out of their stockpiles of hard currencies before then and have to absorb a huge loss.
Thus governments must be realistic about the limited effects they can have on currency prices.
These limits were well illustrated in the 2001 Argentine financial collapse.
Argentina in the 1990s had pegged the value of its currency at a fixed rate to the United States dollar—a ^Baker, Andrew.
Tying the peso to the dollar, however, represented a loss of sovereignty over monetary policy, one of the key levers to control an economy.
As a historic United States expansion brought unprecedented prosperity (allowing interest rates to be kept relatively high), Argentina suffered four years of recession, but could not lower interest rates to stimulate growth.
Argentina accumulated more than $100 billion in foreign loans and could not service its debts.
Assistance from the IMF in restructuring debt was contingent on a tight financial policy of tax increases and spending cuts—a mistake during a major multiyear recession, according to critics.
In 2001, as the United States and IMF stood by, Argentina’s economy collapsed; two presidents resigned in short order; and a populist took power, defaulted on foreign debts, and devalued the peso to create jobs—an embarrassing chapter for the IMF and a painful one for Argentina.
In 2003, Argentina defaulted on a $3 billion payment to the IMF, the largest default in IMF history.
Its economy turned around and it paid the IMF off in 2006, though negotiations with foreign government creditors continued.
More recently, pressures built up in a vastly more important case—China’s currency.
As in Argentina in 2001, the current policy of “pegging” China’s currency to the dollar did not adjust to different economic conditions in China and the United States.
China runs a big trade surplus while the United States runs a big trade deficit—over $300 billion with China alone in 2012 and over $500 billion in total.
Critics charge that the dollar-yuan ratio is held artificially high, making China’s exports to the United States cheaper and contributing to the trade imbalance and the loss of United States manufacturing jobs—an issue in United States domestic politics.
As the economic position of the United States has worsened in the past three years, pressure on China to reform its currency has grown.
Stable Currency Exchange Rates for World Business BACKGROUND: Globalization has brought great wealth to the world as business increasingly operates internationally.
The ability to do business internationally depends on the stability of currency exchange rates in different countries.
Whatever the exchange rate, businesspeople can plan on investments, imports, or purchases based on knowing what these things will cost if paid in a foreign currency.
If the world’s major countries maintain stability by coordinating their financial policies, all enjoy the benefit.
That stability can be achieved even if some states free-ride by manipulating their own currency exchange rates to advantage.
If too many countries do so, the collective good is not achieved, as shown in the competitive devaluations of major currencies in the 1930s, which worsened the Great Depression.
China has kept its currency pegged to the United States dollar for years, even as economic conditions in the two countries have diverged and a huge trade imbalance developed.
Most economists expect that if allowed to float freely like the world’s other major currencies, the Chinese currency would rise substantially.
This would help American exports and harm Chinese exports, reducing the trade imbalance somewhat.
China has only slowly allowed its currency to appreciate in value modestly, and will not allow it to float freely.
In 2006, China, Japan, and South Korea announced plans to work toward coordinating their currency policies.
In 2010, South Korea agreed to further coordinate currency exchanges with China.
Along with the ASEAN countries, they are also studying the creation of an Asian currency unit that would track the aggregate value of the region’s currencies.
Both measures are possible early steps toward the eventual creation of an Asian currency like the euro.
Why Currencies Rise or Fall In the short term, exchange rates depend on speculation about the future value of currencies.
But over the long term, the value of a state’s currency tends to rise or fall relative to others because of changes in the long-term supply and demand for the currency.
Printing money is a quick way to generate revenue for the government, but the more money printed, the lower its price.
Domestically, printing too much money creates inflation because the amount of goods in the economy is unchanged but more money is circulating to buy them with.
Demand for a currency depends on the state’s economic health and political stability.
People do not want to own the currency of an unstable country, because political instability leads to the breakdown of economic efficiency and of trust in the currency.
For instance, in 2001, when a new Indonesian president took office after a period of political and economic turmoil, the Indonesian currency jumped 13 percent in two days because of expectations of greater stability. that it will let the currency rise, the actual changes have been quite modest.
Unlike the trade system based on equality and reciprocity, the international financial system more closely resembles a dominance hierarchy.
The IMF uses a weighted voting system that gives power to the largest economies.
Until recently, major world currency decisions were taken by the Group of Seven countries.
This was expanded to the larger and more inclusive G20—a flattening of the dominance hierarchy in response to the world economic crisis—but still leaves the top countries calling the shots.
World currency markets are dominated by the United States dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen.
By keeping its currency artificially low, China is free riding on the world currency system by boosting its own exports.
However, China is not a large enough Dollars and euros anchor the currency system, 2010. piece of the world economy as a whole to bring down the currency system by its nonparticipation.
States also have a shared interest in currency stability because instability tends to be profitable for speculators at the expense of central banks.
States also share an interest in the integrity of their currencies against counterfeiting, but “rogue” states may feel otherwise.
In 2006, the United States accused North Korea of passing off tens of millions of dollars in extremely realistic counterfeit $100 bills—a direct gain for the North Korean regime at the expense of the United States Treasury.
Despite these shared interests in currency stability, states also experience conflicts over currency exchange.
For instance, as Canada’s dollar rose 25 percent in 2009-2012 relative to the United States dollar, American automakers shifted production, and thousands of jobs, out of Canada and into the United States.
An overvalued currency, whose exchange rate is too high, creates a chronic trade deficit.
Because they see such adjustments as harmless, liberals view these changes as positive mechanisms for the world economy to work out inefficiencies and maximize overall growth.
A unilateral move to reduce the value of one’s own currency by changing a fixed or official exchange rate is called a devaluation.
Generally, devaluation is a quick fix for financial problems in the short term, but it can create new problems.
As a result, demand for the currency drops, even at the new lower rate.
Investors become wary of future devaluations, and indeed such devaluations often follow one after another in unstable economies.
In the first three weeks of 2009, Russia devalued its ruble six times after the price of its main export, oil, plummeted.
A currency may be devalued by being allowed to float freely after a period of fixed exchange rates, often bringing a single sharp drop in values.
In general, any sharp or artificial change PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE Changes in the value of the dollar—reflecting underlying trends in United States and foreign economies as well as governments' monetary policies—directly affect the prices of imported goods such as gasoline, here dropping in 2012.
Growth rates continue to run near 9 percent as of 2012, exceeding nearly all countries in the developing world.
After economic slowdowns during the 2008 global financial crisis, rapid growth has returned.
Chinese exports fell during the crisis, but have surged back, leading to massive yearly trade surpluses.
Your position in the international economy is unique, because China's currency, the yuan, does not float freely and was pegged to the United States dollar (and then to a basket of currencies) for more than a decade.
Although your predecessor let the currency rise by 40 percent between 2005 and 2012, many economists consider it still substantially undervalued.
Many feel your fixed currency is one explanation for your country's tremendous economic growth and trade surplus.
The demand for the yuan is high , but because it does not float, your government can keep its value low.
The result is that Chinese exports are much cheaper on the world market, making your goods very attractive.
Given the country's large population, increases in jobs are important to keep unemployment low.
Exports are a key part of this picture, contributing heavily to your economic growth and generating hard currency for your economy and creating jobs.
Since 2010, your country has experienced labor unrest from workers unhappy with their low pay.
Responses to these protests could include higher wages, raising the costs of goods produced and potentially lowering exports.
Both Europe and the United States have complained bitterly about your exchange rate and trade surplus.
The United States has blamed the undervalued yuan for costing America 1. million jobs, and the 2012 American presidential election featured recurrent ""China bashing,"" further exacerbating political tensions.
The condition is that you allow the yuan to float freely on international currency markets.
Such a move would be very popular in international political circles and would lessen the chances that your own economy will ""overheat"" and become inflationary.
In the long run, such a move will ensure your further integration into the international economy.
In addition, leading the World Bank would provide great prestige and leverage for your government.
If the yuan rises rapidly in value, your exports will be less competitive internationally, risking a stall in a key engine of your economy just as you have come through the financial crisis.
You also become more vulnerable to international currency shocks, such as the 1997 Asian economic crisis, which you avoided in large part due to your fixed exchange rate.
Relatively stable exchange rates for international currency can be seen as a collective good, in that all members of the international economy benefit from a stable framework for making investments and sales, yet an individual country can benefit from devaluing its own currency.
Hegemonic stability, in this theory, includes providing backing for world currency stability, using the hegemon’s own economic clout and its influence over other great powers.
Lacking a hegemon, collective goods are thought to be easiest to ensure if controlled by a small group.
In the small-group setting, defectors stand out and mutual cooperation is more readily enforced.
In some states, the politicians or generals who control the government directly control the amounts of money printed.
It is not surprising that inflation tends to be high in those states, because political problems can often be solved by printing more money.
But in most industrialized countries, politicians know they cannot trust themselves with day-to-day decisions about printing money.
Politicians appoint the people who run the bank, but generally for long terms that do not coincide with those of the politicians.
Thus, central bank managers try to run the bank in the national interest, a step removed from partisan politics.
If a state leader orders a military intervention, the generals obey, but if the leader orders an intervention in currency markets, the central bank does not have to comply.
For instance, the head of Thailand’s central bank was fired by the prime minister in a dispute over interest rates in 2001.
In the United States, the central bank is the Federal Reserve, or the Fed.
Multilateral interventions are usually coordinated by the heads of central banks and treasury ministries in the leading countries.
The long-term, relatively nonpartisan perspective of central bankers makes it easier for states to achieve the collective good of a stable world monetary system.
Domestically, the Fed exercises its power mainly by setting the discount rate—the interest rate the government charges when it loans money to private banks.
In effect, this rate controls how fast money is injected into the economy.
If the rate is set too high, too little money will circulate and consumers and businesses will find it hard to borrow as much or as cheaply from private banks; economic growth will be depressed.
Central bank decisions about the discount rate have important international consequences.
If interest rates are higher in one state than in another, foreign capital tends to be attracted to the state with the higher rate.
And if economic growth is high in a foreign country, more goods can be exported to it.
The resulting international conflicts can be resolved only politically (such as at G20 meetings), not technically, because each central bank, although removed from domestic politics, still looks out for its own state’s interests.
Although central banks control sizable reserves of currency, they are constrained by the limited share of world money they own.
As economic actors, states do not drive the direction of the world economy; in many ways they follow it, at least over the long run.
Yet, as we have seen in the recent global economic crises, states still play a key role in the global economy.
In the short run, states can adopt massive financial stimulus packages, can rescue private banks and corporations that teeter on bankruptcy, and can prosecute individuals who act illegally to cause economic hardship.
The World Bank and the IMF Because of the importance of international cooperation for a stable world monetary system and because of the need to overcome collective goods problems, international regimes and institutions have developed around norms of behavior in monetary relations.
Just as the UN institutionally supports regimes based on norms of behavior in international security affairs, the same is true in the world monetary regime.
It established the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development , more commonly called the World Bank, as a source of loans to reconstruct the Western European economies after the war and to help states through future financial difficulties.
The World Bank and the IMF continue to be the pillars of the international financial system.
Bretton Woods set a regime of stable monetary exchange, based on the United States dollar and backed by gold, that lasted from 1944 to 1971.
Other states’ currencies were exchanged at fixed rates relative to the dollar.
Copelovitch, Mark S The International Monetary Fund in the Global Economy.
The international currency markets operated within a narrow range around the fixed rate.
If a country’s currency fell more than 1 percent from the fixed rate, the country had to use its hard-currency reserves to buy its own currency back and thus shore up the price.
If the price rose more than 1 percent, it had to sell its currency to drive the price down.
The United States economy no longer held the overwhelming dominance it had in 1944—mostly because of European and Japanese recovery from World War II, but also because of United States overspending on the Vietnam War and the outflow of United States dollars to buy oil.
By 1971, the dollar was no longer worth 1/35 of an ounce of gold, and the United States had to abandon its fixed exchange rate.
President Nixon unilaterally dumped the dollar-gold system, and allowed the dollar to float freely.
The abandonment of the gold standard was good for the United States and bad for Japan and Europe, where leaders expressed shock at the unilateral United States actions.
The interdependence of the world capitalist economy, which had produced record economic growth for all the Western countries after World War II, had also created the conditions for new international conflicts.
The SDR has been called “paper gold” because it is created in limited amounts by the IMF, is held as a hard-currency reserve by states’ central banks, and can be exchanged for various international currencies.
The SDR is today the closest thing to a world currency that exists, but it cannot buy goods—only currencies.
SDRs are linked in value to a basket of several key international currencies.
When one currency rises a bit and another falls, the SDR does not change value much; but if all currencies rise , the SDR rises with them.
Since the early 1970s, the major national currencies have been governed by the managed float system.
Transition from the dollar-gold regime to the managed float regime was difficult.
States had to bargain politically over the targets for currency exchange rates in the meetings now known as G6 summits.
In 2009, it was announced that the G20, including far more developed and developing countries, would begin to replace the G8 in undertaking major financial deliberations.
A state can then borrow against its quota to stabilize its economy in difficult times and repay the IMF in subsequent years.
In 2009, world leaders pledged an additional $1 trillion to be paid to the IMF so it could help developing countries cope with the global financial crisis.
Unlike the WTO or UN General Assembly, the IMF and the World Bank use a weighted voting system—each state has a vote equal to its quota.
Thus the advanced economies control the IMF, although nearly all the world’s states are members.
In 2008, the IMF adjusted the voting formula, increasing modestly the quota and voting power of China (from about 3 to 3. percent of the total) and other developing countries.
Since 1944, the IMF and the World Bank have tried to accomplish three major missions.
First they sought to provide stability and access to capital for states ravaged by World War II, especially Japan and the states of Western Europe.
This mission was a great success, leading to growth and prosperity in those states.
Second, especially in the 1970s and 1980s but still continuing today, the World Bank and the IMF have tried to promote economic development in poor countries.
The third mission, in the 1990s, was the integration of Eastern Europe and Russia into the world capitalist economy.
SEEDS OF DEVELOPMENT The World Bank works to stabilize and develop economies in poor and middle-income countries.
In Pakistan, the Bank runs programs to increase agricultural productivity and improve nutrition.
State Financial Positions As currency rates change and state economies grow, the overall positions of states relative to each other shift.
National Accounts The IMF maintains a system of national accounts statistics to keep track of the overall monetary position of each state.
The current account is basically the balance of trade discussed in Chapter 8.
Money flows out of a state to pay for imports and flows into the state to pay for exports.
For instance, money spent by a British tourist in Florida is equivalent to money spent by a British consumer buying Florida oranges in a London market; in both cases money flows into the United States current account.
Government transactions are military and foreign aid grants, as well as salaries and pensions paid to government employees abroad.
For example, a Honda subsidiary in America may send profits back to Honda in Japan.
Capital flows are measured in net terms—the total investments and loans foreigners make in a country minus the investments and loans that country’s companies, citizens, and government invest in other countries.
Most of such investment is private, although some is by government agencies and state-owned industries.
Capital flows are divided into foreign direct investment —such as owning a factory, company, or real estate in a foreign country—and indirect portfolio investment, such as buying stocks and bonds or making loans to a foreign company.
These various kinds of capital flows have somewhat different political consequences (see “International Debt” and “Foreign Direct Investment” later in this chapter), but are basically equivalent in the overall national accounts picture.
The third category, changes in foreign exchange reserves, makes the national accounts balance.
Any difference between the inflows and outflows of money (in the current account and capital flows combined) is made up by an equal but opposite change in reserves.
If a state has more money flowing out than in, it gets that money from its reserves.
If it has more money flowing in than out, it puts the money in its reserves.
At least, they almost balance; there is a residual category—errors and omissions—because even the most efficient and honest government cannot keep track of every bit of money crossing its borders.
International Debt In one sense, an economy is constantly in motion, as money moves through the processes of production, trade, and consumption.
The hard-currency reserves owned by governments are one form of standing wealth, but not the most important.
Most standing wealth is in the form of homes and cars, farms and factories, ports and railroads.
In particular, capital goods are products that can be used as inputs for further production.
Nothing lasts forever, but standing wealth lasts for enough years to be treated differently from goods that are quickly consumed.
Standing wealth creates new wealth, so the economy tends to grow over time.
Businesses and households borrow money because they think they can use it to create new wealth faster than the rate of interest on the loan.
If a state’s economy is healthy, it can borrow money from foreign governments, banks, or companies and create enough new wealth to repay the debts a few years later.
But states, like businesses, sometimes operate at a loss; then their debts mount up.
In a vicious circle, more and more of the income they generate goes to pay interest, and more money must be borrowed to keep the state in operation.
If its fortunes reverse, a state or business can create wealth again and over time pay back the principal on its debts to climb out of the hole.
Failure to repay debts makes it hard to borrow in the future, a huge impediment to economic growth.
When debts become unpayable, the lenders (banks and governments) have to write them off the books or settle them at a fraction of their official value.
In 2001, when Argentina collapsed under more than $100 billion of debt accumulated over the prior decade , creditors had to accept less than onethird of their money in a 2005 restructuring deal.
In 2010 to 2012, financial markets repeatedly slumped in reaction to fears of a Greek default on large debts, and possible contagion to larger economies—Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and perhaps Italy.
In 2012, several bailouts stabilized the crisis but not until austerity measures had driven the entire euro zone into a recession, projected to last through 2013.
A second reason is the income and consumption pattern among households and businesses.
If people and firms spend more than they take in, they must borrow to pay their bills.
The credit card they use may be from a local bank, but that bank may be getting the money it lends to them from foreign lenders.
A third reason for national debt is government spending relative to taxation.
Under the principles of Keynesian economics (named for economist John Maynard Keynes), governments sometimes spend more on programs than they take in from tax revenue —deficit spending —to stimulate economic growth.
This has been the strategy adopted by many G8 countries in the current financial crisis, especially the United States.
If this strategy works, increased economic growth eventually generates higher tax revenues to make up the deficit.
If it does not, a state finds itself with a poor economy in even deeper debt.
Thus, for all the DRAGGED DOWN BY DEBT Failure to make payments on international debt, called a default, is a very serious action because it can cut off a country's access to future investment and loans.
Nonetheless, several states have defaulted on debts rather than inflict painful budget cuts that would hurt the population.
In 2011-2012, Greece narrowly averted defaulting on its huge debts, accepting EU bailouts intended to stabilize the euro zone that Greece belongs to.
This trader reacts as Germany's stock market falls on fears of a Greek default.
In the long run, international debt reflects these underlying realities.
Shifts in financial fortune among the great powers often accompany changing power relations.
Consider how the past decade has changed the financial positions of the United States, of Russia and Eastern Europe, and of Asia.
The Position of the United States The United States is an extraordinarily wealthy and powerful state.
Its most unique strengths may be in the area of international security—as the world’s only superpower— but its economic strengths are also striking.
It is not only the world’s largest economy but also the most technologically advanced one in such growth sectors as computers, telecommunications, aviation and aerospace, and biotechnology.
The United States position in scientific research and higher education is unparalleled in the world.
The United States position in the international economy, however, has shifted over the decades.
In the early 1950s, the United States economy was about twice the size of the next six advanced industrial states combined.
By the 1980s, its relative share of world GDP had dropped almost by half.
In 1950, the United States held half of the world’s financial reserves; by 1980, it held less than 10 percent.
This long-term decline after the extraordinary post-1945 United States hegemony was a natural and probably unavoidable one.
In the early 1980s, the trade deficit (exports minus imports) grew from near zero to $200 billion in just a few years.
The trade deficit shrank back, but then grew to more than $700 billion a year by 2007.
After shrinking again during the 2008-2009 recession, the trade deficit began to grow again in 2010.
The budget deficit meanwhile jumped to $300 billion per year in the early 1980s, then closed in the 1990s and briefly became a large surplus, only to exceed $1 trillion a year in 20082012 as a result of war spending, tax cuts, and a Keynesian effort to stimulate economic growth during the economic recession.
These trends have caused alarm regarding United States international economic leadership.
The United States economy began the 21st century roughly, after a decade of relative prosperity in the 1990s.
The bursting of an Internet investment “bubble” was followed by a worldwide recession in 2001 and then the economic disruptions that followed the September 2001 terrorist attacks.
Tax cuts and war spending primed growth in 2002-2006, but at the cost of rising debt.
Growth resumed in 2009 but remained sluggish, with persistently high unemployment, ever-rising debt, and contentious government decision-making.
By 2013, stock markets had fully recovered from the 2008 crash, but a new European recession threatened to hurt United States exports.
The Effects of United States Budget Deficits on Financial Markets since 1980.
Congressional Budget Office In addition, the accumulated debt from decades of deficit spending remains.
The United States government’s national debt grew from about $1 trillion in 1980 to $3 trillion in 1990, $5 trillion in 2000, and $16 trillion in 2013.
The interest payments are equivalent to what would otherwise be a healthy rate of economic growth.
Once, the United States was the world’s leading lender state; now it is the world’s leading debtor state.
These United States financial trends have profound implications for the entire world political economy.
The Position of Russia and Eastern Europe The United States provided limited capital to help get the Russian and Eastern European region on its feet again after the Cold War.
Instead, states in this region faced daunting challenges as they converted from centrally planned to capitalist economies and joined the world capitalist economy.
These challenges included integrating into the world trading system (membership in the WTO, bilateral trade agreements, and so forth) and attracting foreign investment.
Among the most difficult tasks were the attempts of states in this region to join the international monetary system.
These matter greatly because having a stable and convertible currency is a key element in attracting foreign business and expanding international trade.
Most of the states of the former Soviet bloc became members of the IMF and were assigned quotas.
But the IMF and the World Bank would not make loans available freely to these states until their governments took strong action to curb inflation, balance government budgets, and ensure economic stability.
Such stability would have been easier to achieve with the foreign loans, however, creating a chicken-andegg problem.
All the economies of the region experienced a deep depression in the years following the end of the Cold War.
In general, the Eastern European countries have turned around their economies more effectively than have the former Soviet republics.
Among the latter, Russia was better off than some others; it had inherited much of the Soviet Union’s economic infrastructure and natural resources, TABLE 9.
Inflation reached 1,500 percent in 1992 but was brought down to less than 10 percent by 2006.
Growth returned—more than 6 percent a year in 2000-2005—and a new flat tax on income boosted tax collections.
The chaos of transition also provided fertile ground for corruption among government officials.
In 2004, Russia’s largest oil company was shut down by President Vladimir Putin because of nonpayment of a $10 billion tax bill, only to have its assets purchased by a state-owned business.
The state has consolidated its control of major companies and the media again, using its powers to put the “plutocrats” under its control or push them aside.
Since a financial crisis in 1998, Russia has registered strong economic growth and reduced runaway inflation to less than 10 percent a year.
In recent years, high oil prices have helped Russia to pay off debts and build large foreign reserves.
However, structural obstacles remain, including corruption, weak rule of law, and political uncertainty as the government centralizes power and reasserts state control over business and the press.
Russia was aggressive in attempting to stabilize its economy during the 2008 global recession and those efforts appeared to pay off, as economic growth began to return a year later.
The return of Vladimir Putin to the presidency in 2012 could provide greater economic stability (perhaps at the cost of freedoms), and Russia’s WTO membership should boost trade and foreign investment.
Full integration into the world capitalist economy will require currency stability, stronger rule of law, and reduced corruption.
Perhaps Russia’s biggest economic challenge is its current reliance on oil exports and the need to diversify its sources of wealth.
The Position of Asia Following decades of robust growth since the devastation of World War II, Japan by the 1980s seemed to be emerging as a possible rival to the United States as the world’s leading industrial power.
Japanese auto manufacturers gained ground on United States rivals when smaller cars became popular after the oil-price shocks of the 1970s.
In electronics and other fields, Japanese products began to dominate world markets, and Japanese capital became a major economic force in nearby developing economies and even in the United States, where Japanese creditors financed much of the growing United States national debt.
The economic growth of the 1980s drove prices of stocks and real estate to unrealistic levels based on speculation rather than inherent value.
When these collapsed at the end of the 1980s, many banks were left with bad loans backed by deflated stocks and real estate.
These losses were covered up, and the underlying problems—lax banking regulation, political cronyism, and outright corruption—persisted through the 1990s.
Despite the example of Japan’s financial system, these mistakes were repeated almost exactly in the 1990s by other countries of East and Southeast Asia.
Real estate and stocks became overvalued as rapid economic growth led to speculation and ever-rising expectations.
Banks made massive bad loans based on the overvalued assets and got away with it because of political corruption and cronyism.
In 1997, these economies suffered a serious financial crisis, which jumped across international borders and sent shock waves around the globe that reverberated for two years.
The 1997 Asian financial crisis began when currency speculators began selling off the currencies of Southeast Asian countries.
Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia were forced to let their currencies be devalued.
Other so-called emerging markets around the world—notably Brazil—suffered as investors generalized the problems in Asia.
The Philippines addressed the problem in the manner that international agencies and foreign investors preferred.
After losing $1 billion in unsuccessfully defending its currency’s value, the Philippines let its currency float and then asked the IMF for a $1 billion stabilization loan, which the IMF approved in a week.
In return for the IMF loan, the Philippines’ government agreed to keep interest rates high and budget deficits low , to pass a tax reform law, and to tighten control of banks that had made bad real estate loans.
These kinds of tough measures create political problems, especially when banks are politically connected or when governments are corrupt.
The Philippines, by addressing such problems, won international approval.
Other Asian countries did not act decisively and suffered greater economic setbacks.
The currency speculators attacked Indonesia, which had to let its currency fall, raise interest rates, and let its stock market drop.
Within months, Indonesia too sought tens of billions of dollars in IMF loans, with the usual conditions attached.
But Indonesia resisted implementing the promised reforms, and its economy continued to slide in 1998.
Riots and student protests eventually forced Indonesia’s President Suharto to resign after 30 years of dictatorship.
Overall, in Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia, stock markets lost about half their value and currencies about a quarter of their value.
When South Korea caught this “Asian flu” in 1997, its stock markets collapsed and its banks were saddled with $50 billion in bad loans based on cronyism.
The IMF stepped in with a $60 billion international bailout—the largest ever—and Koreans elected a new reformist president.
Thus in South Korea, as in Thailand and Indonesia, the financial crisis brought about reform as well as pain.
The government reduced inflation from 20 percent to less than 4 percent in 1995-1997, and the engineer of this tight-money policy, Zhu Rongji, became the Chinese prime minister in 1998.
In theory, the instant free flow of capital around the world—a result of global communications technologies—should stabilize economies.
Investors can shift money quickly, and thus incrementally, as conditions indicate shifting strength and weakness of different BODY CHECK East Asia's economies have grown robustly in the decade since the 1997 financial crisis, but many of the causes of instability remain.
Poor quality control in China's fast-growing export sector has sent tainted foods, drugs, and toys to Western markets.
Instead of waiting for governments to devalue or revalue currencies when problems are far along, markets can gradually adjust values day by day.
In practice, however, the global liquidity of capital has also shown a destabilizing tendency, as small events can be amplified and reverberate in distant locations.
Thus the problems of Thailand became an Asian crisis and then an emerging-markets crisis, as liquid capital fled for cover at the speed of light.
These events foreshadowed the financial crisis in 2008 when events in one country and sector again quickly spread worldwide.
Governments face a dilemma in that politically desirable policies—from stimulating growth and keeping taxes low to supporting banks and businesses owned by friends and relatives—tend to undermine currency stability.
If allowed to continue, such policies may lead to an economic collapse and the loss of foreign investment, but tough policies to maintain currency stability may cause a government to lose power.
In all the regions just discussed—North America, Asia, Russia and Eastern Europe— the role of private businesses is expanding relative to that of the state.
Throughout the remainder of the world, private business plays a role in the economy that exceeds that of the state.
The remainder of this chapter considers the international political issues related to the operation of private businesses across state borders.
Multinational Business Although states are the main rule makers for currency exchange and other international economic transactions, those transactions are carried out mainly by private firms and individuals, not governments.
Multinational Corporations £2 Watch the Video ""Banking interests and Regulatory Reform"" at MyPoliSciLab Multinational corporations are companies based in one state with affiliated branches or subsidiaries operating in other states.
There is no exact definition, but the clearest case of an MNC is a large corporation that operates on a worldwide basis in many countries simultaneously, with fixed facilities and employees in each.
There is also no exact count of the total number of MNCs, but most estimates are in the tens of thousands worldwide.
Most important are industrial corporations, which make goods in factories in various countries and sell them to businesses and consumers in various countries.
Financial corporations also operate multinationally— although often with more restrictions than industrial MNCs.
Among the largest commercial banks worldwide, the United States does not hold a leading position—reflecting the traditional United States antitrust policy that limits banks’ geographic expansion.
The McDonald’s fast-food chain and American Telephone and Telegraph are good examples.
So are the international airlines, which sell tickets in dozens of states for travel all over the world.
The United States predominates in service MNCs as it does in industrial ones.
The role of MNCs in international political relations is complex and in some dispute14 Some scholars see MNCs as virtually being agents of their home national governmentsThis view resonates with mercantilism, in which economic activity ultimately serves political authorities; thus MNCs have clear national identities and act as members of their national society under state authority.
A variant of this theme (from a more revolutionary world view) considers national governments as being agents of their MNCs; state interventions serve private, monied interests.
Others see MNCs as citizens of the world beholden to no governmentThe head of Dow Chemical once said he dreamed of buying an island beyond any state’s territory and putting Dow’s world headquarters there.
In such a view, MNCs act globally in the interests of their (international) stockholders and owe loyalty to no stateIn any case, MNCs are motivated by the need to maximize profits.
Only in the case of state-owned MNCs—an important exception but a small minority of the total companies worldwide—do MNC actions reflect state interests.
As independent actors in the international arena, MNCs are increasingly powerful.
Only 27 states had more economic activity per year in 2011 than did the largest MNC, Shell Oil, at nearly $500 billion.
However, the largest government has government revenues above $2 trillion —about six times that of Shell.
They are so deeply entwined in so many states that they have a profound interest in the stable operation of the international system—in security affairs as well as in trade and monetary relations.
MNCs prosper in a stable international atmosphere that permits freedom of trade, of movement, and DOING BUSINESS WORLDWIDE Multinational corporations play important roles in international relations and are powerful actors with considerable resources in negotiating with governments.
Here, Airbus, a division of a European MNC, shows off its new super-jumbo jet at the Singapore Airshow, 2008.
Multinational Corporations, Globalization, and the Changing Calculus of Conflict.
Thus MNCs are, overall, a strong force for liberalism in the world economy, despite the fact that particular MNCs in particular industries push for certain mercantilist policies to protect their own interests.
Most MNCs have a world management system based on subsidiaries in each state in which they operate.
The operations within a given state are subject to the legal authority of that state’s government.
But the foreign subsidiaries are owned (in whole or in substantial part) by the parent MNC in the home country.
Thus, the parent MNC hires and fires the top managers of its foreign subsidiaries.
The business infrastructure is a key aspect of transnational relations —linkages among people and groups across national borders.
In addition to the direct connections among members of a single MNC, the operations of MNCs support a global business infrastructure connecting a transnational community of businesspeople.
A United States manager arriving in Seoul, South Korea, for instance, does not find a bewildering scene of unfamiliar languages, locations, and customs.
Rather, he or she moves through a familiar sequence of airport lounges, telephone calls and faxes, international hotels, business conference rooms, and CNN broadcasts—most likely hearing English spoken in all.
Foreign Direct Investment MNCs do not just operate in foreign countries, they also own capital there—buildings, factories, cars, and so forth.
For instance, United States and German MNCs own some of the capital located in Japan, and Japanese MNCs own capital located in the United States and Germany.
Investments in foreign countries are among the most important, and politically sensitive, activities of MNCs.
Although there is a strong trend toward more foreign direct investment, these flows rise and fall with the global economy.
Direct investment is long term, and it is more visible than portfolio investment.
Investments in the manufacturing sector usually entail the greatest investment in fixed facilities and in training workers and managers.
Investments in the service sector tend to be less expensive and easier to walk away from if conditions change.
Mercantilists tend to view foreign investments in their own country suspiciously.
In developing countries, foreign direct investment often evokes concerns about a loss of sovereignty, because governments may be less powerful than the MNCs that invest in their country.
These fears also reflect the historical fact that most foreign investment in the global South once came from colonizers.
Furthermore, although such investments create jobs, they also bring dislocations of traditional ways of life and cultures.
Economic nationalists in industrialized countries also worry about losing power and sovereignty due to foreign investment.
In Canada, for instance, mercantilists are alarmed that United States firms own more than half of Canada’s manufacturing industry and more than two-thirds of Canada’s oil and gas industry.
Canada is much smaller than the United States, yet it depends heavily on United States trade.
In this asymmetrical situation, some Canadians worry that they are being turned into an annex of the United States—economically, culturally, and ultimately politically—losing their own national culture and control of their economy.
Meanwhile, United States economic nationalists have similar concerns over foreign direct investment in the United States.
Mercantilists see a loss of power when foreign investors buy up companies and real estate in a debtor country.
Such concerns seem stronger when a foreign MNC buys an existing company or building than when it builds a new factory or other facility.
For example, in 2005, an outcry in the United States forced a Chinese oil company to withdraw its bid to buy the United States company Unocal, which ended up selling itself for a lower price to a United States company.
But when Honda builds a new car factory in Ohio, adding jobs and facilities to the United States economy, Americans perceive no such loss.
Liberal economists emphasize that global efficiency and the increased generation of wealth result from the ability of MNCs to invest freely across international borders.
Investment decisions should be made solely on economic grounds, not nationalistic ones.
In the view of liberal economists, foreign investments in the United States help, rather than hurt, the United States economy.
Because United States MNCs have more than $1 trillion of foreign direct investment outside the United States, the picture is by no means one-sided.
Host and Home Government Relations A state in which a foreign MNC operates is called the host country; the state where the MNC has its headquarters is called its home country.
MNC operations create a variety of problems and opportunities for both the host and home countries’ governments.
Conflicts between the host government and the MNC may spill over to become an interstate conflict between the host government and home government.
Conversely, because MNCs have many states to choose from, a host government cannot generally force an MNC to do business in the country against the MNC’s wishes.
At least in theory, MNCs operate in host countries only when it is in the interests of both the MNC and the host government.
One obvious conflict concerns the distribution of new wealth between the MNC and the host government.
This distribution depends on the rate at which MNC activities or profits are taxed, as well as on the ground rules for MNC operations.
Before an MNC invests or opens a subsidiary in a host country, it sits down with the government to negotiate these issues.
Rather, the government’s main leverage is to promise a favorable climate for doing business and making money; the MNC’s main leverage is to threaten to take its capital elsewhere.
National and local governments may offer to provide business infrastructure— such as roads, airports, or phone lines—at the government’s expense.
Over time, certain locations may develop a strong business infrastructure and gain a comparative advantage in luring MNCs to locate there.
In addition to these relatively straightforward questions of distribution, MNC relations with host governments contain several other sources of potential conflict.
United States Policy toward the Nationalization of Natural Resource Investments in the Third World.
In recent years, Russia, Venezuela, Bolivia, and Ecuador have all taken significant state ownership in what had been foreign assets in those countries’ oil and gas sectors.
Once an MNC has invested in fixed facilities, it loses much of its leverage over the government because it cannot move to another country without incurring huge expenses.
However, governments hesitate to break their word with MNCs because then other MNCs may not invest in the future.
In fact, for this reason, foreign direct investment in Bolivia dropped by 90 percent from 1999 to 2005.
Another source of conflict is the trade policies of the host government.
Government restrictions on trade seldom help foreign MNCs; more often they help the host country’s own industries—which often directly compete with foreign MNCs.
Trade restrictions are thus another form of leverage that states have in luring foreign direct investment.
Trade regulations often seek to create as many jobs and as much taxable income as possible within the host country.
MNCs generally want the freedom to assemble goods anywhere from parts made anywhere; governments, by contrast, want to maximize the amount of wealth created on their own territories.
With parts and supplies now routinely converging from many countries to go into a product completed in one country, it is very difficult to say exactly where the product was made.
The question is a complex one that entails long negotiations between MNCs and host governments.
Monetary policy also leads to conflicts between MNCs and host governments.
When a state’s currency is devalued, imports suddenly become more expensive.
A foreign MNC selling an imported product in the host IT S A JOB Foreign direct investment is often sought by host governments because it stimulates employment and economic growth, though at wages that home countries would not tolerate.
Note that along with investment, a host country imports certain cultural trappings of the MNC's activity—such as Mattel's rendition of femininity in its doll.
For example, if the dollar falls relative to the yen, Toyota USA may have to charge more United States dollars for its cars in order to pay for the parts it brings in from Japan.
Therefore, an MNC making a long-term investment in a host country wants the country’s currency to be reasonably stable.
Finally, MNCs may conflict with host governments on issues of international security as well as domestic political stability.
When an MNC invests in a country, it assumes that its facilities there will operate profitably over a number of years.
If a war or revolution takes away the MNC’s facility, the company loses not just income but capital—the standing wealth embodied in that facility.
In 2001, ExxonMobil suspended operations at gas fields in Aceh province of Indonesia for three months until the Indonesian government—which earns $1 billion a year from the operation—brought in military forces to suppress armed separatists who had been attacking ExxonMobil.
In 2003, Chevron Texaco, Shell, and TotalFinaElf had to shut down oil production in Nigeria for weeks owing to ethnic violence.
In negotiating over these various sources of conflict, MNCs use a variety of means to influence host governments.
These generally follow the same patterns as those used by domestic corporations.
Such activities are politically sensitive because host-country citizens and politicians may resent foreigners’ trying to influence them.
Corruption is another means of influence over host governments that cannot be overlooked.
Certainly this occurs frequently with host governments in the global South (where government officials may be more desperate for income), but corruption also occurs regularly in rich industrialized countries.
MNCs have a range of conflicts with their home governments , just as they do with their host states.
Some MNC conflicts with home governments resemble the conflicts with host governments.
A recurrent complaint of MNCs against home governments is that policies adopted to punish political adversaries—economic sanctions and less extreme restrictions—end up harming the home-country MNCs more than the intended target.
Usually, a competing MNC from another country is able to step into the gap when a government restricts its own MNCs.
Unless they are prohibited from doing so, MNCs tend to go on doing business wherever it is profitable, with little regard for the political preferences of their governments.
International business prospers in stable political environments in host countries, but the relationship of a host country with an investing MNC can be complex.
Foreign investors are wary of putting money into business environments marked by inflation, crime, corruption, and especially armed violence that could hit their facilities and employees.
Ivory Coast, the world's largest supplier of cocoa, not only suffered from civil war in recent years but also depends on child labor to grow the cocoa that corporations ultimately market as chocolate products around the world.
Under pressure from the United States government, Conoco quickly decided to back out of the deal.
This move saved Conoco a fight with its home government, but cost Conoco a lucrative contract that went instead to a European company.
The shareholders and top executives of an MNC are mostly from its home country.
But as the world economy becomes more integrated, this is becoming less true.
Just as MNCs are increasingly doing business all over the world and assembling products from parts made in many countries, so are shareholders and managers becoming more international in composition.
All business activity takes place in an environment shaped by politics.
The international business environment most conducive to the creation of wealth by MNCs is one of stable international security.
It is difficult and risky to make money in a situation of international conflict, especially one that threatens to degenerate into violence and war.
War destroys wealth, reduces the supply of labor, and distorts markets in many ways.
Certainly some businesses profit from international instability and the threat of war—such as arms merchants and smugglers—but these are the exceptions.
Beyond these international security concerns, MNCs favor political stability in the broader rules of the game governing international business.
In monetary policy, international business benefits from the stability of rates that the managed float system tries to achieve.
In trade policy, business benefits from the stability of tariff levels in the slowly shifting WTO framework.
In norms of international law, business benefits from the traditions holding governments responsible for their predecessors’ debts and requiring compensation for nationalized foreign assets.
Occasionally, MNCs can get their home governments to provide security when host governments fail to do so.
IR scholars continue to study the relationships between the international economic activities of MNCs and the international security activities of their home governments/ Corporate alliances involving MNCs often have international implications.
When business alliances in an industry that has international markets occur within a single state, the alliances may in effect promote economic nationalism.
Increasingly, however, corporate alliances are forming across national borders.
Such alliances tend to promote liberalism rather than economic nationalism.
These international business alliances undermine both economic nationalism and the concept of a world splitting into rival trading blocs based in Europe, North America, and East Asia.
In fact, international business alliances create interdependence among their home states.
National interests become more intertwined and interstate conflicts tend to be reduced.
By operating in multiple countries at once, all MNCs have these effects to some degree.
But because they are based in one home country, MNCs are 2 Bernhard, William T., and David Leblang.
International alliances of MNCs, however, are at home in several countries at once.
We do not yet live in a world without national borders—by a long shot—but the international activities of MNCs are moving us in that direction.
Chapter 10 explores some of the ways in which people, companies, and ideas are becoming globally integrated across states.
These currencies have no inherent value but depend on the belief that they can be traded for future goods and services.
Inflation rates vary widely but are generally much higher in the global South and former Soviet bloc than in the industrialized West.
These reserves back a national currency and cover short-term imbalances in international financial flows.
However, a sudden unilateral devaluation of the currency is a risky strategy because it undermines confidence in the currency.
By adjusting interest rates on government money loaned to private banks, a central bank can control the supply of money in the national economy.
From 1945 to 1971, this was done by pegging state currencies to the United States dollar and the dollar in turn to gold.
Since then the system has used Special Drawing Rights —a kind of world currency controlled by the IMF—in place of gold.
The balance of trade must be balanced by capital flows and changes in reserves.
Though the uncontrolled inflation of the early 1990s has subsided, the economies of the former Soviet republics are still not fully integrated into the world economy.
The largest are based in the leading industrialized states, and most are privately owned.
States depend on MNCs to create new wealth, and MNCs depend on states to maintain international stability conducive to doing business globally.
Governments seek such foreign investments on their territories so as to benefit from the future stream of income.
Generally, MNCs promote policies favorable to business—low taxes, light regulation, stable currencies, and free trade.
They also support stable international security relations, because war generally disrupts business.
These inter-MNC alliances, even more than other MNC operations across national borders, are creating international interdependence and promoting liberal international cooperation.
Analyze the various influences that may have been at work in the change of currency values—monetary policies, the underlying state of national economies, the actions of central banks , and factors such as political uncertainty that affect investors’ confidence in a currency.
The IMF’s Special Drawing Rights are a world currency used only by governments for international currency management and national accounts.
Many scholars and politicians alike think private international investment is the best hope for the economies of Russia and Eastern Europe.
Suppose that the head of Dow Chemical had his way and established Dow’s world headquarters on an island outside all state territories.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview Foreign direct investment is a central part of the international economy.
Although much of that investment is investment between developed countries (such as Japan and the United States), an increasing amount flows from developed countries in the global North to developing countries in the global South.
Yet, with the growth of the global economy and the rise of globalization, FDI has become a global phenomenon.
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, FDI into developing countries remained low, averaging less than $20 billion as the 1990s approached.
By the end of the 1990s, however, over $200 billion in investments entered into developing economies from abroad.
While some find these FDI flows necessary to spur economic growth, others argue that the money is not worth the political and social costs.
Some states have attempted to lure FDI, especially from large Western MNCs, by undertaking domestic economic reforms.
Other states do little to encourage FDI, fearful of potential negative environmental, social, and political impacts.
FDI Brings Positive Benefits to Develop ng Countr es FDI brings capital investment that is key to economic growth.
What developing countries need more than anything to spur growth is capital.
It is difficult for developing economies to generate this capital from within, so foreign investment is an excellent source of it to increase the potential for economic growth.
FDI often comes in the form of factories that bring increased employment for developing countries.
While some argue that these jobs do not pay well, by local standards they often pay better than jobs generated locally.
As firms and MNCs spread their manufacturing across the globe, this increases economic interdependence between states and thus fosters better relationships.
As investors put more money into other states' economies, they may care more about those states' policies in other areas such as human rights or the environment.
This could lead to pressure on FDI recipients to improve standards in areas such as labor practices or pollution.
ARGUMENT 2 FDI Brings Problems to Developing Countries FDI's impact on developing economies is limited.
Often, a very small number of individuals benefit from FDI, leaving the rest of the population unaffected by this external investment.
Thus, even when FDI does add to economic growth, this growth is distributed very unevenly, leading to a large rich-poor gap in recipient states.
To lure large amounts of foreign investment, states will often adopt policies to please investors such as large MNCs.
Almost all lack any significant benefits, and unionization is nearly always prohibited.
The jobs can be very temporary as well—if a lower-cost labor supply is found, MNCs will pick up and move to other locations at a moment's notice.
These are not the types of jobs that bring long-term stability to developing economies.
Some of these forces are the result of state decisions—as we discussed in Chapter 8, states have attempted to integrate their economies through free trade agreements.
Still other forces are factors such as technological changes that influence how states, nonstate actors, and even individual citizens function on a day-to-day basis.
First, we will discuss state decisions to cooperate in order to create international organizations that are supranational—they subsume a number of states and their functions within a larger whole.
The UN, as we have seen, has some supranational aspects, though they are limited by the UN Charter, which is based on state sovereignty.
On a regional level, the European Union is a somewhat more supranational entity than the UN; other regional organizations have tried to follow Europe’s path as well, but with only limited success.
These IOs all contain a struggle between the contradictory forces of nationalism and supranationalism —between state sovereignty and the higher authority of supranational structures.
The other source of “coming together” we examine is technological change, specifically, the revolution in information technologies such as the Internet.
These technologies may be even more far-reaching in that they operate globally and regionally across state boundaries without formal political structures.
Nearly all of us have been affected by information technology that has brought us closer together within a state, across a region, or around the world.
Whether the sources of integration are from states or nonstate actors, the process of integration always involves transnational actors or issues.
Transnational actors (for example, MNCs and NGOs) bridge national borders, creating new avenues of interdependence among states.
Transnational issues (for example, global warming or the spread of information technology) are processes that force states to work together because they cannot solve or manage the issue alone.
This chapter explores how transnational actors and issues can lead to integration either through the actions of states or through technological change.
International integration refers to the process by which supranational institutions replace national ones—the gradual shifting upward of sovereignty from state to regional or global structures.
The ultimate expression of integration would be the merger of several states into a single state—or ultimately into a single world government.
Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism, in which states or other political units recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers 1 RisseroKappen, Thomas, ed.
This is the form of government adopted in the United States Constitution.
In practice, the process of integration has never gone beyond a partial and uneasy sharing of power between state and supranational levels.
States have been unwilling to give up their exclusive claim to sovereignty and have limited the power and authority of supranational institutions.
It represents only a step in the direction of international integration.
The most successful example of the process of integration by far— though even that success is only partial—is the European Union.
The European states have historical and present-day religious, ethnic, and cultural differences.
The 27 members of the EU in 2011 spoke 23 different official languages.
If ever there were a candidate for the failure of integration, Europe would appear to be it.
That Western European states began forming supranational institutions and creating an economic community to promote free trade and coordinate economic policies caught the attention of IR scholars, who used the term integration to describe what they observed.
Seemingly, integration challenged the realist assumption that states were strictly autonomous and would never yield power or sovereignty.
Integration processes in Europe and elsewhere are making state borders more permeable to people, goods, and ideas—increasing interdependence.
The European Union is deepening economic integration while expanding eastward.
Here, in 2006, the Tour de France crosses into Germany, passing only a road sign where in centuries past, great armies faced off across massive fortifications.
According to functionalists, technological and economic development lead to more and more supranational structures as states seek practical means to fulfill necessary functions such as delivering mail from one country to another or coordinating the use of rivers that cross borders.
As these connections became denser and the flows faster, functionalism predicted that states would be drawn together into stronger international economic structures.
The European experience, however, went beyond the creation of specialized agencies to include the development of more general, more political supranational bodies, such as the European Parliament.
Neofunctionalism is a modification of functional theory by IR scholars to explain these developments.
Neofunctionalists argue that economic integration generates a political dynamic that drives integration further.
Closer economic ties require more political coordination in order to operate effectively and eventually lead to political integration as well—a process called spillover.
Some scholars focused on the less tangible sense of community that began to develop among Europeans, running contrary to nationalist feelings that still existed as well.
The low expectation of violence among the states of Western Europe created a security community in which such feelings could grow.This is a prime example of the identity principle discussed in Chapter 1.
Elsewhere in the world, economies were becoming more interdependent at both the regional and global levels.
In Asia, the Association of South East Asian Nations , founded in 1967, chalked up some successes in promoting regional economic coordination over several decades.
The Andean Common Market, begun in 1969, promoted a limited degree of regional integration in the member states of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia.
Other South American countries (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay) founded Mercosur in 1991 to increase economic trade and integration.
Of course, none of these organizations have experienced the success of the EU, but their aims are often similar.
Integration reduces states’ ability to shield themselves and their citizens from the world’s many problems and conflicts.
For example, in the early 1990s Venezuela found that its open border with Colombia brought in large transshipments of cocaine bound for the United States.
Moreover, as states increasingly fear transnational terrorism, the prospects of open borders can give state leaders pause.
The centralization of political authority, information, and culture as a result of integration can threaten both individual and group freedom.
Ethnic groups want to safeguard their own cultures, languages, and institutions against the bland homogeneity that a global or regional melting pot would create.
As a result, many states and citizens, in Europe and elsewhere, responded to the new wave of integration with resurgent nationalism over the past decade.
Indeed, these forces have set in motion a wave of disintegration of states running counter to the integrating tendencies in today’s world.
After the Cold War, disintegration centered on Russia and Eastern Europe—especially in the former Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia.
States in other regions—Somalia, Democratic Congo, and Iraq—appear in danger of breaking into pieces, in practice if not formally.
A challenge to integration theorists in the future will be to account for these new trends running counter to integration.
In the less successful integration attempts, nationalism stands virtually unchallenged, and even in the most successful cases, nationalism remains a potent force locked in continual struggle with supranationalism.
This struggle is a central theme even in the most successful case of integration—the European Union.
You Are a Citizen of Europe"" at MyPoliSciLab The European Union Like the UN, the European Union was created after World War II and has developed since.
But whereas the UN structure has changed little since its Charter was adopted, the EU has gone through several waves of expansion in its scope, membership, and mission over the past 50 years.
Most of the next decade was spent recovering with help from the United States through the Marshall Plan.
But already, two French leaders, Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, were developing a plan to implement the idea of functionalism in Europe—that future wars could be prevented by creating economic linkages that would eventually bind states together politically.
In 1950, Schuman as French foreign minister proposed a first modest step—the merger of the French and German steel and coal industries into a single framework that could most efficiently use the two states’ coal resources and steel mills.
These six states worked through the ECSC to reduce trade barriers in coal and steel and to coordinate their coal and steel policies.
The ECSC also established a High Authority that to some extent could bypass governments and deal directly with companies, labor unions, and individuals, Britain did not join, however.
If coal and steel sound like fairly boring topics, that was exactly the idea of functionalists.
The issues involved were matters for engineers and technical experts, and did not threaten politicians.
Since 1952, technical experts have served as the leaders of the integration process in other aspects of European life and outside Europe.
International scientific communities deserve special mention in this regard.
If German and French steel experts had more in common than German and French politicians, this is even truer of scientists.
Today the European scientific community is one of the most internationally integrated areas of society.
For example, the EU operates the European Space Agency and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory.
Although technical cooperation succeeded in 1952, political and military cooperation proved much more difficult.
In line with the vision of a united Europe, the six ECSC states signed a second treaty in 1952 to create a European Defense Community to work toward integrating Europe’s military forces under one budget and command.
But the French parliament failed to ratify the treaty, and Britain refused to join such a force.
The ECSC states also discussed formation of a European Political Community in 1953, but could not agree on its terms.
Thus, in economic cooperation the supranational institutions succeeded, but in political and military affairs, state sovereignty prevailed.
The Treaty of Rome In the Treaty of Rome in 1957, the same six states (France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg) created two new organizations.
Euratom, the European Atomic Energy Community, was formed to coordinate nuclear power development by pooling research, investment, and management.
As discussed briefly in Chapter 8, there are important differences between free trade areas, customs unions, and common markets.
Creating a free trade area meant lifting tariffs and restrictions on the movement of goods across borders, as was done shortly after 1957.
Today the European Free Trade Association is an extended free trade area associated with the European Union; its members are Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Switzerland.
In a customs union, participating states adopt a unified set of tariffs with regard to goods coming in from outside the free trade area.
Without unified tariffs, each type of good could be imported into the state with the lowest tariff and then reexported (tariff free) to the other states in the free trade area; this would be inefficient.
The Treaty of Rome committed the six states to creating a customs union by 1969.
A customs union creates free and open trade within its member states, bringing great economic benefits.
For instance, a Belgian financier can invest in Germany on the same terms as a German investor.
Although the Treaty of Rome adopted the goal of a common market, even today it has been only partially achieved.
In practice, the CAP has led to recurrent conflicts among member states and tensions between nationalism and regionalism.
To promote national self-sufficiency in food, many governments give subsidies to farmers.
The CAP was based on the principle that a subsidy extended to farmers in any member state should be extended to farmers in all EU countries.
That way, no member government was forced to alienate politically powerful farmers by removing subsidies, yet the overall policy would be equalized throughout the community in line with the common market principle.
The next step in the plan for European integration, after a free trade area, customs union, and common market, was an economic and monetary union in which the overall economic policies of the member states would be coordinated for greatest efficiency and stability.
A possible future step could be the supranational coordination of economic policies such as budgets and taxes.
To reduce state leaders’ fears of losing sovereignty, the Treaty of Rome provides that changes in its provisions must be approved by all member states.
For example, France vetoed Britain’s application for membership in the EEC in 1963 and 1967.
However, in 1973 Britain did finally join, along with Ireland and Denmark.
This action expanded the organization’s membership to nine, including the largest and richest countries in the region.
Richer European states give substantial aid to the poorer ones in hopes of strengthening the weak links.
Yet, in 2011, the debt problems of these countries created the need for expensive new bailout funds and threatened the stability of the wider European economy.
Under the free trade area first created by the 1957 Treaty of Rome, goods can move freely across European borders to reach consumers in any member country.
In agriculture, creating an integrated free market in Europe has not been easy; the EC adopted a Common Agricultural Policy in the 1960s to address the problem.
These Danish farmers took to the streets in 2011 to protest EU agricultural policies that put them at a disadvantage.
Structure of the European Union The structure of the EU reflects its roots in technical and economic cooperation.
The coal and steel experts have been joined by experts on trade, agriculture, and finance at the heart of the community.
Although the rule of Eurocrats follows the functionalist plan, it has created problems as the EU has progressed.
Politicians in member states have qualms about losing power to the Eurocrats.
Citizens in those states have become more uncomfortable in recent years with the growing power of faceless Eurocrats over their lives.
Citizens can throw their own political leaders out of office in national elections, but the Eurocrats seem less accountable.
The Eurocrats consist of a staff of 25,000, organized under the European Commission at EU headquarters in Brussels, Belgium.
The Commission has 27 individual members—one from each member state—who are chosen for four-year renewable terms.
Their role is to identify problems and propose solutions to the Council of the European Union.
These individuals are supposed to represent the interests of Europe as a whole (supranational interests), not their own states, but this goal has been only imperfectly met.
The European Commission lacks formal autonomous power except for day-to-day EU operations.
For instance, in 2009 the 27 energy ministers met to approve EU efforts to restart natural gas supplies from Russia that had been shut off in a price dispute with Ukraine.
This formal structure reflects states’ resistance to yielding sovereignty.
It also means that the individuals making up the Council of the European Union vary from one meeting to the next, and that technical issues receive priority over political ones.
The arrangement thus gives some advantage back to the Commission staff.
The Council of the European Union in theory has functioned using weighted voting based on each state’s population, but in practice it operated by consensus on major policy FIGURE 10.
After adoption of the Lisbon Treaty , nearly all issues are now decided by qualified majority voting.
The Treaty’s definition of a qualified majority is that at least 55 percent of EU members, representing 65 percent of EU citizens, must vote in favor to secure passage.
The Council of the European Union must approve the policies of the European Commission and give it general directions.
This European Council of the 28 state leaders meets with the European Commission president twice a year.
There is a European Parliament, which falls somewhat short of a true legislature passing laws for all of Europe.
It must approve the Commission’s budget but cannot control it item by item.
The parliament shares power with the Council under a “co-decision procedure” in such areas as migration, employment, health, and consumer protection.
The 2009 Lisbon Treaty significantly expanded the areas in which the co-decision procedure applies.
In 1999, an independent commission created by the parliament found waste and fraud in the Commission, leading all 20 commissioners to resign.
The Economic and Social Committee discusses continent-wide issues that affect particular industries or constituencies.
This committee is purely advisory; it lobbies the European Commission on matters it deems important.
It is designed as a forum in which companies, labor unions, and interest groups can bargain transnationally.
The European Court of Justice in Luxembourg adjudicates disputes on matters covered by the Treaty of Rome—which covers many issues.
The European Court can overrule national laws that conflict with EU law—giving it unique powers among international courts.
In addition, it hears cases brought by individuals, not just governments.
In hundreds of cases, the Court has ruled on matters ranging from discrimination in the workplace to the pensions of Commission staff members.
The Single European Act European integration has proceeded in a step-by-step process that produces tangible successes, reduces politicians’ fears of losing sovereignty, and creates pressures to continue the process.
Often major steps forward are followed by periods of stagnation or even reversals in integration.
The first major revision of the Treaty of Rome—the 1985 Single European Act—began a new phase of accelerated integration.
For instance, professionals licensed in one state should be free to practice in another, but Spain’s licensing requirements for, say, physical therapists may have differed from those of Britain.
The Commission bureaucrats worked to smooth out such inconsistencies and create a uniform set of standards.
For example, a dispute raged for decades over the definition of chocolate.
Belgium— famous for its chocolates—requires the exclusive use of cocoa butter for a product to be called chocolate; Britain and other countries use a cheaper process that partially substitutes other vegetable oils.
Britain and six other EU countries that joined the EU since 1973 won an exemption from the all-cocoa butter rule that applies to the other eight EU members.
Under the pressure of integration, however, the EU is moving to unify standards such as food regulations.
The chocolate wars illustrate that the seemingly simple concept of economic integration sets in motion forces of change that reach into every corner of society and affect the daily lives of millions of people.
The Single European Act also gave a new push to the creation of a European Central Bank , and a single currency and monetary system—longstanding goals that have since been accomplished.
As long as the economies of the EU members were tied to separate states , efforts to maintain fixed exchange rates were difficult.
For example, British politicians in 1992 were reluctant to deepen a recession by keeping interest rates high just to save German politicians from inflation that might result from lowering rates.
The 1992 process moved economic integration into more political and controversial areas, eroding sovereignty more visibly than before.
However, Europe 1992 continued to put aside for the future the difficult problems of political and military integration.
The Maastricht Treaty The Maastricht Treaty, signed in the Dutch city of Maastricht in 1992, renamed the EC as the EU and committed it to further progress in three main areas.
The first was monetary union , in which the existing national currencies were abolished and replaced by a single European currency.
A second set of changes, regarding justice and home affairs, created a European police agency and responded to the new reality that borders were opening to immigrants, criminals, sex traffickers, and contraband.
It also expanded the idea of citizenship, so that, for example, a French citizen living in Germany can vote in local elections there.
A third goal of Maastricht— political and military integration—was even more controversial.
The treaty commits European states to work toward a common foreign policy with a goal of eventually establishing a joint military force.
National Interests and Conventional Statecraft in the European Community.
As an amendment to the Treaty of Rome, Maastricht had to be ratified by all members.
The ratification process stirred up strong public feelings against closer European union in several countries.
In the end, the EU implemented the Maastricht Treaty, although more slowly and with fewer participating countries than originally hoped.
Economic and technical integration, including the new monetary union among 12 members, maintained momentum.
Europe’s economic integration has begun to reshape political economy at a global level.
The EU now sets the rules for access to one of the world’s largest markets, for a vast production and technology network, and for the world’s strongest currency.
The United States chemical industry operated under United States regulations that exempt 80 percent of chemicals.
But the EU adopted stricter chemical regulations, requiring tests of health effects of all chemicals used in products and mandating efforts to substitute for toxic chemicals in everyday products.
As a result, several major United States cosmetics companies reformulated their products to comply with new EU cosmetics regulations calling for removal of unhealthy substances.
Even after 50 years of preparation, spillover from economic to political issues is elusive.
Monetary Union A European currency, the euro, has replaced national currencies in 17 EU member states, as mandated in the Maastricht process.
After several years as an abstract unit like the IMF’s SDR , used by national governments and for international exchange, the euro came into full circulation in 2002 and the national currencies ceased to exist.
The European Central Bank took over the functions of states’ central banks.
In participating states, fundamental economic and financial conditions must be equalized.
For example, in 2010 the unemployment rate was over 11 percent in Slovakia but only 5 percent in the Netherlands.
In an integrated economy that is also politically centralized, the central government can reallocate resources, as the United States might do if Texas were booming and Massachusetts were in recession.
But the EU does not have centralized powers of taxation or control of national budgets.
The main solution adopted at Maastricht was to restrict membership in the monetary union, at least in the first round, to only those countries with enough financial stability not to jeopardize the union.
To join the unified currency, a state had to achieve a budget deficit of less than 3 percent of GDP, a national debt of less than 60 percent of GDP, an inflation rate no more than 1. percentage points above the average of the three lowest-inflation EU members, and stable interest rates and national currency values.
This meant hard choices by governments in France, Spain, Italy, and other countries to cut budgets and benefits and to take other politically unpopular moves.
Governments fell to opposition parties in several countries, but the new leaders generally kept to the same course.
As a result of their newfound fiscal discipline, all 12 EU members that wanted to participate in the euro qualified.
Slovenia joined in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, and Estonia in 2011.
Britain, Denmark, and Sweden opted to retain their national currencies.
A monetary union infringes on a core prerogative of states—the right to print currency.
Because citizens use money every day, a European currency along these lines could deepen citizens’ sense of identification with Europe—a victory for supranationalism over nationalism.
However, precisely for this reason, some state leaders and citizens resisted the idea of giving up the symbolic value of their national currencies.
These problems were reflected in the task of designing euro banknotes and coins.
The solution was to put generic architectural elements on the front of the banknotes and a map of Europe on the back.
In 2004, the European Commission challenged the EU member states for voting to let France and Germany break the euro rules by running high budget deficits.
And Latvia’s government lost power within six months of TAKE A NUMBER The Maastricht Treaty called for a monetary union with a common currency.
In 2002, the euro currency came into effect smoothly in 12 countries and emerged as a world currency that rivals the United States dollar.
But the 2008 recession exposed underlying problems that triggered a eurozone debt crisis and second recession in 2012, especially in weaker members.
These workers in hard-hit Spain, where unemployment passed 25 percent, line up for help in 2013.
Greece, which had previously admitted to falsifying economic data in order to be admitted to the eurozone, had for years borrowed more than it could repay, and needed a European bailout to survive the global financial crisis.
Because Greece used the euro, its troubles affected global investors’ impressions of all euro states.
In fact, in 2010, only two states in the EU actually met the EU targets for debt levels.
Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and Italy all undertook large-scale economic reforms, and governments lost power in Greece, Italy, and other EU states.
Germany and France fought over who would help bail out the euro states in trouble.
After Germany’s economic minister stated that Germany “would not offer Greece a cent,” cooler heads prevailed and the EU countries banded together to support one another’s economies.
By 2012, the EU had patched together a bailout system capable of propping up its members’ economies when needed, backed by more than a trillion dollars.
But the EU’s decision process remained cumbersome, and citizens took to the streets frequently in countries such as Greece and Spain that had to implement harsh austerity budgets in exchange for bailouts.
The austerity measures not only drove up unemployment, above 25 percent in the case of Spain in 2013 , but also helped drive the whole eurozone into recession.
Despite these recent problems in the eurozone, the creation of a European currency is arguably the largest financial overhaul ever attempted in history, and in its first eight years it has been successful.
European Financial Health BACKGROUND: The 17 states that make up the eurozone have given up their national currencies in favor of a common one.
For instance, deficit spending on politically popular programs would normally affect just that country’s currency, but if the country is in the eurozone, then that effect is spread across all the other euro countries.
To avoid the temptation to free-ride, the European Union set up rules for fiscal responsibility (including low deficits) before a country can adopt the euro.
As later became clear, several countries, including Greece, fudged those requirements when they first joined the euro.
The health of the euro currency is thus a collective good depending on the fiscal discipline of its members.
Free riding threatens all eurozone members since an economic crisis in one country can easily spread to others through the common currency.
In 2010, Greek fiscal policies combined with the aftermath of the global recession to put Greece into a debt crisis, nearing bankruptcy.
The value of the euro began to drop and world financial markets fell as anxiety increased.
The EU has expanded from 15 members to 28 since 2004, with potentially far-reaching changes in how the EU 14 operates.
Spain and Portugal, admitted in 1986 as the 11th and 12th members, filled out the western side of Europe.
They are located on the immediate fringe of the present EU area, and as relatively rich countries, they did not disrupt the EU economy.
Norway applied to join and was accepted, but its citizens voted down the idea in a referendum in 1994, leaving the EU with 15 members after 1995—all but two of the main states of Western Europe.
Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, and Cyprus.
The European Commission expanded to 25 members, without the five largest having two seats, and with new voting rules that move away from a requirement for consensus.
Croatia joined in 2013 as the 28th member, showing that despite its financial problems the EU continues to expand, albeit slowly.
In response, the European Union and IMF put together a $141 billion rescue package for Greece.
To take effect, the package needed approval from all 16 eurozone members.
In Germany, where fiscal discipline is a tradition, angry voters did not want to bail out the irresponsible Greeks, and the governing party’s slim majority in Parliament was threatened.
The German government thus faced both domestic costs and a direct price tag of $28 billion for Germany’s share of the bailout.
Identity played a role in the German government’s decision to approve the deal.
The European Union’s identity as a continent in common meant that Germany saw the collective good of euro stability as its own good.
However, reciprocity also played a role, since the German government supported the bailout only after the problem threatened to spread and destabilize the euro, directly harming Germany if it did not Greeks protest austerity measures taken as part of a bailout plan, 2010. approve the deal.
Just the thought of fellow Europeans in need did not alone make Germany want to help.
Although it rebuffed Turkey in 2002, the EU later agreed to begin formal entry negotiations with Turkey in 2005—the start of a yearslong process.
The EU has not reached a consensus on admitting Turkey as a full member.
Proponents note that Turkey has made major economic and political changes, including abolishing the death penalty and improving human rights, to try to win EU membership.
Granting full membership would reward these changes, keeping an implicit promise to reciprocate Turkey’s actions.
Turkey’s GDP, growing rapidly in recent years, would add about 5 percent to the EU’s economy.
And Turkish workers could help alleviate a labor shortage in Western Europe.
Supporters also argue that Turkey as an EU member would serve as a bridge between Europe and the important but unstable Middle East region and as an example of secular democracy to other Middle Eastern countries.
Opponents note that Turkey would be the only Muslim country in the EU, yet would become the second most populous EU member after Germany.
With 2 million Turks already living in Germany, opponents argue that EU membership would open the floodgates for immigration from a large, poor country, overwhelming the smaller and richer EU members.
Costs to subsidize Turkish farmers and expand social programs could reach tens of billions of euros.
Income Levels of Old and New EU Members, 2005 $40,000 30,000 LO O o C\J CC5 H—■ g 20,000 CD Q Q_ O CD 10,000 12 Euro Countries* Other Pre-2004 Members 10 Countries 2 Countries Joined in 2004 Joined in 2007 Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, Lux., Ireland, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Austria, Finland Poland, Czech Rep., Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Cyprus Turkey (wants to join) Britain, Denmark, Sweden Bulgaria, Romania Slovenia adopted the euro in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, and Estonia in 2011.
In 20102013, the financial crisis in the eurozone pushed aside the question of admitting Turkey or other new members.
As the new members joined the EU since 2004, the ability of the EU to reach decisions by consensus became more complicated, a point underscored by Slovakia’s single-handed veto of a massive euro bailout briefly in 2011, The working time required to make decisions in the Council of the European Union expanded, with potential conflicts and alliances on a particular issue among 28 rather than 15 members.
Recall that collective goods are generally harder to provide in larger groups, where free riding is less obvious, than in smaller ones.
Furthermore, by Western European standards, the new members are relatively poor.
Existing EU members were wary of being dragged down by these economies, most of which are still embroiled in the painful transition from socialism to capitalism and sometimes lack stable currencies.
In fact, however, the 2012-2013 debt crisis and recession centered on the older members such as Greece, Spain, and Portugal, not the new members.
Perhaps as a result of these pressures, the EU in the last decade has shown signs of dividing into “inner” and “outer” layers—with states such as France and Germany joining a currency union and deepening their integration, and those such as Britain and perhaps the new members operating at the edges of the EU with more autonomy.
Since 1995, the EU has established and expanded the Schengen area , a zone in which border controls have been abolished.
Goods and people move freely within the zone without stopping at borders.
Norway, Iceland, and Switzerland also belong, although they are not EU members.
IMPERFECT UNION CAflTAlIM' The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007.
Efforts to update European governance with the new Lisbon Treaty finally succeeded in 2009.
But much complexity remains to be worked out, as shown in the muddled response to the Greek financial crisis in 2011.
Here, protesters demonstrate at the European Central Bank in Frankfurt, Germany, 2011.
The Lisbon Treaty To grapple with the implications of an expanding EU, the 25 leaders signed an EU constitution in late 2004, and the European Parliament gave it a strong vote of support in 2005.
To take effect, it had to be ratified by all 25 states, including several requiring referenda.
The constitution would establish a stronger president of the EU, as well as a foreign minister, and would replace the requirement for consensus in EU decision making with majority voting in more cases.
But voters in France and the Netherlands rejected the constitution and the process halted.
At the end of 2007, the EU moved forward with another new proposed constitution, the Lisbon Treaty.
The treaty was similar to the previous constitution, but faced a popular referendum only in Ireland.
For example, a charter of human rights was made legally binding on all member states.
On the other hand, some changes allow state members and individual citizens to place more checks on EU power.
National parliaments will now also receive draft legislation to evaluate and respond to before it is enacted in Brussels.
The Treaty also attempts to increase transparency by requiring European Council meetings to be held in public.
And in an attempt to engage EU citizens directly, the Commission must now take up any proposal or petition that receives 1 million signatures.
Within the EU are the “inner six” and the new arrivals, each with its own concerns.
Around the edges are the EFTA states participating in the European Economic Area.
Russia and even the United States are European actors in some respects but not others.
Operating by consensus, with a large and universal membership of 56 states, the OSCE has little power except to act as a forum for discussions of security issues.
In the late 1990s, the OSCE shifted into new tasks such as running elections, helping political parties in Bosnia and Kosovo, and providing various forms of monitoring and assistance in half a dozen Eastern European countries.
Thus, international integration is not a matter of a single group or organization but more a mosaic of structures tying states together.
These various structures of the European political system, centered on the EU, are IGOs composed of states as members.
But a lesstangible aspect of integration is the sense of identity that develops over time as economic ties bring people closer together across borders.
Supranational identity, culture, and communication are also aspects of international integration.
The remainder of this chapter considers how information technologies are bypassing states and bringing about this kind of integration globally.
The Power of Information Global telecommunications are profoundly changing how information and culture function in international relations.
These technological advances, at the center of globalization, are bringing the identity principle to the fore as communities interact across distances and borders.
Newly empowered individuals and groups are creating new transnational networks worldwide, bypassing states.
Connecting the World New international political possibilities arise from technological developments.
The media over which information travels—telephones, television, films, magazines, and so forth—shape the way ideas take form and spread from one place to another.
The media with the strongest political impact are television, radio, phones, and the Internet.
BACKGROUND For decades, Turkey has desired full membership in the European Union.
Your own country maintains extensive economic ties with Turkey as well—Germany is Turkey's top source of imports and biggest market for exports.
An economically healthy Turkey in the EU would be good for German businesses.
Past German leaders have differed on their views on Turkey's application, ranging from outright opposition to strong support.
Turkish leaders strongly oppose this option, and other European leaders have not supported your compromise to date.
While Turkey's application to the EU has supporters and detractors across Europe, no country opposes Turkish membership more than France.
Recently, when France held the EU presidency, it demanded delays of Turkey's accession talks.
H V — arbeitgeber nrw DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Turkish membership in the EU is not popular domestically.
Native Germans are concerned that immigrants could freely come to Germany and take jobs.
They also fear that a wave of cheap exports from Turkey will undermine German workers.
Already, more than 2. million Turks live in Germany, making them the largest ethnic minority in your country.
There have been ethnic tensions between the Turkish immigrants and native Germans, leading for calls for tight restrictions on Turkish immigration.
Yet, many of the Turks in Germany are voting and tax-paying citizens who have urged you to support Turkey's membership.
Upon hearing of France's proposal, ethnic Turks begin large protests in several cities in Germany to urge your support of Turkey's application.
Radio, and increasingly TV, reaches the poorest rural areas of the global South.
Ordinary over-the-air TV and radio signals are radio waves of specific frequencies, which are a limited resource in high demand, regulated by governments.
Because radio waves do not respect national borders, the allocation of frequencies is a subject of interstate bargaining.
The Qatar-based al Jazeera, begun in 1996, is a force in Middle Eastern politics and reaches an influential audience worldwide.
In a 2006 poll in six Arab countries, citizens listed al Jazeera as their main source of international news by a large margin over any other satellite TV network.
Telephone and Internet Even more empowering of ordinary citizens are telephones and the Internet.
These are two-way media through which users interact among themselves without a centralized information source.
In 2012, the world had 6 billion cell phone subscriptions, almost as many as people and far outnumbering the 1. billion landlines.
Surprisingly, one of the most politically important features of these technologies turned out to be the cell phone camera.
It has empowered ordinary citizens to create visual records, such as videos of political demonstrations in one country that end up on TV in another country.
In the 2011-2012 Arab Spring revolutions, especially in Syria, cell phone videos played a critical role in winning support by showing governments brutally murdering citizens.
A related technological development of paramount political importance is the growth of social media such as Facebook, building communities and allowing sharing of ideas outside government control and sometimes across international borders.
In Africa, cheap cell phones with cheap prepaid calling cards have let millions of relatively poor individuals communicate.
These phones empower individuals, for example by letting farmers check market prices before deciding when to harvest crops.
In one notable African success, Kenya has become the world’s leader in using cell phones for banking.
The country has 10 million banking transactions daily , but half the population lacks a bank account, so entrepreneurs developed the M-Pesa mobile payment system.
City dwellers can transfer money to their home villages by phone instead of taking a wad of cash for a long bus ride.
Deep political divisions over the Internet came into focus in December 2012, at a conference of the ITU in Dubai to develop a new treaty on the Internet and global 16 Franda, Marcus.
International Telecommunication Union . telecommunications, Russia, China, and others saw the Internet as a system of government-controlled networks, while the United States and others, including Google and various NGOs, saw it as a more amorphous entity to facilitate the free flow of information.
The United States House of Representatives, in a rare moment of bipartisanship, unanimously opposed the new treaty.
The Digital Divide Taken on its own, the addition of phone and Internet capability in poor countries is impressive.
A person living in the global North is far more likely than a person in the global South to have a landline, cell phone, and Internet access.
As the Internet wires parts of the world into a tight network centered on the United States, Europe, and East Asia—where most Web users live—other regions are largely left out.
In 2012, the Internet bandwidth per user was 25 times higher in Europe than Africa.
The Internet reached 70 percent of households in the global North but only 20 percent in the global South.
The numbers for mobile phone Internet are 51 percent in the North and 8 percent in the South.
The explosive growth of Internet use is occurring mainly among the world’s richer people.
Some activists hope that the Internet can transform poor villages in the global South, partly by letting them produce traditional goods locally and market them globally.
In one successful experiment in India in recent years, a businessman placed computer screens with pointing and clicking devices and high-speed Internet access in walls and kiosks in very poor slums.
In each location, neighborhood kids quickly gathered, taught themselves to browse the Internet, and even invented their own terminology to describe the unfamiliar cursor and icons on the screen.
This small-scale “hole in the wall experiment” shows that simple methods can go far to break down the digital divide between the world’s rich and poor.
A model project in Cambodia in 2001 helped revive a village silk-weaving industry by marketing locally made scarves on a village Web site.
However, critics noted that the project was feasible only because a satellite company owned by the Thai prime minister donated $18,000 per year of link time.
A United States aid organization provided the computers, training, Web site design, and credit card processing required to sell scarves from the village.
The reality is that most poor villages cannot afford the Internet, cannot read the language of most Web sites, and cannot maintain computers and Web sites without extensive training.
Since 2007, the One Laptop Per Child project has been mass-producing an inexpensive Web-capable wireless personal computer, priced at $200.
The laptops can be hand-powered, with one minute of exertion charging the battery for ten minutes of use.
Several countries have ordered millions for their children, and about 3 million have shipped to 40 countries, notwithstanding problems and setbacks.
In 2009, Uruguay bought one for every school-age child in that country.
Other than showing some adults how to use the solar chargers, the project included no instructions.
Within two weeks, the students were singing ABC songs, teaching themselves to read.
And in five months, they had hacked into the Android operating system to enable a camera and customize the desktop.
Today, governments can gather, organize, and store huge amounts of information.
In this respect, the information revolution empowers governments more than ever.
In the past, a wanted criminal, drug lord, or terrorist could slip over the border and take refuge in a foreign country.
The terrorists who attacked the United States in 2001 demonstrated how easy this was.
Today, however, it is more likely that a routine traffic ticket in the foreign country could trigger an instant directive to arrest the person.
On the other hand, information technologies give repressive governments more power to keep tabs on citizens, spy on dissidents, and manipulate public opinion.
Those technologies are now being mobilized in force to strengthen counterterrorism.
Just as citizens and terrorists find it harder to hide from governments, so are state governments finding it harder to hide information from each other.
A powerful state such as the United States can increase its power through information technologies.
It can and does monitor phone calls, faxes, data transmissions, and radio conversations in foreign countries.
WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS Global communication, a very new capability on the time scale of the international system, is changing the rules of IR and empowering nonstate transnational actors.
Telecommunications could change the path of development in poor countries, possibly bypassing traditional infrastructure such as phone lines and leapfrogging to a wireless networked economy.
Egypt successfully blocked a choke point and cut off international Web access.
And Syria’s government used its own hackers to track down the identities of protesters anonymously posting antigovernment videos and messages on the Web.
The United States government in response trained democracy activists in technologies of the Internet and social media and created shadow Internet and cell phone networks inside foreign countries whose governments were trying to shut down communications.
As the cost of information technology decreases, it comes into reach of more states.
Now small states can gain some of the same capabilities electronically.
Even sophisticated information is more available and cheaper—high-resolution satellite photos are now available commercially and are cheap or free.
These images can be used for both military purposes and natural resource management—for example, knowing which states (including one’s own) have such resources as oil, minerals, forests, and farmland, and the rate at which they are being used.
Most governments create explicit channels of information dissemination to influence domestic and international audiences.
Stations such as Radio Moscow broadcast radio programs in dozens of languages aimed at all the world’s regions.
The United States operates the Voice of America shortwave radio network, which is picked up in many remote regions.
The United States also beams specialized programming into Cuba (TV/ Radio Marti) and China, among others.
Governments spread false as well as true information as a means of international influence.
In the 1930s, the Nazis discovered that the “big lie,” if repeated enough times, would be accepted as truth by most people.
It is harder to fool international audiences these days, but domestic ones can still respond to propagandists misinformation.
Most governments own and operate at least one main TV station, and many hold a monopoly on TV stations.
Thus, TV signals often rank with military equipment and currency as capabilities so important to a government that it must control them itself.
Indeed, in a military coup d’etat, usually one of the first and most important targets seized is the television broadcasting facility.
Information as a Tool against Governments Information can be used against governments as well, by foreign governments, NGOs, or domestic political opponents.
Governments, especially repressive ones, fear the free flow of information, for good reason.
New information technologies have become powerful tools of domestic opposition movements and their allies in foreign governments.
Television coverage has fed popular discontent regarding the current United States war in Iraq, as it did for the Vietnam War and the Russian war in Chechnya.
In 2009, the Chinese government began blocking all access to YouTube after videos surfaced of Chinese military forces repressing pro-Tibet demonstrations.
In Iran, where millions of people have used the Internet to discuss taboo topics such as sex, fashion, and politics, the government was widely criticized for cracking down on protesters after a disputed election in 2009.
That crackdown was broadcast on Internet sites such as Twitter and Facebook as opposition members posted video and pictures of beatings and even the shooting death of a female protester.
The global peace demonstrations preceding the 2003 Iraq War used information technologies to turn out millions of people in dozens of countries on short notice.
In 2010, the United Arab Emirates announced it would shut down BlackBerry’s services, but later reached a compromise allowing users to continue using the devices.
A major controversy over Web freedom also emerged in 2010 when the United States company Google announced that it would no longer comply with Chinese law that censors Internet searches by blocking politically sensitive words from its Chinese search engine.
Nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations have also harbored the power of cellular phones and the Internet to recruit operatives, raise money, and coordinate attacks—even to detonate improvised explosive devices remotely with a cell phone’s ring triggering the bomb when called.
Recall that new “smart weapons” technologies empower foot soldiers HOT OFF THE PRESS Information, which easily crosses state borders, is a major factor in both international and domestic politics and may even be laying technological foundations for a global identity.
Here a staff member of Kenya's daily newspaper surveys the damage after police—responding to unfavorable coverage of the president— stormed its offices and burned tens of thousands of copies, 2006.
New communications technologies may be doing the same for ordinary citizens relative to governments and political parties.
The Internet in many ways empowers small fringe groups relative to states, and leaves states vulnerable in new ways.
Hackers have taken over control of United States government computers and have unleashed costly viruses against businesses and people worldwide.
During the U.S.China spy plane standoff in 2001, nationalistic Chinese hackers claimed to have put pro-Chinese graffiti on 1,000 United States Web sites, and United States hackers returned the favor.
An Ohio school district found that its site now played China’s national anthem.
The Chinese communist party criticized “Web terrorism” and the crisis eased.
But the United States government worries that real terrorists could use the Internet to cause massive disruptions in United States economic life.
All in all, the tide of technology seems to be running against governments.
Information gets through, and no political power seems capable of holding it back for long.
As more and more communication channels carry more information to more places, governments become just another player in a crowded field.
CONNECTED States do not control the global flow of information, which has become a potent force in world politics.
Despite efforts by authoritarian governments, the young participants in the Arab Spring used Internet capabilities and social networking sites to publicize abuses and organize resistance.
These protesters in Egypt's capital in 2012 stay connected to each other and the world via iPad.
Telecommunications and Global Culture As the information revolution continues to unfold, it will further increase international interdependence, making actions in one state reverberate in other states more strongly than in the past.
Information is thus slowly undermining realists’ assumptions of state sovereignty and territorial integrity.
At the same time, by empowering substate and transnational actors, information technology is undermining the centrality of states themselves in world affairs.
The information revolution greatly increases transparency in international relations.
As a result, states do not need to arm against unknown potential threats because they see the real threats.
Similarly, the ability to monitor performance of agreements makes collective goods problems easier to resolve because cheaters and free riders can be identified.
Moreover, the ability of governments to bargain effectively with each other and to reach mutually beneficial outcomes is enhanced by the availability of instant communications channels.
In these ways, the increased transparency allowed by new technologies strengthens the reciprocity principle as a solution to IR conflicts.
The complex monitoring and accounting required in international agreements based on reciprocity—from trade deals to arms control—comes much easier in a transparent world.
In the past, nationalism has tapped into the psychological dynamics of group identity in a powerful way that has legitimized the state as the ultimate embodiment of its people’s aspirations and identity.
Now the information revolution may aid the development of transnational or supranational identities.
Journalists, scientists, and church members, among others, work in communities spanning national borders.
So do members of transnational movements, such as those linking women from various countries, or environmentalists, or human rights activists.
The links forged in such transnational communities may create a new functionalism that could encourage international integration on a global scale.
Citizens of different states share their admiration of sports stars, who become international celebrities.
The Olympics (run by the International Olympic Committee, an NGO) is a global event with a worldwide audience/ 0 The U.S.-Chinese rapprochement of 1971 was so delicate that political cooperation was impossible until the way had first been paved by sports—the United States table tennis team that made the first official United States visit to China.
People who travel to other countries often develop both a deeper understanding and a deeper appreciation for them.
Added to these contacts are exchange students and those who attend college in a foreign country.
Like international integration and globalization generally, global culture has its downside.
For many people, especially in the global South, the information revolution carrying global culture into their midst is, despite its empowering potential, an invasive force in practice.
Above all, the emerging global culture is dominated by the world’s superpower, the United States; United States cultural influence is at least as strong as United States military influence.
Culture may be just another economic product, to be produced in the place of greatest comparative advantage, but culture also is central to national identity and politics.
The prospect of cultural imperialism thus opens another front in the conflict of liberalism and The power of information, opening up a wave of globalization in international business, is also strengthening global communities that cross or even transcend national borders.
Some events, such as the British royal wedding in 2011, may be rooted in one nation but become global news stories followed by millions around the world.
A Behind'the'Scenes Look at the Politics, the Scandals, and the Glory of the Games.
At the UN-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society in 2005, Europe and developing countries tried unsuccessfully to break the monopoly held by a United States consortium over registering domain names, including country-code domains such as “.uk” and “.cn” that states want to control as a matter of national sovereignty.
By 2009, however, the Internet’s governing body, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers , announced that Internet addresses can now contain non-Latin characters.
This will allow addresses to contain Chinese, Cyrillic, Japanese, Arabic, or any number of non-Latin based characters to form a Web address.
Recent trends seem to be moving toward a more multilateral world culture.
Boy and girl bands are systematically recruited and developed, then marketed globally via social media.
Another highly successful cultural export product can be found in Brazilian soap operas.
Over the coming years and decades, their shape will become clearer, and scholars will be able to determine more accurately how they influence world politics and state sovereignty.
We need not wait as long to see the effects of a different kind of supranational influence, however.
Environmental problems, which rarely recognize national borders, have forced states into ever-closer cooperation as political leaders find that the only effective responses are at a supranational level.
These processes generally lead to an ongoing struggle between nationalism and supranationalism.
Instead, forces of disintegration tore apart previously existing states such as the Soviet Union.
Its 28 member states have given considerable power to the EU in economic decision making.
EU agricultural subsidies are a major source of trade conflict with the United States.
It is the biggest experiment with money in history and had great success in its first years but hit a crisis in 2010-2013 over members’ debts.
A monetary union requires roughly comparable inflation rates and financial stability in participating states.
The Commission’s president, individual members, and staff all serve Europe as a whole—a supranational role.
However, the Council of the European Union representing member states has power over the Commission.
The European Court of Justice also has limited powers, but has extended its jurisdiction more successfully than any other international court, and can overrule national laws.
The EU’s structures and procedures were adapted as it moved from 15 to 27 members.
The EU faces challenges in deciding how far to expand its membership, particularly regarding Turkey.
Supranational relationships and identities are being fostered by new information technologies— especially mass media such as TV, radio, and the Internet—although the process is still in an early stage.
Government access to information can also increase the stability of international relationships, since the security dilemma and other collective goods problems become less difficult in a transparent world.
Authoritarian governments find it hard to limit the flow of information into and out of their states.
This process may hold the potential for the development of a single world culture.
However, some politicians and citizens worry about cultural imperialism— that such a culture would be too strongly dominated by the United States.
Functional economic ties among European states have contributed to the emergence of a supranational political structure, the EU, which has considerable though not unlimited power.
Suppose you happened to be chatting with the president of the European Commission, who is complaining about the public reaction in European states against the growing power of the Commission’s Eurocrats.
Suppose the government of Turkey hired you as a consultant to help it develop a presentation to the EU about why Turkey should be admitted as a member.
Information technologies are strengthening transnational and supranational communications and identity.
However, they are also providing states with new instruments of power and control.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview Since the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community, there appears to be a forward-moving process of integration in Europe.
It is economically large, with an aggregate GDP greater than that of the United States.
It is a powerful force diplomatically, mediating international disputes and conflicts, even those involving other great powers.
Yet, the EU has lately had difficulty furthering the integration process.
After the adoption of the euro, the EU changed its focus from deepening integration (taking over more policy areas from member states) to broadening membership by admitting former Eastern European states to membership.
This expansion has extended the economic and political power of the EU, but it has also resulted in challenges.
Attempts to change EU rules to further extend the power of the European Parliament, to create a position to help unify European foreign policy, to make the EU's human rights charter legally binding, and to alter voting systems within the EU Council to remove the requirement for unanimous voting have all met with stiff resistance.
The global economic recession also put strains on the EU, with the Hungarian prime minister warning in 2009 of a ""new iron curtain"" between rich (Western European) and poor states.
The EU Integration Process Is Fonished Progress ng Troubles with the proposed Constitution and new Lisbon Treaty prove there are difficulties.
The rejection of the proposed European Constitution in 2007 and the initial rejection of the Lisbon Treaty in 2008 show that major challenges lie ahead when it comes to implementing major EU policy changes.
Even the attempt to guarantee individual rights in Europe created controversy.
Many of the major EU changes, including the Single European Act and Maastricht, began when the EU had 12 or 15 members.
Now, with 28 members, finding agreement among all the states will be extremely difficult, especially on issues where unanimous consent is required.
ARGUMENT 2 The EU Integration Process Will Continue to Advance Obstacles have been overcome in the past.
Few observers gave the EU much of a chance to get the euro off the ground, yet it has succeeded in doing so.
Soon after the defeat of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland, a new agreement was reached to allow a second vote.
EU ministers have been persistent and creative in their attempts to deepen the integration process.
With the failure to date of the Doha Round of WTO negotiations and tensions with the United States over when and where NATO forces should be used, the EU has strong incentives to deepen cooperation among its members.
It now knows it cannot rely only on the WTO to further trade liberalization or on the United States for military leadership.
The EU has been and remains flexible as to how member states respond to the deepening of cooperation.
Thus, further integration does not require unanimous adoption of all policies.
EU Enlargement, Region Building and Shifting Borders of Inclusion and Exclusion.
Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Interdependence and the Environment Global threats to the natural environment are a growing source of interdependence.
States’ actions regarding pollution, conservation, and natural resources routinely affect other states.
A sustainable natural environment is a collective good, and states bargain over how to distribute the costs of providing that good.
The technical, scientific, and ethical aspects of managing the environment are complex, but the basic nature of states’ interests is not.
The collective goods problem arises in each issue area concerning the environment, resources, and population.
For example, the world’s major fisheries in international waters are not owned by any state; they are a collective good.
The various fishing states must cooperate (partly by regulating nonstate actors such as MNCs) to avoid depleting the stocks of fish.
If too many states fail to cooperate, the fish populations decline and everyone’s catch drops.
And indeed, in 1997-2007, catches worldwide declined by about 15 percent.
Because the world’s states did not solve the collective goods problem of world fisheries, they are paying $20 billion a year in subsidies to bankrupt fishing industries in their respective countries.
The benefits of that fish go entirely to the one catching it, whereas the eventual costs of depleted stocks will be shared by all who fish there.
No world government exists to decide such a question, so states must enter into multilateral negotiations, agreements, and regimes.
In 1999, a UN-sponsored agreement among all the world’s major fishing states set goals to reduce fleet overcapacity.
The pain of unemployment and economic adjustment should thus be shared.
However, the agreement is voluntary, its implementation delayed, and its effect on collapsing fisheries probably too little, too late.
This type of collective goods dilemma has been called the tragedy of the commons/ Centuries ago, the commons were shared grazing land in Britain.
As with fisheries, if too many people kept too many sheep, the commons would be overgrazed.
Britain solved the problem by enclosure of the commons—splitting it into privately owned pieces on each of which a single owner would have an incentive to manage resources responsibly.
The global commons refers to the shared parts of the earth, such as the oceans and outer space.
As in other areas of IPE, the solution of environmental collective goods problems is based on achieving shared benefits that depend on overcoming conflicting interests/ Regimes are an important part of the solution , providing rules based on the reciprocity principle to govern bargaining over who gets the benefits and bears the costs of environmental protection.
Functional IOs specialize in technical and management aspects of the environment.
For example, the transnational community of experts and policy makers concerned with pollution in the Mediterranean is an epistemic community.
Interest in the environment has grown steadily since the first Earth Day organized by environmental activists in 1970.
It adopted general principles—that one state’s actions should not cause environmental damage to another, for instance—and raised awareness about international aspects of environmental damage.
The larger and more ambitious 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, brought together more than a hundred state leaders.
The 1992 Earth Summit established the Commission on Sustainable Development, which monitors states’ compliance with the promises they made at the Earth Summit and hears evidence from environmental NGOs such as Greenpeace.
The Commission’s ability to monitor and publicize state actions is supposed to discourage states from cheating.
China and other developing countries in Asia stand at the center of the debate over sustainable development.
In the drive for rapid economic growth, these countries have created serious pollution and other environmental problems.
In early 2013, Beijing’s smog far exceeded dangerous levels, and residents who ventured outside suffered burning lungs and stinging eyes.
Because of China’s size, any success in developing its economy along Western industrialized lines (for example, with mass ownership of automobiles) could create shocks to the global environment.
In recent years, while China has been scouring the planet for raw materials, it has also become a leader in the development of “green” technology.
But China’s growth is still powered in large part by dirty, coalburning power plants.
Sustainable Development A major theme of these conferences is sustainable development.
This refers to economic growth that does not deplete resources and destroy ecosystems so quickly that the basis of that economic growth is itself undermined.
The concept n applies to both the industrialized regions and the global South.
The Atmosphere Preserving the health of the earth’s atmosphere is a benefit that affects people throughout the world without regard for their own state’s contribution to the problem or its solution.
Two problems of the atmosphere have become major international issues—global warming and depletion of the ozone layer.
Developing countries such as China rely heavily on coal and other dirty technologies for the energy and raw materials they need.
In 2013, the Beijing air quality far exceeded the most dangerous end of the pollution scale.
This woman's mask offers scant protection as she rides past a steel plant in Beijing, 2013.
Global Warming Global climate change, or global warming, is a long-term rise in the average world temperature.
Growing and compelling evidence shows that global warming is a real problem, that it is caused by the emission of carbon dioxide and Watch the Video Establishing Carbon Markets"" at MyPoliSciLab Watch the Video ""Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon"" at MyPoliSciLab other gases, and that it will get much worse in the future.
Unfortunately, the international community has had little success solving the problem.
Over the coming decades, according to most estimates, global temperatures may rise by between 3 and 10 degrees Fahrenheit if nothing is done.
Possibly within a few decades, the polar ice caps will begin to melt and cause the sea level to rise by as much as a few feet.
Studies in 2012 confirmed that the warming trend is accelerating, faster than what had been seen as worst-case scenarios.
The first 12 years of the 21st century were all among the 14 warmest ever recorded.
Global warming could flood many coastal cities and devastate low-lying areas such as the heavily populated coastal areas of Bangladesh and China.
Urgent calls for action to avert global warming come from island states in the Pacific that will likely disappear this century.
Indeed, reflecting an all too realistic lack of faith in international action, the low-lying state of the Maldives created a fund to buy land in another country to move its 300,000 residents as its territory disappears.
It is also possible that climate changes could benefit some regions and make agriculture more productive.
The UN Environment Program , whose main function is to monitor environmental conditions, works with the World Meteorological Organization to measure changes in global climate from year to year.
Since 1989, the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has served as a negotiating forum for this issue.
It is costly to reduce the emissions of gases—mainly carbon dioxide—that cause global warming.
These gases result from the broad spectrum of activities that drive an industrial economy.
They are a by-product of burning fossil fuels —oil, coal, and natural gas—to run cars, tractors, furnaces, factories, and so forth.
Ironically, data stored in “the cloud,” seemingly free from earthly concerns, actually lives in data centers that use vast amounts of electricity and run large diesel generators, contributing to global warming.
United Nations Environment Program 9 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
The political costs of such actions—which would likely increase unemployment, reduce corporate profits, and lower personal incomes—could be severe.
If Arctic sea ice melts, polar bears may go extinct, but they do not have a seat at the table in international climate negotiations.
Neither do today’s children, who cannot vote but will live with the long-term consequences of their elders’ actions.
For individual states, the costs of reducing greenhouse emissions are almost unrelated to the benefits of a solution.
If one state reduces its industrial production or makes expensive investments in new technologies, this will have little effect on the long-term outcome unless other states do likewise.
And if most states took such steps, a free rider that did not go along would save money and still benefit from the solution.
First, there is the dilemma of short-term (and predictable) costs to gain long-term benefits.
Second, specific constituencies such as oil companies and industrial workers pay the costs, whereas the benefits are distributed more generally across domestic society and internationally.
Greenhouse gases are produced by each state roughly in proportion to its industrial activity.
Eighty percent of greenhouse gases now come from the industrialized countries—25 percent from the United States alone.
Yet the most severe impacts of global warming are likely to be felt in the global South.
In densely populated countries such as Bangladesh, hundreds of millions of people stand to lose their homes and farmland under a rising sea.
Offsetting these North-South divisions, however, is the emerging realization that global climate change could cause environmental catastrophes across both North and South.
International treaties have been much more successful at addressing ozone depletion than global warming, mostly because of costs.
The 1997 Kyoto Protocol, extended in 2012, set modest goals for industrialized countries to reduce their output of carbon dioxide and related gases, but progress has fallen short.
If global warming melts polar ice caps in the coming decades, sea levels could rise and devastate many cities.
All of these elements make for a difficult multilateral bargaining situation, one not yet resolved.
The Framework Convention on Climate Change adopted at the 1992 Earth Summit set a nonbinding goal to limit greenhouse emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
The treaty did not commit the signatory states to meet target levels of greenhouse emissions by a particular date, owing to United States objections to such a commitment.
Fisher, Dana R National Governance and the Global Climate Change Regime.
The 1997 Kyoto Protocol adopted a complex formula for reducing greenhouse emissions to 1990 levels in the global North over about a decade.
Countries in the global South received preferential treatment because their levels were much lower.
The agreement called for 40 industrialized countries to reduce emissions to 5 percent below 1990 levels, by 2012, with binding penalties for failure.
The EU pledged $400 million per year to help the global South reduce its emissions.
After enough ratifications the treaty came into effect in 2005, and mandatory carbon cuts began in 2008, but are falling short of targets.
The European Union established markets to trade carbon emission credits among 11,000 industrial facilities across Europe, and in 2012 linked it to Australia’s market to create a global carbon trading system by 2015.
However, the economic slowdown in Europe led to a drastic price drop for carbon credits in 2011.
Europe deferred the requirement for flights to and from Europe to buy carbon credits pending talks scheduled for 2013.
Meanwhile, South Korea created its own carbon emissions trading scheme in 2012.
All these carbon markets use free market principles to make reduction in carbon emissions more efficient.
For example, a venture in Brazil earned carbon credits by burning methane gas from a garbage dump instead of venting it as a strong greenhouse gas.
European investors bought the credits and could then sell them to, say, a polluting factory in Eastern Europe where reducing carbon might be especially expensive.
Ratification of the United Nations Framework Convention and the Kyoto Protocol.
Victor, David G The Collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the Struggle to Slow Global Warming.
In late 2011, a meeting in Durban agreed to extend the Kyoto framework to 2013-2017.
The participants—195 countries, 99 IGOs, and 1,598 NGOs—made plans for a new treaty by 2015 that would force cuts starting in 2020 and include countries such as China, India, and Brazil that had gotten a free ride under Kyoto.
A new Green Climate Fund was to disperse $100 million to developing countries to help them adapt.
Whether these new plans meet with more success than past agreements remains to be seen.
Meanwhile, about half the states of the United States , and a number of cities, began taking steps to limit greenhouse emissions.
Yet, none of these moves are enough, or soon enough, to decisively reverse the direction of climate change.
The dilemma of global warming remains fundamentally unsolved, and with weak enforcement mechanisms, even the states that signed the Kyoto Protocol did not meet their targets by 2012.
Indeed, even European states, which have the largest markets for carbon as an attempt to lower emissions, have yet to see any declines in carbon dioxide.
Moreover, some EU leaders have questioned the operation of the cap-and-trade carbon market systern, pushing for other alternatives to cut emissions.
Ozone Depletion A second major atmospheric problem negotiated by the world’s governments is the depletion of the world’s ozone layer.
A New Climate Treaty BACKGROUND: The prevention of global warming is a collective good that affects the entire world but results from the actions of the world’s states individually.
Those affected most actually will be those least responsible for causing it.
Weather disasters such as the 2010 catastrophic floods in Pakistan would become more common if the world does not address the problem effectively.
The costs of required actions are high, however, and states have not been willing to pay them.
Thus the international community has not yet been able to address the very serious problem of global warming.
Major players such as the United States did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol, and the world’s output of greenhouse gases has not slowed.
In late 2011, the world’s states gathered in Durban, South Africa, to negotiate a new treaty on global warming to follow Kyoto.
Countries of the global North and global South differed on their approaches.
At 3:00m., Europe bitterly denounced language that India and China favored.
As the ozone layer thins, more ultraviolet radiation reaches the earth’s surface.
Over Antarctica, a seasonal hole in the ozone grew larger year by year.
If ozone levels kept rising, the increased radiation could eventually kill off vegetation, reduce agricultural yields, and disrupt ecosystems.
Clearly, this was another collective goods problem in that one state could benefit by allowing the use of CFCs in its economy, provided that most other states prohibited their use.
CFCs could be replaced with other chemicals at relatively modest costs.
Furthermore, the consequences of ozone depletion were both better understood and more immediate than those of global warming.
Perhaps because of these cost issues, states had much more success in negotiating agreements and developing regimes to manage ozone depletion than global warming.
In the 1987 Montreal Protocol, 22 states agreed to reduce CFCs by 50 percent by 1998.
In 1992, as evidence of ozone depletion mounted, the schedule was again accelerated, with major industrial states phasing out CFCs by 1995.
The signatories agreed in principle to establish a fund to help developing countries pay for alternative refrigeration technologies not based on CFCs.
Without such an effort, the states of the global South would be tempted to free-ride and could ultimately undermine the effort.
The Montreal Protocol was revised and strengthened again in 1997 and 1999.
Rich countries stopped making CFCs in 1996 and have contributed about $3 billion to the fund.
This money, supporting thousands of projects in more failure, South Africa’s foreign minister convened a small group of key players for a huddle on the conference floor—the United States, China, India, Britain, France, Sweden, Poland, Gambia, and Brazil.
Brazil’s negotiator suggested new language, and within two hours the group had reached agreement, the talks were over and the conference saved.
The dominance principle came into play as a few big players from North and South worked out an agreement and presented it to the rest of the world.
Collective goods problems are easier to solve in smaller groups than in larger ones.
The ozone hole is projected to slowly shrink back over the coming 50 years if current arrangements continue.
The Montreal Protocol on CFCs is the most important success yet achieved in international negotiations to preserve the global environment.
It showed that states can agree to take action on urgent environmental threats, can agree on targets and measures to counter such threats, and can allocate the costs of such measures in a mutually acceptable way and actually pay up when the bill comes.
But the international cooperation on the ozone problem has not been widely repeated on other environmental issues.
Environmental negotiations resemble trade talks in that they rely on the reciprocity principle as the prime mover of agreement.
If each country contributes, and all the others contribute, a goal such as restoring the ozone layer can be accomplished.
As with trade, the agreements and regimes are complicated and require monitoring of compliance to prevent free riding.
The biggest difference from trade talks is that when trade talks succeed in solving a collective goods problem, the participants get a short-term, tangible benefit of billions of dollars added to the world economy.
When environmental collective goods problems are solved, the participants get a short-term, tangible bill to pay, and then long-term benefits.
The size of that bill seems to be the major difference between very difficult, expensive global warming solutions and reasonably affordable ozone solutions.
Biodiversity Biodiversity refers to the tremendous diversity of plant and animal species making up the earth’s ecosystems.
Because of humans’ destruction of ecosystems, large numbers of species are already extinct.
Extinction results from overhunting, overfishing, and introducing non-native species that crowd out previous inhabitants.
But the most important cause is loss of habitat —the destruction of rain forests, pollution of lakes and streams, and loss of agricultural lands to urban sprawl.
Because ecosystems are based on complex interrelationships among species, the extinction of a few species can cause deeper changes in the environment.
For example, the loss of native microorganisms can lead to chronic pollution of rivers or to the transformation of arable land into deserts.
Because ecosystems are so complex, it is usually impossible to predict the consequences of a species’ extinction or of the loss of a habitat or ecosystem.
Generally, the activities that lead to habitat loss are economically profitable, so real costs are associated with limiting such activities.
Species preservation is thus a collective good resembling global warming; the costs are immediate and substantial but the benefits are long term and ill defined.
It has been difficult to reach international agreement on sharing the costs of preserving biodiversity.
A UN convention on trade in endangered species has reduced but not eliminated such trade.
However, because of fears that the treaty could limit United States patent rights in biotechnology, the United States never ratified it.
The United States does, however, participate in other biological treaties, such as a 1971 wetlands convention and the 1973 Convention 15 Swanson, Timothy M., ed.
International regimes to protect whales and dolphins have had limited success.
The International Whaling Commission sets quotas for hunting certain whale species, but participation is voluntary and governments are not bound by decisions they object to.
The Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission regulates methods used to fish for tuna, aiming to minimize dolphin losses.
The United States, which consumes half the world’s tuna catch, has gone further and unilaterally requires—in the Marine Mammal Protection Act—that dolphin-safe methods be used for tuna sold in United States territory.
Other countries have challenged the act through international trade organizations as an unfair restriction on tuna exports to the United States.
Such conflicts portend future battles between environmentalists and free trade advocates.
Free traders argue that states must not use domestic legislation to seek global environmental goals.
Environmentalists do not want to give up national laws that they worked for decades to enact, over the opposition of industrial corporations.
For example, the United States Clean Air Act successfully reduced air pollution in United States cities, but the regulations had to be revised in 1997, on order of the WTO, to allow gasoline refined in Venezuela and Brazil to compete in United States markets.
Environmentalists adopted the sea turtle as a symbol of their opposition to the WTO after the WTO overturned United States regulations that required shrimp to be caught in nets from which sea turtles (an endangered species) can escape.
Recent conflicts have arisen over United States laws restricting imports of foods with pesticide residues, and over European laws on imports of genetically engineered agricultural and pharmaceutical products, which the United States wants to export worldwide.
Thus, unilateral approaches to biodiversity issues are problematic because they disrupt free trade; multilateral approaches are problematic because of the collective goods problem.
It is not surprising that the international response has been fairly ineffective to date.
Forests and Oceans Two types of habitat—tropical rain forests and oceans—are especially important to biodiversity and the atmosphere.
Both are also reservoirs of commercially profitable resources such as fish and wood.
They differ in that forests are located almost entirely within state territory, whereas oceans are largely beyond any state territory, in the global commons.
DeSombre, Elizabeth R Domestic Sources of International Environmental Policy.
TAKE IT TO THE BANK Some environmentalists criticize the World Bank and other international institutions promoting economic development in poor countries for interfering destructively in local ecosystems such as rain forests.
The green revolution increased yields but shifted patterns of agriculture in complex ways, such as by increasing pesticide and fertilizer runoff.
Now genetically engineered crops promise further increases in agricultural productivity—more food on the table—but with environmental consequences that are not fully understood.
This gene bank in the Philippines stores rice varieties from around the world.
Genetically modified organisms are highly controversial in Europe, and this certainly includes your country.
In 1997, for example, Ireland reluctantly approved a permit for the global MNC Monsanto to grow sugar beets near Dublin.
After several legal attempts to halt the planting of the crop failed, activists destroyed the crop in the ground before it could be harvested.
Your country has quietly supported several Irish biotechnology firms in the past with joint ventures in research.
These have produced a variety of advances that give Ireland a significant advantage in this field over other European states.
Several MNCs stand to benefit from this research, providing you with investment and tax income.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Unfortunately, this ""positive but precautionary"" approach is unpopular with the public.
Some worry that Ireland's reputation as ""the Green Island"" will suffer, possibly posing a threat to tourism—a major source of income for your country.
Others join the chorus of European opposition to GMOs based on concerns over the possible environmental effects of these products.
In the spring of 2004, the European Union approved an end to the moratorium on GMO product sales (with your country voting in the majority), partially under a threat from the United States to enforce a WTO ruling that found the GMO ban illegal.
The United States is your largest single trade partner, but other EU states combined are your most significant export market.
SCENARIO Imag ine that the balance of power in the EU shifts against GMOs with the admission of new Central European states.
Thus, although it would still be legal to grow GMO crops, it would not be legal to export them to EU countries.
Given your comparative technological advantage in this area, your economy stands to profit from expanding GMO use through increased agricultural output and increased business activity from MNCs.
The United States has no regulations concerning the importation of GMO products and would be open to exports of these crops.
Some environmentalists warn that GMOs could have negative effects on ecology, wildlife, and human health.
Many of your EU partners will shun your GMO products, robbing you of a large export market for these goods.
Rain forests thus benefit all the world’s states; they are collective goods.
International bargaining on the preservation of rain forests has made considerable progress, probably because most rain forests belong to a few states.
These few states have the power to speed up or slow down the destruction of forests—and international bargaining amounts to agreements to shift costs from those few states onto the broader group of states benefiting from the rain forests.
Although some rich states have large forests, most of the largest rain forests are in poor states such as Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Madagascar.
Such states can benefit economically from exploiting the forests—freely cutting lumher, clearing land for agriculture, and mining.
Now that rich states have an interest in protecting rain forests, they are using development assistance as leverage to induce poorer states to protect their forests rather than exploit them.
Under international agreements reached in the early 1990s, rich countries contribute hundreds of millions of dollars in foreign aid for this purpose.
In some poor countries burdened by large foreign debts, environmentalists and bankers from rich countries have worked out “debt-for-nature swaps” in which a debt is canceled in exchange for the state’s agreement to preserve forests.
In 2006, for example, the United States government and NGOs helped Guatemala cancel more than $20 million in debts in exchange for expanded conservation programs.
In 2005, Brazil announced that deforestation had fallen 50 percent since 2003, while in 2008 it announced that it planned to end deforestation by 2015.
Oceans The oceans, covering 70 percent of the earth’s surface, are (like the rain forest) a key to regulating climate and preserving biodiversity.
Oceans, like forests, are attractive targets for short-term economic uses that cause long-term environmental damage.
Such uses include overfishing, dumping toxic and nuclear waste (and other garbage), and long-distance oil shipments with their recurrent spills.
Unlike rain forests, oceans belong to no state but are a global commons.
This makes the collective goods problem more difficult because no authority exists to enforce regulations.
Preserving the oceans depends on the cooperation of more than a hundred states and thousands of nonstate actors.
For example, drift nets are huge fishing nets, miles long, that scoop up everything in their path.
They are very profitable but destructive of a sustainable ocean environment.
However, no state has the authority to go onto the high seas and stop illegal use of these nets.
One solution that states have pursued involves “enclosing” more of the ocean.
Territorial waters have expanded to hundreds of miles off the coast , so that state sovereignty encloses substantial resources such as fisheries and offshore oil and 17 Dauvergne, Peter.
This solution has been pursued in the context of larger multilateral • • 19 negotiations on ocean management.
The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea , negotiated from 1973 to 1982, governs the uses of the oceans.
After more than a decade’s delay and renegotiation of some of the deep-sea mining aspects, the United States signed UNCLOS in 1994, but has yet to ratify the treaty.
Varying interpretations leave economic rights in dispute in a number of locations.
In the East China Sea, China sent five warships in 2005 to back up its claim to an undersea gas field partly claimed by Japan, where China began drilling and Japan granted drilling rights to a Japanese company.
UNCLOS also developed the general principle that the oceans are a common heritage of humankind.
The continent’s strategic and commercial value is limited, however, and not many states care about it.
Thus, states have been successful in reaching agreements on Antarctica because the costs were low and the players few.
The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 —one of the first multilateral treaties concerning the environment—forbids military activity as well as the presence of nuclear weapons or the dumping of nuclear waste.
It sets aside territorial claims on the continent for future resolution and establishes a regime under which various states conduct scientific research in Antarctica.
The treaty was signed by all states with interests in the area, including both superpowers.
Antarctica is largely a success story in international environmental politics.
Pollution Pollution generally creates a collective goods problem, but one that is not often global in scale.
With some exceptions—such as dumping at sea—the effects of pollution are limited to the state where it occurs and its close neighbors; United States industrial smokestack emissions cause acid rain in Canada but do not directly affect distant states.
China’s terrible air pollution kills nearly half a million Chinese a year, but few foreigners.
Even when pollution crosses state borders, it often has its strongest effects closest to the source.
This localized effect makes for a somewhat less intractable collective goods problem, because a polluting state can seldom free-ride, and few actors are involved.
In several regions—notably Western and Eastern Europe and the Middle East—states are closely packed in the same air, river, or sea basins.
In such situations, pollution controls must often be negotiated multilaterally.
State-Controlled Waters Overfishing and similar problems of managing the ""commons"" of world oceans have been addressed by enclosing the most important ocean areas under the exclusive control of states.
Several regional agreements seek to limit acid rain, caused by air pollution.
European states—whose forests have been heavily damaged—have agreed to limit air pollution and acid rain for their mutual benefit.
In 1988, 24 European states signed a treaty to limit nitrogen oxide emissions to 1988 levels by 1995.
After long negotiations, the United States and Canada signed bilateral agreements to limit such pollution as well.
Water pollution often crosses borders as well, especially because industrial pollution, human sewage, and agricultural fertilizers and pesticides all tend to run into rivers and seas.
For instance, in 2005, a huge chemical spill in northeast China polluted a river that flows into Russia.
Longstanding regional agencies that regulate shipping on heavily used European rivers now also deal with pollution.
The Mediterranean basin is severely polluted and difficult to manage because so many states border it.
In 2010, the largest oil spill in United States history occurred in the Gulf of Mexico.
The spill resulted from an explosion on an oil platform, which resulted in a broken oil pipe 5,000 feet below the surface of the ocean.
The leakage took months to contain and highlighted the dangers associated with deep-water oil drilling.
British Petroleum, the company that operated the well, agreed to set aside billions of dollars to pay damages to residents of several southern United States states affected by the spill.
Toxic and nuclear wastes are a special problem because of their long-term dangers.
But such wastes have been sent to developing countries for disposal, for a fee.
For instance, toxic ash from Pennsylvania became material for bricks in Guinea, and Italian nuclear waste was shipped to Nigeria.
Norms have developed in recent years against exporting toxic wastes—a practice seen as exploitive of the receiving country.
Forty more countries, in Africa, did not sign the treaty but called for a complete halt to toxic waste shipments to Africa.
Nonetheless, in 2006 a multinational company tried to dispose of toxic waste from a tanker ship in the Netherlands but took it back, on finding the cost to run into hundreds of thousands of dollars.
For example, here industrial waste and sewage in the New River crosses from Mexico into California, 2003.
In 1986, a meltdown at the Soviet nuclear power plant at Chernobyl, in Ukraine, created airborne radioactivity that spread over much of Europe, from Italy to Sweden.
The accident exemplified the new reality—that economic and technical decisions made in one state can have grave environmental consequences for other countries.
Soviet leaders made matters worse by failing to notify neighbors promptly of the accident.
On the various issues of water and air pollution, both unilateral state actions and international agreements have often been feasible and effective.
In recent decades, river water quality has improved in most industrialized regions.
Market economies have begun to deal with pollution as just another cost of production that should be charged to the polluter instead of to society at large.
Some governments have begun to allocate “pollution rights” that companies can buy and sell on a free market.
In the former Soviet bloc, decades of centrally planned industrialization created more severe environmental problems.
With staggering environmental damage and human health effects, the economically strapped former Soviet republics had to bargain over limiting pollution and repairing the damage.
For example, the severely polluted Aral Sea, formerly contained within one state, the Soviet Union, is now shared by two, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
Once the world’s fourth-largest inland sea, it shrank in half, its huge fisheries destroyed, after a Soviet-era mega-irrigation project to grow cotton in the desert diverted the Aral Sea’s inlet rivers and polluted them with pesticides.
After local and international political leaders failed to implement plans to address the problem, local populations suffered from widespread health effects of the disaster.
Natural Resources The natural environment is not only a delicate ecosystem requiring protection, but also a repository of natural resources.
Because the extraction of resources brings states wealth, these resources regularly fuel international conflicts.
Because they are mostly located within individual states, however, they do not present a collective goods problem.
Three aspects of natural resources shape their role in international conflict.
Second, their sources—mineral deposits, rivers, and so forth—are associated with particular territories over which states may fight for control.
Third, natural resources tend to be unevenly distributed, with plentiful supplies in some states and an absence in others.
These aspects mean that trade in natural resources is extremely profitable; much additional wealth is created by such trade.
The fossil fuels thus account for 95 percent of world energy consumption.
Some energy consumed as electricity comes from hydroelectric dams or nuclear power plants, but most of it comes from burning fossil fuels in electric-generating plants.
The energy released by burning that much coal is equivalent to the amount of energy North Americans use per person every day.
Wealthier people, of course, consume more energy per person than do poorer people, but 65 pounds is the average.
The North American’s pile of coal would be five times larger than that of a person in China, 20 times that of an African.
The four industrialized regions of the North use much more energy per person than those of the South.
Because South Asia and Africa have little industry, North America uses 15 times as much per person as those two regions.
Among industrialized countries there are differences in the efficiency of energy use—GDP produced per unit of energy consumed.
The least efficient are the former Soviet Republics; North America is also rather inefficient; Europe and Japan are the most energy efficient.
International trade in energy thus plays a vital role in the world economy.
Although all forms of energy are traded internationally, the most important by far is oil, the cheapest to transport over long distances.
Venezuela and Mexico and Nigeria and Angola are also major oil exporters.
But by far the largest source of oil exports is the Middle East—especially the countries around the Persian Gulf (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, Iran, TABLE 11.
The politics of world energy revolve around Middle Eastern oil shipped to Western Europe, Japan/Pacific, and North America.
The importance of oil in the industrialized economies helps explain the political importance of the Middle East in world politics/ 3 Not only is energy a crucial economic sector , but it is also one of the most politically sensitive because of the dependence of the West on energy imported from the Middle East and the rest of the global South.
To secure a supply of oil in the Middle East, Britain and other European countries colonized the area early in the 20th century, carving up territory into protectorates in which European power kept local monarchs on their thrones.
The United States did not claim colonies or protectorates, but United States MNCs were heavily involved in the development of oil resources in the area from the 1920s through the 1960s—often wielding vast power/ 0 These United States and European oil companies kept the price paid to local states low and their own profits high, yet local rulers depended on the expertise and capital investment of these companies.
After World War II the British gave up colonial claims in the Middle East, but the Western oil companies kept producing cheap oil there for Western consumption.
Then in 1973, during an Arab-Israeli war, the oil-producing Arab states of the region decided to punish the United States for supporting Israel.
They cut off their oil exports to the United States and curtailed their overall exports.
OPEC realized its potential power and the high price the world was willing to pay for oil.
This 1973 oil shock had a profound effect on the world economy and on world politics.
High inflation plagued the United States and Europe for years afterward.
The economic instability and sense of United States helplessness—coming on top of the Vietnam War—seemed to mark a decline in American power and perhaps the rise of the global South.
But higher oil prices led to the expansion of oil production in new locations outside of OPEC—in the North Sea , Alaska, Angola, Russia, and elsewhere.
By the mid-1980s, the Middle East was rapidly losing its market share of world trade in oil.
At the same time, industrialized economies learned to be more energy efficient.
With supply up and demand down, oil prices dropped in the late 1980s to historic lows of less than $20/barrel.
But the main pipeline from oil-producing Azerbaijan to the Black Sea traveled through war-torn Chechnya in southern Russia.
Russia then built a bypass route around Chechnya that carries a large and growing amount of Caspian oil for export through the Black Sea.
Dividing the Caspian Sea The Caspian Sea is the world's largest inland body of water.
It could be defined under international law as either a lake or a sea. a A lake has a joint area in the middle that can be exploited only if the countries agree on terms.
If the whole area is split as in the map on the right, the sectors can be defined by median lines or by a division into five sectors of equal area , giving Iran a larger sector.
In 2010, with major oil development underway in all five countries' coastal areas, a summit meeting agreed to give each a 25-mile zone, but most of the border issues remain in dispute.
Russia had agreed with its neighbors, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, to use the median line on the seabed floor.
In 2012, a naval arms race was underway, and Russia held joint military exercises with Kazakhstan to practice defense of oil facilities from an Iranian attack.
But this conflict will be resolved not through dominance, but through reciprocity.
Nobody benefits from a war and all five countries benefit from developing their oil resources.
Solutions are enormously complicated—in this case factoring in additional elements like shipping, fishing, smuggling, and pipeline routes—and reaching agreement can take a very long time. a Sciolino, Elaine.
Foreign Policy , June 22,2012. states and oil companies built a large-capacity pipeline, costing billions of dollars, through Azerbaijan and Georgia to Turkey’s Mediterranean coast.
All three countries on the new pipeline route were at war in the past decade.
A dozen other existing and proposed oil pipelines for Caspian Sea oil are no easier.
Across the Caspian Sea, Turkmenistan wants to export natural gas to Pakistan, and from there to Asia, but a pipeline would have to cross war-torn Afghanistan.
Meanwhile in 2003, a new $4 billion pipeline began carrying oil from Chad through Cameroon for export, promising to help both countries alleviate poverty, but as rebels based in Sudan attacked in Chad, oil money was diverted to military purposes.
Although borders and geopolitics may be less and less important in communications and business, they still matter greatly in such international economic transactions as oil pipelines.
First, burning oil contributes to global warming, and high prices made it profitable to burn less oil and be more energy efficient.
For instance, in 2008 sales of gasguzzling SUVs dropped sharply while hybrids sold briskly.
Second, high oil prices increase the export earnings of oil-producing countries.
Countries such as Venezuela and Mexico count on oil revenues in their economic development plans and to repay foreign debts.
These countries eased their debt problems as a result of higher prices, which also played a crucial part in Russia’s economic recovery.
The easy money concentrated in a few hands allowed dictators to rule and extremism to flourish in states such as Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Venezuela.
More importantly, high oil prices helped drive the world economy into a severe recession, curtailing demand and forcing prices back down to $40 a barrel in a matter of months.
The exporting countries and their recently rich governments suddenly found themselves cash poor.
And the alternative energy sources like solar power, which had looked promising when oil was expensive, lost support when oil prices dropped, suggesting the start of a new cycle of dependence on oil imports in Western countries.
Minerals To build the infrastructure and other manufactured goods that create wealth in a national economy, states need other raw materials in addition to energy.
These include metals, other minerals, and related materials extracted through mining.
The political economy of minerals—iron, copper, platinum, and so forth—differs from that of world energy.
The value of international trade in oil is many times that of any mineral.
Moreover, mineral supply is not so concentrated in one region of the world.
Industrialized countries have also reduced their vulnerability by stockpiling strategic minerals.
Most important to industrialized economies are the minerals that go into making industrial equipment.
The leading producers of steel are the former Soviet Union, Japan, the United States, China, and Germany, followed by Brazil, Italy, South Korea, France, and Britain.
Some industrialized countries, notably Japan, depend heavily on importing iron ore for their steel industry.
Iron ore is not concentrated in one location but is exported from developing and industrialized countries around the world.
For other important industrial minerals such as copper, nickel, and zinc, the pattern of supply and trade is much more diffuse than for oil, and the industrialized countries are largely self-sufficient.
China currently holds a near monopoly on the world’s supply of “rare earth’’ minerals vital to the production of electronics.
Certain agricultural products have spawned producer cartels such as the Union of Banana Exporting Countries and the African Groundnut Council.
Like minerals, some export crops come mainly from just a few countries.
Despite the concentrations, producer cartels have not been very successful in boosting prices of these products, which are less essential than energy.
This need increases as a society industrializes, as it intensifies agriculture, and as its population grows.
World water use is 35 times that of just a few centuries ago, and grew twice as fast as population in the 20th century.
Yet water supplies are relatively unchanging and are becoming depleted in many places.
One-fifth of the world’s population lacks safe drinking water, and 80 countries suffer water shortages.
Water supplies—rivers and water tables—often cross international boundaries; thus access to water is increasingly a source of international conflict.
Sometimes—as when several states share access to a single water table—these conflicts are collective goods problems.
For instance, the Euphrates River runs from Turkey through Syria to Iraq before reaching the Persian Gulf.
Iraq objects to Syrian diversion of water from the river, and both Iraq and Syria object to Turkey’s diversion.
The Jordan River originates in Syria and Lebanon and runs through Israel to Jordan.
In 1964, Syria and Lebanon tried to build dams and divert water before it reached Israel, rendering Israel’s new water system worthless.
Israeli air and artillery attacks on the construction site forced Syria to abandon its diversion project, and Israel’s 1967 capture of the Golan Heights precluded Syria from renewing such efforts/' Thus, the dominance principle comes into play in resolving conflicts over natural resources.
Water also contains other resources such as fish and offshore oil deposits.
The UNCLOS treaty enclosed more of these resources within states’ territory—but this enclosure creates new problems.
Norms regarding territorial waters are not firmly entrenched; some states disagree on who owns what.
Also, control of small islands now implies rights to surrounding oceans with their fish, offshore oil, and minerals.
WATER, WATER EVERYWHERE *>■ As population growth and economic development increase the demand for water, more international conflicts arise over water rights.
Many important rivers pass through multiple states, and many states share access to seas and lakes.
The Aral Sea, once part of the Soviet Union but now shared between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, was among the world's largest lakes until it was decimated by the diversion of its water sources to irrigate cotton.
Of course, these resources can also be directly related to international security.
IR scholars have expanded their studies of environmental politics to systematically study the relationship of military and security affairs to the environment/ 0 One side of this relationship is the role of the environment as a source of international conflict.
We have seen how environmental degradation can lead to collective goods problems among large numbers of states, and how competition for territory and resources can create conflicts among smaller groups of states.
Activities in the international security realm also affect the environment.
Military activities—especially warfare—are important contributors to environmental degradation, above and beyond the degradation caused by economic activities such as mining and manufacturing.
During the 1991 Gulf War, for example, Iraqi forces spilled large amounts of Kuwaiti oil into the Persian Gulf and then, before retreating from Kuwait, blew up hundreds of Kuwaiti oil wells, leaving them burning uncontrollably and covering Iraq and Iran with thick black smoke.
Population Global population reached a record high today, as it does every day.
World population, 7 billion in 2012, is growing by 80 million each year.
Barring a nuclear war or an environmental catastrophe, today’s children will grow up and have children of their own.
For the coming 20 to 30 years, world population growth will be driven, rather mechanistically, by the large number of children in today’s populations in the global South.
The projected world population in 2030 will be 8-9 billion people, and there is little anyone can do to change that projection.
Of the increase in population in that period, 96 percent will be in the global South.
Among the world’s poorest countries, population is expected to triple in the next 50 years, whereas many rich countries will see 9 O population shrinkage in that period.
To the extent that developing countries accumulate wealth—a subject taken up in Chapter 13—their populations will grow more slowly.
A second factor affecting the rate of population growth will be government policies regarding women’s rights and birth control.
New data in 2002 showed that higher women’s status and literacy are reducing population growth more than expected 28 Kahl, Colin H States, Scarcity, and Civil Strife in the Developing World.
Two hundred years ago, the British writer Thomas Malthus warned that population tends to increase faster than food supply and predicted that population growth would limit itself through famine and disease.
Today, experts and officials who warn against world overpopulation are sometimes called Malthusian.
Critics of this view point out that technology has kept pace with population in the past, allowing more food and other resources to be extracted from the environment even as population keeps growing.
The Demographic Transition Population growth results from the difference between rates of birth and rates of death.
First, death rates fall as food supplies increase and access to health care expands.
Later, birthrates fall as people become educated, more secure, and more urbanized, and as the status of women in society rises.
At the end of the transition, as at the beginning, birthrates and death rates are fairly close to each other, and population growth is limited.
But during the transition, when death rates have fallen more than birthrates, population grows rapidly.
One reason poor people tend to have many children is that under harsh poverty, a child’s survival is not assured.
Disease, malnutrition, or violence may claim the lives of many children, leaving parents with no one to look after them in their old age.
As a state makes the demographic transition, the structure of its population changes dramatically.
At the beginning and middle of the process, most of the population is young.
The Demographic Transition As income rises, first death rates and then birthrates fall.
Early in the transition, the population contains a large proportion of children; later it contains a large proportion of elderly people.
Families have many children, and adults do not have a long life expectancy.
Because children are not very productive economically, the large number of children in poor countries tends to slow down the accumulation of wealth.
But by the end of the demographic transition, because adults live longer and families have fewer children, the average age of the population is much older.
Eventually a substantial section of the population is elderly—a different nonproductive population that the economy must support.
The industrialized countries have completed the demographic transition and now have slow population growth.
Most developing countries are in the middle of the transition and have rapid population growth.
Yet the best way to slow population growth is to raise per capita income.
Population growth thus contributes to a vicious cycle in many poor states.
Where population rises at the same rate as overall wealth, the average person is no better off over time.
Even when the economy grows faster than population, so that the average income rises, the total number of poor people may increase.
The demographic transition tends to widen international disparities of wealth.
States that manage to raise incomes a bit enter an upward spiral—as population growth slows, income levels per capita rise more, which further slows population growth, and so forth.
Meanwhile, states that do not raise incomes have unabated population growth; per capita incomes stay low, which fuels more population growth—a downward spiral.
Within the South, disparities are also sharpened as a few countries manage to slow population growth and raise incomes while others fail to do so.
Even within a single country, the demographic transition sharpens disparities.
Cities, richer classes, richer ethnic groups, and richer provinces tend to have low birthrates compared to the countryside and the poorer classes, ethnic groups, and provinces.
In countries such as France, Israel, and the United States, wealthier ethnic groups have much slower population growth than poorer ethnic groups.
The first group, including China and India, entered the phase of the demographic transition marked by falling birthrates in the 1970s, But in nearly 70 other poor states, death rates kept falling faster than birthrates, leading to accelerating population growth.
These population trends contributed to disparities within the global South that emerged in the 1990s, notably between Africa and Asia.
Population Policies The policies that governments adopt—not just economic and demographic conditions— influence the birthrate.
At one extreme, China uses its strong government control to try to enforce a limit of one child per couple.
Penalties for having a second child include being charged for services that were free for the first child.
China has started to encourage wealthy and more educated families to have two children, and now, in some Chinese cities such as Shanghai, coupies are allowed two-child families.
China’s policy has lowered growth rates considerably in the cities but less so in the countryside, where most people still live.
Still, in a single decade , China’s fertility rate fell from 6 children per woman to about 2.5, a dramatic change.
In some cases, Chinese peasants have reportedly killed newborn daughters so that they could try for a son.
Simply bribing or paying fines became more common routes around the one-child policy in the 1990s.
Most often, parents in China are using information technology—ultrasound scans—to determine their fetus’s gender and abort it if female.
China’s 2000 census showed the percentage of female births at 0.85 per boy, rather than the normal 0.95, a difference that amounts to a million “missing” girls per year.
In recent years, hundreds of thousands of young women there have been kidnapped and sold as brides.
Because of the demographic transition, controlling population growth helps economic development and vice versa.
Various countries use a wide range of population policies to this end, none stricter than China's one-child policy for urban couples.
These Dutch babies enter a society well through the demographic transition, with plentiful resources for relatively few babies.
The birthrate fell from nearly 6 per woman to about 4-7 in the 1970s and 2. in 2011.
India’s government, strongly committed to birth control, has tried to make information and means widely available, but as a democracy it does not have China’s extreme government control over society.
Countries with somewhat higher incomes than India or China can succeed more easily.
Traditionally, many governments have adopted such policies because population was seen as an element of national power.
Today, only a few governments have strongly pronatalist policies, but many do not make birth control or sex education available to poor women.
In some such states, population is not considered a problem ; in other states, the government simply cannot afford effective measures to lower birthrates.
In cultures that traditionally see women as valuable only in producing babies, great pressures exist against women who stop doing so.
Many women do not use birth control because their husbands will not allow them to.
These husbands may think that having many children is proof of their manliness.
However, as women’s status improves and they can work in various occupations, own property, and vote, women gain the power as well as the education and money necessary to limit the size of their families.
According to the UNFPA, improving the status of women is one of the most important means of controlling world population growth.
Government policies about women’s status vary from one state to another.
International programs and agencies, such as the UN Commission on the Status of Women, are working to address this issue on a global scale.
Disease Population growth is determined by the death rate as well as the birthrate.
In poor countries, people tend to die younger, often from infectious diseases; in richer countries, people live longer and die more often from cancer and heart disease.
The proportion of babies who die within their first year is the infant mortality rate.
This rate is an excellent indicator of overall health because it reflects a population’s access to nutrition, water, shelter, and health care.
Although death rates vary greatly from one state or region to another, the overall trends are stable from decade to decade.
Wars, droughts, epidemics, and disasters have an effect locally but hardly matter globally.
In the poorest countries, which are just beginning the demographic transition, the death rate declined from nearly 30 deaths per thousand population in 1950 to less than 15 since 1990.
In the industrialized countries, the death rate bottomed out around 10 per thousand by 1960, and now stands around 7 in 32 Anderson, John Ward.
These stable trends in mortality mean that the death rate is not a means by which governments or international agencies can affect population growth—worsening poverty may cause famine and a rising death rate, but this is not a realistic way to control population growth.
It would mean moving backward through the demographic transition, which would wreck any chance of lowering birthrates.
In short, most of the world is already at or near the end of the transition in death rates; the key question is how long birthrates take to complete the transition.
J Three mortality factors, however—HIV/AIDS, other infectious diseases, and smoking—deserve special attention because they exact very high costs even if they do not much affect global population trends.
In these cases, actions taken in the short term have long-term and often international consequences, and once again there are short-term costs and long-term benefits.
HIV/AIDS In the worldwide AIDS epidemic, one state’s success or failure in limiting the spread of HIV affects infections in other states as well.
AIDS spreads internationally—through business, tourism, migration, and military operations—reflecting the interdependence of states.
By 2009, the HIV/AIDS epidemic had already killed more than 30 million people, and an estimated 33 million more were infected—though most of them did not know it.
Population and AIDS by World Region, 2012 Region 3 Population Population Growth Rate 1991-2010 HIV Infections World 7,000 1.2% 34 Global North 1,405 0.
In 2007, UNAIDS corrected earlier estimates, resulting in a significant drop in infection rates.
In Africa, already the world’s poorest region, AIDS has emerged as one of several powerful forces driving the region backward into deeper poverty.
About 5 percent of adults are infected with HIV, more than half of them women.
Infection is also rampant in African armies, with direct implications for international security.
In Angola, it was the end of a long civil war that opened borders and increased traffic with neighboring states that had high HIV infection rates.
As Angola’s infection rate began to climb, military officers took the initiative to set up education programs and comprehensive HIV testing within the army.
In contrast to other African states with high military infection rates, Angola’s aggressive program kept the rate as low as in the general population, below 10 percent.
In North America and other industrialized regions, new drug therapies (which keep the virus in check for years) dramatically lowered the death rate from AIDS starting in the late 1990s.
But these treatments were too expensive to help much in Africa and other poor regions.
India and Brazil began to export cheap generic versions of these drugs, violating patent rights of Western drug companies.
The United States government threatened to punish South Africa and other countries if they allowed import of these drugs without compensating United States corporations holding patents.
In response, AIDS activists demonstrated loudly and mobilized public opinion to get the policies changed.
Meanwhile, drug companies began offering lower prices to poor countries, but delivery of the drugs to millions of poor people remained painfully slow.
In 2004, the international community finally initiated the large-scale delivery of antiviral drugs to AIDS patients in poor countries.
The worldwide effort to slow AIDS, coordinated by the World Health Organization , illustrates how global-level problems such as AIDS are making 10s such as WHO more important.
Currently, international efforts focus on trying to get antiviral medicines to more of the world's 40 million infected people, such as this woman in Swaziland, who began recovering after starting twice-a-day pills provided free each month, 2004.
The G8 states responded with pledges of a bit more than $1 billion—’’laudable” but “not enough,” in Annan’s view.
In 2003, President Bush pledged $15 billion over five years to help slow AIDS in Africa.
Between 2009 and 2014, the United States government has pledged $48 billion to combat AIDS, tuberculosis , and malaria.
In 2006, five countries—France, Britain, Norway, Brazil, and Chile—agreed to raise $300 million a year to buy medications for children with AIDS, TB, and malaria.
While observers have applauded these increased efforts, much more work remains, including care for the estimated 12 million children orphaned by AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa.
The 2001 UN session also revealed sharp differences between Western, secular states and a number of Islamic states that objected to any reference to gay people.
Catholic authorities worldwide have objected to programs that encourage condom use.
As these examples show, some of the most effective prevention measures (public education, outreach to at-risk groups, condom distribution, free needles to drug users) are culturally and politically sensitive issues.
States must cooperate with each other if they are to bring the epidemic under control.
These international efforts are coordinated primarily by WHO and funded mainly by the industrialized countries.
But the entire WHO budget is equivalent to that of a midsize hospital in the global North.
WHO depends on national governments to provide information and carry out policies, and governments have been slow to respond.
Some governments falsify statistics to underreport the number of cases , and many governments are reluctant to condone or sponsor sex education and distribution of condoms because of religious or cultural taboos.
In recent years, HIV has spread rapidly in South Asia, China, and Russia/Eastern Europe, where prostitution and drug use are growing.
Thailand was especially vulnerable because of its huge prostitution industry, acceptance of male promiscuity, and large tourism industry.
It was one of the first developing countries to develop an effective antiAIDS program, which focuses on public education, and it dramatically lowered the infection rate in the 1990s.
In China, the government has been slow to act, and a stigma still prevents effective identification or treatment of the rapidly growing HIV-positive population.
Unscrupulous cash-for-blood businesses, especially in one rural region, caused massive HIV infection.
Altman, Lawrence K AIDS Surge Is Forecast for China, India, and Eastern Europe.
As a result, 60 percent of China’s population has had hepatitis B, compared with 1 percent in the United States and Japan—a danger sign for the future growth of HIV in China.China had an estimated 1 million infected people in 2011.
AIDS illustrates the transnational linkages that make international borders less meaningful than in the past.
Effective international cooperation could save millions of lives and significantly enhance the prospects for economic development in the poorest countries in the coming decades.
But once again, a collective goods problem exists regarding the allocation of costs and benefits.
A dollar spent by WHO has the same effect regardless of which country contributed it.
PANDEMIC PREVENTION In 2009, H1N1 influenza spread rapidly across much of the world, testing the small and poorly funded international institutions devoted to global health, such as the World Health Organization.
In Mexico City in 2009, where the epidemic gained speed and shut down normal life for weeks, this baptism went on but with flu precautions taken.
TB, malaria, hepatitis, dengue fever, and cholera have all reemerged or spread in recent decades, often mutating into drug-resistant forms.
Malaria sickens hundreds of millions of people and kills more than a million per year, nearly all in Africa.
New campaigns have distributed millions of mosquito nets in Africa to reduce malaria—a proven, cost-effective measure.
Meanwhile, new and poorly understood diseases have emerged, among them HIV, Ebola virus, hantavirus, and hepatitis C Pneumonia, influenza, diarrheacausing diseases, and measles all continue to be major problems but are not growing or spreading to the same extent.
Vaccination programs have reduced the incidence of both polio and measles in recent years.
A measles vaccination campaign now reaches 85 percent of infants worldwide, reducing deaths by 80 percent since 2000.
Sadly, a polio vaccination drive in Pakistan was cut short in 2012 after Taliban militants killed health workers, claiming the vaccine was a Western plot to sterilize Muslim children.
Iodine deficiency has historically received little attention although it affects as many as 2 billion people worldwide.
Even moderate deficiencies in fetuses can lower intelligence by 10 to 15 I.Q. points, and serious deficiencies can stunt growth and cause mental 37 Rosenthal, Elisabeth.
For about 5 cents per person yearly, iodine can be added to salt and completely prevent the deficiency, but many countries in the global South and former Soviet bloc still do not do so.
An international campaign has increased the use of iodized salt from 25 percent of households worldwide in 1990 to 66 o o percent in 2006.
Currently, scientists fear that bird flu could mutate and spread person to person, sparking a global pandemic that could potentially kill millions.
This strain of swine flu was found in many countries, many of which adopted quarantine policies for patients.
Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab Smoking Worldwide, more than a billion people smoke, five-sixths of them in developing countries, and 5 million people a year die from tobacco-related disease.
States that fail to curb the spread of nicotine addiction face high future costs in health care—costs that are just beginning to come due in many poor countries.
The costs are largely limited to the state itself; its own citizens and economy pay the price.
Tobacco companies’ recent marketing campaigns targeting women in the global South could produce a huge increase in smokers in that group, according to the World Health Organization.
By contrast, in the United States, about 24 percent of men smoke compared to 18 percent of women.
Member states pledge to ban tobacco advertising and are encouraged to raise taxes on tobacco 5 percent a year above the inflation rate.
The United States, alone among the world’s major powers, still had not ratified the treaty in 2011.
Population issues are sometimes portrayed as simply too many people using up too little food and natural resources.
However, the idea that overpopulation is the cause of hunger in today’s world is not really accurate.
There is enough food, water, petroleum, land, and so forth—but these are unequally distributed.
This unequal distribution is directly related to the gap between the global North and the global South.
Strains on the environment and on natural resources are global in scope, yet in the North they arise from industrialization , whereas in the South they are more affected by growing populations.
These differences in environmental impacts are by no means the only such North-South difference.
The large numbers of actors involved in global environmental problems make them more difficult to solve.
The industrialized states are much more responsible for the problem than are developing countries, but countries such as China and India also contribute to the problem.
Solutions are difficult to reach because costs are substantial and dangers are somewhat distant and uncertain.
Unlike global warming, the costs of solutions are much lower and the problem is better understood.
An international treaty on biodiversity and an agreement on forests aim to reduce the destruction of local ecosystems, with costs spread among states.
Oil prices rose dramatically in the 1970s but declined in the 1980s as the world economy adjusted by increasing supply and reducing demand.
Prices spiked again around 1991 and 2007-2008 before collapsing in 2008.
Consequently, this area has long been a focal point of international political conflict.
Death rates have fallen throughout the world, but birthrates will fall proportionally only as per capita incomes go up.
The faster the economies of poor states develop, the sooner their populations will level out.
Effective policies are those that improve access to birth control and raise the status of women in society.
Actual policies vary, from China’s very strict rules on childbearing to pronatalist governments that encourage maximum birthrates and outlaw birth control.
Currently 33 million people are infected with HIV, and 30 million more have died.
Most are in Africa, but new infections are growing rapidly in Asia and Russia.
Few effective international agreements have been reached to solve the problem of global warming.
Some politicians call for the Western industrialized countries, including the United States, to be more self-sufficient in energy resources in order to reduce dependence on oil imports from the Middle East.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview The Kyoto Protocol has been the strongest attempt to date to control the pollutants that lead to global warming.
Although the Protocol has been in effect for only a few years, it has already generated tremendous controversy.
As discussed in this chapter, Kyoto uses a market mechanism to allocate caps on the amount of emissions that can come from various countries.
Yet, only developed countries are required to meet the targets under Kyoto.
Some countries, such as the United States, object to the nonbinding targets for developing countries.
In particular, the United States objects to China's classification as a developing state that does not need to abide by the limits of the treaty.
It claims that China will be allowed to pollute while the United States pays a high economic cost to reduce global warming.
These costs could run into the hundreds of billions of dollars overthe long run.
Now, as the world attempts to design a new global warming treaty to replace the Kyoto Protocol when it expires, the question of who pays is again at the forefront of discussions.
Developing Countries Should Pay Their Share to Stop Warming Developing countries contribute to warming, so they should pay.
Developing countries contribute large amounts of carbon dioxide to the global atmosphere.
They should not be allowed to free-ride on the efforts of the wealthy states who want to slow down global warming.
While the cost to slowdown global warming will be high initially, over time technology will help states keep costs low while lessening emissions.
Thus, one should not be overly concerned that the costs of policy change in developing states will be overwhelming.
Developing countries could benefit economically from Kyoto-type agreements.
If the Kyoto agreement is extended or future agreements have similar market-based mechanisms as Kyoto, developing countries could benefit economically.
If these countries can bring emissions down enough to sell their extra cap space, they could actually recoup some of the costs of implementing the agreement.
ARGUMENT 2 Only Developed Countries Should Pay to Stop Warming The costs to developing countries will undermine development.
Placing even some of these costs on developing countries will lead to economic hardship, which will further undermine development, which could then increase emissions since these states would have no money to invest in better technologies or to develop cleaner industries.
For many years, developed countries paid little attention to the environment as they built industries, achieved economic growth, and became successful.
Now, with India and China threatening to become economically successful, Western states want to place limitations on how other states can develop and how they can treat the environment.
Non-Western states should be allowed the same development path as Western states.
Although developing countries do their fair share of polluting, many of these emissions come from industries that have been shipped from developed states.
Western states did not want these polluting industries in their backyards, so they sent them abroad, and now demand that the host countries pay the billforthe cleanup.
Houser, Trevor, Rob Bradley, Britt Childs, Jacob Werksman, and Robert Heilmayr.
It develops the theories of imperialism introduced in Chapter 3 , which try to explain this gap in terms of historical colonization of the South by the North.
Chapter 13 discusses international aspects of economic development in the South.
IR scholars do not agree on the causes or implications of poverty in the global South, nor on solutions to the problem.
They are concentrated in Africa, where income levels have lagged for decades.
Two decades ago the concentration was as strong in South Asia, but economic growth there has greatly reduced extreme poverty.
Although billions of people are rising out of poverty, because of population growth the number of very poor people nonetheless remains about the same/ The bottom line is that every five seconds, somewhere in the world, a child dies as a result of malnutrition.
The world produces enough food to nourish these children and enough income to afford to nourish them, but their own families or states do not have enough income.
Meanwhile, in that same five seconds the world spends $270,000 on military forces, a thousandth of which could save the child’s life and more.
Likewise, people lack water, shelter, health care, and other necessities because they cannot afford them.
The widespread, grinding poverty of people who cannot afford necessities is less visible than the dramatic examples of starvation triggered by war or drought, but affects many more people.
The UN in 2000 adopted the Millennium Development Goals, which set targets for basic needs measures to be achieved by 2015 and measured against 1990 data.
The first of the eight goals is to cut in half the proportion of the world’s population living in “extreme poverty,” defined as income of less than $1.25 per day.
This goal was met ahead of schedule in 2010, although Africa lagged far behind Asia in cutting poverty.
World Bank. 12 % 10 o c\j CT> o o CM 03 DC O CD Q_ Q CD 8 6 42 0 China South Asia Africa Middle East Latin America $10,000 GDP per Capita Note: For the global North overall, GDP per capita is $30,000.
The Middle East is about as developed as China in terms of GDP per capita, but is growing at only half the rate.
Chapter 13 will explore the reasons for these differences in economic growth, but here we note simply that the world’s regions vary on both income and growth, with the two dimensions not correlated.
Experts disagree about how much poverty and inequality have decreased, with some arguing that poverty has been halved through rapid economic growth and that the global distribution of income is shifting from having rich and poor extremes to having a bell curve distribution with a large population at middle incomes—an emerging global middle class.
Between 1990 and 2008, incomes per person in the global South as a whole rose from about $3,000 to about $5,500.
Basic Human Needs Some countries in the global South have made rapid progress in raising incomes, but others are caught in a cycle of poverty.
Until incomes rise, the population will not move through the demographic transition ; population growth will remain high and incomes low.
People need food, shelter, and other necessities of daily life in order to feel secure.
Furthermore, as long as people in the global South blame imperialism for a lack of basic needs, extreme poverty fuels revolution, terrorism, and anti-Western sentiments.
In particular, education allows a new generation to meet other basic needs and move through the demographic transition.
Literacy—which UNESCO defines as the ability to read and write a simple sentence—is the key component of education.
A person who can read and write can obtain a wealth of information about farming, health care, birth control, and so forth.
Some poor countries have raised literacy rates substantially; others lag behind.
Primary-school attendance in 2008 was more than 90 percent in most world regions, though only 76 percent for Africa.
In the North, about 90 percent of secondary-age children are enrolled, but in most of the global South, fewer than two-thirds are.
In 2008 in the global South, according to UNICEF, one in four children suffered from malnutrition, one in seven lacked access to health care, and one in five had no safe drinking water.
The AIDS epidemic is undoing progress made over decades in reducing child mortality and increasing education.
In both cases, achievement of these basic needs for children roughly correlates with the regions’ respective income levels.
Effective health care in poor countries is not expensive—less than $5 per person per year for primary care.
For instance, UNICEF has promoted four inexpensive methods that together are credited with saving the lives of millions of children each year.
Experts estimate that regular weighing and advice can prevent half of all cases of malnutrition.
A second method is oral rehydration therapy , which stops diarrhea in children before they die from dehydration.
The BABY BOOST Nearly a billion people in the global South—most of them in Africa and South Asia—live in abject poverty, lacking safe water, housing, food, and the ability to read.
Natural disasters, droughts, and wars can displace subsistence farmers from their land and make matters worse.
But sustained advances in health care, such as the prenatal checkup given these women in Ivory Coast in 2012, are bringing dramatic improvements.
World Bank. third method is immunization against six common deadly diseases: measles, polio, tuberculosis , tetanus, whooping cough, and diphtheria.
In recent decades, the number of children immunized in poor countries has risen from 5 percent to more than 50 percent.
By 2010, the number of children immunized at least once against measles had climbed to 85 percent.
Since 1990, despite the daunting problems of war and the HIV/AIDS epidemic, public health in the global South registered some important gains.
Infant tetanus deaths were halved, and access to safe water was extended to a billion more people.
Deaths of children under five worldwide hit a record low, below 8 million, in 2010, down from nearly 12 million in 1990.
Measles 1 0 deaths dropped by three-quarters in just ten years, 2000-2010, a striking success.
Still, globally, the disparities in access to health care are striking.
J The 75 percent of the world’s people living in the global South have about 30 percent of the world’s doctors 10 Esman, Milton J., and Ronald J Herring, eds.
The biggest killers are AIDS, acute respiratory infections, diarrhea, TB, malaria, and hepatitis.
Yet, because the people with such diseases are poor, there is often not a large enough market for drug companies in the industrialized world to invest in medicines for them.
In many rural locations, people must walk miles every day to fetch water.
Note that access to water does not mean running water in every house, but a clean well or faucet for a village.
In 1990— 2010, the number without access fell by half, meeting the MDG target early, but one in six people worldwide still lack safe drinking water.
Some 2. billion people, a third of the world’s population, do not have access to sanitation.
The result is recurrent epidemics and widespread diarrhea, which kill millions of children each year.
Poor sanitation in Haiti allowed a cholera epidemic (ironically introduced by visiting Nepalese peacekeepers, sent to help Haiti) to kill thousands in 2010-2013.
Despite the tremendous progress the world has made in improving water and sanitation, with population growth there are still about 1 billion people lacking safe water and more than 2 billion without adequate sanitation.
Of the world’s seven billion people, about one in six lives in substandard housing or is homeless altogether.
For indicator after indicator, we find about a billion people left behind with nothing.
The different indicators do not overlap perfectly, but basically the bottom billion of humanity, most living in rural areas, are in desperate poverty.
The most important factors keeping these people in desperate poverty appear to be civil war, corruption, the “resource curse” , and landlocked locations without ready access to trade.
In theory, providing for basic needs should give poor people hope of progress and should ensure political stability.
In Sri Lanka, a Children are a main focus of efforts to provide basic human needs in the global South.
Education is critical to both economic development and the demographic transition.
Girls worldwide receive less education than boys, and in Afghanistan underthe Taliban, they were banned from schools altogether.
This math class in Kandahar, Afghanistan, in 2002 followed the Taliban's fall.
The policy showed that even a very poor country could meet basic needs at low levels of per capita income.
The war became more and more brutal—with death squads and indiscriminate reprisals on civilians—until it consumed the progress Sri Lanka had made.
War in the global South—both international and civil war—is a leading obstacle to the provision of basic needs.
War causes much greater damage to society than merely the direct deaths and injuries it inflicts.
In war zones, economic infrastmcture such as transportation is disrupted, as are government services such as health care and education.
Wars drastically reduce the confidence in economic and political stability on which investment and trade depend.
The worldwide pattern somewhat resembles the map of wars in progress on page 154.
War is often part of a vicious circle for states unable to rise out of poverty.
The fragility of life in poor countries was demonstrated all too starkly in 2010 when a major earthquake devastated Haiti, already the poorest country in the Western hemisphere, with annual GDP of $1,300 per person.
Because of poor construction, many buildings collapsed, and because of poor health and sanitation facilities, survivors faced desperate conditions.
Haitians could only hope that international aid would help them rebuild from scratch in the coming years.
World Hunger Of all the basic needs of people in the global South, the most central is food.
Malnutrition refers to the lack of needed foods including protein and vitamins.
The term hunger refers broadly to malnutrition or outright undernourishment —a lack of calories.
Hunger does not usually kill people through outright starvation, but it weakens them and leaves them susceptible to infectious diseases that would not ordinarily be fatal.
Their potential contribution to economic accumulation is wasted because they cannot do even light work.
And they are a potential source of political instability—including international instability—as long as they stay hungry.
At the World Food Summit in 1996, world leaders adopted a goal to cut hunger in half by 2015.
Chronic undernourishment means failing to consume enough food on average over a year to maintain body weight and support light activity.
A quarter of the world’s children under age 5—and nearly half those in India—were underweight.
Traditionally, rural communities have grown their own food—subsistence farming.
Colonialism disrupted this pattern, and the disruption has continued in postcolonial times.
States in the global South shifted from subsistence to commercial agriculture.
Small plots were merged into big plantations, often under the control of wealthy landlords.
By concentrating capital and orienting the economy toward a niche in world trade, this process is consistent with liberal economics.
Commercial agriculture relies on machinery, commercial fuels, and artificial fertilizers and pesticides, which must be bought with cash and often must be imported.
To pay for these supplies, big farms grow cash crops—agricultural goods produced for export to world markets.
Such crops typically provide little nutrition to local peasants; examples include coffee, tea, and sugar cane.
When a plantation is built or expanded, subsistence farmers end up working on the plantation at very low wages or migrating to cities in search of jobs.
Ironically, the higher food prices in 2007-2008 have provided increased income for farmers in rural areas, yet at the cost of many being unable to afford food.
The threat of major food shortages threatened Pakistan after devastating floods in the summer of 2010.
According to the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization, nearly 2 million acres of crops were lost in the Pakistan flood, leaving food in short supply for people and farm animals.
States, IGOs, and NGOs rushed food to Pakistan after the floods, hoping to avert a major humanitarian catastrophe. 'i r\ International food aid itself can sometimes contribute to these problems/ Agricultural assistance may favor mechanized commercial agriculture.
And if an international agency floods an area with food, prices on local markets drop, which may force even more local farmers out of business and increase dependence on handouts from the government or international community.
Also, people in a drought or famine often have to travel to feeding centers to receive the food, halting their work on their own land.
Rural and Urban Populations The displacement of peasants from subsistence farming contributes to a massive population shift that typically accompanies the demographic transition.
More and more people move to the cities from the countryside—urbanization.
This is hard to measure exactly; there is no standard definition of when a town is considered a city.
But industrialized states report that about 70 to 90 percent of their populations live in cities.
Urbanization is not caused by higher population growth in cities than in the countryside.
In cities, the people are generally better educated, with higher incomes.
They are further along in the demographic transition and have lower birthrates than people in the countryside.
Rather, the growth of urban population is caused by people moving to the cities from the countryside.
They do so because of the higher income levels in the cities—economic opportunity—and the hope of more chances for an exciting life.
They also move because population growth in the countryside stretches available food, water, arable land, and other resources.
In many cities, the influx of people cannot be accommodated with jobs, housing, and services.
Many states have considered policies to break up large land holdings and redistribute land to poor peasants for use in subsistence farming—land reform.
The main opponents of land reform are large landowners, who often wield great political power because of their wealth and international connections to markets, MNCs, and other sources of hard currency.
DISPLACED Subsistence farmers displaced from their land risk chronic hunger and sometimes starvation.
These villagers in eastern Democratic Congo, where sporadic political violence has continued for more than a decade, flee new fighting in 2012.
Women in Development Economic development in poor countries is closely tied to the status of women in those societies.
This is a relatively recent revelation; most attention for decades had focused on men as supposedly the main generators of capital.
Governments and international reports concentrated on work performed by male wage earners.
Women’s work, by contrast, often is not paid for in money and does not show up in financial statistics.
But women in much of the world work harder than men and contribute more to the economic well-being of their families and communities.
Women are key to efforts to improve the lot of children and reduce birthrates.
In nutrition, education, health care, and shelter, women are central to providing the basic needs of people in poor countries.
For instance, when food is in short supply, men and boys often eat first, with women and girls getting what is left.
Women are central to rural economies, to population strategies, and to the provision of basic human needs, including education.
Here, a women's cooperative in Mauritania makes small loans to its members, 2006.
Across the global South, only in Latin America do women’s literacy rates approach those of men.
In Pakistan, three-quarters of boys but little more than half the girls receive primary education.
Throughout Asia, Africa, and the Middle East , more boys receive education, especially at the secondary level, though the gap has closed considerably in recent years.
The Taliban regime in Afghanistan took extreme measures against women’s education, banning all girls from school and all women from paid work.
These issues occupied the 1995 UN women’s conference in Beijing, China, attended by tens of thousands of state and NGO representatives.
For example, international agencies help women organize small businesses, farms, and other income-producing activities.
UNICEF has helped women get bank loans on favorable terms to start up small businesses in Egypt and Pakistan as well as cooperative farms in Indonesia.
Women have organized cooperatives throughout the global South, often in rural areas, to produce income through weaving and other textile and clothing production, retail stores, agriculture, and so forth.
In the slums of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, women heads of household with no land for subsistence farming had been forced into begging and prostitution.
Women taking part in the Integrated Holistic Approach Urban Development Project organized income-producing businesses in areas such as food processing, cloth weaving, and garment production.
These profitable businesses earned income for the women and helped subsidize health and sanitation services in the slums.
The home state is not under any obligation to let such people leave, and, more important, no state is obligated to receive migrants.
As with any trade issue, migration creates complex patterns of winners and losers.
Immigrants often provide cheap labor, benefiting the host economy overall, but also compete for jobs with citizens of the host country.
Most industrialized states try to limit immigration from the global South.
Despite border guards and fences, many people migrate anyway, illegally.
In the United States, such immigrants come from all over the world, but mostly from nearby Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean.
In Western Europe, they come largely from North Africa, Turkey, and Eastern Europe/ 3 Some Western European leaders worry that the loosening of border controls under the process of integration will make it harder to keep out illegal immigrants.
In 2004-2006, tens of thousands of migrants and refugees from subSaharan Africa came to Morocco and climbed over razor-wire fences to enter two tiny Spanish enclaves there.
Once on Spanish soil, they could not be sent home if they kept authorities from determining their nationality.
The increase in migrants trying to reach the enclaves in Morocco followed Spanish efforts to stem the flow of migrants crossing in boats from North Africa to Spain itself near the Gibraltar straits.
In turn, when Spain cracked down on the crossings at the Moroccan enclaves, Africans set out in boats and rafts to reach the Spanish-owned Canary Islands in the Atlantic off Morocco.
International law and custom distinguish migrants from refugees, people fleeing to find refuge from war, natural disaster, or political persecution.
International norms obligate countries to accept refugees who arrive at their borders.
Refugees from political persecution may be granted asylum to stay in the new state.
Acceptance of refugees—and the question of which states must bear the costs—is a collective goods problem.
ON THE MOVE Refugees are both a result of international conflict and a source of conflict.
In addition to those fleeing war and repression and those seeking economic opportunity, hundreds of thousands of people each year cross borders as sex and labor slaves.
These refugees crossing from war-torn Libya into Tunisia in 2011 show their Bangladesh passports.
Includes refugees, asylum seekers, returned refugees, and internally displaced people.
This problem came into sharp focus in 2011 when tens of thousands of refugees from Tunisia and Libya poured into Italy, from which they could pass freely into other nearby European countries, France stopped accepting them, and EU leaders reviewed their freemovement rules.
The number of international refugees in the world was about 10 million in 2012.
About 15 million more people were displaced within their own countries.
Three-fourths of these internally displaced persons resided in Colombia, Congo, Somalia, Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria.
The majority of refugees and IDPs have been displaced by wars , most recently by the civil war in Syria, which by early 2013 had generated 600,000 refugees in Turkey and Jordan, and 2. million internally displaced persons, all fleeing violence in general and sexual violence in particular.
In 2013, Jordan declared it would take no more refugees in a new Syrian crisis beyond the 200,000 already there.
They live in “camps” that have become long-term neighborhoods, mainly in Jordan, Lebanon, and the Palestinian territories of Gaza and the West Bank.
The poverty of the refugees in turn fuels radical political movements among the inhabitants.
The question of Palestinian refugees’ right to return to what is now Israel has challenged every attempt at a comprehensive peace settlement for years.
It is not always easy to distinguish a refugee fleeing war or political persecution from a migrant seeking economic opportunity.
Illegal immigrants may claim to be refugees in order to be allowed to stay, when really they are seeking better economic opportunities.
In recent decades this issue has become a major one throughout the North.
In Germany, France, Austria, and elsewhere, resentment of foreign immigrants has fueled upsurges of right-wing nationalism in domestic politics.
Remittances A crucial aspect of migration and immigration is remittances—money sent home by migrants to relatives in their country of origin.
Your neighbor to the east, Zimbabwe, has undergone years of political, economic, and social turmoil.
Most recently, a contested presidential election set off waves of violence and protest there.
Besides the political violence, a food shortage crisis affects up to half of the 12 million inhabitants of Zimbabwe.
Finally, Zimbabwe has experienced several outbreaks of cholera, which have killed thousands who lack basic health care in the midst of the crisis.
These terrible political, social, and economic conditions have led many to flee Zimbabwe looking for temporary relief from the conditions in that country.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Your own political and economic situation, however, is quite different.
Over the past decade, your country has gone from being one of the poorest in Africa to one with a per capita GDP of $15,000 per person.
The economic situation of your country is solid and the political situation is relatively stable.
While your political and economic situation is certainly better than Zimbabwe's, it is not clear that you would be able to provide assistance or refuge for the tens of thousands of Zimbabweans fleeing to your country.
In particular. your health care system, already strained by the AIDS epidemic, would be quickly overtaxed by refugees streaming in from Zimbabwe infected with cholera.
And while your own public has some tolerance for a limited number of refugees, they would oppose accommodating all Zimbabweans who want assistance.
Another cholera outbreak occurs, which spurs tens of thousands of additional refugees to pour into Botswana.
Your health minister implores you to shut down the border because of the cholera threat.
But you are under some pressure from the international community to accept the refugees.
This could lead to resentment on the part of your own population if the refugees take jobs, drain food supplies, or burden your health care system.
Unlike FDI, remittances are not transferred between companies or wealthy individuals, but usually between families.
They also are not handed out by governments and thus, not subject to corruption or governmental waste.
Also, unlike foreign aid, remittances are not subject to conditions from donors.
These characteristics of remittances make them important, yet also difficult to study.
They have helped some poorer states, such as the Philippines and Bangladesh, improve their investment ratings and sell bonds, luring more foreign direct investment.
However, remittance levels are very vulnerable to economic downturns in wealthy countries.
Remittances also continue the cycle of dependency of poor states on wealthy ones.
Should wealthy states close their borders or expel migrant populations, this would create hardships for individual families as well as the economies of developing countries.
Trafficking In addition to migration and refugees, a growing number of people— estimated at about 700,000 annually—are trafficked across international borders against their will.
They include both sex slaves and labor slaves, with each category including females and males, adults and children.
Perhaps 20,000 of these people are trafficked to 28 Singer, David A Migrant Remittances and Exchange Rate Regimes in the Developing World.
The Well-Being of Refugees BACKGROUND: Wars and disasters regularly displace millions of people from their homes, as they seek safety and survival by fleeing.
Not infrequently, they show up at an international border seeking to cross and find refuge on the other side.
With most wars happening in poor regions of the world, the neighboring countries that are expected to absorb refugee populations often lack the resources to provide for them.
There is thus a temptation to free-ride and turn refugees away at the border.
The identity principle can play a role, as when refugees are a persecuted minority who cross the border into a country where their ethnic group is a majority.
Singer, David A Migrant Remittances and Exchange Rate Regimes in the Developing World.
In 2010, the United States State Department listed 13 countries making insufficient efforts to stop human trafficking, including friends such as Kuwait, Malay'l O sia, and Saudi Arabia/ 29 United States Department of State.
The main approach, however, is reciprocity—neither expecting countries to take in refugees just from the goodness of their hearts, but also not threatening them or forcing them to do so.
The world’s refugee regime is a reciprocity-based set of rules that the world’s states have agreed to.
All states are supposed to follow the same rules, which require them to take in war refugees.
In order to help the host countries, the international community has an international organization, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , to help take care of refugee populations.
UNHCR funding is itself a collective goods problem, and the agency often runs short of desperately needed supplies when the good is not provided.
Refugees from Kyrgyzstan are separated when Tajikistan closes the border, 2010.
There are several very different approaches to these questions; we will concentrate on two contrasting theories of wealth accumulation, based on more liberal and more revolutionary perspectives.
Economic Accumulation A view of the problem from the perspective of capitalism is based on liberal economics— stressing overall efficiency in maximizing economic growth.
This view sees the global South as merely lagging behind the industrialized North.
More wealth creation in the North is a good thing, as is wealth creation in the South—the two are not in conflict.
A different view of things, from the perspective of socialism, is concerned with the distribution of wealth as much as the absolute creation of wealth.
It sees the North-South divide as more of a zero-sum game in which the creation of wealth in the North most often comes at the expense of the South.
It also gives politics more of a role in redistributing wealth and managing the economy than does capitalism.
But socialists see economic classes rather than states as the main actors in the political bargaining over the distribution of the world’s wealth.
And mercantilism promotes the idea of concentrating wealth , whereas socialism promotes the broader distribution of wealth.
For socialists, international exchange is shaped by capitalists’ exploitation of cheap labor and cheap resources—using states to help create the political conditions for this exploitation.
Thus, whereas mercantilists see political interests as driving economic policies, socialists see economic interests as driving political policies.
In Latin America in recent years, several states have elected leftist presidents committed to changing course away from free market capitalism and toward a socialist philosophy with more state-owned industries.
Capitalist and socialist approaches are rather incompatible in their language and assumptions about the problem of poverty and its international implications.
This chapter somewhat favors socialist approaches, focusing on the past history of imperialism as a central cause of the North-South divide, and on revolutionary strategies and massive redistribution of wealth as solutions to it.
Almost all have some form of mixed economy that includes both private and state ownership.
In most capitalist countries the government balances the inhuman side of capitalism by redistributing some wealth downward.
In the 2008-2009 financial crisis, some of the largest capitalist economies, including the United States and Great Britain, found themselves spending money to buy portions of private companies, such as insurance companies, automakers, and banks, to keep these businesses from going into bankruptcy.
Economic development is based on capital accumulation —the creation of standing wealth such as buildings, roads, and factories.
In order for human populations and their capital to grow, they must produce an economic surplus by using capital to produce more capital.
This is done by investing money in productive capital rather than using it for consumption.
The more surplus an economy produces, the more resources are available for investment above the minimum level of consumption needed to sustain human life.
The Industrial Revolution of several centuries ago greatly accelerated the process of world accumulation, drawing on large amounts of energy from fossil fuels.
But industrialization has occurred very unevenly across the world regions.
Information technology now is making a fuel-burning infrastructure relatively less important in the advanced economies.
The countries of the global South may need to pass through a phase of heavy industrialization, as countries in the North did, or perhaps they can develop economically along different paths, using new technology from the start.
While a generation of students in industrialized countries go online, poorer countries still struggle to extend literacy to rural populations.
Production in the global South uses relatively little capital and much labor , reflecting an early stage of industrialization.
To develop economically, poor countries must generate self-sustaining capital accumulation.
Agriculture, energy, and textiles are classic export products from the global South, relatively low-capital and labor-intensive.
In Morocco, textiles such as these for sale in 2010 are a major source of export revenue.
The World-System The global system of regional class divisions has been seen by some IR scholars as a n 1 ___ world-system or a capitalist world economy.
This view is Marxist in orientation (focusing on economic classes; see Chapter 3) and relies on a global level of analysis.
Industrialized regions mostly manufacture goods—work that uses more capital, requires more skilled labor, and pays workers higher wages.
Conflicts among great powers, including the two world wars and the Cold War, basically result from competition among core states over the right to exploit the periphery.
The concentration of capital and the scale of wages each form a continuum rather than a sharp division into two categories/ In world-system theory, the semiperiphery is an area in which some manufacturing occurs and some capital concentrates, but not to the extent of the most advanced areas in the core.
Eastern Europe and Russia are commonly considered semiperipheral, as are some of the newly industrializing countries such as Taiwan and Singapore.
The semiperiphery acts as a kind of political buffer between the core and periphery because poor states can aspire to join the semiperiphery instead of aspiring to rebel against domination by the core.
Over time, membership in the core, the semiperiphery, and the periphery changes somewhat, but the overall global system of class relations remains.
Areas that once were beyond the reach of Europeans, such as the interior of Latin America, become incorporated as periphery.
Areas of the periphery can become semiperiphery and even join the core, as North America did.
And core states can slip into the semiperiphery if they fall behind in accumulation, as Spain did in the late 16th to early 17th centuries.
Because world-system theory provides only general concepts but not firm definitions of what constitutes the core, semiperiphery, and periphery, it is hard to say exactly which states belong to each category.
The actual patterns of world trade support world-system theory to some extent.
The industrialized West fits the profile of the core, exporting more than it imports in machinery, chemicals, and similar heavy manufactured goods.
In the 1990s, all the other regions imported more than they exported in such goods.
But in the 2000s, China (and other Asian countries) also became a net exporter of heavy manufactured goods.
Asia also still has a niche in exporting light manufacturing including textile production.
The shift of export-oriented manufacturing from the industrialized countries to Asia reflects globalization.
The industrialized West’s net imports of energy are an enormously important type of trade and another indication of globalization.
The Middle East specializes in exporting oil, and Russia, Latin America, and Africa all export energy on balance as well.
These regions’ patterns of specialization must be kept in perspective, however.
All regions both import and export all these types of goods, and the net exports listed in the table amount to only a small part of the world’s total trade.
The three regions that engage with the globalizing world economy primarily as rawmaterial exporters are growing more slowly.
Having exportable natural resources would seem a big plus for an economy, but in fact the problems of basing economic growth on resource exports have been called the o C resource curse.
Even in a middle-income country, Chile, the quadrupling of the price of its main export commodity, copper, in 2003-2006 was a mixed blessing.
Protesters demanded that the billions of dollars be spent on social services for the poor, but the president warned against spending what could be a temporary windfall.
Meanwhile the high export earnings strengthened Chile’s currency, making it harder for other industries to export their products.
Then in late 2008, the global recession caused a crash in copper prices, drastically cutting Chile’s income.
Imperialism Both the disparities in wealth between the global North and South and the regions’ export specializations have long histories.
In Chapter 3 we discussed Marxist theories of imperialism, which give a particular kind of explanation for how the North-South gap evolved.
Here we review how imperialism affected the South over the centuries and how its aftereffects are still felt around the world.
Imperialism, especially in the 16th to mid-20th centuries, structured world order starkly around the dominance principle, with masters and slaves, conquerors and conquered peoples with their land, labor, and treasures.
At the same time, imperialism depends on the identity principle to unite the global North around a common racial identity that defines nonwhite people as an out-group.
Other civilizations existed in other world regions for centuries before Europeans ever arrived.
These cultural traditions continue to exert an influence on IR, especially when the styles and expecn H tations of these cultures come into play in international interactions . ' •i r Humphreys, Macartan, Jeffrey D Sachs, and Joseph E Stiglitz.
Republic S Asia Emergence of Hinduism, Buddhism; Ancient India; Arab conquest Turkish period Taj Mahal Europear built o o_ o Z5_ CD c7)' 3 v independence Africa Kingdom of Ghana Yoruba, Mali, Benin slave trade — Congo Zimbabwe Buganda Ashanti -CD O c European -§ colonialism §“O Middle East Mesopotamia, Egypt, Persia; Jews, Christians; Greeks/Romans; Islam Crusades Arah pmnirp _ Arab Islamic nationalism rev.
Today’s North American population is overwhelmingly descended from immigrants.
In most of the world , however, European empires incorporated rather than pushed aside indigenous populations.
Today’s populations are descended primarily from indigenous inhabitants, not immigrants.
These populations are therefore more strongly rooted in their own cultural traditions and history than are most Americans.
European civilization evolved from roots in the Eastern Mediterranean—Egypt, Mesopotamia , and especially Greece.
By that time, states were carrying out sophisticated trade relations and warfare with each other in a broad swath of the world from the Mediterranean through India to East Asia.
In the “warring states” period, at about the same time as the Greek city-states, sophisticated states (organized as territorial political units) first used warfare as an instrument of power politics.
By aboutd.0, when Europe was in its “dark ages” and Arab civilization in its golden age, China under the T’ang dynasty was a highly advanced civilization quite independent of Western influence.
Japan isolated itself from Western influence under the Tokugawa shogunate for several centuries, ending after 1850 when the Meiji restoration began Japanese industrialization and international trade.
In Africa, the great kingdoms flowered after aboutd.00 (as early asd. in Ghana) and were highly developed when the European slave traders arrived on the scene around 1500.
The Arab caliphate of aboutd. to 1200 plays a special role in the international relations of the Middle East.
Almost the whole of the region was once united in this empire, which arose and spread with the religion of Islam.
In the 16th to 19th centuries, the Eastern Mediterranean came under the Turkish-based Ottoman Empire, which gave relative autonomy to local cultures if they paid tribute.
This history of empires continued to influence the region in the 20th century.
For example, Pan-Arabism , especially strong in the 1950s and 1960s, saw the region as potentially one nation again, with a single religion, language, and identity.
Iraq’s Saddam Hussein during the Gulf War likened himself to the ruler who drove away the Crusaders a thousand years ago.
The strength of Islamic fundamentalism throughout the region today, as well as the emotions attached to the Arab-Israeli conflict, reflect the continuing importance of the Arab caliphate.
The Italian city-states of the period also rediscovered the rules of interstate power politics, as described by an advisor 38 Sun Tzu.
European monarchs put cannons on sailing ships and began to “discover” the world.
The development of the international system, of imperialism, of trade and war, were all greatly accelerated by the Industrial Revolution after about 1750.
Ultimately the European conquest of the world brought about a single world civilization, albeit with regional variants and subcultures.-0 History of Imperialism, 1500-2000 European imperialism got its start in the 15th century with the development of oceangoing sailing ships in which a small crew could transport a sizable cargo over a long distance.
With superior military technology, Europeans gained control of coastal cities and of resupply outposts along major trade routes.
In the 16th century, Spain and Portugal had extensive empires in Central America and Brazil, respectively.
The imperialists bought slaves in Africa and shipped them to Mexico and Brazil, where they worked in tropical agriculture and in mining silver and gold.
The wealth produced was exported to Europe, where monarchs used it to buy armies and build states.
These empires decimated indigenous populations and cultures, causing immense suffering.
Over time, the economies of colonies developed with the creation of basic transportation and communication infrastructure, factories, and so forth.
But these economies were often molded to the needs of the colonizers, not the local populations.
Decolonization began with the British colonists in the United States, who declared independence in 1776.
The new states in North America and Latin America were, of course, still run by the descendants of Europeans, to the disadvantage of Native Americans and African slaves.
India became Britain’s largest and most important colony in the 19th century.
Latecomers such as Germany and Italy were frustrated to find few attractive territories remaining in the world when they tried to build overseas empires in the late 19th century.
Japan began building its own empire, as did the United States, at the end of the 19th century.
China became weaker and its coastal regions fell under the domination, if not the formal control, of European powers.
Rebel^ Opium |j on Boxc Wars Rebell an & Korea Korea s P |il tpanese) Taiwan . autonomous Japanese em P ire ComHong jr munist Kong ion China to China South Asia Dutch CO CD O CL X East Indies Company Indonesia -^ India (E F British) Indian independence ’hilippines Vietnam War Africa c e es Independence er.) rp Slave Lrade Q o LU Angola, |p ortU g U ese) Mozambique Scramb for colon (Brit., Fr. f C Middle East Ottoman Fmnirp British & French mandates A| 9 erian independence 15 1 00 16 1 00 17 1 00 18 1 00 19 1 00 20 J5& 45a ■las 00 FIGURE 12.
In Latin America, most of the 19th century was absorbed with wars, border changes, the rise and fall of dictatorships and republics, a chronic foreign debt problem, revolutions, and recurrent military incursions by European powers and the United States to recover debts.
In the wave of decolonization after World War II, it was not local colonists (as in the Americas) but indigenous populations in Asia and Africa who won independence.
Decolonization continued through the mid-1970s until almost no European colonies remained.
Most of the newly independent states have faced tremendous challenges and difficulties in the postcolonial era because of their colonial histories.
Effects of Colonialism For most states in the global South, the history of having been colonized by Europeans is central to their national identity, foreign policy, and place in the world.
For these states— and especially for those within them who favor socialist perspectives—international relations revolves around their asymmetrical power relationships with industrialized states.
The inhabitants are forced to speak the language of the colonizers, to adopt their cultural practices, and to be educated at schools run under their guidance.
The inhabitants are told that they are racially inferior to the foreigners.
White Europeans in third world colonies in Africa and Asia were greatly outnumbered by native inhabitants but maintained power by a combination of force and (more important) psychological conditioning.
After generations under colonialism, most native inhabitants either saw white domination as normal or believed that nothing could be done about it.
The whites often lived in a bubble world separated from the lives of the local inhabitants.
The best farmland was planted in export crops rather than subsistence crops, and was sometimes overworked and eroded.
The infrastructure that was built served the purposes of imperialism rather than the local population—for instance, railroads going straight from mining areas to ports.
The education and skills needed to run the economy were largely limited to whites.
It was in the colonial administration’s interest to foster local cycles of capital accumulation.
Much of the infrastructure that exists today in many third world countries was created by colonizers.
In some cases , colonization combined disparate communities into a cohesive political unit with a common religion, language, and culture, thus creating more opportunities for economic accumulation.
In some cases, the local political cultures replaced by colonialism were themselves oppressive to the majority of the people.
Areas of White Minority Rule in Africa, 1952-1994 Formal colonialism was swept away over 40 years.
Through the 1960s, a wave of successful independence movements swept from one country to the next, as people stopped accepting imperialism as normal or inevitable.
Although many third world countries gained independence around the same time, the methods by which they did so varied.
However, nonviolence broke down in the subsequent Hindu-Muslim civil war, which split India into two states—India mostly with Hindus, and Pakistan mostly with Muslims.
Some colonies—for example, Algeria and Vietnam—won independence through warfare to oust their European masters; others won it peacefully by negotiating a transfer of power with weary Europeans.
In Algeria, France abandoned its colonial claims in 1962 only after fighting a bitter guerrilla war.
Some colonial liberation movements fought guerrilla wars based on communist ideology.
The Viet Minh, for instance, defeated the French occupiers in 1954 and established communist rule in all of Vietnam by 1975.
The Soviet Union supported many such movements, and the United States opposed them.
But in most cases the appeal of liberation movements was the general theme of anticolonialism rather than communist ideology.
Across the various methods and ideologies of liberation movements in the global South, one common feature was reliance on nationalism for strong popular support.
Nationalism was only one idea that these movements took from Europe and used to undermine European control; others included democracy, freedom, progress, and Marxism.
Leaders of liberation movements often had gone to European universities.
Under European control many states also developed infrastructures, educational and religious institutions, health care, and military forces based on the European model.
Europe’s conquest of the global South thus contributed tools to undo their conquest.
A few states, such as Singapore, have accumulated capital successfully since becoming independent.
But others, including many African states, seem to be going backward, with little new capital accumulating to replace the old colonial infrastructure.
One reason for these problems is that under colonialism, the training and experience needed to manage the economy were often limited to white Europeans, leaving a huge gap in technical and administrative skills after independence.
Another problem faced by newly independent states was that as colonies, their economies had been narrowly developed to serve the needs of the European home country.
For Zambia, it was copper ore; for El Salvador, coffee; for Botswana, diamonds.
Such a narrow export economy would seem well suited to use the state’s comparative advantage to specialize in one niche of the world economy.
The liberal free trade regime based around the WTO corrected only partially for the North’s superior bargaining position in North-South trade.
It is not easy to restructure an economy away from the export of a few commodities.
In any case, coffee plantations and copper mines take time and capital to create, and they represent capital accumulation—they cannot just be abandoned.
In addition, local inhabitants’ skills and training are likely to be concentrated in the existing industries.
Furthermore, infrastructure such as railroads most likely was set up to serve the export economy.
The newly independent states inherited borders that were drawn in European capitals by foreign officers looking at maps.
As a result, especially in Africa, the internal rivalries of ethnic groups and regions made it very difficult for the new states to implement coherent economic plans.
In a number of cases, ethnic conflicts within former colonies led to civil wars, which halted or reversed capital accumulation.
Finally, governments of many postcolonial states did not function very effectively, creating another obstacle to accumulation.
In other cases, governments tried to impose central control and planning on their national economy, based on nationalism, mercantilism, or socialism.
In sum, liberation from colonial control did not change underlying economic realities.
The main trading partners of newly independent countries were usually their former colonial masters.
The administrative units and territorial borders were those created by Europeans.
The state continued to occupy the same peripheral position in the world-system after independence as it had before.
And in some cases it continued to rely on its former colonizer for security.
Borders, Railroads, and Resources in Angola and Namibia Despite the independence of Angola and Namibia, colonial times shaped the borders and infrastructure in the region.
This concept also covers the relationship of the global South with the United States, which was not a formal colonizer.
And it covers the North-South international relations of Latin American states, independent for almost two centuries.
Dependency Marxist IR scholars have developed dependency theory to explain the lack of accumulation in the third world.
These scholars define dependency as a situation in which accumulation of capital cannot sustain itself internally.
A dependent country must borrow capital to produce goods; its debt payments then reduce the accumulation of surplus.
The development (or lack of development) of a third world state depends on its local conditions and history, though it is affected by the same global conditions as other countries located in the periphery.
One historically important configuration of dependency is the enclave economy, in which foreign capital is invested in a third world country to extract a particular raw material in a particular place—usually a mine, oil well, or plantation.
Here the cycle of capital accumulation is primed by foreign capital, is fueled by local resources, and completes itself with the sale of products on foreign markets.
Angola’s Cabinda province, located up the coast from the rest of Angola, is a classic enclave economy.
Chevron pumps oil from a large field of offshore wells, with the money going to Angolan government officials, who spend some on weapons and pocket large sums in flagrant acts of corruption.
The people of Cabinda, aside from a tiny number who work for Chevron, live in poverty with crumbling infrastructure, few government services, few jobs, and recurrent banditry by unpaid soldiers.
Inside the Chevron compound, however, United States workers drive on paved roads, eat American food, and enjoy an 18-hole golf course.
They spend 28 days there, working 12-hour days, then fly back to the United States for 28 days of rest.
Traveling the 12 miles to the airport by helicopter, the Americans rarely leave the fenced compound, which Chevron reportedly surrounded with land mines.
European colonialism worldwide promoted values and norms implying that the colonizer's culture was superior to the indigenous culture.
This girl displaced by violence in Kenya, a former British colony, plays with a light-skinned doll, 2008.
A different historical pattern is that of nationally controlled production, in which a local capitalist class controls a cycle of accumulation based on producing export products.
The cycle still depends on foreign markets, but the profits accrue to the local capitalists, building up a powerful class of rich owners within the country.
They are not unpatriotic, but their interests tend to converge with those of foreign capitalists.
For instance, they want to keep local wages as low as possible, to produce cheap goods for consumers in the rich countries.
The local capitalists, in alliance with political authorities, enforce a system of domination that ultimately serves the foreign capitalists.
After World War II, a third form of dependency became more common—penetration of national economies by MNCs.
Here the capital is provided externally (as with enclaves), but production is for local markets.
The cycle of accumulation depends on local labor and local markets, but because MNCs provide the foreign capital, they take out much of the surplus as profit.
According to dependency theory, the particular constellation of forces within a country determines which coalitions form among the state, the military, big landowners, local capitalists, foreign capitalists , foreign governments, and middle classes such as professionals and skilled industrial workers.
On the other side, peasants, workers, and sometimes students and the church form alliances to work for more equal distribution of income, human and political rights, and local control of the economy.
These class alliances and the resulting social relationships are not determined by any general rule but by concrete conditions and historical developments in each country.
Like other Marxist theories, dependency theory pays special attention to class struggle as a source of social change.
Some people think that under conditions of dependency, economic development is almost impossible.
Others think that development is possible under dependency, despite certain difficulties.
Revolutionary Movements Poverty and lack of access to basic human needs are prime causes of revolutions, especially when poor people see others living much better.
Most revolutionary movements espouse egalitarian ideals—a more equal distribution of wealth and power.
During the Cold War years, the classic revolutionary movement was a communist insurgency based in the countryside.
Usually “ United States imperialism” or another such foreign presence was viewed as a friend of the state and an enemy of the revolution.
Sometimes the United States government gave direct military aid to governments facing such revolutionary movements.
In a number of countries, United States military advisors and even combat troops were sent to help put down the revolutions and keep communists from taking power.
For its part, the Soviet Union often armed and helped train the revolutionaries.
Thus, the domestic politics of poor countries became intertwined with great power politics in the context of the North-South gap.
In reality, many of these governments and revolutions had little to do with global communism, capitalism, or imperialism.
They were local power struggles—sometimes between the haves and the have-nots, sometimes between rival ethnic groups—into which great powers were drawn.
By the early 1990s, these communist revolutions seemed to have played themselves out—winning in some places, losing in others, and coming to a stalemate in a few countries.
The end of the Cold War removed superpower support from both sides, and the collapse of the Soviet Union and the adoption of capitalist-oriented economic reforms in China undercut the ideological appeal of communist revolutions.
Several Marxist revolutionary movements linger, however, including in Colombia, Peru, and ^ 3 Skocpol, Theda.
In Nepal, Maoist rebels fought for a decade until a 2006 peace agreement, then won elections and became the country’s governing party.
In foreign policy, revolutionary governments often start out planning radically different relationships with neighbors and great powers.
The pattern of international alliances often shifts after revolutions, as when a Cold War client of one superpower shifted to the other after a change of government.
But the new government usually discovers that, once it holds power, it has p, the same interest as other states in jfSSi j Sf.Mj promoting national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The rules of the international system now work for the revolutionaries instead of against them, once they control a state.
Their state also has the same geographical location tij M as before, the same historical conflicts H j l * with its neighbors, and the same ethnic ties.
So it is not unusual over time to South Africa's former president, Nelson Mandela (here shown at a march of the find similar foreign policies emanating African National Congress in Boipatong, 1992), had unusual success in making from a revolutionary government as the difficult transition from revolutionary to state leader, and then leaving office from its predecessor Thus although peacefully.
He had the advantage of coming to power nonviolently (relatively speaking), enjoying tremendous world respect, and leading a country that is rules of international relations have tended to triumph over revolutionary challenges.
Overall, North-South relations show how difficult it has become to separate political economy from international security.
The original political relations contained in European imperialism led to economic conditions in the South—such as high population growth, urbanization, and concentrations of wealth—that in turn led to political movements for independence, and later to revolutions.
The various aspects of the NorthSouth gap considered in this chapter—including hunger, refugees, and the structure of commodity exports—all contain both economic and political-military aspects.
Marxists emphasize that the economic realities of accumulation, or the lack of accumulation, lie beneath all the political struggles related to global North-South relations.
But Marxists’ strategies—from armed revolutions to self-reliance to state ownership— have not been successful at changing those realities.
Chapter 13 therefore turns in depth to the question of how economies in the South can develop the accumulation process and what role the North can play in that process. and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab Study ^ 5 Stavig, Ward.
About a billion live in extreme poverty, without access to adequate food, water, and other necessities.
Third world states have had mixed success in meeting their populations’ basic needs.
The most important cause is the displacement of subsistence farmers from their land because of war, population pressures, and the conversion of agricultural land into plantations growing export crops to earn hard currency.
Huge slums have grown in the cities as poor people arrive and cannot find jobs.
International agencies based in the North have started taking women’s contributions into account in analyzing economic development in the South.
War and repression in the South have generated millions of refugees seeking safe haven.
Under international law and norms, states are generally supposed to accept refugees but do not have to accept migrants.
Almost all the wars of the past 50 years have been fought in the global South.
Capitalism emphasizes overall growth with considerable concentration of wealth, whereas socialism emphasizes a fair distribution of wealth.
However, state ownership has not been very successful in accumulating wealth.
Consequently, many states have been selling off state-owned enterprises , especially in Russia and Eastern Europe.
In this theory, capitalists in the North exploit the South economically and use the wealth thus generated to buy off workers in the North.
Revolutions thus occur in the South and are ultimately directed against the North.
Today’s North-South gap traces its roots to the past colonization of the southern world regions by Europe.
This colonization occurred at different times in different parts of the world, as did decolonization.
These culminated in a wave of successful independence movements after World War II in Asia and Africa.
Over time, however, old national interests and strategies tend to reappear.
The zones of the world economy as described by world-system theorists treat the North as a core and the South as largely a periphery.
In North and South America, independence from colonialism was won by descendants of the colonists themselves.
In Asia and Africa, it was won mainly by local populations with a long history of their own.
Suppose you lived in an extremely poor slum in the global South and had no money or job—but retained all the knowledge you now have.
Currently incomes in the global North are five times as high, per person, as in the global South.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview The movement of people across borders is one of the important issues that blends domestic politics and international relations.
Although much of the debate is couched in terms of immigrants' (and migrants') impact on the economy of the host state, a variety of international factors shape the incentives of individuals to migrate, including global economic conditions, political conditions in neighboring states, and the status of military conflicts within and between states.
Immigration policy must balance empathy for those abroad with a responsibility for those already here.
Whether the debate is over war refugees in Africa, economic immigrants in Europe, or victims of natural disasters in Latin America, immigration policy is always a matter of intense debate.
The question of immigration policy has become one of extremely divided opinions in the United States—opinions that cross traditional ideological and political party lines.
Because illegal immigrants often do not pay income taxes, they are a large untapped source of tax revenue.
Many of these immigrants use social services, such as education, so allowing them to earn citizenship will allow them to ""pay"" for these services through taxes.
Workers who earn money inside the United States often send significant portions back to their home countries.
This money helps to stabilize home countries economically, providing opportunities for family members and improving their quality of life.
Without the presence of these working immigrants , some industries (agriculture and construction in particular) would experience labor shortages, driving up prices for all Americans.
There is already a legal path to citizenship that has been taken by millions of Americans.
It would be unfairto reward with citizenship those who illegally entered the country after so many Americans had to undergo a long, arduous process to earn their rights.
During economic downturns, layoffs increase and jobs are harder to come by.
This competition is especially damaging to Americans of lower socioeconomic status, who are already threatened in other ways by the economic downturn.
Increases in immigration resulting from the policy would create security risks.
If a path to citizenship encourages surges in future immigration, it will be difficult to keep United States borders secure, leading to security risks.
In this age of global terrorism, any factor increasing the large numbers of individuals passing across state borders can threaten a state's security.
For Further Reading Givens, Terri E., Gary P Freeman, and David L Leal, eds.
Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Experiences Chapter 12 discussed the situation in the global South and how it came to be; this chapter takes up the question of what to do about it.
Economic development refers to the combined processes of capital accumulation, rising per capita incomes (with consequent falling birthrates), increasing skills in the population, adoption of new technological styles, and other related social and economic changes.
The concept of development has a subjective side that cannot be measured statistically—the judgment of whether a certain pattern of wealth creation and distribution is good for a state and its people.
But one simple measure of economic development is the per capita GDP—the amount of economic activity per person.
By this measure, we can trace the successes and failures of the South as a whole and, more important, its regions and countries.
The latter is more important because it contains the seeds of possible lessons and strategies that could build on the South’s successes in the future.
Most of the global South made progress on economic development in the 1970s, but per capita GDP decreased in the 1980s in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East, with only China growing robustly.
In the 1990s, real economic growth returned across much of the South—about 5-6 percent annual growth for the South as a whole, and even higher for China, compared to 2-3 percent in the global North.
China stood out among the regions of the South as making rapid progress toward economic development.
Because China and South Asia together contain the majority of the population in the global South, this development is very important.
This new growth shows that it is possible to rise out of poverty to relative prosperity.
And although the 2008-2009 global economic crisis threatened the developing world, most states in the global South have emerged more quickly than their wealthy counterparts in the global North.
But the NICs quickly resumed growth and have developed much further and faster than most of the global South.
Each succeeded in developing particular sectors and industries that were competitive on world markets.
These sectors and industries can create enough capital accumulation within the country to raise income levels not just among the small elite but across the population more broadly.
Scholars do not know whether the NICs are just the lucky few that have moved from the periphery to the semiperiphery of the world-system or whether their success can eventually be replicated throughout the world.
Taiwan also used a strong state industrial policy, specializing in the electronics and computer industries and in other light manufacturing.
Hong Kong—controlled by China since 1997—also has world-competitive electronics and other light industries, but its greatest strengths are in banking and trade.
Singapore is a trading city located at the tip of the Malaysian peninsula—convenient to the South China Sea, the Indian Ocean, and Australia.
For different reasons, each of these states holds a somewhat unusual political status in the international system.
South Korea and Taiwan were hot spots of international conflict that came under the United States security umbrella during the Cold War.
Both were militarized, authoritarian states intolerant of dissent that later became democratic.
United States spending in East Asia during the Cold War benefited South Korea and Taiwan.
They are more city-states than nation-states, and their cities are trading ports and financial centers.
Although not as repressive or as militarized as South Korea and Taiwan during the Cold War era, Hong Kong and Singapore were not democracies either.
Hong Kong was ruled by a British governor (and since 1997 by the government in Beijing), and Singapore by a dominant individual.
The Chinese Experience If there was ever doubt that the successes of the NICs could be replicated elsewhere and on a larger scale, China ended those doubts.
China has 1. billion people, and this size alone makes China’s efforts to generate self-sustaining accumulation worthy of study.
But China has also had the world’s fastest-growing economies over the past two decades.
Between the communist victory of 1949 and the Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s, in the era of Chairman Mao Zedong, Chinese economic policy emphasized national self-sufficiency and communist ideology.
The state controlled all economic activity through central planning and state ownership.
After Mao died in 1976, China under Deng Xiaoping instituted economic reforms and transformed its southern coastal provinces into free economic zones open to foreign investment and run on capitalist principles.
Peasants worked their own fields, instead of collective farms, and got rich if they did well.
Foreign investment flooded into southern China, taking advantage of its location, cheap labor, and relative political stability.
Other areas of China gradually opened up to capitalist principles as well.
The state required more industries to turn a profit and gave more initiative to managers to run their own companies and spend the profits as they saw fit.
However, China has also re-created some of the features of capitalism that Mao’s revolutionaries had overturned.
New class disparities emerged, with rich entrepreneurs driving fancy imported cars while poor workers found themselves unemployed.
Unprofitable state-owned industries laid off 10 million workers in the 1990s, with more coming each year.
Most frustrating for ordinary Chinese is the widespread official corruption accompanying the get-rich atmosphere.
Even after the setback of a 1997 financial crisis, their growth has made them prosperous by the standards of the global South.
But no single, simple lesson applicable to other states emerges from the NICs.
Authorities used the military to violently suppress the protests, killing hundreds of people and signaling the government’s determination to maintain tight political control while economic reform proceeded.
China then weathered the 1997 Asian financial crisis despite its widespread problems with bad bank loans, money-losing state industries, and corruption.
MNCs’ foreign investments primed rapid growth in Chinese exports—to $250 billion in 2000 and over $2 trillion in 2012.
In the coming years, it is poised to join the United States, Japan, and Germany as a major automobile exporter.
In 2012, a new generation of Chinese leaders took charge, led by President Xi Jinping.
China had sustained its rapid economic growth year after year, even after the 2008 global economic downturn hurt Chinese exports, with the help of large government infrastructure expenditures.
But growing inequality and widespread corruption threatened the legitimacy of the Communist party.
Despite efforts to clamp down on political expression, demonstrations but also on wildly popular microblogging sites, China’s version of Twitter.
In rural villages, peasants openly protested land seizures, taxes, pollution, and corruption by local officials.
President Xi declared the battle against corruption a top priority, while continuing to discourage protests and writings that target party officials engaging in corrupt practices.
With China now in the WTO and its citizens wired to the Internet, the economy gains great advantages, but citizens can also bypass government-controlled information.
Some observers expect economic integration in an information era to inexorably open up China’s political system and lead to democratization, whereas others think that as long as Chinese leaders deliver economic growth, the population will have little appetite for political change.
China’s economic success has given it both more prestige in the international system and a more global perspective on international relations far from China’s borders.
In 2004-2006, President Hu and other Chinese leaders made high-profile visits to resourcerich areas of the global South, notably Africa and Latin America, making large-scale deals for minerals and energy to fuel China’s growth, while boosting China’s foreign aid to these areas.
In 2009, the large Western economies announced that ^Rotberg, Robert I., ed.
Oxford, 2009. many Chinese citizens expressed their views not only in strikes and CAR CULTURE China's rapid economic growth has raised incomes dramatically, especially for a growing middle class.
These successes followed China's opening to the world economy and adoption of market-oriented reforms.
However, as exports slow down in a global recession, China must develop its domestic market and consumer spending ratherthan relying so heavily on exports to fuel growth.
Here, 700,000 Chinese consumers do their part as they mob the Shanghai auto show in 2011, hoping to get in on China's growing infatuation with that ultimate big-ticket consumer item, the automobile.
For years it appeared that China’s huge population would supply limitless cheap labor to foreign investors making goods in China.
China's View of Its Neighborhood China's continuing growth is the leading example of success of economic development in the global South.
MNCs have begun to move some light manufacturing to other Asian countries with even cheaper labor, such as Vietnam.
China’s economic miracle did hit a bump in the 2008-2009 economic crisis.
China’s investments in the United States, made with the trade surpluses China had accumulated over the years, lost a substantial fraction of their value in the financial meltdown.
Chinese leaders announced a major stimulus package aimed at spurring domestic consumption in China, but this faced problems in the short term, including the cultural problem of getting people with a history of poverty to spend instead of saving, and the economic problem of reorienting an export-driven economy to produce for domestic markets.
Yet, despite these dangers and risks, China’s economy has forged ahead out of the economic crisis.
For example, Chinese exports quickly returned to pre-recession levels after a drop in 2009 and kept growing.
It is unclear what lessons China’s economic success over the past decade holds for the rest of the global South.
These topics are being debated vigorously as China navigates its new era of rising prosperity and rising expectations, finds its way in the newly turbulent world economy, and as other poor states look to China’s experience for lessons.
India Takes Off AT YOUR SERVICE India, like China, deserves special attention because of its size and recent robust growth.
From 1996 to 2012, India’s average annual growth rate exceeded 7 percent.
India’s decade of success still does not compare to China’s nearly three decades, and India’s GDP per person is still not much more than half of China’s.
But India’s success has started it toward what could be, in the coming years, a repetition of China’s rise out of poverty.
India’s economy was for decades based loosely on socialism and state control of large industries but on private capitalism in agriculture and consumer goods.
The state subsidizes basic goods and gives special treatment to farmers.
Unlike China, India has a democratic government, but a fractious one, with various autonomy movements and ethnic conflicts.
India’s government has suffered from corruption, although this has improved in recent years.
India has grown rapidly in recent years, using its large, well-educated, Englishspeaking population to generate export revenues in the service sector—software companies, call centers serving American customers, and professional services in such areas as accounting, architecture, engineering, and medicine.
This radiologist in Bangalore, India's technology capital, reads body scans from a United States hospital sent via the Internet and discusses the results by phone with the patient's doctor in Connecticut, 2004.
To take an extreme example, 12 years after a fertilizer plant was built, it employed 3,000 workers but had not produced any fertilizer.
In the 1990s, China received many times the foreign investment that India did.
The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union—India’s major trading partner—threw India into a severe economic crisis that nearly caused it to default on its international debts.
Although reforms were imperfectly carried out, India saw robust economic growth return in the late 1990s.
Recent economic growth comes despite continuing corruption and bureaucracy in India’s government; Indians joke that the economy grows at night while the government is asleep.
In the era of globalization, India’s niche in the globalized world economy is in the service and information sectors.
Whereas South Korea specialized in exporting heavy manufactured goods and China in light manufactured goods, India specializes in exporting information products such as software and telephone call center services.
Each country uses its labor force to add value to products that are exported worldwide, especially to the large American market.
India also uses its location to advantage by working during the nighttime hours in North America.
Software companies can hand off projects daily for the India shift to work on overnight, and American hospitals can send medical notes for overnight transcription.
MNCs widely use India’s labor force to answer phone calls from around the world, such as technical support calls for the company’s products.
India’s future success or failure will bear strongly on several competing theories about economic development.
In particular, China has had success under a harsh, centralized political system whereas India has a free-wheeling democracy.
If India continues to succeed, however, then clearly authoritarian government is not a precondition.
In both cases, China was able to make dramatic improvements very quickly because of its authoritarian government, whose control extended to every village and every bedroom.
In the 1950s, China ordered mass campaigns in which citizens exterminated pests and set up sanitation facilities.
As a result, in the 1960s China’s rates of epidemic diseases such as cholera and plague dropped, and so did the infant mortality rate.
In the 1970s, with its heavy-handed one-child policy, China forced down the fertility rate.
Thus, China relied on the dominance principle to force individuals to take actions that were in society’s interest.
Its successes in improving public health and lowering fertility provided a foundation for China’s subsequent economic success, although obviously at a cost to individual freedom.
India, by contrast, has relied more on the identity principle, getting people to change their preferences and want to have fewer children and help improve public health.
Without a dictatorship to force compliance, India’s progress has been slower.
However, over time India is moving toward the same results as China, albeit decades later, and doing so without giving up its own national identity as a democracy.
Fertility Rate *Replacement level, steady-state population Other Experiments Other sizable developing countries have pursued various development strategies, with mixed successes and failures.
The five highest-income countries come from three of the four regions and vary from zero to 9 percent growth rate.
The fastest-growing countries at 7-9 percent are at the lower end of the income scale.
Clearly China is developing faster than the other 15 large countries of the global South, although all posted solid growth, 5-9 percent for most.
The fact that the five regions of the global South can be mapped onto single contiguous zones on this figure shows that whole regions are moving together in distinct patterns.
In Asia, three of the first to try to follow the NICs were Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand.
It fell short of that goal, but made some progress in attracting foreign investment.
But Indonesia has had to import oil since 2004 because of decreasing production.
After navigating the 1997 crisis smoothly, the Philippines got onto a growth curve, currently about 5 percent a year, that is positive but not fast enough to address the widespread poverty in the country.
Malaysia also set out to follow closely in the footsteps of the tigers.
Although it exports oil and gas, Malaysia focused its export industry heavily on electronics.
It was hit hard by the information sector dot-com crash of 2001-2002, but came back to grow at 5-7 percent per year in 2004-2008.
With income per person of $15,000, Malaysia has successfully risen to a middle-income level.
It received enormous foreign investment in the 1980s and created a sizable middle class.
But its growth masked serious problems revealed in the 1997 financial crisis.
Thailand recovered and posted strong growth, despite continuing problems with bad loans.
But a coup in 2006, and political instability, have made Thailand somewhat less attractive for foreign investment.
These factors held back the economic development of the would-be NICs of Southeast Asia.
Vietnam is a communist state following a reform model modeled on China’s.
Like China, Vietnam has few worries about terrorism and was largely unaffected by the 2008 economic crisis.
This period of fast growth follows liberalization of the economy, which had been held back by decades of devastating war and centralized communist rule.
As with China, Vietnam did a good job at meeting basic human needs at very low average income levels and has reduced extreme poverty despite remaining a poor country.
The large Asian states of Bangladesh and Pakistan are more deeply mired in poverty and have dimmer prospects for capital accumulation in the coming years.
Nonetheless, at the end of 2008, Bangladesh successfully emerged from emergency rule with fair elections that saw a huge turnout and brought new hopes for development and the curtailing of corruption.
Pakistan, by contrast, continued to struggle with instability in areas bordering Afghanistan.
With the government and judiciary in open conflict in 2013, Pakistan’s prospects hinged on finding political stability.
In Latin America, the major countries start from higher income levels but lower growth rates than in China and South Asia.
Brazil built up a sizable internal market by concentrating income in a growing middle and upper class.
However, its cities are still ringed with huge slums filled with desperately poor people.
A decade ago, the election of a leftist president, Lula da Silva, raised fears that spending on social programs would undermine Brazil’s financial position, but instead he reined in spending, brought down inflation, and stabilized Brazil’s financial position—proving that in Brazil, as in China, socialists can make good capitalists.
By 2012, Brazil enjoyed a rare combination of high growth, democracy, and shrinking inequality, offering a development model for others to emulate.
Brazil hopes its selection to host the 2014 soccer World Cup and 2016 Olympic games will increase its economic and political prestige.
Like Brazil, Mexico has pockets of deep poverty and a sizable foreign debt but, unlike Brazil, has oil to export.
Mexico has also enjoyed relative political stability, though corruption is a problem.
A reformist president was elected in 2000, though the long-standing ruling party regained power in 2012.
However, drug-related violence has claimed 60,000 lives and undercuts political and economic stability.
In Africa, Nigeria is the largest country and, with oil to export, should be one of the less impoverished.
But at $2,600 per person, its income is quite low, and corruption takes a steady toll on the economy.
Oil provides 95 percent of export earnings and pays two-thirds of the government’s budget.
After years of military dictatorship, elections were held in 1999, and Nigeria enjoyed more political stability in the new century, but a cease-fire with armed rebels in the oil-rich south was followed by an upsurge of Islamist terrorist bombings in the north.
Nigeria reached an agreement with the IMF in 2000, but broke it in 2002 after failing to meet targets.
Elsewhere in Africa, Ethiopia and Democratic Congo are growing fast but starting from great poverty.
Democratic Congo was poised to recover from decades of war, but persistent violence threatens progress.
A few African countries, however, such as Kenya and Mauritius, are emerging as model information-sector economies with bright prospects.
In the Middle East, Israel has developed economically in an unusual manner.
It received sustained infusions of outside capital from several sources—German reparations, United States foreign aid, and contributions from Zionists in foreign countries.
This outside assistance was particular to the history of German genocide against Jews during World War II and the efforts of Jews worldwide to help build a Jewish state afterward.
Few if any developing countries could hope to receive such outside assistance (relative to Israel’s small 5 MacLeod, Dag.
The small countries with large oil exports—such as iaudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, and the United Arab mirates—have done well economically.
But they are in a pecial class; their experience is not one that others withut oil can follow.
Iran began to grow robustly and to ttract foreign investment after the Iran-Iraq War ended in 988.
In ddition, Islamic radicalism creates frictions with Western owers and makes investors wary.
Turkey was somewhat successful in developing its conomy without oil revenues.
Like South Korea and Taiwan, Turkey was an authoritarian state for many years but L as allowed political liberalization since the 1990s.
It has developed under a United States security umbrella and has received considerable United States foreign aid.
Turkey suffered recession in 2000-2001 and received a $30 billion IMF bailout.
Since 2003, Turkey’s economy has grown solidly and its debt position has improved, although Turkey’s exports suffered during the recent financial crisis.
Egypt is mired in poverty despite substantial United States aid since the late 1970s.
The state owns much of the industry, operates the economy centrally, imposes high import tariffs, and provides patronage jobs and subsidized prices in order to maintain political power.
Reforms in the 1990s brought economic growth, but remaining problems include high unemployment, a trade deficit, and widespread corruption.
After the overthrow of its authoritarian ruler in 2011, Egypt looked forward to restarting its economy, which was seriously disrupted by the instability of the Arab Spring.
Globalization is creating winners and losers while sharpening income disparities.
Debt, currency crises, IMF conditionality, and the privatization of state-owned enterprises are among the sources of upheaval and poverty in many poor countries.
After lethal factory fires, these garment workers protest unsafe working conditions in exportoriented factories in Bangladesh, 2013.
Lessons Watch the Video Kenya's Developmental Challenge"" at MyPoliSciLab The largest developing countries are following somewhat different strategies with somewhat different results.
These themes concern trade, the concentration of capital, and corruption.
Import Substitution and Export-Led Growth Throughout the global South, states are trying to use international trade as the basis of accumulation.
For the reasons discussed in Chapter 8, a policy of self-reliance or autarky is at best an extremely slow way to build up wealth.
But through the creation of a trade surplus, a state can accumulate hard currency and build industry and infrastructure.
This might seem to be a good policy for reducing dependency—especially on the former colonial master—while shrinking a trade deficit or building a trade surplus.
But it is against the principle of comparative advantage and has not proven effective in most cases.
Some scholars think that import substitution is a useful policy only at a very early phase of economic development, after which it becomes counterproductive.
More and more states have shifted to a strategy of export-led growth, a strategy used by the NICs.
This strategy seeks to develop industries that can compete in specific niches in the world economy.
These industries may receive special treatment such as subsidies and protected access to local markets.
Exports from these industries generate hard currency and create a favorable trade balance.
The state can then spend part of its money on imports of commodities produced more cheaply elsewhere.
It leaves poor countries vulnerable to sudden price fluctuations for their exports.
Thus, states have looked to exporting manufactured goods, rather than raw materials, as the key to export-led growth.
However, in seeking a niche for manufactured goods, a developing country must compete against industrialized countries with better technology, more educated workforces, and much more capital.
It is not enough to subsidize and protect an industry until it grows in size; someday it has to be able to stand its own ground in a competitive world or it will not bring in a trade surplus.
To invest in manufacturing, these countries must concentrate what surplus their economies produce.
Money spent building factories cannot be spent subsidizing food prices or building better schools.
Thus the concentration of capital for manufacturing can sharpen disparities in income.
But home markets for manufactured goods do not come from poor peasants in the countryside or the unemployed youth in city slums.
Rather, wealth must be concentrated in a middle class that has the income to buy manufactured goods.
These disparities may result in crowds rioting in the streets or guerrillas taking over the countryside.
Capital for manufacturing can come instead from foreign investment or foreign loans, but this reduces the amount of surplus available to the state in the long term.
Another way to minimize capital needs is to start out in low-capital industries.
These industries can begin generating capital, which can then be used to move into somewhat more technologically demanding and capital-intensive kinds of manufacturing.
The industry is fairly labor-intensive, giving an advantage to countries with cheap labor, and does not require huge investments of capital to get started.
In 2005, textile tariffs were removed worldwide, so textile exporters in developing countries gained access to Western markets but faced intensified competition from China.
The borrowers are organized into small groups and take responsibility for each other’s success, including repaying the loans.
Repayment rates have been high, and the idea has spread rapidly in several regions.
In one popular application, village women used small loans to start businesses renting cell phone time.
Rural farmers used the phone time to find out market conditions before making a long trek to sell their products.
Thus, bringing the information revolution to isolated villages raised incomes for the farmers and the women alike, and the bank got its loans repaid.
Tens of millions of families have received loans from thousands of institutions worldwide.
Microcredit is the opposite of a trickle-down approach—it injects capital at the bottom of the economic hierarchy.
A loan to buy a goat or cell phone may do more good, dollar for dollar, than a loan to build a dam.
In line with liberalism, capitalists favor development paths that tie developing countries closely to the world economy and international trade.
They argue that although such development strategies defer equity, they maximize efficiency.
Once a state has a selfsustaining cycle of accumulation under way, it can better redress poverty in the broad population.
The same concept applies broadly to the world’s development as a whole.
From a capitalist perspective, capital accumulation is concentrated in the North.
This unequal concentration creates faster economic growth, which ultimately will bring more wealth to the South as well.
There is no practical way, in this view, to shift wealth from the North to the South without undermining the free market economics responsible for global economic growth.
Socialists, by contrast, argue that meaningful economic development should improve the position of the whole population and of the poor—sooner rather than later.
Thus, socialists tend to advocate a more equitable distribution of wealth; they dispute the idea that greater equity will impede efficiency or slow down economic growth.
Rather, by raising incomes among the poorer people, a strategy based on equity will speed up the demographic transition and lead more quickly to sustained accumulation.
On a global level, socialists do not see the NorthSouth disparities as justified by global growth benefits.
They favor political actions to shift income from North to South in order to foster economic growth in the South.
Such redistribution, in this view, would create faster, not slower, global economic growth—as well as more balanced and stable growth.
The capitalist theory that unequal income distributions are related to higher economic growth is only weakly supported by empirical evidence.
But there are also cases of relatively equitable countries that grow slowly and inequitable ones that grow rapidly.
The World Bank CAPITAL INVESTMENT Foreign investment, international debt, and domestic inequality all can help concentrate the necessary capital for manufacturing.
In recent years, microcredit—very small loans made directly to very poor people— provides a way to use capital more diffusely.
This woman in Recife, Brazil, runs her own convenience store in 2010 with help from a microloan.
Microcredit, Barefoot Banking, and the Business Solution for Ending Poverty.
The Bank recommends extending access to health care, education, and jobs—as well as to political power—to the poorest people in societies of the global South in order to spur faster economic growth.
Corruption is an important negative factor in economic development in many states.
Corruption centers on the government as the central actor in economic development, especially in its international aspects.
Through foreign policy, the government mediates the national economy’s relationship to the world economy.
It enforces worker discipline—calling out the army if necessary to break strikes or suppress revolutions.
It sets tax rates and wields other macroeconomic levers of control over the economy.
And in most developing countries, it owns a sizable stake in major industries—a monopoly in some cases.
Corruption adds another player, the corrupt official, to share the benefits.
For instance, a foreign oil company can pay off an official to award a favorable contract, and both can profit.
In 2003, United States prosecutors indicted a Mobil Oil executive for paying $78 million to two senior officials in Kazakhstan—with a kickback of $2 million for the Mobil executive—to secure Mobil’s billion-dollar stake in a huge oil field there.
He pleaded guilty to tax evasion, received a prison sentence, and had to pay taxes on the $2 million.
But for several reasons, corruption has a deeper effect in poor countries.
First, because there is simply less surplus to keep economic growth going; accumulation is fragile.
Another difference is that in developing countries dependent on exporting a few products, the revenue arrives in a very concentrated form—large payments in hard currency—presenting a greater opportunity for corruption than in a more diversified economy.
Furthermore, in developing countries incomes are often so low that corrupt officials are more tempted Corruption is a major impediment to economic development in both rich and poor countries but is more devastating to economies in the global South and to transitional former communist economies.
In India, widespread corruption has held back economic development and equality for years.
These Delhi supporters of hunger-striking anti-corruption activist Anna Hazare hold a ""key"" to corrupt officials' Swiss bank locker, 2012. to accept payments.
Corruption in the global South presents a collective goods problem for states and MNCs in the 8 World Bank.
Therefore, there is an incentive to clamp down on corruption only if other industrialized states do likewise.
The United States in recent decades has barred U.S, companies from making corrupt deals abroad, but other countries of the North had not done so until recently, Germany and Canada even allowed their companies to deduct foreign bribes on their taxes.
Transparency helps solve collective goods problems A Berlin-based NGO called Transparency International pushed successfully for action to stem corruption in international business deals.
The group publishes annual surveys showing the countries that business executives consider most corrupt.
The top five on the list in 2012 were Somalia, North Korea, Afghanistan, Sudan, and Burma.
In 1997, the world’s 29 leading industrialized states agreed to forbid their companies from bribing foreign officials.
And the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, a coalition of states, NGOs, and MNCs launched by Britain in 2002, fights corruption in the especially vulnerable oil, gas, and mineral sectors worldwide by getting companies to release information on payments they make to developing countries.
In Chad in 1999, a consortium led by ExxonMobil and backed by World Bank loans struck a deal to build a $4 billion oil pipeline, with oil revenues going through a Citibank account in London to avoid corruption.
But in 2005, as the oil money flowed in, Chad’s government—under attack by rebels based in Sudan—pulled out of the deal to use the money for its military, and the World Bank suspended its loans.
J Watch the Video ""Fair Trade Coffee"" at MyPoliSciLab North-South Capital Flows Capital from the global North moves to the South and potentially spurs growth there in several forms—foreign investment, debt, and foreign aid.
The rest of this chapter discusses these capital flows from North to South.
Foreign Investment Poor countries have little money available to invest in new factories, farms, mines, or oil wells.
Foreign investment has been crucial to the success of China and other Asian developing countries.
Overall, private capital flows to the global South were about $500 billion in 2012—four times the amount given in official development assistance.
Foreigners who invest in a country then own the facilities; the investor by virtue of its ownership can control decisions about how many people to employ, whether to expand or shut down, what products to make, and how to market them.
Because of past colonial experiences, many governments in the global South have feared the loss of control that comes with foreign investments by MNCs.
Sometimes the presence of MNCs was associated with the painful process of concentrating capital and 10 World Bank data.
Although such fears remain, they are counterbalanced by the ability of foreign investors to infuse capital and generate more surplus.
By the 1980s and 1990s, as models based on autarky or state ownership were discredited and the NICs gained success, many poor states rushed to embrace foreign investment.
One way in which states have sought to soften the loss of control is through joint ventures, companies owned partly by a foreign MNC and partly by a local firm or the host government itself.
Sometimes foreign ownership in joint ventures is limited to some percentage , to ensure that ultimate control rests with the host country.
The percentage of ownership is usually proportional to the amount of capital invested; if a host government wants more control, it must put up more of the money.
MNCs invest in a country because of some advantage of doing business there.
Some states have better absorptive capacity than others—the ability to put investments to productive use—because of more highly developed infrastructure and a higher level of skills among workers or managers.
As these are most often middle-income states, the funneling of investments to states with high absorptive capacity tends to sharpen disparities within the global South.
MNCs also look for a favorable regulatory environment in which a host state will facilitate, rather than impede, the MNC’s business.
MNC decisions about foreign investment also depend on prospects for financial stability, especially for low inflation and stable currency exchange rates.
If a currency is not convertible, an MNC will not be able to take profits back to its home state or reinvest them elsewhere.
Banks and MNCs conduct political risk analyses to assess the risks of political disturbances in states in which they might invest.
Beyond these financial considerations, a foreign investor producing for local markets wants to know that the host country’s economic growth will sustain demand for the goods being produced.
Similarly, whether producing for local consumption or export, the MNC wants the local labor supply —whether semiskilled labor or just cheap—to be stable.
Foreign investors often look to international financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the IMF, and to private analyses, to judge a state’s economic stability before investing in it.
Foreign investment is an important source of capital for economic development in the global South.
The relationship of foreign investors and host countries transcends economics and draws in culture, politics, and identity.
These Japanese executives visit their Honda factory in India, where Honda has invested $400 million, in 2008.
The state may try to get its own citizens into the management and professional workforce of factories or facilities created by foreign investment.
Not only can physical capital accumulate in the country, but so can the related technological base for further development.
Most poor states seek to build up an educated elite with knowledge and skills to run the national economy.
One way to do so is to send students to industrialized states for higher education.
North-South Debt Borrowing money is an alternative to foreign investment as a way of obtaining funds to prime a cycle of economic accumulation.
If accumulation succeeds, it produces enough surplus to repay the loan and still make a profit.
It keeps control in the hands of the state and does not impose painful sacrifices on local citizens, at least in the short term.
The borrower must service the debt—making regular payments of interest and repaying the principal according to the terms of the loan.
Debt service is a constant drain on whatever surplus is generated by investment of the money.
With foreign direct investment, a money-losing venture is the problem of the foreign MNC; with debt, it is the problem of the borrowing state, which must find the money elsewhere.
Often, a debtor must borrow new funds to service old loans, slipping further into debt.
Debt service has created a net financial outflow from South to North in recent years, as the South has paid billions more in interest to banks and governments in the North than it has received in foreign investment or development aid.
Failure to make scheduled payments, called a default, is considered a drastic action because it destroys lenders’ confidence and results in cutoff of future loans.
Rather than defaulting, borrowers usually attempt debt renegotiation—reworking the terms on which a loan will be repaid.
By renegotiating their debts with lenders, borrowers seek a mutually acceptable payment scheme to keep at least some money flowing to the lender.
If interest rates have fallen since a loan was first taken out, the borrower can refinance.
Borrowers and lenders can also negotiate to restructure a debt by changing the length of the loan or the other terms.
Occasionally state-to-state loans are written off altogether—forgiven—for political reasons, as happened with United States loans to Egypt after the Gulf War.
North-South debt encompasses several types of lending relationships, all of which are influenced by international politics.
The borrower may be a private firm or bank in a developing country, or it may be the government itself.
Loans to the government are somewhat more common because lenders consider the government less likely to default than a private borrower.
The lender may be a private bank or company, or a state (both ^Tomz, Michael.
Usually banks are more insistent on receiving timely payments and firmer in renegotiating debts than are states.
Some state-to-state loans are made on artificially favorable concessionary terms, in effect subsidizing economic development in the borrowing state.
Debt renegotiation has become a perennial occupation of the global South.
Such renegotiations are complex international bargaining situations, like international trade or arms control negotiations.
If a borrowing government accepts terms that are too burdensome, it may lose popularity at home.
But if the borrowing state does not give enough to gain the agreement of the lenders, it might have to default.
To solve this problem, state creditors meet together periodically as the Paris Club, and private creditors as the London Club, to work out their terms.
Through such renegotiations and the corresponding write-offs of debts by banks, developing countries have largely avoided defaulting on their debts.
By then, financial institutions had adjusted psychologically to the reality that Argentina could not pay its debt.
Indeed, Argentina recovered— its economy growing 9 percent a year since 2001—and in 2005 offered its creditors a take-it-or-leave-it deal for repayment of less than 30 cents on the dollar.
Still, default is a risky course because of the need for foreign investment and foreign trade to accumulate wealth.
Lenders too have generally proven willing to absorb losses rather than push a borrower over the edge and risk financial instability.
In 2010-2012, these debt problems jumped to the global North as the euro zone grappled with the heavy indebtedness of some of its poorer members—especially Greece, as well as Portugal, Spain, and Ireland.
In a 2011 bailout agreement, bankers holding Greek debt had to accept 50 cents on the dollar.
Even so, in 2011-2013, Greek voters expressed anger toward budget cuts required to meet conditions for each stage of the bailout.
Despite stabilization, developing countries have not yet solved the debt problem.
The debt service absorbs almost a third of the entire hard-currency export earnings in Latin America—the region most affected.
International Monetary Fund, Statistical Appendix to World Economic Outlook, April 2011.
But G7 members in 2005 agreed to eliminate all debts owed by 37 very poor countries to the World Bank and IMF—cutting almost in half the poorest countries’ estimated $200 billion in debt.
The first $40 billion, owed by 18 countries, began to be written off in 2006.
This capital plays an important role in funding early stages of accumulation in developing countries and in helping them get through short periods of great difficulty.
And, as a political entity rather than a bank, the IMF can make funds available on favorable terms.
The IMF scrutinizes developing countries’ economic plans and policies, withholding loans until it is satisfied that the right policies are in place.
Then it makes loans to help states through the transitional process of implementing the IMF-approved policies.
Its approval of a state’s economic plans is a “seal of approval” that bankers and MNCs use to assess the wisdom of investing in that state.
Thus, the IMF wields great power to influence the economic policies of developing countries.
An agreement to loan IMF funds on the condition that certain government policies are adopted is called an IMF conditionality agreement; implementation of these conditions is referred to as a structural adjustment program.
Dozens of developing countries have entered into such agreements with the IMF in the past two decades.
The IMF demands that inflation be brought under control, which requires reducing state spending and closing budget deficits.
These measures often spur unemployment and require that subsidies of food and basic goods be reduced or eliminated.
Short-term consumption is curtailed in favor of longer-term investment.
Surplus must be concentrated to service debt and invest in new capital accumulation.
It also wants to ensure that inflation does not eat away all progress and that the economy is stable enough to attract investment.
Because of the pain inflicted by a conditionality agreement—and to some extent by any debt renegotiation agreement—such agreements are often politically unpopular in the global South.
On quite a few occasions, a conditionality agreement has brought rioters into the streets demanding the restoration of subsidies for food, gasoline, and other essential goods.
Sometimes governments have backed out of the agreement or have broken their promises under such pressure.
An annual subsidy of $3. billion provides a supply of bread at one-third its real cost for Egypt’s large and poor population.
These costs distort the free market, encouraging Egyptians to eat more bread than they otherwise would, driving up the need for imported wheat, and offering widespread opportunities for corruption by diverting subsidized flour or bread to black markets.
But when the government tried to raise the price of bread in 1977, street riots forced a reversal.
Instead, the government has subtly changed the size and composition of loaves, and in 1996 began secretly mixing cheaper corn flour into statemilled wheat flour.
After receiving a $6 billion rescue package from the IMF, Iceland was forced to make fundamental reforms to its banking sector.
Greece, which received over $133 billion from the IMF, agreed to eliminate several paid holidays while cutting all wages of all public workers by 3 percent.
The South in International Economic Regimes Because of the need for capital and the wealth created by international trade, most states of the global South see their future economic development as resting on a close interconnection with the world economy, not on national autarky or regional economic communities.
The WTO trading regime sometimes works against poor states, however, relative to industrialized ones.
A free trade regime makes it harder for poor states to protect infant industries in order to build self-sufficient capital accumulation.
A poor state can be competitive only in low-wage, low-capital niches—especially those using natural resources that are scarce in the North, such as tropical agriculture, extractive industries, and textiles.
Instead, world trade deals concentrated on free trade in manufactured goods, in which states in the North have comparative advantages.
As a result, some developing countries had to open their home markets to foreign products, against which home industries were not competitive, yet see their own export products shut out of foreign markets.
Current WTO negotiations are attempting to remedy this inequity, but so far without success.
MIRACLE OF LOAVES IMF conditionality agreements often call for reducing subsidies for food, transportation, and other basic needs.
In Egypt, bread prices are heavily subsidized, forcing the government to use hard currency to import wheat.
But public resistance to bread price increases is so strong that the government has not brought itself to cut the subsidy.
Few states in the global South can afford this legal process, and therefore few use it to help their own industries knock down unfair barriers to trade.
Recall that even if a state wins a WTO dispute, it gains only the right to place tariffs on the offending country’s goods in an equal amount.
For small states, this retaliation can inflict as much damage on their own economies as on the economies of the offending states.
These and other measures—such as the Lome conventions in which EU states relaxed tariffs on goods from the global South—are exceptions to the overall rules of trade, intended to ensure that participation in world trade advances rather than impedes development.
Nonetheless, critics claim that poor states are the losers in the overall world trade regime.
Countries in the South have responded in several ways to these problems with world economic regimes.
In the 1970s, OPEC shifted the terms of trade for oil—bringing huge amounts of capital into the oil-exporting countries.
Also in the 1970s, many poor and middle-income states tried to form a broad political coalition to push for restructuring the world economy so as to make North-South economic transactions more favorable to the South.
The NIEO proposal also called for the promotion of industrialization in the global South and for increased development assistance from the North.
The NIEO never became much more than a rallying cry for the global South, partly because of the South’s lack of power and partly because disparities within the South created divergent interests among states there.
Countries in the South continue to pursue proposals to restructure world trade to benefit the South.
These efforts now take place mainly through the UN Conference on Trade and Development , which meets periodically but lacks power to implement major changes in North-South economic relations.
China sometimes uses the South-South solidarity argument in wooing new friends in Africa.
Your economy suffered from the recent global recession but has emerged from that crisis in strong shape.
Your country has undergone extensive privatization over the past decade, as you sold ownership in key industries to private investors.
Indeed, most major manufacturing industries in your country are now privately owned, a significant change from 20 years ago.
Much of this privatization was encouraged by the International Monetary Fund after a significant economic crisis in 2001.
One area of your economy that has not liberalized as fast as the industrial sector is the financial and banking sector.
The financial and banking industries are still protected by extensive regulation that limits foreign ownership.
These regulations have discouraged foreign direct investment from wealthy EU states, the United States, and Japan.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS You are an incredibly popular prime minister, having recently won an unprecedented third term in office.
Much of your popularity, however, is based on the economic success you have engineered.
Voters have continued to support your privatization and economic liberalization efforts, mostly because the Turkish economy has remained strong.
Business elites, however, continue to support strong regulation efforts in the finance and banking sector in order to insulate Turkey from international economic crises.
These regulations also protect their own advantageous financial positions within the Turkish economy.
International investors. however, would like more freedom to invest in these sectors of your economy.
SCENARIO Now imagine that one of the key sources of capital for your economy, the EU, continues to struggle with debt crisis issues in Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Italy.
As a result of these EU struggles, FDI to your country declines precipitously.
Moreover, exports fall due to declining economic fortunes in your key trading partners in Europe.
The economy that bolstered your popularity and international standing is now becoming a major problem for your administration.
One potential solution to your economic problems would be to loosen the regulatory controls in the finance and banking sector.
Western observers and the IMF have suggested that such a policy change will provide a much needed injection of capital into your economy, which could lift the Turkish economy out of its current downturn.
Different kinds of development assistance have different purposes, which often overlap.
Some are humanitarian, some are political, and others are intended to create future economic advantages for the giver.
The state or organization that gives assistance is called a donor; the state or organization receiving the aid is the recipient.
Foreign assistance creates, or extends, a relationship between donor and recipient that is simultaneously political and cultural as well as economic.
Foreign assistance can be a form of power in which the donor seeks to influence the recipient, or it can be a form of interdependence in which the donor and recipient create a mutually beneficial exchange.
The remainder of this chapter examines the patterns and types of foreign assistance, the politics involved, and the potential impact of foreign assistance.
Patterns of Foreign Assistance Large amounts of foreign assistance come from governments in the North.
Of the roughly $130 billion in governmental foreign assistance provided in 2012, more than 90 percent came from members of the Development Assistance Committee , consisting of states from Western Europe, North America, and Japan/Pacific.
Several oil-exporting Arab countries provide some foreign development assistance, and in 2003, transition economies became a net “exporter” of financial aid.
Three-quarters of the DAC countries’ government assistance goes directly to governments in the global South as state-to-state bilateral aid; the rest goes through the UN or other agencies as multilateral aid.
The DAC countries have set themselves a goal to contribute 0. percent of their GNPs in foreign aid.
Only Norway, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg meet the target.
In fact, Oxfam International reported that industrialized countries’ aid dropped from 0.48 percent of income in 1960-1965 to 0.34 percent in 1980-1985 and then to 0.24 percent in 2003.
After the 2001 terrorist attacks, Britain proposed a $50 billion increase in foreign aid, nearly doubling current levels, and the United States raised its aid budget sharply.
In 2002, rock star Bono took United States treasury secretary Paul O’Neill on a two-week tour through Africa to argue for increased United States foreign assistance.
A Comparative Analysis of Democracy Assistance and PolitF cal Conditionality.
Other UN programs focus on concentrating capital, transferring technology, and developing workforce skills for manufacturing.
But most UN programs—such as UNICEF, UNFPA, UNESCO, and WHO—focus on meeting basic needs.
One is that governments and citizens tend to perceive the UN as a friend of the global South, not an alien force, a threat to sovereignty, or a reminder of colonialism.
Second, UN workers may be more likely to make appropriate decisions because of their backgrounds.
UN workers who come from the global South or have worked in other poor countries in a region may be more sensitive to local conditions and to the pitfalls of development assistance than are aid workers from rich countries.
Third, the UN can organize its assistance on a global scale, giving priority to projects and avoiding duplication and the reinvention of the wheel in each state.
A major disadvantage faced by UN development programs is that they are funded largely through voluntary contributions by rich states.
Each program has to solicit contributions to carry on its activities, so the contributions can be abruptly cut off if the program displeases a donor government.
For instance, the UN complained in early 2005 that only 5 percent of the $500 million pledged for southern Sudan by the international community five months earlier had actually been paid.
A second major disadvantage of UN programs is their reputation for operating in FIGURE 13.
Foreign Assistance as a Percent of Donor's Income, 2011 and 1960-2011 Sweden Norway Luxembourg Denmark Netherlands United Kingdom Belgium Finland Ireland France Switzerland Germany Australia Canada Spain Portugal New Zealand Austria United States Italy Japan Korea Greece All countries 0.25 0.
Grants are funds given free to a recipient state, usually for some stated purpose.
Technical cooperation refers to grants given in the form of expert assistance in some project rather than just money or goods.
Credits are grants that can be used to buy certain products from the donor state.
For instance, the United States regularly gives credits that can be used to purchase United States grain.
If people in a recipient country become accustomed to products from the donor state, they are likely to buy those same products in the future.
Unlike commercial loans, government-to-government development loans are often made on concessionary terms, with long repayment times and low interest rates.
Although still an obligation for the recipient country, such loans are relatively easy to service.
Loan guarantees , which are used only occasionally, are promises by the donor state to back up commercial loans to the recipient.
If the recipient state services such debts and ultimately repays them, there is no cost to the donor.
But if the recipient cannot make the payments, the donor has to step in and cover the debts.
Military aid is not normally included in development assistance, but in a broad sense belongs there.
It is money that flows from North to South, from government to government, and it does bring a certain amount of value into the economies of the global South.
If a country is going to have a certain size army with certain weapons, getting them free from a donor state frees up money that can be used elsewhere in the economy.
However, of all the forms of development assistance, military aid is certainly one of the least efficient and most prone to impede rather than help economic development.
It is also geared almost exclusively to political alliances rather than actual development needs.
The main agency dispensing United States foreign economic assistance is the State Department’s Agency for International Development , which works mainly through the United States embassy in each recipient country.
Major recipients of United States foreign aid include Israel, Egypt, and Turkey—all important strategic allies in the volatile Middle East.
Governments provide more than $50 billion annually in foreign assistance and private donors more than $10 billion in additional aid.
In the West, the United States gives among the least amount of foreign aid as a percentage of GDP, despite recent increases.
HELPING OUT an inefficient, bureaucratic manner, without the cohesion and the resources that governments and MNCs in the North take for granted.
Started by President Kennedy in 1961, the Peace Corps now sends nearly 8,000 volunteers to 76 countries, where they participate in projects affecting about a million people.
In foreign aid, the donor must have the permission of the recipient government to operate in the country.
This goes back to the principle of national sovereignty and the history of colonialism.
National governments have the right to control the distribution of aid and the presence of foreign workers on their soil.
Only occasionally is this principle violated, as when the United States and its allies provided assistance to Iraqi Kurds against the wishes of the Iraqi government following the Gulf War.
International norms may be starting to change in this regard, with short-term humanitarian assistance starting to be seen as a human right that should not be subject to government veto.
Private Aid Private donations provide a smaller amount, although sometimes a significant one.
For instance, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation contributes more than $1 billion annually to world health campaigns.
By 2008, according to the OECD, private aid flows from DAC countries neared $130 billion.
This figure was equal to official development assistance given by state governments.
Individuals may give to charities that send money or food abroad such as the Red Cross, Doctors without Borders, or their local church.
Originally devoted to short-term aid to famine victims, and still active in that effort, Oxfam America realized that over the longer term, people need not just handouts of food but the means to feed themselves—land, water, seeds, tools, and technical training.
The distinctive aspect of the Oxfam model is that it relies on local communities to determine the needs of their own people and to carry out development projects.
Oxfam does not operate projects itself but provides funding to local organizations.
Rather, it calls both sides “project partners”—working together to accomplish a task.
In this model, a little outside money can go a long way toward building sustained local economic development.
Furthermore, projects help participants empower themselves by organizing to meet their own needs.
Oxfam did not design or organize the project; women in Addis Ababa did.
But when their garment-making workshop became profitable and was ready to expand and employ twice as many women, Oxfam gave the group a $15,000 grant to build a new building.
The relationship between North and South—groups such as Oxfam and their project partners—is likened to a good marriage in which decisions are made jointly and dependency does not develop.
In this model, economic development is not charity; it is in the interests of people in the rich countries as well as the poor.
A cooperative relationship between North and South is essential for a peaceful and prosperous world.
Even in a narrow economic sense, development in the global South creates new markets and new products that will enrich the industrialized countries as well.
The group’s philosophy of a “rights-based approach to development” has drawn praise from human rights NGOs.
Because of disappointment with the political uses of foreign aid in the past, Oxfam has tried to minimize the role in its projects of governments in both the North and South.
For instance, Oxfam does not accept government funds, nor does it make grants to governments.
The general goals of the Oxfam model of foreign aid are consistent with a broader movement in the global South toward grassroots empowerment.
Efforts such as those of Oxfam partners are organized by poor people to gain some power over their situation and meet their basic needs—not by seizing control of the state in a revolution but by means that are more direct, more local, and less violent.
The key to success is getting organized, finding information, gaining self-confidence, and obtaining needed resources to implement action plans.
For example, in India, local women’s groups using only the power of persuasion and logic have persuaded some landowners to give them land for cooperative income-generating projects such as vegetable farming and raising silkworms.
Elsewhere in India, women working as gatherers of wood and other forest products got organized to win the legal minimum wage for 250,000 female forest workers—three times what they had been paid before.
In this case, government action was necessary, but the pressure for such action came from local organizing.
The women took their case to the public and the press, staging protest marches and getting an art exhibit relating to their cause displayed in the provincial capital.
Such examples do not mean that national and foreign governments are unimportant.
On the contrary, government policies affect millions of people more quickly and more widely than do grassroots efforts.
Indeed, grassroots organizing often has as an ultimate goal the restructuring of national political and social life so that policies reflect the needs of poor people.
But the successes of grassroots empowerment show that poor communities can be more than victims of poverty waiting to be saved, or passive bystanders in NorthSouth relations.
Nor do poor people need to place their hopes for change in violent revolutions aimed at toppling national governments—revolutions that lead to greater suffering more often than to stable economic development.
Although the model may be effective in the local communities it reaches, it would have to be adopted widely and replicated on a much larger scale in order to influence the overall prospects for development.
In the case of assistance to survivors of the 2004 tsunami, Oxfam’s $12 million in contributions compares with about 50 times that amount pledged by the United States government.
It is unclear whether the principles that the model embodies, from a reliance on local community organizers to an avoidance of government involvement, would work on PARTNER IN DEVELOPMENT The Oxfam model of foreign assistance emphasizes support for local groups that can stimulate self-sustaining economic development at a local level.
A mutually beneficial North-South partnership is the global goal of such projects.
These women show off a mill they purchased with microcredit from an Oxfamaffiliated group in Gambia, 2001.
One advantage of private aid giving, like that of Oxfam, is the flexibility with which it can be given.
Private aid organizations may also be more efficient (due to their smaller size) and better able to create partnerships with local recipients.
Unfortunately, private aid organizations’ lack of size and official government status can also be a disadvantage.
They can be barred from entering a country (Zimbabwe recently expelled all private NGOs providing assistance), and they may have difficulty providing large-scale relief in times of crisis.
They also may promote development policies that are at odds with government policy, putting them in conflict with other donor governments.
The Politics of Foreign Assistance Many governments and private organizations provide ongoing development assistance in the form of projects in local communities in the South that are administered by agencies from the North to help meet basic needs.
Such charitable programs are a useful means by which people in the North funnel resources to people in the South, but may create unanticipated problems.
For example, the programs do not address the causes of poverty, the position of poor countries in the world economy, or local political conditions such as military rule or corruption.
In addition, although photos of a hungry child may stare at the reader from a magazine page while the accompanying text notes that a few cents a day can “save” the child may raise awareness in the North of the extent of poverty in the South, at worst they tend to be exploitive and to reinforce racist and paternalistic stereotypes of the helplessness of people in the global South.
Moreover, although the motivation for foreign aid is to help those who are less fortunate, donor states have discovered that foreign aid is also an important tool of leverage over recipient states.
Many donor states thus try to use some types of foreign aid to create economic and political changes in recipient countries.
Like almost all donor states, the United States uses the promise of foreign aid, or the threat of cutting it off, as leverage in political bargaining with recipients.
For example, when Pakistan proceeded in the late 1980s with a nuclear weapons program despite United States warnings, a sizable flow of United States aid was terminated.
Then when Pakistan supported United States military action in next-door Afghanistan in 2001, United States aid was restored.
In 2004, the United States launched the Millennium Challenge Corporation , which increases United States aid but only to governments with certain policies, such as rule of law, control of corruption, investment in education, and sound fiscal management.
After potential recipients apply for aid, a board composed of government and private officials reviews the applications.
In this way, the United States hopes to reduce the aid lost to corruption and waste.
Of course, foreign assistance is also a complicated domestic political process.
For example, in recent years, aid advocates in the United States have fought a United States law requiring that food sent to hungry people in Africa be grown in the United States and shipped in United States vessels.
Instead of this simple handout system, they proposed using United States funds to buy food locally in Africa, which would save a lot of money, get aid to the hungry people months faster, and help African farmers.
But the proposal was opposed by the so-called Iron Triangle of food aid— United States agribusiness that profits from selling the food to the government, United States shipping companies that profit from shipping it, and United States charities (including CARE and Catholic Relief Services) that fund a healthy fraction of their budgets by selling in Africa some of the grain they ship from the United States.
Yet because of the Iron Triangle’s lobbying power, Congress killed off the proposal to allow purchase of local food in Africa.
The one type of foreign assistance that is the least politically motivated is disaster relief.
It is the kind of foreign assistance given when poor people are afflicted by famine, drought, earthquakes, flooding, or other such natural disasters.
When disaster strikes a poor state, many people are left with no means of subsistence and often without their homes.
Disaster relief is the provision of short-term relief to such people in the form of food, water, shelter, clothing, and other essentials.
Disaster relief is very important because disasters can wipe out years of progress in economic development in a single blow.
Generally, the international community tries to respond with enough assistance to get people back on their feet.
The costs of such assistance are relatively modest, the benefits visible and dramatic.
Having a system of disaster relief in place provides the global South with a kind of insurance against sudden losses that could otherwise destabilize economic accumulation.
International disaster relief has become more organized and better coordinated in the past decade but is still a complex process that varies somewhat from one situation to the next.
Contributions of governments, private charitable organizations, and other groups and agencies are coordinated through the UN Office of the Disaster Relief Coordinator in Geneva.
In 2006, the UN set up a $500 million fund to enable it to respond quickly to disasters without waiting to raise funds first each time disaster strikes.
Typically, international contributions make up no more than about onethird of the total relief effort, the remainder coming from local communities and national governments in the affected states.
Money to Help Poor Children around the World BACKGROUND: The world’s children—2 billion people under age 18—have special humanitarian needs.
The future depends on them, yet they are among the most vulnerable members of their societies, and are most prone to preventable deaths from disease.
The great majority of the world’s children live in the global South, including large numbers in abject poverty in the poorest countries.
This benefit is enjoyed by humanity regardless of how much anyone contributes to it.
If too many free-ride, however, UNICEF will lack resources and so will needy children.
In 2000, the UN adopted the Millennium Development Goals for reducing poverty in the global South.
Ten years later, and two-thirds of the way to the target date of 2015, world leaders met to review progress.
Some important progress had been made, but “unmet commitments inadequate resources” had led the process to fall short of goals in key areas.
The dominance principle does not help the world’s children, who occupy the low ranks on the world’s hierarchies.
Despite the potential collective action problem with a large number of actors, disaster relief is generally a positive example of international cooperation to get a job done—and an example of the use of the identity principle to solve a collective goods problem.
Embarrassing failures in the past—of underresponse or overresponse, of duplication of efforts or agencies working at cross-purposes— became rarer in the 1990s, and in the new century, groups coordinate their actions '-j more effectively.
The devastating earthquake in Haiti in 2010 showed the progress and the limitations of international relief efforts.
Overnight, millions lost family members, homes, possessions, safe drinking water, and ways of life.
With no functioning government or medical care system, initial relief efforts were chaotic and international aid poorly coordinated.
Many victims died as planes stacked up over the small airport, unable to deliver supplies.
In days, however, United States military forces took over the airport, and massive international assistance flowed in.
Governments and NGOs pledged billions of dollars to help Haiti get back to its feet under UN guidance.
Rather, UNICEF relies on voluntary contributions, two-thirds of them from governments and the rest from foundations, NGOs, and individuals.
The identity principle works well in this situation because all the world’s people were once children and can identify with children.
More importantly, it has reinforced an identity link of Americans with UNICEF over the decades, helping produce almost $20 million more from United States foundations and grants as well as $130 million from the United States Congress.
The top four donors to UNICEF after the United States are Norway, the Netherlands, Britain, and Sweden—all countries where humanitarian aid is a strong element of national identity.
This somewhat spontaneous coordination of states, IOs, and NGOs seems contrary to the anarchical international system.
The relationship between disasters and economic development is complex, and appropriate responses vary according to location, type and size of disaster, and phase of recovery.
International norms regarding states’ legal obligations to assist others in times of natural disaster and to accept such assistance if needed are changing.
Some have even suggested extending the idea of the responsibility to protect to the area of disaster relief.
This idea became particularly relevant in the wake of Cyclone Nargis, which struck Burma in 2008.
An estimated 130,000 people died in that natural disaster, yet the repressive government of Burma delayed or denied efforts of the international community to provide assistance to those affected by the cyclone.
While aid did eventually flow into Burma, weeks were wasted while the government denied the needed assistance for coping with the cyclone.
The Impact of Foreign Assistance There is a danger in providing foreign assistance—especially in large-scale governmental aid programs—that people from the North may provide assistance inappropriate for a developing country’s local conditions and culture.
Nomadic herders in the area of Lake Turkana near the Sahara desert—the Turkana tribe—were poor and vulnerable to periodic droughts.
Western aid donors and the Kenyan government decided that the herders’ traditional way of life was not environmentally sustainable and should be replaced by commercial fishing of the abundant tilapia fish in Lake Turkana.
Norway, with its long experience in fishing, was asked to teach fishing and boat-building methods to the Turkana.
To create a commercially viable local economy, Norwegian consultants recommended marketing frozen fish fillets to Kenya and the world.
Thus in 1981, Norway finished building a $2 million, stateof-the-art fish freezing plant on the shores of Lake Turkana and a $20 million road connecting the plant to Kenya’s transportation system.
So after a few days, the freezers were turned off and the facility became a very expensive driedfish warehouse.
Second, Turkana culture viewed fishing as the lowest-status profession, suitable only for those incompetent at herding.
Third, every few decades, Lake Turkana shrinks as drought reduces the inflow of water.
Such a drought in 1984-1985 eliminated the gulf where the fishing operations were based.
The Norwegians might have foreseen these problems by doing more homework instead of just transplanting what worked in Norway.
When the drought hit, the 20,000 herders who had been brought to the lake to learn fishing were left in an overcrowded, overgrazed environment in which every tree was cut for firewood and 23 Pelling, Mark.
Instead of becoming selfsufficient, the Turkana people became 'l ^ totally dependent on outside aid/ In the past decade, many scholars have undertaken research to understand whether foreign aid is effective at creating economic growth and alleviating poverty in the global South.
Heated debates now occur among academics and policy makers as to whether aid is effective and, therefore, whether more or less should be given.
On one side, scholars suggest increasing foreign assistance in order to deal with the crushing inequalities between the global North and the global South.
Because the global South cannot reliably sustain capital accumulation, assistance from the North is neces'l sary to jump-start economic growth/ Countering this position, however, is research suggesting that aid does not always help poor countries develop.
In particular, unless recipient countries possess institutions that practice good government, aid will largely be wasted or fall into the hands of corrupt leaders.
This research has been the inspiration for the United States’ MCC policies as well as more IMF conditionality.
They contend that the flow of aid has allowed leaders in poor states to avoid difficult policy changes that would pave the way for long-term economic growth.
They argue that in some African countries, the massive infusion of foreign assistance after decolonization led to increased 'l Q poverty and dependence on charity, rather than increased wealth and independence/ Sometimes foreign assistance contributes goods to third world economies with little understanding of local needs or long-term strategies.
Here, free supplies including cartons of mouthwash are delivered by the United States ambassador and the captain of a United States Navy ship participating in Project Handclasp, 1989.
Confronting the North-South Gap The giving and receiving of foreign assistance is political, even if the motivations for giving it are not.
Perhaps most important is that people in the North become aware of the tremendous gap between North and South and try to address the problem.
Poverty can seem so overwhelming that citizens in rich countries can easily turn their backs and just try to live their own lives.
The integrated global economy brings to the North products and people from the South.
The information revolution puts images of poverty on TV sets in comfortable living rooms.
Security relations and political economy alike have shifted in the post-Cold War era to give new prominence to the global South.
Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab 3 Harden, Blaine.
Why the West’s Efforts to Aid the Rest Have Done So Much III and So Little Good.
In recent years many poor countries, led by China, have grown robustly.
And while the 2008-2009 recession hurt the global South, growth has begun to return.
Though still poor, China is the world’s leading success story in economic development.
This reflects the experiences of the NICs and China as well as the theory of comparative advantage.
But the opposite theory—that authoritarian government is necessary to maintain control while concentrating capital for industrialization—has also not been supported.
MNCs look for favorable local conditions, including political and economic stability, in deciding where to invest.
Through renegotiations and other debt management efforts, the North and South have improved the debt situation in recent years.
These conditionality agreements often necessitate politically unpopular measures such as cutting food subsidies.
The Generalized System of Preferences tries to compensate by lowering barriers to exports from the global South.
Such aid is often used for political leverage and promotes the export of products from the donor state.
Past successes in economic development have depended heavily on developing a manufacturing base, which requires access to scarce capital.
Some scholars criticize the IMF for imposing harsh terms in its conditionality agreements with poor states.
Others applaud the IMF for demanding serious reforms before providing financial resources.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview Billions of dollars per year in foreign aid flow from developed countries to developing countries.
Yet as discussed in this chapter, the amount of foreign aid from the Development Assistance Committee has fluctuated greatly over time.
When measured as a percentage of DAC countries 7 GDP, the amount of foreign aid has steadily fallen in the past four decades.
Multilateral agencies (such as investment banks and the UN) give nearly $12 billion to the global South.
Private donors from DAC countries now provide over $300 billion in aid flows as well, more than three times the official assistance provided by DAC countries.
Recently, a controversy has emerged regarding the question of how much aid to give.
Some prominent economists and political figures have called for large increases in foreign aid given by DAC countries, larger than the increases seen after the 9/11 attacks.
While these skeptics do not necessarily call for decreasing foreign assistance, they argue that increasing the level of foreign aid would not help to achieve the ultimate goal of much of the aid, economic development.
DAC Countries Should Significantly Increase Foreign Aid Foreign aid can help solve important problems.
From health care crises, infrastructure maintenance, and literacy programs to food assistance, foreign aid can be essential to help poorer states kick-start the development process.
Higher levels of assistance would increase the quality of life for millions of people living in poverty abroad.
As the United States and the EU compete for influence with China in places like Africa and Latin America, increasing foreign assistance will create tighter economic, political, and social bonds between DAC countries and recipient states, potentially preventing China from gaining allies in the developing world.
By providing money and other resources to stabilize poor countries, DAC countries decrease the chances that disaffected individuals in those countries will blame the West for their problems.
This resentment often leads to anti-Western behavior—in the extreme case, support for terrorism.
ARGUMENT 2 DAC Countries Should Not Signifiicantly Increase Foreign Aid Large amounts of foreign aid are wasted or stolen.
Some economists estimate that in some cases, half of aid packages are stolen by corrupt leaders or state officials, while other times, the aid is simply wasted.
Developing countries may get used to receiving large amounts of aid and neglect to develop internal programs to provide education, health care, or infrastructure maintenance.
This dependency is dangerous for developing countries since it leaves them vulnerable to the policies of aid donors.
Thus, as a condition for receiving aid, developing states must promise to make certain changes or perform particular tasks.
This is a particularly egregious violation of sovereignty since it is done under the guise of helping the recipient states.
These themes are inescapable in human society, from the smallest groups to the world community.
The subject of international relations is in this sense an extension of everyday life and a reflection of the choices of individual human beings.
IR belongs to all of us—North and South, women and men, citizens and leaders—who live together on this planet.
This book has shown that in IR, more than other social settings, collective goods problems pose formidable challenges to successful cooperation among the large number of independent actors.
With no central government to enforce order, actors in IR have developed three kinds of solutions to collective goods problems— our three core principles.
Characteristic solutions based on the reciprocity principle are complicated, take forever to agree upon, and require extensive monitoring of compliance thereafter.
But woven together, these reciprocity-based agreements offer the basis for an international system that has moved over centuries from extreme war-proneness to ever stronger peace and prosperity—notwithstanding the world’s many serious remaining problems.
One major theme of this book is the nature of the international system as a welldeveloped set of rules based on state sovereignty, territoriality, and “anarchy”—a lack of central government.
Yet the international system is becoming more complex, more nuanced, and more interconnected with other aspects of planetary society.
State sovereignty is now challenged by the principle of self-determination.
International norms have begun to limit the right of government to rule a population by force against its will and to violate human rights.
Territorial integrity is also problematic, because national borders do not stop information, environmental changes, or missiles.
Information allows actors— state, substate, and supranational—to know what is going on everywhere in the world and to coordinate actions globally.
Technological development is just one aspect of the profound, yet incremental, changes taking place in international relations.
New actors are gaining power, longstanding principles are becoming less effective, and new challenges are arising for states, groups, and individuals alike.
Technology is profoundly changing the utility and role of military force.
Technology plays key roles on both sides in counterinsurgency wars such as in Afghanistan and the other 11 active wars in the world.
Nonmilitary forms of leverage, particularly economic rewards, have become much more important power capabilities.
In IPE, we see simultaneous trends toward integration and disintegration among states.
People continue to speak their own language, to fly their own flag, and to use their own currency with its pictures and emblems.
At the same time, however, although people identify with their state, they also now hold competing identities based on ethnic ties, gender, and (in the case of Europe) region.
In international trade, liberal economics prevails because it works so well.
States have learned that to survive, they must help the creation of wealth by MNCs and other actors.
Because of high costs, the large number of actors, and collective goods problems, international bargaining over the environment is difficult.
Meanwhile, North-South relations are moving to the center of world politics.
Demographic and economic trends are sharpening the global North-South gap, with the North continuing to accumulate wealth while much of the South lags.
Ultimately, the North will bear a high cost for failing to address the economic development of the South.
Perhaps, by using computerization and biotechnology innovations, poor states can develop their economies more efficiently and sustainably than did Europe or North America.
The future is unknowable now, but as it unfolds you can compare it—at mileposts along the way—to the worlds that you desire and expect.
The choices you make and actions you take will ultimately affect the world you live in.
You are involved, and year by year, the information revolution and other aspects of interdependence are drawing you more closely into contact with the rest of the world.
You can act in many ways to bring the world you expect more into line with the world you desire.
You can empower yourself by finding the actions and choices that define your place in international relations.
Now that you have completed the studies covered in this book, don’t stop here.
Be a part of the changes that will carry this world through the coming decades.
Glossary acid rain Rain caused by air pollution that damages trees and often crosses borders.
See also mutually assured destruction and Strategic Defense Initiative . arms race A reciprocal process in which two or more states build up military capabilities in response to each other, autarky A policy of self-reliance, avoiding or minimizing trade and trying to produce everything one needs by oneself, balance of payments A summary of all the flows of money into and out of a country.
In extreme cases, poor civil-military relations can lead to military coups, civil war A war between factions within a state trying to create, or prevent, a new government for the entire state or some territorial part of it.
Some states’ currencies are nonconvertible, See also hard currency. cost-benefit analysis A calculation of the costs incurred by a possible action and the benefits it is likely to bring, Council of the European Union A European Union institution in which the relevant ministers (foreign, economic, agriculture, finance, etc.) of each member state meet to enact legislation and reconcile national interests.
When the meeting takes place among the state leaders, it is called the “European Council.” (p.
The discount rate is set by countries’ central banks, diversionary foreign policy Foreign policies adopted to distract the public from domestic political problems, Doha Round A series of negotiations under the World Trade Organization that began in Doha, Qatar, in 2001.
European Commission A European Union body whose members, while appointed by states, are supposed to represent EU interests.
Supported by a multinational civil service in Brussels, the commission’s role is to identify problems and propose solutions to the Council of Ministers, See also Council of the European Union.
European Court of Justice A judicial arm of the European Union, based in Luxembourg.
The court has actively established its jurisdiction and its right to overrule national law when it conflicts with EU law.
European Parliament A quasi-legislative body of the European Union that operates as a watchdog over the European Commission and has limited legislative power, European Union The official term for the European Community (formerly the European Economic Community) and associated treaty organizations.
The EU has 25 member states and is negotiating with other states that have applied for membership.
See also Maastricht Treaty. exchange rate The rate at which one state’s currency can be exchanged for the currency of another state.
Since 1973, the international monetary system has depended mainly on floating rather than fixed exchange rates.
See also floating exchange rates. floating exchange rates The rates determined by global currency markets in which private investors and governments alike buy and sell currencies, See also fixed exchange rates. foreign assistance Money or other aid made available to third world states to help them speed up economic development or meet humanitarian needs.
See also Development Assistance Committee . foreign direct investment The acquisition by residents of one country of control over a new or existing business in another country.
South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore, free trade The flow of goods and services across national boundaries unimpeded by tariffs or other restrictions; in principle (if not always in practice), free trade was a key aspect of Britain’s policy after 1846 and of United States policy after 1945. free trade area A zone in which there are no tariffs or other restrictions on the movement of goods and services across borders, See also customs union. game theory A branch of mathematics concerned with predicting bargaining outcomes.
Games such as prisoner’s dilemma and Chicken have been used to analyze various sorts of international interactions, gender gap Refers to polls showing women lower than men on average in their support for military actions, as well as for various other issues and candidates, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade A world organization established in 1947 to work for freer trade on a multilateral basis; the GATT was more of a negotiating framework than an administrative institution.
Generalized System of Preferences A mechanism by which some industrialized states began in the 1970s to give tariff concessions to third world states on certain imports; an exception to the most-favored nation principle, See also most-favored nation . genocide An intentional and systematic attempt to destroy a national, ethnic, racial, or religious group, in whole or part.
See also crimes against humanity and dehumanization. geopolitics The use of geography as an element of power, and the ideas about it held by political leaders and scholars, globalization The increasing integration of the world in terms of communications, culture, and economics; may also refer to changing subjective experiences of space and time accompanying this process, global warming A slow, long-term rise in the average world temperature caused by the emission of greenhouse gases produced by burning fossil fuels—oil, coal, and natural gas.
Also called the “bureaucratic politics model.” great powers Generally, the half-dozen or so most powerful states; the great power club was exclusively European until the 20th century.
Dozens of third world states have entered into such agreements with the IMF in the past two decades, See also International Monetary Fund . immigration law National laws that establish the conditions under which foreigners may travel and visit within a state’s territory, work within the state, and sometimes become citizens of the state , imperialism The acquisition of colonies by conquest or otherwise.
See also misperceptions, selective perceptions. intellectual property rights The legal protection of the original works of inventors, authors, creators, and performers under patent, copyright, and trademark law.
Such rights became a contentious area of trade negotiations in the 1990s. intercontinental ballistic missiles The longest-range ballistic missiles, able to travel 5,000 miles, See also ballistic missile. interdependence A political and economic situation in which two states are simultaneously dependent on each other for their well-being.
International Criminal Court A permanent tribunal for war crimes and crimes against humanity, international integration The process by which supranational institutions come to replace national ones; the gradual shifting upward of some sovereignty from the state to regional or global structures, International Monetary Fund An intergovernmental organization that coordinates international currency exchange, the balance of international payments, and national accounts.
Islamist Political ideology based on instituting Islamic principles and laws in government.
A broad range of groups using diverse methods come under this category. issue areas Distinct spheres of international activity within which policy makers of various states face conflicts and sometimes achieve cooperation, just wars A category in international law and political theory that defines when wars can be justly started and how they can be justly fought , See also war crimes.
Keynesian economics The principles articulated by British economist John Maynard Keynes, used successfully in the Great Depression of the 1930s, including the view that governments should sometimes usedeficit spending to stimulate economicgrowth.
Kyoto Protocol The main international treaty on global warming, which entered into effect in 2005 and mandates cuts in carbon emissions in 2008-2012.
Almost all the world’s major countries, except the United States, are participants, land mines Concealed explosive devices, often left behind by irregular armies, that kill or maim civilians after wars end.
Maastricht Treaty A treaty signed in the Dutch city of Maastricht and ratified in 1992; it commits the European Union to monetary union (a single currency and European Central Bank) and to a common foreign policy.
Muslims See Islam . mutually assured destruction The possession of second-strike nuclear capabilities, which ensures that neither of two adversaries could prevent the other from destroying it in an albout war.
See also deterrence. national debt The amount a government owes in debt as a result of deficit spending. national interest The interests of a state overall (as opposed to particular parties or factions within the state), nationalism Identification with and devotion to the interests of one’s nation.
South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore, nonaligned movement A movement of third world states, led by India and Yugoslavia, that attempted to stand apart from the U.S.-Soviet rivalry during the Cold War. nongovernmental organization A transnational group or entity (suchas the Catholic Church, Greenpeace,or the International Olympic Committee) that interacts with states, multinational corporations , other NGOs,and intergovernmental organizations.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization A U.S.-led military alliance, formed in 1949 with mainly West European members, to oppose and deter Soviet power in Europe.
North-South gap The disparity in resources between the industrialized, relatively rich countries of the West and the poorer countries of Africa, the Middle East, and much of Asia and Latin America, optimizing Picking the very best option; contrasts with satisficing, or finding a satisfactory but less than best solution to a problem.
The model of “bounded rationality” postulates that decision makers generally “satisfice” rather than optimize, organizational process model A decisionmaking model in which policy makers or lower-level officials rely largely on standardized responses or standard operating procedures.
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries The most prominent cartel in the international economy; its members control about half the world’s total oil exports, enough to significantly affect the world price of oil.
Oxfam America A private charitable group that works with local third world communities to determine the needs of their own people and to carry out development projects.
Oxfam does not operate the projects but provides funding to local organizations to carry them out. ozone layer The part of the atmospherethat screens out harmful ultraviolet raysfrom the sun.
Certain chemicals used in industrial economies break the ozone layer down. (p.
Private creditors meet as the London Club. peacebuilding The use of military peacekeepers, civilian administrators, police trainers, and similar efforts to sustain peace agreements and build stable, democratic governments in societies recovering from civil wars.
Special Drawing Right A world currency created by the International Monetary Fund to replace gold as a world standard.
Critics call it an expensive failure that will likely be ineffective, See also A ntiballistic Missile Treaty. subsistence farming Rural communities growing food mainly for their own consumption rather than for sale in local or world markets. subtext Meanings that are implicit or hidden in a text rather than explicitly addressed, (p.
United Nations An organization of nearly all world states, created after World War II to promote collective security.
UN Charter The founding document of the United Nations; it is based on the principles that states are equal, have sovereignty over their own affairs, enjoy independence and territorial integrity, and must fulfill international obligations.
UN Conference on Trade and Development A structure established in 1964 to promote third world development through various trade proposals, UN Convention on the Law of the Sea A world treaty governing use of the oceans.
U.S.-Japanese Security Treaty A bilateral alliance between the United States and Japan, created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan.
The United States maintains troops in Japan and is committed to defend Japan if attacked, and Japan pays the United States to offset about half the cost of maintaining the troops, war crimes Violations of the law governing the conduct of warfare, such as by mistreating prisoners of war or unnecessarily targeting civilians, See also just wars.
Warsaw Pact A Soviet-led Eastern European military alliance, founded in 1955 and disbanded in 1991.
It opposed the NATO alliance, See also North Atlantic Treaty Organization . weapons of mass destruction Nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, all distinguished from conventional weapons by their enormous potential lethality and their relative lack of discrimination in whom they kill.
World Bank Formally the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development , an organization that was established in 1944 as a source of loans to help reconstruct the European economies.
Later, the main borrowers were third world countries and, in the 1990s, Eastern European ones.
Ann, 105n44, 110n63 Tierney, Michael]., Illn65 Tilly, Charles, 160n20, 454n43 Tobias, Sheila, 114n71 Tolba, Mostafa K., 388n3 Tomlinson, John, 380n30 Tomz, Michael, 478nll Toulmin, Camilla, 433n22 Touval, Saadia, 78n64 Trachtenberg, Marc, 29n23 Tracy, James D., 309n32 Trainor, Gen.
Entries for tables and figures are followed by “table” and “fig. ” respectively.
