If you do not hear anything when the images change, e-mail Caryn Koplik ckoplik@nationalhumanitiescenter.org for assistance.
Intelligence analysts had discovered the bases as a result of a U-2 surveillance flight over Cuba on October 14.
The CIA used this map to brief President Kennedy about the bases, which were not yet completed, showing the radius the missiles could cover.
The ExComm included officials such as the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury, and the Attorney General, and former officials such as Dean Acheson.
They met in secret for the next six days, most often without the President.
Until recently most accounts credit the free-flowing deliberations of the ExComm with generating the strategy of deploying a blockade around Cuba in order to block the Soviet Union from bringing the missile warheads and additional military equipment to the island.
We now know that the Soviets actually had delivered the warheads already.
Myths versus Reality, Sheldon Stern demonstrates that the President shaped the ExComm discussions to conform to the least confrontational military option in the hope of avoiding conflict. americainclass.org 13 ExComm Misconstrues Soviet Motives The ExComm assessed that the Soviet had risked placing the missiles in Cuba because Premier Khrushchev came away from a 1961 summit meeting with President Kennedy believing the young United States leader was weak.
ExComm members assumed that the Soviet leader wanted to use the missiles as a bargaining chip to have the United States end its support for West Berlin.
The letter arrived late in the evening, and the ExComm decided to examine the proposal early the next morning.
That evening the Soviet KGB station chief in Washington, DC asked ABC White House correspondent John Scali to convey essentially the same proposal to President Kennedy.
U-2s had been flying over Cuba three or four times each day since October 16 without incident.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that the President commence an attack on Cuba immediately.
Strategic Imbalance Sergei Khrushchev : “Now with regard to the question of parity.
John the Divine said that God has seven cups of anger which he could pour out onto the earth.
So, applying this analogy to us, we could say that the Soviet side had at that time only half-a-cup.
He also announced the United States would increase its military budget by 15% for the next fiscal year.
Defense of Cuba Nikita Khrushchev: “I was haunted by the knowledge that the Americans could not stomach having Castro’s Cuba right next to them.
The Non-Aligned Movement was organized in 1961 by India, Indonesia, Egypt, and Yugoslavia to represent the Third World in East-West conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Of the 25 original members, Cuba was the only one from the Western Hemisphere.
At the time, the Soviet Union and China both claimed to be the “natural leader” of the Third World.
The Soviet claim would have been eviscerated if it allowed the United States to overthrow the Cuban government by invading Cuba, because as a founding member of the NAM, Cuba was viewed a Third World leader. americainclass.org 25 Operation Mongoose Authorized by President John F Kennedy on November 30, 1961, Operation Mongoose was the largest CIA covert operation carried out until that time.
In January, 1962, the United States succeeded in suspending Cuba’s OAS membership.
In February, 1962, the United States imposed a total economic embargo on Cuba that included food and medicine.
The United States held unusually large military exercises in the Caribbean, the most provocative of which involved the mock invasion of Vieques Island.
The name of the island in the war game was “Ortsac,” which is “Castro” spelled backwards.
The build-up troubled US military planners, even as they concluded that the Soviets were not installing ballistic missiles.
Soldiers were told that they were going on a mission near Vladivostok, and their destination was revealed to them only after they left port.
Cuban leaders interpreted the action as a prelude to a United States attack.
Meanwhile United States strategic forces remained at DefCon 2, the highest state of alert prior to nuclear war.
President Kennedy ended the alert on November 20, 1962, when Cuba accepted the fait accompli that the Soviets would be taking back the bombers and patrol boats.
Sitting on the left, Raul Castro, Fidel Castro, Osvaldo Dorticos, Raul Roa, and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez meet with Alexandr Aleexev, Anastas Mikoyan and translator.
