Some commentators see Dealey Plaza as being too small for such a big event.
Others argue that the American people could not accept that a “nobody” changed the course of history.
While still others suggest “we” let our emotions get the better of us because JFK was such a compelling figure.
Rarely is there an honest appraisal of the Warren Commission’s more outlandish distortions.
The fallback position focuses on Americans’ alleged inability to face the reality that random acts happen.
The subtext to these lines of thought points to everything but a political assassination.
As many as 70 million Americans, along with television viewers in 23 other countries, were watching when the CBS News anchorman, Walter Cronkite, reported President Kennedy’s death.
The nation’s shock and disbelief that JFK could be assassinated that way, cut down at the age of 46 no less, melded with expressions of mourning.
Back in Washington, live television added a new dimension to the four-day presidential requiem that followed with its formal military pageantry and Catholic ritual.
My earliest conscious memory as a child was seeing my mother cry while watching the funeral on a black-and-white television in our suburban San Jose, California living room.
I get the importance of TV and film and imagery in recording the events in Dallas.
But I don’t have to then make a giant leap to accept the conclusions of the Warren Commission simply because the event was emotionally meaningful.
After his murder, far more people claimed to have voted for Kennedy in 1960 than was numerically possible.
Few contemporary reporters place the assassination in its historical context.
They’re more comfortable discussing the semiotics of the Zapruder film than explaining why most people do not accept the official line.
Put simply, the dominant interpretation of the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination has been ahistorical, superficial, and condescending.
Jack Ruby and Lee Harvey OswaldJFK and the Lone GunmanHad John Kennedy LivedTruman on the CIA Rarely does a former President take a public stand calling for reining in a federal agency he had a hand in creating.
Yet a month after President Kennedy was assassinated, former President Harry S Truman published a thoughtfully phrased article in theWashington Post warning the American people about the dangers of the Central Intelligence Agency.
It has become an operational and at times policy-making arm of the Government.
We have grown up as a nation, respected for our free institutions and for our ability to maintain a free and open society.
It might be a coincidence that President Truman chose that moment to call for reeling in the CIA, but it’s also possible he sensed something about the operational aspects of the assassination that disturbed him.
In November 1963, the American people hadn’t a clue about the power the CIA amassed in the decade after Truman signed the National Security Act in March 1947.
Rigging elections, overthrowing governments, arming mercenaries, engaging in propaganda, money laundering, blackmail, assassination, and so on.
In the 1970s, events relating to the Watergate scandal forced the CIA to take a “modified limited hang-out” and admit to some wrongdoing in order to ensure that its “family jewels” remained concealed.
CIA Director Richard Helms had no choice but to admit that in the early 1960s there existed CIA collusion with Mafia hit men to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Once it was revealed that the CIA possessed an elaborate assassination capability the public outcry was loud enough to compel Congress to look into the Kennedy assassination.
The committee sought the testimony of the mobsters Johnny Roselli and Sam Giancana, and the Russian oil geologist, George DeMohrenshildt, who had been Lee Oswald’s buddy in Dallas.
It’s kind of a bummer that all three men were murdered before they could share their views about the assassination with Congress.
George Joannides, the CIA agent who was brought out of retirement to serve as the Agency’s liaison with the HSCA, led the committee on wild goose chases and failed to divulge his background as an agent involved in the JM/WAVE anti-Castro mercenary effort run out of Miami in the early-1960s.
The CIA has since sealed away its files dealing with Joannides’s Miami operations.
There has never been an adequate explanation putting to rest the idea that the operational planning for the Kennedy assassination might have originated inside the cauldron of anti-Castro paramilitary activity in Miami under CIA aegis.
Yet even Caro is forced to concede that the Kennedy assassination put to rest all of Lyndon Johnson’s brewing troubles associated with the Bobby Baker prostitution scandal as well as those swirling around his close associates, Billy Sol Estes and Malcolm Wallace.
But Caro, one of the historians held in the highest esteem, drops examining the ramifications for LBJ of the criminal investigation as fast as the Senate did back on November 23, 1963.
It was a photo-op designed, according to Johnson as well as his biographer Caro, to reassure the nation that there was a new president at the helm.
The famous photograph is best known for First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy’s anguished appearance still wearing the dress she had on during the assassination.
One leg was almost entirely covered with it and her right glove was caked – that immaculate woman – it was caked with blood, her husband’s blood.
Lady Bird noted the change in Jackie Kennedy’s tone from soft-spoken sorrow to “an element of fierceness” when she suggested to her that she change out of her bloodstained clothes.
Toward the end of the two-hour flight from Dallas to Andrews Air Field the White House physician, Dr.
George Burkley, also suggested to Jackie that she change out of her bloody dress.
At 4:30 in the morning, at the time when the substandard autopsy of her husband was being completed at Bethesda Naval Hospital, the former First Lady was still wearing her blood-spattered pink suit.
Texas Governor John Connally and his wife Nellie, who were sitting in the jump seat directly in front of President and Mrs.
Kennedy, would for the rest of their lives insist that the bullet that ripped into the governor’s back was a distinct shot from those that hit the president.
Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell, two of John Kennedy’s best friends from Boston, were riding in the car behind the presidential limousine.
Moments after the shooting, Dallas Police Officer, Joseph Marshall Smith, ran up, along with two-dozen other people, toward the stockade fence where it appeared a shot had been fired.
Officer Smith told the Warren Commission that a man stopped him in the parking lot behind the fence and flashed his “Secret Service” identification.
The Secret Service assured the Commission that it had no agents that day stationed in the area where Officer Smith said he encountered one.
But he had dirty fingernails . . . and hands that looked like an auto mechanic’s hands.
Doctor Strangelove On March 13, 1962, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Lyman Lemnitzer, laid out in a memo to Defense Secretary Robert McNamara his plans for creating a pretext for going to war in Cuba.
Codenamed “Operation Northwoods,” the nation’s highest military commanders had signed on to Lemnitzer’s top-secret memo, which urged the Kennedy Administration to stage a diverse range of clashes to justify invading Cuba.
General Lemnitzer’s scheme for victory against the communists offers a glimpse into the mentality of the men who Kennedy sometimes called “brass hats” he inherited from Ike.
Lemnitzer recommended steps to pave the way for the United States to invade Cuba, which included the following:“3.
We could arrange to cause such incident in the vicinity of Havana or Santiago as a spectacular result of Cuban attack from the air or sea, or both.
The presence of Cuban planes or ships merely investigating the intent of the vessel could be fairly compelling evidence that the ship was taken under attack.
The nearness to Havana or Santiago would add credibility especially to those people that might have heard the blast or have seen the fire.
The United States could follow up with an air/sea rescue operation covered by United States fighters to ‘evacuate’ remaining members of the non-existent crew.
Johnson’s NSAM-273 also nullified President Kennedy’s earlier memorandum, NSAM-263, that he signed on October 11, 1963, approving a withdrawal of 1,000 United States military personnel from Vietnam by the end of December 1963, with “the bulk” of the troops withdrawn by the end of 1965.
Kennedy, not wanting to open himself up to attacks from the war hawks going into the 1964 election campaign, directed that there would be no formal announcement of the withdrawal order until he gave the go ahead.
Even so, the historian Robert Dallek notes that during a news conference on October 31, 1963, Kennedy himself told the press he planned to remove a thousand troops from Vietnam before the end of the year.
Other aspects of “Operation Northwoods” that sprung from the mind of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs were equally chilling because they went beyond blowing up ships outside the United States, but urged other operations closer to home:“4.
We could develop a Communist Cuban terror campaign in the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington.
We could foster attempts on the lives of Cuban refugees in the United States even to the extent of wounding in instances to be widely publicized.
This kind of operation using patsies and forged documents to hoodwink the public looks a lot like the modus operandi of the Kennedy assassination.
General Lemnitzer and Air Force General Curtis LeMay were among the most extreme right-wingers in the military establishment that President Kennedy inherited from the Eisenhower Administration.
Other kindred souls ran the Central Intelligence Agency, including Allen Dulles, Richard Bissell, George Cabell, and Richard Helms.
Initially, these war hawks viewed Kennedy as a lightweight and believed he would go along with their aggressive aims in Cuba and Vietnam.
But they soon discovered that Kennedy possessed an unanticipated steel in his use of executive power.
He did not hesitate to fire powerful national security personnel if he concluded they were either undermining his leadership or double-crossing him.
He sacked Dulles, Bissell, and Cabell after they misled him about the chances for success of the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion.
And when it became apparent to Kennedy that Lemnitzer’s prejudices were affecting his judgment, Kennedy sent the father of “Northwoods” to the equivalent of Siberia when he dumped him as Joint Chiefs Chair and named him Supreme Commander of NATO where he would be far from Washington policy circles.
Kennedy was surrounded by a Joint Chiefs of Staff that were ideologically far to his right.
They were a staff of Generals who learned many of the wrong lessons from World War Two and were obsessed with the growing Soviet threat and apparently believed the United States could “win” a nuclear war.
They resembled the military officers in Stanley Kubrick’s brilliant 1964 satire, Dr.
In another Hollywood anecdote, Kennedy pushed for the release of the movie, Seven Days in May , which portrayed anti-communist military chiefs pulling a coup d’etat against civilian authority.JFK and Cuba President Kennedy did not only have to contend with the hardliners in his military and intelligence establishment, but with an American population that had been whipped up into a frenzy about the Soviet threat since the days of the McCarthy witch hunts.
Kennedy, the Missiles, and the Crisis of American Confidence , the historian Robert Weisbrot argues that the Congress and the press were already primed for a United States military strike against the Western Hemisphere’s preeminent “threat” of communism.
Kennedy’s effort at some kind of action directed against Castro, even a failed one, was widely seen as superior to doing nothing at all.
In April 1961, in a White House press statement, Kennedy bore “sole responsibility” for the failure of the CIA’s ill-fated adventure.
Yet his approval rating jumped ten points in the months following the Bay of Pigs to 83 percent.
After the invasion, a Gallup poll showed that 71 percent of respondents believed Castro could not win “a free and fair election” in Cuba, and a majority wanted to continue the flow of United States money and material to anti-Castro fighters.
Weisbrot observes that even the popular culture amplified the notion that Castro was a murderous tyrant.
An October 1961 episode of Rod Serling’s CBS television drama, The Twilight Zone, featured a thinly veiled caricature of Castro as a megalomaniac whose paranoia ultimately leads him to commit suicide.
Yet by the summer of 1963, through two different backchannels to Castro, Kennedy, at the time of his death, was seeking a rapprochement with Cuba.
Having already promised Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in resolving the missile crisis that the United States would not invade the island, he was intent on normalizing relations with Cuba.
A Treaty and a Speech In early 1963, when President Kennedy opened up serious negotiations with the Soviet Union on atmospheric nuclear testing he faced considerable opposition from the hardliners.
The nuclear physicist, Edward Teller, for example, lambasted Kennedy for helping the Russians shield their tests from scrutiny; he and his ideological soul mates were less interested in keeping Strontium-90 and other radioactive poisons out of the bones and teeth of the world’s children than they were concerned about monitoring Soviet tests.
Kennedy came under withering attack when he decided unilaterally to suspend United States atmospheric nuclear tests to reinforce his desire for what would be the first nuclear arms control treaty ever signed by the superpowers.
Kennedy put his presidency on the line in winning popular support for the Atmospheric Test Ban Treaty.Although historians have widely praised Lyndon Johnson’s skills at passing legislation, John Kennedy expended considerable political capital and pushed and prodded his former colleagues in the United States Senate to support the agreement.
On September 24, 1963, the Senate ratified the Limited Test Ban Treaty by a vote of 80 to 19.
In it, Kennedy presents a vision of world peace where the superpowers can find common ground and move beyond the hostilities of the Cold War.
Chastened by the close call of the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy had emerged from that crucible determined to find a way forward that lessened the possibility of nuclear annihilation.
He believed the Limited Test Ban Treaty was the first step in what would be a long journey.
In short, both the United States and its allies, and the Soviet Union and its allies, have a mutually deep interest in a just and genuine peace and in halting the arms race.
One of the reasons why the Kennedy assassination continues to affect millions of people the way it does, even 50 years later, is the sense that we are still fighting the same battle today.
On one side, is a military-industrial-intelligence complex with its global reach and surveillance state, its CIA and its NSA; on the other side, is a vision of an American future that values peace and refuses to measure the country’s “greatness” by its ability to wreak death and destruction.Our current president’s legacy includes being the first to assassinate an American citizen with a flying robot.
The same corporations that made a killing on the Vietnam War, such as Brown and Root , continue to profit from the warfare state.
It appears that the conflict in which Kennedy found himself embroiled at the time when he was killed remains unresolved.
