STRATEGIC AIR COMMAND OPERATIONS IN THE CUBAN CRISIS OF 1962 HISTORICAL STUDY NO. 90 y i^Ay^ THOMAS S POWER General, USAF Commander in Chief EXCLUDED FROM/ftUTOMATIC REGRADINC-j DOTDIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY SPECIAL HAKDSJJ3ET REQUIRED NOT RELEASABLE TQ^QREIGN NATIONALS OR THEIR E^RESE^TATIVES UNCIASSIRED"" UNCLASSIFIED This is a fgg|sgBsas£. document accordancewith the provisions of It contains information affecting the United States and, accordi be afforded and distribut tents will ""be restricted Reproduction of this prohibited except with origin.
National Defense of utmost security will and dissemination of its con""need to know"" basis. in whole or in part is >ermission of the office of because it ""OSSIFIED ■USSffl) PREFACE This is a history of Strategic Air Command's role in the Cuban crisis of October and November 1962.
It emphasizes reconnaissance activities and the unprecedented alert generation of SAC bombers and missiles.
The SAC staff agrees with tills distinguished historian and would add that unless it is written promptly it cannot serve the immediate and long-range requirements of SAC and the Air Force.
It has never been the function of the Air Force historian to write histor^ for history's sake.
During the crisis a member of the SAC historical staff was on duty in the operations war room 2k hours a day, seven days a week.
There he was able to follow events through the displays, briefings, informal discussions with battle staff personnel, and by examination of hundreds of messages which flowed in and out of the combat reports center.
On a daily basis he was responsible for compiling a chronology of events for the Chief of Staff.
The fuse was removed from an explosive situation when Premier Khrushchev removed his missiles and bombers from Cuba.
Thus the immediate problem was surmounted, and on terms favorable to the United States.
The larger issue of the presence of Soviet arms and troops in the Western Hemisphere remains.
The island is a heavily armed Soviet bastion which threatens to become a sally port for Communist infiltration of Latin America.
As this history is completed SAC U-2 aircraft still fly over the island, diplomatic negotiations continue in an attempt to remove Soviet troops, and an angry debate over past, present, and future Cuban policy still rumbles through the land.
The narrative portion of this history was prepared by Eobert Kipp, Lynn Peake, and Herman Wolk.
A footnote citation ending with an exhibit number, g., Ex 15, means that document is number 15 in the accompanying volumes of documents.
InfS this way the story was kept close to a strictly chronological pattern, ^but continul±yj]rtthinieach:^^ . *Electronic Intelligence and Weather Flights required the heavijgst 3^^-^ r« c\ fa Castro's Cuba had been under photographic surveillance for at least seven months prior to October 2$62.
U-2 flights by the the defensive buildtrategiq Air Cornwit h photography but IThe aircraft was Nickname of the operation was Quick Fox.
The SAC eventually relinquished command and control of the mission to Tactical Air Command on h November.
CubaH Assigned to this work was the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing, Forbes AF3, Kansas.
Its objective was to search forj j* During its nine hour mission, the aircraft was refueled once fby a/XC-135 Of .the 96th Air Refueling Squadron, Altus AFB, Oklahoma.
I Upon return to Forbes, all j """"""[ ana film were flown to Offutt/AFB for processing and distribution by the J^th Reconnaissance Technical Group.
By the end of October ;• J5 J5^X pr/^c^a Another responsibility placed on the 55th Wing beginning ih October was weather reconnaissance flights to support the newly begun U-2 missions.
Weather was an important factor in planning the high altitude photo flights.
At the direction of Headquarters SAC, one or two H-hfK. aircraft a .day made a circuit of Cuba.
Eighteen missions were flown in October, averaging six hours a mission.
No outstanding problems developed that handicapped their completion; however, an R-Vm* crashed on takeoff from MacDill on 11 November, killing the crew of three.
J&) L^U~* A potentially dangerous situation for all R-Vfs flying near Cuba did develop in late October.
The SAC, although recognizing the need for fighters to approach for identification, warned that tail chase and lock-on by fire control systems ""can be disastrous"" for the fighter.
In one instance, because of darkness, identification by an B-hj of a friendly aircraft was made only at the last moment.
It was only because of the pilot's decision to take the risk that the fighter was not fired upon.
To SAC, these incidents proved the inadequacy of CINCLANT procedures for timely warning of hostile intent against recon aircraft.
To remedy the situation CINCLANT asked that all aircraft engaged in peripheral reconnaissance show a normal IFF/SIF recog25 nition signal.
Warnings also went to CONAD and Navy units to stay clear of the R-Vf tail area.
This seemed to solve the problem because no further incidents were reported.
J&gf"" 1 V * tn^oSh^ 1 had beSn S6nt to ^^JP replace a K aircraft sent to Forbes for camera modification.
J$% \y\ OU mmmmm^ nussre Before completing this review gf flEKEMT activltiej #during the Cuban crisis, brief mention should be made of a single flight by an EEEMT equipped YB-58.
Headquarters USAF ordered the mission; the Air Force Systems Command provided the aircraft; General Dynamics provided the crew; and SAG planned the mission.
Executed on 30 October, the aircraft flew a mission along the northern coast of Cuba, going no closer than 35 nautical miles.
Most of the | j were The U-2 Over' Cuba Turning nowKto photographic reconnaissance, it has be6n noted that CIA U-2s had ""been flying over Cuba since the spring'of 1962.
Their photos enabled Uv.S. intelligence officers to identify modern missile equipped patrol boats, operational surf ace-to-airl miss ile sites , short range cruise missile sites, and modern MIG-21 fighters.
Although there were reports , „ Ilst , ucti Jn of ballistic .issue sites on the island, CIA flights vera unable to verify them. jfig) ^L> In early October the Defense' Apartment was taking steps to get the responsibility for reconnaissance of Cuba transferred to the military.
Strategic Air Command first entered the picture when a representative froAPCIO-5 arrived at Offutt m on 3 October with a revest that this command submit a plan to the POP for photo reconnaissance of the island.
Operations and intelligence officers immediately went to work and the next day Operations Plan 6T-63, nictate Brass Knob, was on its way to the Pentagon.
Jpg, U_, To prepare for the flights, SAC sent two experienced U-2 pilots of the 4080th Strategic Wing (4028th Strategic Eeconnaissance Weather Squadron), Majors Eichard S Heyser and Endolf Anderson, Jr., to Edwards AEB, California, for qualification in the new U-2F model.
Thls alr . craft had a J75 engine, giving it higher thrust than the J5T of the U-2A model standard in the toSoth.
The P model could climb 5,000 feet higher than the A model, to 75,000 feet, and it had provisions for inflight refueling.
The two Fs at ^^ ^^ ^ ^ ^^ Reconnaissance Squadron Provisional stationed at that base.
At a luncheon meeting with the Secretary of the Air Force the' need for Air Force photo reconnaissance over Cuba was discussed.
When questioned regarding SAC's capability to perform the' mission, the CTHCSAC assured * the Secretary that his pilots could he checked out in the' U-2F and overfly Cuba by Sunday , 35 That afternoon SAC received ""'* offieial direction to begin overflights as soon as possible.
The wing commander, Colonel John A Bes Portes, gathereda team ' '■_ ' of 21 specialists and left for California that night.
Compton, SAC Director of Operations ,""'' and 'Major ^""T^"" 'General James W; Wilson, Director' of* Materiel.
They are designated as A-l, A-2, may be installed in the equipment bay aft of the cockpit, dependHe took off at 1130 pm various camera configuand B Any one of these .ower equipment bay hatches corresponding camera coning on the type of mission.
In addition to the main camer$. load, a tracker camera is mounted in the aft end of each hatch.
Reaching the Gulf of Mexico, he \ continued southeast, passing over the Yucatan Channel between Mexico and Cuba.
Then some 70 miles south of the Isle of Pines, off the southwestern coast of Cuba, he executed a left turn, and flying slightly northwest, approached Cuba.
Prom operating altitude a vertical photograph gives a coverage of 6. by 6. miles.
They had left *"""" Edwards for the Florida base, accompanied by Generals Compton and Wil'~'l ■ son, even before Heyser had left.
There, some 30 members of an exist""~' ~' ing WRSB-4 detachment were absorbed and the group designated Operating Location X under the command of Colonel Des Portes.
Two missions had been planned for .the 15th, Heyser from McCoy and Anderson from Edwards, but now the hour was late and crew rest became a problem for Anderson.
Therefore, SAC had the aircraft ferried to McCoy by a WRSP-4 pilot and There, on the morning of 15 October, he and Heyser took off on missions of about five hours each, this time photographing virtually the entire length of the island.
S^rom May to November was Cuba's Href-steft-H"" a KC-135 of the 93rd BW was dispatched to take Anderson to McCoy.
IWSSffl »«—■ rainy season, but the sky over the island on the 15th, like the previous day, was remarkably clear of cloud cover. ^ ^ff^ The film from these three reconnaissance flights (lk and 15 October) provided conclusive evidence of the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba and directly precipitated Residential action on 22 October to quarantine Cuba> 3 Heyser's photos revealed three Medium Range Ballistic Missile sites near San Cristobal.
The equipment was highly mobile, and it seemed every effort was being made to make the site operational as soon as possible.
On 15 October two Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile sites were found at Guanajay.
Each site had four launch pads and was similar in construction to a' site in the Soviet Union believed to use a highly reliable 2000 mile missile having a 3 to 6 megaton yield and a circular error probable of 1. 'nautical miles.
Except for Brown, whose B configuration malfunctioned, all reported their cameras worked well.
J&g) ^A* Photography on the 17th provided further evidence of the gravity of the situation.
At Santa Clara Airfield 39 MIC-21 and 20 MIG-15 aircraft could be counted.-28 bombers were being assembled at San Julian.
Heyser covered roughly the western twothirds of the island and Anderson the eastern one-third.
The next day, Major Edwin G Emerling and Captains Gerald E Mcllmoyle and Robert L Primrose, leaving Laughlin, covered the length of the island, and landed at McCoy o 51 &&f LLfi These missions identified the third IR3M site in Cuba, at.
This unmistakable evidence that the Soviet buildup in Cuba had entered a new phase, as mentioned previously, caused the President to establish a strict quarantine of the island to prevent further shiploads of offensive weapons from arriving, and to call on Premier Khrushchev to withdraw those already there. ^f *""*-* By 20 October SAC U-2 activities at McCoy had begun to assume the aspect of a routine operation.
Additional crews and support personnel flown in from Laughlin brought the OL X complement to 11 pilots, k navigators, and 68 airmen.
The day of a U-2 pilot slated for a mission began soon after midnight when he awoke, had breakfast, and went to the Operations building for his pref light briefing.
By this time operations planners had completed the pilot's mission folder using information received from the SAC Headquarters Reconnaissance Control Center the previous evening.
Navigation, intelligence, and weather were the main topics of the briefing.
Two hours before takeoff the pilot had a medical check and began to don his pressure suit.
The pilot usually left McCoy about eight o'clock local time and the mission lasted two to five hours c His debriefing upon return consisted of mission information such as takeoff, landing, and. turning point times; weather; sightings; and evaluation of equipment performance.
U$f &&*S mm UNCLASSIFIED Three missions .ere flown over Cuba on the 2 0tT, 22n d, and 23rd All eg^at worked we . u , excep1; dur±ng captain ^^^^^ ^ ^ the S2n d „ hen hi3 c oonfiguration ^^ (ta ^^ a 6Qo ^^ mile flight line photograph, malfunctioned * ^^ ^ ^ ^ flight Paths on the firS t two days continued favorable ana then began to deteriorate.
Weather ^ ^ t<> ^ ^ ^^ the 2tal , and although m the ^^ fey a s±ngie ^^ ^ ^ tne piiot estimated no coverage of his target, in northwestern Ouba because of solid undercut conditions.^ father in the target area cancelled Missions on the 26th and all bat one on the 27th.
A search by *avy and Air Porce rescue units failed to discover any trace of the aircraft or its pilot.
They did not because he had been shot down and had crashed on the island.
Jfief «-» ^or Anderson would prohably have scoffed at the suggestion that his worK OTe r Ouba could he termed heroic.
So Anderson left Florida that morning and over the eastern end of the island a projectile, presumably from a Soviet manned SAM site, exploded near his aircraft.
Several small fragments penetrated the aircraft , then ruptured his flying suit and entered his body.
He died almost immediately from the decompression and crashed on the island somewhere in the Banes -Ant ilia area.
J^ U^ Major Anderson was the first and only combat casualty of the Cuban crisis.
On h November, following United Nations and Swiss negotiations 65 6k with Cuba, his body was returned to the United States.
Indeed, their quiet courage — the self-contained fortitude of men who serve in lonely and dangerous outposts unsupported by the cheers of the crowd — represents even a higher valor than the shared trepidity of a nation at war.
The question of vhy the hostile action against Anderson vent .undetected ""by United States radars inevitably arose.
Although the Secretary of Defense had been told that the U-2s were covered throughout their flights,"" in fact they were not.
Flight following means tracking plus surveillance of the vicinity so friendly aircraft can be warned of a hostile act.
He was also ordered to be prepared to retaliate against defense . installations when directed from the national level.
Permission from JCS to resume U-2 operations in support of opera• *.j£& ...i> .'v tions in the Pacific, the United Kingdom, and Alaska came on ""the last '. ^':^i.
At I528Z, 3 November, Captain Robert Spencer left McCoy for a four hour mission.
Routes covered the whole island with emphasis on ports, missile sites, and routes from 82 the sites to the ports.
Coverage was estimated at not more than 50 per cent, however, due to weather.
This was the second failure in as many attempts with this equipment, and it was not used again.
This was probably of only slight consolation to the first U-2 pilot to return to Cuba since 27 October, but it proved to be correct.
The 4o80th SW flew from one to five missions on all but five days during the month.
As previously mentioned, primary targets early in the month were missile sites and ports; with SAM sites, airfield activity, and new construction of roads and storage areas having only slightly less priority.
By 10 November high and low altitude photography had confirmed that all six MRBM and three IKBM sites had been dismantled.
Also, photos of missile launchers stowed on the decks of ships in ports, and later visual confirmation by United States naval vessels at sea, confirmed that k-2 Soviet MRBMs previously identified in Cuba had left.
The agreement of Premier Khrushchev on 28 October to withdraw all offensive weapons from Cuba was interpreted by the United States to mean the Beagles as well as the missiles.
But it was not until 20 November, after lengthy negotiations, that the Soviet leader agreed to remove bombers.
The JCS directed daily flights over key targets, but not more than two a day, and coverage of the entire island once a month.
The Defense Intelligence Agency provided the objectives, priority, and frequency of coverage.
Beginning on 2k November flights originated and terminated 92 at the Texas base.
Low level reconnaissance, however, was placed on a standby alert basis on 21 November.
Although CINCLANT reasoned that a combination of high and low surveillance would best satisfy requirements, and' the JCS agreed, ""overriding political reasons"" dictated their cessation. that the immediate threat to hemispheric peace had been solved to the President 's satisfaction, but routine surveillance would continue indefinitely to insure they were not clandestinely returned.
X&S^ ^-^ Before concluding this discussion of SAC's reconnaissance activities during the Cuban crisis, it will be necessary to return briefly to the early days of the quarantine for a description of the special sea search mission.
Because it is neither ""fish nor fowl"" the historian encountered some difficulty in integrating this material.
Sea bearo With the quarantine of Cuba imposed by President Kennedy at 1000 hours Eastern Standard Time , 2k October, a huge armada of ships took up stations to block the arrival of further shipments of offensive weapons to Cuban ports.
General LeMay immediately offered Air Force assistance in the shipping surveillance, and CINCLANT replied with a definite request.
He asked SAC to search an area in mid-Atlantic bounded by 30°N 60°W to 38°N 35°W to 25°N kO°K to 23°N 60°W to origin.
The CINCLANT required name and position of all merchant ships in this area and their 97 course and speed.
Compton, directed his operations staff to begin planning a one-time surveillance mission, nickname Blue Banner, p^ LLs Initial work was completed late on 2k October.
Orders to pre. pare for the mission went to the 303rd Air Refueling Squadron , Kindley AFB, Bermuda; Lajes Task Force (98th ARS, Lincoln AFB, Nebraska), Azores; and the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing , Forbes AFB, Kansas.
The Lajes Task Force was to launch nine tankers, also early on the 2 5 th.
In case . subsequent missions were requested, the 5 5th SEW was to be prepared to fulfill them.
J^f LU Search aircraft of the two tanker squadrons took off with full fuel loads early on the 25th as directed.
Shortly after the Kindley and Lajes aircraft had become airborne,' USAF contacted the SAC battle staff and requested cameras be used on Blue Banner aircraft to get a photographic record of sightings.
They were not used, however, because no further missions were •required of the refueling units.
In general, the Past Talk system is a SAC high frequency single sideband radio system providing the alternate means of command and control in event land line communications fail.
From Bermuda, the seven aircraft of the 303rd ARS vere airborne about 11:^5 minutes each. pH a-» Preparations for the use of R-V7 aircraft in sea search missions also continued during the early hours of 25 October.
Shortly before midnight five tankers had left Forbes for Kindley, there to be prepared for refueling the jets during their search missions.
Their mission consisted of a flight from the home base to an area near Bermuda for refueling, then search in assigned areas east and south of the island, another refueling, and return to Forbes.
When an aircraft made a sighting, either visually or by radar, it descended to about 5,000 feet to take photographs and to determine name and registry.
Film was flown to Offutt AFB for processing and hence to Washington where it was put into the hands of the National Photographic Interpretation Center.
J^ *J*J Strategic Air Command's assistance in the aerial surveillance of shipping was not to be completed with the one day search.
Shortly before noon on the 25th, CINCLANT requested another mission the next day ready to continue these missions — the intimation was indefinitely.
Only one returned to the home base, however; the other three had equipment malfunctions and one missed its second refueling due to bad weather.
One aircraft at a time, after refueling, flew a general orbital search pattern.
This tactic failed to locate the Grozny on 26 Ocnext morning, after two R-Vfs had launched successfully, the third crashed while leaving Kindley, killing all four crewmen aboard.
After making positive identification, he made • passes at the ship at all angles, photographing it„ He remained circling the target for over two hours while a USN destroyer approached Four went direct from Forbes to the search area; one, the aircraft which had the radio malfunction the day before, flew from Kindley.
Ttoen the Navy contacted the ship, the R-Vf returned to Kindley where his cameras were unloaded and the film flown to SAC Headquarters for processing. The.JCS reported late r> in the day that surface ships were following the Grozny , but out of sight.
J&J CO Immediately upon completion of this task SAC terminated the mission and all six R-Vfs remaining at Kindley and their support tankers and maintenance personnel returned to Forbes.
The USAF officially relieved SAC of contingency requirements for shipping surveillance on 29 November.
Reconnaissance activities after that date will be covered in the regular SAC semi-annual command history.
B contributed as much to the security of the United States as any . . . group of men in five outstanding lessons of Cuba the need for modern long range reconnaissance capabilities.
The U-2s and their systems proved extremely reliable,/ attesting to the skill of maintenance support personnel.
Between Ik October and 30 November the 4o8oth.flew 91 sorties (not counting the fatal 27 October mission) over Cuba for 402:52 hours.
The processing of raw data in the form of exposed camera film and I ^""rom ELI3ST Although more prosaic, was as vital to fhe reconnaissance . effort af^fiying the mission.
Major Edwin G • Emerling, Major Buddy L Brown, Major Richard S Heyser, Major James A Quails, Captain Roger A Herman, Captain George M Bull, Captain Charles W Kern, Captain Gerald 2.
Joseph V Charyk, gave SAC the responsibility for supervising the delivery and processing of all original film from the U-2 missions.
After processing, the film was again flown to the National Photographic Interpretation Center, Washington, D C, where it was interpreted and prints made for use by government officials.
The U-2's tracker film went from McCoy to Offutt AFB for processing during the entire period of the crisis.
It was important that the tracker film be speedily processed and sent to the Interpretation Center in time for use in the readout of the B configuration film because it was a record of the aircraft's flight _ path.
J&f CU During early photographic operations, prior to 3 November, there was a broad distribution of prints and additional copies of U-2 film, but beginning on that date film began to be handled by priority.
UNCLASSIFIED Between lk October and 2h November 289,560 feet of film was exposed on U-2 flights. {/f OU> The significance of the U-2 film has already been discussed.
Five processing centers were involved in preparing it and SAC courier aircraft maintained a nationwide pickup and delivery service.
According oc the SA.C Director of Intelligence, Brigadier General Robert Ef.
But he believed the Air Force must continue to modernize its intelligence processing equipment.
Speed and sophistication in the' gathering system was of little use if the processing equipment could not match its modernity.
Also, it was necessary to maintain a redundancy in ohis type of equipment . during normal times, despite higher costs so that the increased demands of a time of crisis, like Cuba, could be met. ''' (yff CO UMCLASStBED Chapter II BOiMBER AND TAJNKER OPERATIONS On 1.
However, SAC's buildup to an unprecedented position of readiness did not begin immediately.
Aside from reconnaissance activities, the command's initial force deployment during the Cuban crisis involved withdrawal from three Florida bases.
Air Command was thoroughly familiar with TAC requirements at the three Florida bases in support of Commander in Chief, Atlantic Cuban contingency plans.
Tactical Air Command was in fact revising its plans when the Cuban situation became a crisis.
Crumm, Chief of SAC Operations Plans Division, directed development of an evacuation plan for Homestead, MacDill, and McCoy.
This plan was completed on ±6 October, 3 and approved by General Power the following day.
The first assumed alert forces would remain at home, and the second called for evacuation of all SAC tactical aircraft.
Compton's (Director of Operations) direction, SAC provided concerned units with these planning factors for aircraft movement if necessitated by ""weather or other contingency requirements.""' £&$ff ^w Meanwhile, air defense requirements in the Florida area became ■ as urgent as the tactical military buildup.
Later the same day, as the influx of TAC, ADC, and army units increased, General Power ordered immediate execution of evacuation plan one — involving non-alert tactical aircraft at Homestead, MacDill, and McCoy. (flfSj (J> Strategic Air Command directed these aircraft to deploy as individual flights as soon as generated, and imposed a continuous work sched7 r M 3 nle until all movements were completed.
Only SAC's alert .forces remained at the Florida bases, but even their position was not inviolate.
J^&} ^As the military buildup in the southeastern United States continued unabated over the weekend, General Power ordered evacuation of alert forces from Homestead and MacDill on 22 October, and from McCoy on 2k October.
The command had previously assigned the nickname Riders Up to the Florida base evacuation, and concurrently established two options for execution of evacuation plan two.
Timing of option one, code name Gay Crowd, presumed an orderly flow; while option two, code name Crisp Bacon, was based on fast reaction time.
Option one timing was used for evacuation of alert forces from the three bases.
J^) IMS '■ These alert forces generally deployed to the same bases as the unit's non-alert aircraft.
However, alert tankers of the i)-07AR3. went to Seymour Johnson; and the alert B-52s of the kOk^m, whose bombers were already split between Sheppard. and Turner, deployed to Turner.
Another SAC installation, Barney AFB, Puerto Rico, was also utilized extensively by other forces during the Cuban crisis, but although SAC alerted its Ramey units to prepare for deployment, actual evacuation did not prove necessary.
J&€) ^""^ Selection of deployment bases for Florida units had been predicated upon maintaining WO capability with minimum disruption.
Consequently, evacuation did not seriously degrade SAC's WO capability except during actual alert force deployment and reconfiguration.
In fact, command readiness was enhanced when the initially evacuated non-alert strike aircraft remained in EWO configuration at the deployment bases Increased Readiness Posture V (^}^ On Saturday, 20 October, two days before President Kennedy's address to the nation.
General Power ordered the initial actions presaging attainment of an unprecedented level of strategic readiness.
First was ■a directive to immediately reinstate all adjusted and degraded aircraft alert sorties.
This was closely followed by an order to immediately reinstate all degraded missile alert sorties.
The command specified that necessary actions in both aircraft and missile units would take precedence over all other actlvi , 16 Finally, SAC directed all B-52 units JHCLASSIFe 3^ UHCMSSffttD except those possessing H model aircraft* to generate two -bombers per squadron equivalent and place them on standby status.
These aircraft would be available for ground alert duty if i/8 airborne alert was directed and launched from the ground alert posture.
Simultaneously, SAC directed affected KC-135 units to generate and maintain on standby status sufficient tankers to replace those alert KC-135s committed to support 1/8 airborne alert operations.
However, the &4C Inspector General recalled an airborne Eighth Air Force team scheduled to perform a unit inspection.
Major subordinate commands were also directed to initiate maximum security measures short of sabotage alert operations.
Several hours earlier,, the JCS, accepting General Power's recommendations of 16 October, had directed SAC to initiate l/8 airborne alert and to begin B-h7 force dispersal.
Late on 23 October, the JCS directed SAC to begin generation of its forces at llj-OOZ, 2^ October.
This involved establishment of pefcon 2 for SAC forces and declaration of an Athour j both of which the command implemented at the time speciDuring this phase of the Cuban crisis, SAC remained in/aJDefcon 3 statusj for only 39 hours — the period between the President's speech and imposition of the naval quarantine.
Actually, the establishment l_of Defccn 3] had little impact upon SAC because its major provisions had. been previously enforced.
The feature of ; ^3AC Defccn 3 which most improved the command's readir.ess was the reinstatement of all degraded aircraft and missile alert soriies.fj This General Power had begun two days earlier.
The JCS also initiated airborne alert and medium UBCLASSRH) -' ******* -hu.
In vie. of the coed's longstanding requirement for an airborne alert, the decision to Initiate this progran was particularly significant. pxtf CO Airborne Alert On 22 October, the JCS directed SAC to initiate airborne alert at the 1/8 level immediately, simultaneously specifying that it should be in full effect by the afternoon of the following day.
These procedures had been completely overhauled in early 1962 to facilitate rapid axta iIm e„t of a full scale airborne alert.
Dome indoctrination program consisted of 1. 3-52 launches per day — 4 on the southern route, 6 on the northern route, and 2 on the Timle Ballistic Missile Early Warning Site monitor route.
The Spanish task force provided Wo refuelings each for bombers on the southern route, the Alaskan and United States task forces each provided one refueling for northern route bombers, and the Alaskan task force additionally furnished one refueling for bombers on the Thule ■ monitor route. jfgf %Xj Major considerations in expanding airborne alert were target cover"" age, bomber route spacing, and air refueling support.
Because of fuel limitations at Eielson AFB, Alaska, the greatest increase in B-52 traffic occurred on the southern route.
It was particularly important that Spanish authorities be promptly informed because of the very considerable increase in tanker and bomber activity In that area.
Shortly after the decision to initiate l/8 air alert, the JCS requested the Joint United States Military Advisory Group in Madrid to make ""appropriate notification and coordination"" ■with Spanish authorities.
Every B-52 unit vas aware of its route assignment and the specific time it should launch into the stream.
Initial launch into the northern route would come from the unit with the first assigned launch time subsequent to I hour plus 15 minutes.
The first launch on the southern route was not scheduled until at least four hours and 30 minutes after I hour because additional time was required to bring the Spanish task force up to strength.
In fact, necessary KC-135s were already in place at I hour at both Eielson and the northeast U„S. task forces.
Shortly after I hour, the first augmentation tankers departed United States bases for Spain.
The only significant changes in force structure occurred because of the Straight Pin modification program and resultant aircraft shortages in B5 2H units.
Initially, the 379th Wing vas the only H equipped unit committed to the l/8 alert.
This caused minor S a P s in launch schedules and precluded assignment of the EkvS monitor progra^Jto B-52H aircraft.
The command policy vas that when a unit's inventory reached 11 aircraft, of which five had completed Straight Pin or were f lyable, it would be required to fly one Chrome Dome sortie daily.
On receipt of a sixth modified aircraft, two sorties would be required.
The Strategic Air Command issued separate implementation orders for each individual sortie so added.
By 5 November, five B-52H units representing nine sorties had been integrated into the airborne alert.
Additionally, Eielson furnished the Thule monitors with their single required refueling, which brought Eielson's total commitment to 18 tanker sorties daily.
J^f) ^-K^^j As scon as l/8 airborne alert posture was initiated, SAC placed primary emphasis upon maintaining the maximum number of sorties in the air.
There were two major aspects of this program* One involved a slight relaxation of the stringent operating criteria applied to airborne alert at the indoctrination level; and the other was clarification of the relative priority of airborne alert over ground alert.
Ji^fj On 2k October, at General Compton's direction, SAC issued a waiver authorizing a B-52 sortie to continue with one engine shut down.
Numbered air force commanders could also authorize additional waivers as necessary to ac•UO complish the mission.
Two days later, SAC headquarters authorized 4 -* ufiifLAdoiritu the use of manual over-ride and manual boom latching.
Since early 1962, when SAC reduced the time required to attain l/l6 or l/8 air alert from 72 to approximately 2h hours, the command had authorized use of designated ground alert sorties if required to meet initial launch timing.
Further degradation of the ground alert posture was not authorized except in those units which had insufficient weapons of the proper type and model.
In such cases, SAC authorized weaponsubstitution on specified ground alert sorties to guarantee proper weapons for airborne alert sorties.
In normal operation, there is an automatic disconnect if the relative position of the tanker and receiver places the boom at an unsafe angle.
Manual over-ride eliminates this automatic feature and substitutes therefor the individual proficiency of the receiver pilot and boom operator, either of whom can disconnect manually.
Manual boom latching puts the refueling operation, completely in the hands of the receiver, as only he can effect a disconnect. ^ mimm UHCLASSfflffl. k2 of weapon shortages, B-52 aircraft availability, and generation problems.
These instructions pertained to preparation of airborne alert sorties for launch, and specif ically prohibited^ replacing an aborting 'Chrome Dome. sortie from the ground alert force.
However, on the following day, 2k October, the command decreed that airborne alert maintained an unqualified priority on aircraft and weapons.
Jfaf ' *-*«-' On h November, SAC further amplified its policies governing replacement of Chrome Dome B-52 aborts.
Although primary emphasis remained on the airborne alert posture, SAC specified that neither the ground alert force nor the non-alert force should be degraded in configuration to deliberately provide a spare for airborne alert sorties.
Any generated sortie capable of launching on time could be substituted for an aborting Chrome Dome bomber.
At the same, time, SAC authorized weapon substitutions on air alert sorties when a spare aircraft was • launched. &f °^ The problem of weapon substitution and attendant degradation of tactics was not serious for airborne alert because of its relative priority.
Although SAC had sufficient numbers of nuclear weapons, the iiCLASSIfifcO -UMCLASStFiED 1,3. ■ command vas short of the most advanced, and. versatile types.
The ideal weapon vas one which could be dropped from any altitude and possessed r ri *' 2 ■■ [^ J depending upon the situation.
Unfortunately, SAC had no such veapon in its operational inventory at the beginning of the Cuban crisis.
Although programmed for SIOP-63, this capability had been delayed by a combination of Atomic Energy Commission production slippages and lack of approved safety rules. fKIRSWfesrejOT) (j^ Depending upon aircraft configuration and unit equipage, internal weapons for airborne alert bombers consisted generally of four Mark 28s or two ■MK'l5/39s.
The MK 28Y1IN had an air and contact burst capability, but was a free-fall weapon requiring high altitude release.
An improved version, the MK 28Y1RI, was a contact burst > maximum ' drogued weapon, which allowed delivery from 1,50Q feet.
SAC did not received approved safety rules for maneuvering this weapon until early November,; 9 The 4l33d Strategic; 'Wingi ; the' first SAC '.unit. .' to.be equipped with the.MK 28Y1FI, the most-.desirabi^'wiapon for';/ * For internal and external weapons carried on airborne alert, see ■ .'page 100a. . , .-, ..... :.,.:. ■■ ■ ywcussifito UfJClASSfftED in sane cases.
The most versa the MC 39 Modification 2 J ___J Other less sophisticated members of this family required release from a higher altitude.
Despite command support for a continuous airborne alert, it had never previously been authorized and it would have been unrealisticto include provisions for it in SIOP 63.
Once airborne alert was authorized, a conflict of interest developed between it and the 5O-63 E-. r 0, particularly under a[Dofcor. generation pcstureJ This applied to aircraft as well as weapons.
The result was that a B-52 wing with 15 aircraft was committed to 15 SIOP sorties plus two on airborne alert.
These weapons were obtained iron eight ground alert sorties, four of which were loaded with four ISCLOTED ""^mmM6k» 1111 s h5 UNCLASSHED iK 2SYHB&3 and four with two MK 39 Mod 2 weapons.
In addition, one nonalert sortie was loaded with two MK 15 Mod 2 weapons because of a shortage of MK 39s.
U-^ Authority to degrade specified sorties committed to the SIOP to insure an effective airborne alert did affect target coverage and damage expectancy.
However, intelligence experts at SAC headquarters determined that damage expectancy of only 2k desired ground zeros dropped to an unacceptable level.
To correct these deficiencies, the command assigned targets to spare Reflex and command support B-Vfs and placed them on alert.
Js™g) ^^ After approximately two weeks of airborne alert operations at the 1/8 level, SAC emphasized the need for proper scheduling to balance the flying load throughout the 3-52 fleet.
The command suggested rotating non-alert aircraft into the Chrome Dome schedule initially, thus leaving the alert force intact insofar as possible.
As alert force aircraft were rotated into the flying schedule, units were expected to expedite changeover and keep degradation to a minimum.
This aircraft rotation policy created further problems, particularly in units with a limited number of the primary weapons required for airborne alert.
In many cases, rotation required downloading and uploading of weapons, thereby UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED increasing demands upon loading teams and decreasing ground alert target coverage.
The spectrum of problems associated with weapon availability emphasized the command requirement for a versatile nuclear veapon.
J^f CO Tanker task forces supporting airborne alert performed creditably during the Cuban crisis.
The number of allocated tankers proved to be adequate except for the northeast task force.
Early in November., as the number of daily B-52 launches reached its peak, Eighth Air Force asserted that a minimum of IT KC-135's within the northeast task force was essential.
The Eighth reported that poor weather over the entire area had occasionally dictated launching three tankers to provide two bombers with planned offload and still retain sufficient fuel for landing at an alternate base.
Therefore, Eighth reasoned that four additional tankers were essential to insure effective bomber support dur• ing bad weather.
The Strategic Air Command replied that three additional tankers were justified, and authorized Eighth Air Force to increase immediately the northeast task force's resources to 16 KC-135s.
This increased allocation put all three Chrome Dome task forces on essentially the same tanker sortie per day rate. tA+ utfcmssM' tT bl J For almost 30 days, the Strategic Air Command maintained an effective and secure airborne deterrent comprising l/8 of its B-52 fleet.
At the direction of JCS, General Power terminated the l/8 airborne alert posture effective 0600Z, 21 November; and SAC returned to its normal indoctrination program.
The numbered air forces were authorized to recall support aircraft, personnel, and equipment at their discretion.
B-52 sorties recovered from airborne alert which were unrefueled in EtfO were to be reinstated to ground alert. (^f CO 3HMO refueled sorties were to be placed on ground alert as bomber/tanker pairs became available. j>f LL* 4.
Number of aircraft previously authorized for training was unchanged. >ff u -""' Concurrently with the return to indoctrination level Chrome Dome, SAC reinstated all operational limitations waived during the emergency.
Those included the temporary policies governing engine loss, low oil pressure, priorities on aircraft and weapons, and use of manual override and manual boom latching.
Jrf Os Daring the one-month operation, 2,0-88 B-52 aircraft were launched; airborne alert flying hours totaled Vf,l68.
CL iL / 1 & ^ ^J Of even greater significance' was the secure, continuous, and immediate strike capability achieved by the program.
While airborne alert operated at peak strength during ' the crisis, approximately 65 airborne B-52s and £L L f J were ""target effective"" at any given time. «^g^ &**» In view of warning deficiencies, existence of which had been highlighted ty the Cuban missile threat, both General Power and General Compton have emphasized that the Strategic Air Command's only secure survivable forces were airborne alert aircraft.
Although the immediate, threat from Cuba was removed, General Power pointed out that the threat of missiles launched over the South Pole, from submarines, or from a satellite carrier vehicle retained.
Medium Dispersal Simultaneously with the directive to initiate l/8 airborne alert, the JCS instructed SAC to implement dispersal plans' for the B-Vf force.
Strategic Air Command specified thatj""* ""] L>» J as scon as possible after arrival at the dispersal bases.
V^ ier y inCe thS primar ^ mission of the 301st and 376th h9 UNCLASSIFIED i arid all but one were generated and ready by 0600Z, 2k October. [cL Parentunits almost exclusively utilized their own administrative support a±rei-aft to transport personnel and equipment needed at the dispersal bases.
Initially, 2,053 passengers and 323,2^0 pounds of cargo were airlifted to the dispersal sites.
However, Truax Field, Madison, Wisconsin, was deleted because of extensive ramp construction and inadequate runway load capacity.
Aircraft of the 96th Wing scheduled for Truax were diverted to the unit's other dispersal bases — Tinker and Tulsa.,' 4 One ether dispersal site was occupied for only a few days.
Because of inadequate facilities and security problems encountered at West Palm Beach, Florida, Eighth Air Force directed the 306th Wing to redeploy the three B-Vfs located there to Plurlburt Field, Florida.
J^fj CA«» Timely and efficient dispersal of the medium force was primarily the result of hard work and dedication at the unit level.
The October I962 history of the 306th Wing contains especially good coverage of dispersal activities.
C concentrated upon such vital areas as command and control, security, personnel welfare, and logistic 'support.
Jrf U -*' Ground rules governing security at dispersal ""bases were gradually strengthened.
On 23 October, SAC directed that alert areas at dispersal sites be roped off and posted with applicable restricted area signs. jfext day, SAC decreed that security at all sites, military as well as civilian, would be provided from command resources.
In addition to point guards for each aircraft, close-in perimeter sentries were also required at civilian airports.
At General Power's request, the USAF Deputy Inspector General for Security established an inspection tour encompassing all SAC dispersal bases.
By the end of October, these teams had visited 26 dispersal fields, and had rated security satisfactory or better at each one.
UNCLASSIFIED 52 UNCLASSIFIED The most significant improvement in the EWO posture of the dispersed force involved upgrading selected B-V7 sorties to first cycle status.
In an EWO situation, these ""bobbers would be provided air refueling by tankers flying their second EWO mission.
To improve the reaction capability of this force, SAC developed plans for upgrading 4. dispersed 3-hjs to first cycle status ""by utilizing 87 available KC-97s.
J&f U^ All 41 sorties selected were located at airfields in the eastern United States.
The major consideration in effecting the change was proper positioning of supporting tankers.
After furnishing units with a detailed listing of personnel and equipment required at the receiving task force base, ^ -SAC ordered deployment of the additional KC-97s on 29 October.
The command emphasized that required support personnel had to be on board deploying unit tankers, and authorized delay if necessary to assemble personnel. ' ffi (JO Aircraft movement began with the departure of the first tanker at 18002, 29 October.
J^ (j^ UNCLASSIFIED 53 By 31 October, 37 . dispersed B-4'fs officially assumed a first cycle capability; three more did so on 1 November; and the forty-first and final one on 2 November.
Although these bombers and supporting tankers enjoyed first cycle status, they remained non-alert sorties because they were not subject to immediate launch.
The Strategic Air Command established a communication and reaction time of one hour for the first cycle dispersed B-Vfs.
Tanker sorties could be ground delayed as required to insure adequate off loads; however, to increase survivability, SAC suggested that the maximum tanker loiter time be computed. ffi LL-* » This dispersal posture remained in effect until 15 November, when SAC initiated afmodified Defcon 2 posturej At that time, 32 dispersed 3-47S were degraded and recalled to SAC stations.
On 2k November, the JCS authorized C1NCSAC to terminate B-Vf dispersal at his discretion.
Effective 1800Z on the same day, SAC directed return of the B-kj dispersed force and supporting tankers at Goose, Harmon, and Lajes.
The JCS had not yet authorized the return to Florida bases, so the 306th Wing's B-l*7s deployed to Hunter.
SAC delegated actual execution authority to the parent numbered air forces. uhcussified :w ~ Dispersal of the medium .force did not present any insoluble problems., but experience pinpointed areas where plans and procedures could be improved.
Shortly after initial dispersal, SAC directed units to review and refine support plans while problems were fresh in the minds of participants.
In particular, SAC stressed that support requirements and timing be clearly delineated and coordinated with host agencies.*^ 2 jfrf) fj^ Although this was the first comprehensive medium dispersal operation,, support bases had been periodically exercised under the Clutch Pedal program.
Until early 1962, the command had been committed to exercising assigned dispersal bases with B-Vf aircraft (minus nuclear weapons) every quarter.
Because of the restrictive nature of the operation and its cost to the training program, SAC recommended to USAF that the requirement be deleted.
In May ±962, USAF approved this request, and authorized quarterly surveys utilizing non-tactical aircraft.
If the command received only tactical warning of an impending attack, all efforts would be devoted to launching the alert force and preparing follow-on first cycle sorties.
In such a situation, those aircraft sorties scheduled for dispersal were, in a sense, expendable.
Since force generation was a function of Defcon 2, the command promptly established that posture and declared an A hour, for SAC forces only, of 1400Z, 24 October.
Approximately six hours in advance of A hour, SAC issued comprehensive guidance for assuming Defcon 2 posture to all units.
The emphasis was upon covertly attaining the maximum, state of readiness.
Specifically, no EWO kk-63 deployments were accomplished, and no post-attack command control system aircraft 96 were launched or dispersed.
Another exception was that high priority SAC reconnaissance operations were not curtailed.
F Upon assumption of [Defcon 2,1 SAC recalled personnel on leaves and passes, but not temporary duty personnel required to support continuing operations.
Although the B-kj Combat Crew Training School continued operations, and its students remained in training, the B-52/KC-135 CCTS at Castle and Walker were suspended, and respective commanders determined the most effective utilization of students.
Force generation progressed rapidly and generally was ahead of published schedules.
However, the command was already in a favorable readiness position at [I hourjbecause of such prior actions as evacuation of Florida bases, medium dispersal, and airborne alert.
U^ Initial guidance for^Defcon 2 posture {provided for the return of all excess.aircraft at Reflex/Airmail bases.
Later the same day, General F.wor rescinded this policy and directed that spare h-k~( aircraft be provided at ali Reflex ana Airmail locations (Morocco, Spain, * Lack of JCS safety rules for MK 53s delayed generation of last five £ 2lj.
Spare aircraft were to be EWO configured and available to support any aborted sortie.
Crew manning of spare aircraft in alert status was not initially required. ^ -£s$(JL> However, SAC emphasis upon improving its overall EtfO posture soon changed the function of these aircraft.
Additionally, the command began developing WO commitments for command support B-l*7s assigned to Sixteenth Air Force, Third Air Division, and Seventh Air Division.
By 29 October, SAC had assigned EWO sortie numbers to all command support B-^7s and spare Reflex bombers in Europe and Africa, and had begun targeting actions.
Js&fl Ow By 2 November, 30 spare Reflex/Airmail and command support B-^fs had become EWO capable and officially assumed alert status.
J By the first week of November, the number of generated &-5Ss had jumped to 84 aircraft.
Initially, a very limited number or B-58 sorties were supported by first cycle KC-135 tankers.
All tankers were in position on the following day, and at 2000Z, 3 November, the 20 affected B-58 sorties officially advanced to first cycle status.
Four additional second cycle B-58s assumed a first cycle capability on 5 November.
Major General Compton attributed SAC's ability to maintain this capability throughout the crisis to the high degree of professionalism exhibited by its personnel.
He also concluded that the Cuban crisis vali dated the command's efforts over the years to maintain a high state of readiness in its units.
Phasedown From the beginning of the crisis, Headquarters USAF was concerned about the ability of its forces to maintain an advanced readiness posture indefinitely.
Further extension would degrade both combat crew proficiency and inventory.
J^O U D Continue dispersal of sufficient first and second cycle B->t7s to occupy all dispersal bases.
Revocaxion of the quarantine order on 20 November precipitated further posture degradations.
At the direction of the JCS, CINCSAC terminated l/8 airborne alert at 0600Z, 21 November. later the same day, and in view of the decision to discontinue l/8 airborne alert, General Power proposed to return the command to £tef con jj within two days.
Effective 2100Z on 26 November, SAC terminated extra 3-47 Reflex and Airmail alert, command support alert, loaned B-kf aircraft, and B-VT generated reserve.
On 28 November, the JCS informed SAC that return movement of its evacuated forces was to be coordinated with departure of AFLAKT l40 forces.
On the following day, SAC authorized Eighth Air Force to redeploy evacuated aircraft, crews, and equipment to Homestead, MacDill, and McCoy.
Xtf IMMIED HMD 62 UNCLASSIFIED Chapter III THE MISSILE ALERT The Cuban crisis of 22 Oetober-27 November was unique in the history of the Strategic Air CommandIt afforded SAC an unprecedented opportunity to test its command and control apparatus as well as its force generation ability under stress.
Thus, the task of bringing the ICBM force to alert provided the command a singular opportunity to determine exactly how far it had progressed .toward an adequate missile capability.
In addition to bringing a large number of ICBMs to alert condition, the command learned much about the entire alert process and the many problems connected with it.
Through this experience, policies and procedures were changed or modified once it was determined they were lacking in some respect.
This command directed operational field units to reinstate all degraded missile alert sorties on 20 October.
Reinstated ICBMs included all those adjusted or degraded for modifications.
According to SAC, this • action would take precedence over all other activities and be accomplished as covertly as possible.
J\ T o missiles would remain in an Operational Readiness Training configuration.
Atlas F ORT missiles would be readied as soon as liquid oxygen became available.
On the following day, SAC's October missile alert posture was amended to include l6j Atlas D, E, F, and Titan I missiles.
Lk^> The urgency SAC attached to placing missiles on alert was reflected on 21 October in an order to deviate from normal technical data procedures in bringing ICBMs to rapid readiness configuration.
Units would not check out systems or verify readiness, except when needed for personnel or equipment safety.
This guidance was short lived, however; primarily because of safety considerations, it was rescinded three days later.
Although shakedown* missiles had in the past used LOX, ORT missiles utilized liquid nitrogen.
When conversion of ORT missiles to LOX for EvTO configuration became imminent on 20 October, this command 63 Maintenance program designed to correct incipient ICBM malfunctions.
Shakedown consisted of two successful consecutive countdowns of propellant loadings and additional system checks required to verify subsystem operability.
It became obvious that SAC bases would not have enough LOX to convert all ICBMs.
A national priority for &AC was established with production from all -commercial and government plants channeled in support of the project.
At 1300 hours, 25 October, an adequate supply of LOX had been delivered to the requisite bases. ^f) CO As a result of the above experience, on Ik November SAC directed that Atlas F and Titan I use LOX in all ORT/Shakedown exercises at operational sites.
The use of LOX was a direct outgrowth of SAC's experience in the Cuban crisis while combining ORT with shakedown could be indirectly related to the crisis.
J^j £ 4 -^ With the Cuban situation building to a climax following President Kennedy's address of 22 October, this command invoked the Air Force Systems Command /SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability St.
UELASSiFiE ifefFIED 65 xn general, the SCC Agreement contained provisions whereb;, SAC. would assume operational control of all AFSC launch complexes in ECC status in the event of strategic warning.
The ECC condition represented that status of a launch complex in which a missile could be launched on an 2W0 mission with strategic warning.
The xt should be remembered that the number of alert missiles often fluctuated within any 24 hour period.
ICUSSIFIEO 0KUS9Q 67 n-ccmmission rate for launch upon receipt of execution order reached maximum of Q2 per cent with an average of 89 per cent during the last .ur days of the period.
Positive action taken by your organizations in supporting the SAC mission is ■ commendable. £g} ; ■, fc^^ , ^-^-i-un is Several special problems dictated an early return of ECC missiles Because the Cuban crisis broke during the installation and checkout phase of many ICBMs, prolonged missile alert meant that contractor personnel remained in place without performing any functions.
The major consideration, according to U3AF, remained long range,e., completing missile c duplexes as rapidly as possible and turning them over to SAC for BJQ operations.
It recommended return of Minuteman test facilities at Vandenberg in order to resume testing ""vital to the activation of the weapon system at operational sites.
Delays, according to BSD, could affect activation of operational missile units.
Because operational readiness training was at a critical juncture, BSD also recommended return of three Vandenberg GST facilities, subject to aA.C concurrence.
Also included in the priority list were Atlas ECC sites at Vandenberg , Walker, and Pittsburgh.
Three Titan launchers at Vandenberg were also recommended for return to AFSC for Category II testing and updating. p% . (j^/ IHGUSSflE UNCLASSIFIED l*ev*j.*h*J*s»;, sine* SAC r«m» j p*«* /S""k Dsfc<ra £ and tbs.
Two days later, Atlas F Walker complexes *, 7 « nd natt sbuvgh Atlas V sitr« 4, 5, 6, 9 and 12 vere released to BSD on a request basis.
Tr.ii, provided'or a maximum of 20 T.CBMs to be degraded, for Atlas E -edifications, ""Clean rtweep, "" Atlas F ORT, and Titan I 0RT. i0 jf£) U^ Coincident with the(npdificd I^fcon 2 effective 15 reverb eri the cor^aard. made significant changes in ORT/ Shakedown procedures.
In the irsx.iace, shakedown would be conducted in conjunction with CRT for Atlas F missiles.
This policy had previously been in effect for Titan By combining training and shakedown requirements in one facility, the need for taking two missiles off alert was reduced to only one IC3M being exercised at once.
Thus, since an ICBM must be exercised In shakedown, the opportunity presented itself to combine GET with the shakedown exercise.
In addition, Atlas F ORT/Shakedown exercises would be accomplished. with LQX instead of liquid nitrogen.
Clearly, the need existed for rapid conversion of CRT sites to alert status.
Both changes, therefore, were primarily aicx.at.ed by the desire to avoid WO degradation.
For .purposes of CRT, ?. minimum of 10 px cpe.llant lading exercises vro-uld be conducted on each missile, rimce shakedovm called for two successful countdowns an a row, in the evenx these countdowns had not been flWMHED"" UNiMfft accomplished after 10 exercises, ORT would continue until shakedown requirements were satisfied.
After 10 training exercises on a given missile, however, it would be released for maintenance and returned to alert.
The procedure called for Atlas F alert missiles to be degraded for modifications only after its replacement — with ""Clean Sweep"" modifications completed — had been brought to full E570 status.
Thus, a new complex would be on alert before this command would turn another site back to BSD for modification. ^ ^g^*-^FoUcwing|the return to Defcon k on 27 November^ the command revised its missile alert stance to lVf ICBM alert sorties required.
However, as indicated previously, this was not accomplished without difficulty.
MCiiSSFfEDThe period of the Cuban crisis marked the first time on alert for a new generation of ICBMs -the solid fuel Minuteman.
On 27 October, the first two SM-80 ICBMs went on alert with the 34lst SMW at Malms trom AFB, Montana.
Jj&£) Ua 9 However, rather than temporarily accepting Flight A Minuteman ICBMs at Malmstrora AFB \inder the SAC/AFSC Agreement, the 3l*.lst inadvertently completely signed for the missiles, thereby irrevocably accepting them for this command prior to completion of all required contractor demonstrations.
Only after receiving a launch execution order vould silos be placed in immediate launch configuration.
Further, contractor demonstrations not accomplished were adequately covered by checkout tests, according to BSD, prior to turnover.
Technical order procedures would be followed by SAC in achieving alert with no resultant system degradation in either launch ability or safety.
Site Activation Task Force and contractor personnel continued to work with the 3 ^lst while additional safety precautions directed by SAC could also effectively be applied to the 39Uh SMS at Vandenberg.
As far as BSD .as concerned, disconnecting the lid ordnance device and making the safety control switch safe by manual means was not necessary, based on BSD's technical evaluation.
While procedures were adequate, they required refinement and improvement.
In summary, although the 3 4lst was in fact on strategic alert during the Cuban crisis, its ICBM's perhaps more nearly approached an ECC status.
Jftf) < -*w With a greater number of missiles on alert than would ordinarily have been the case, a strain was placed on SAC's combat ready missile crews, especially at bases where missile alert was greatly accelerated.
This unit's capability would have been marginal even without a crisis situation.
It became clear early in October that accelerated site turnover at Plattsburgh would mean degradation of alert sorties unless additional crews were dispatched to the 556th on temporary duty during the crisis period.
The Second Air Force was alerted by SAC on 12 October that it might become necessary to send one or more Atlas F combat crews to the 556th between 29 October and 20 November. ^ yg) ; to The situation at Plattsburgh built up rapidly, accelerating from two missiles and 22 combat ready crews on 22 October to 7 alert ICBMs with only 23 crews on 28 October.
Four more crews moved to Plattsburgh on 1 November (again, two each from Altus and Lincoln AFBs) with the turnover of additional sites from ECC OKUSSFB) 74 UNCLASSIFIED status, in order to perform necessary maintenance functions, a fully qualified, combat ready Atlas F instructor crew was ordered to the 556th from the 57bth SMS at Vandenberg AFB on 1 November, making a total of nine orevs augmenting the 556th.
Coverage of consoles during maintenance requiring a fully combat ready crew; Additional maintenance support as needed by the commander of the 556th; and Conduct of all Phase II tasks for 556th crews not having completed Phase II ORT at Vandenberg AFB. 5 ptf) U^ The 5T6th combat ready crew would remain at Plattsburgh until ^relaxation of Defcon 2 in order to complete Phase II training for two 556th crews.
The Vandenberg crew would not perform normal alert tours, but would be used as needed to cover maintenance problems on SAC-owned sites at Plattsburgh.
The first four crews dispatched to the 556th left Plattsburgh on 10 November with all crews returned, by 18 November except the Vandenberg crew.
The success of the operation could be traced at least in part to the existence of a contingency plan for this kind of situation.
Further, it illustrated the type of emergency measures that are usually demanded under extraordinary circumstances.
Special problems that developed,g., LOX supply, acceptance of Minuteman ICBMs prior to contractor demonstrations, moving of crews to Plattsburgh, were worked out satisfactorily.
The ro'l e of SAC's missile aiert force in the Cuban crisis was both significant and instructive.
J^) *A»* Overall, missile acceptance programs fell behind schedule as a result of Cuba although installation and checkout tasks continued during the accelerated effort in bringing missiles to alert.
At the end of 1962, it vas difficult to determine whether final acceptance dates would be met as planned.
Since the major objective was readying ICBMs for alert, training which would have resulted in EWO degradation was cancelled.
All Phase III or hardware training for Atlas F in the field and at Vanderiberg stopped on 22 October.
Delay in training of replacement ORT personnel, especially in Atlas D RORT, vas estimated at approximately two months.
Although formal Phase III hardware training was suspended during JDefcon 2, J units vere instructed to accomplish and record all possible tasks while on alert or performing maintenance exercises.
Piatt s burgh AFBs, the Strategic Missile Evaluation Squadron cancelled its recurring visits •;...;, uriit,ii. £;l In general then, t:uimpact, upon ICBM training was significant.
There were no major changes or adaptations, therefore, to be made in a crisis situation.
At the end' of 19^2, there was little likelihood of major recommendations in missile training based upon the Cuban experience.
Because crews were well adapted to alert, no degradation to crew proficiency occurred.
Jf&) LA*** Despite postponement in ORE and perhaps as much as a 30 day delay in Minuteman test launching at Vanderiberg AFB, several major facets of the Cuban operation predominate.
The primary goal of bringing ICBMs to alert status was eminently successful.
It marked the first time on alert with a completely new generation of missiles — the SM-80 Minuteman.
Another highly important ""first"" was the excellent cooperation between SAC, AFSC and the contractors in bringing the ECC agreement to fruition.
Difficulties were encountered « for example, acceptance of SM-80 missiles at Malmstrom AFB prior to contractor checkout.
Nevertheless, much was learned in the successful implementation of the agreeWhile the overall missile alert record remained impressive, the performance of the Titan I was especially significantOn 29 October, of 5b Titan I missiles required on alert, 56 were in alert status.
The shakedown program, initiated early in 19o2, proved valuable. {8ft} L *«— It should be remembered, of course, that Cuba posed a special situation.
Because of the length of the crisis, a slow phasedown was possible prom Eefcon 2. to a modified Bofcon 2 and then to Defco n 3.
The chances of an exact duplicate of Cuba in the future were exceedingly dim, but undoubtedly, SAC would be called upon to adjust to other perhaps radically different situations.
It was hoped that new challenges would result, like Cuba, in successful conclusions. . liyw^^nrn CUSSRED 79 Chapter IV COMPURGATIONS Several highly significant implications for communications resulted xrcm SAC's actions in the Cuban crisis.
But problems developed which clarified the need for different cr more expanded measures in the future.
Among the circuits supplied by SAC were emergency voice and duplex, and full period duplex.
Jg) ^^ oiioxngency neussHs 4^X*Wfif$Coincident with the declaration of Defcon 2, 2h/lU-0OZ October, ail / SAC allocated and emergency on-ca.Ll circuits were called up.
Also with implementation of Defcon 2, ""Minimize"" was instituted whereby teletype and voice traffic was restricted to specified priorities.
For voice traffic, priority h and higher was established, with ""priority"" and higher being the restriction for teletype.
Prior to Defcon 2, STN circuits were called up from the nearest STN grouping point.
Direct distance dialing to dispersed bases had proved timeconsuming and oper( I I-,, ... 1 a-„ic:iaiiy unsatisfactory.
Significant aid was given SAC by the Government Communications Management Group of AT&T. -fs}"" L ^' Difficulties encountered in determining installation locations lent credence to the suggestion that AT&T keep a permanent list of dispersal bases.
Dispersal base surveys should also in the future include information on local AT&T facilities.
An average time of eight hours was required to complete a new circuit 6 J& ^ over an extended distance.
With implementation of ""Minimize,"" teletype traffic was handled without a backlog.
Jtf) «A_ It has heen mentioned that a^ong the early measures ta*en hy co ra cnican.ons-electronics were those Mediately strengthening co,.unica-ns under attach conditions.
The original plan called for the vans to return to MacDill AFB after the Pacific tests for instrumentation removal.
Although both vans were specifically built for the Project Dominic test series,, they were deployed without modifications because of the urgency of the Cuban situation.
This radio facility could be used to augment the SAC Short Order or Fast Talk systems** in the event of loss * Vans were semi-trailer type, over 26 feet long, eight feet wide, with a height of 8-1/2 feet.
In general the Fast Talk system is a SAC high frequency SSB radio system providing an alternate means of command and control in the event landline communications fail.
Approximately 43 hours were needed for complete integration of the Collins station with 20 hours required for the establishment of procedures after the initial decision.
Based upon this experience, it was recommended that, in order to prevent delays in any future emergency, a standard procedure be adopted with an execution code word assigned for complete integration of the Collins station.
J&f iJW Similarly, SAC provided a military backup to Bell Telephone operators at AT&T air/ground sires at Red Oak, Iowa, and North Bend, Nebraska.
Command personnel were in place at Red Oak and North Bend on 23 October.
J^ U^f A requirement for survivable communications with dispersed forces existed during the Cuban crisis.
It will be recalled that a survey was conducted of all dispersed base communication support facilities designed to establish backup communications through locally available MARS facilities.
Although the Air Force Ccmmuni cations Service and ADC provided support, a lack of uniform facilities along with distances* from SAC command posts dictated discarding the MARS plan.
A proposal to dispatch SAC-owned MARS equipment to dispersed bases was also vetoed.
High frequency SSB at dispersal sites monitored broadcasts from the Offutt AFB Short Order station.
ED UNCLASSIFIED Beginning 28 October, ""broa.dca.ctf. originated from the airborne command post, thus exercising high frequency control of dispersed aircraft.
Numbered air forces polled dispersed locations in order to determine whether messages were received and to establish quality of reception and frequency.
Results were reported to the augmented battle staff at SAC Headquarters.
Effective 29 October, polls were taken during each 2k hour period within one hour after a ""Noah's Ark"" message had been broadcast from the airborne command post over Short Order fre19 quencies.
This procedure, originally designed as a ""one time"" effort, continued until dispersal was ended on 2k November since unsatisfactory results were achieved on 29 October.
Acceptable results were reported on 30 October and continued improvement developed through termination on 2h Novemberp&)' *""*■**' As far as execution messages were concerned, dispersed crews would follow the same procedures prescribed for a unit command post.
A ""Looking Glass"" message would be challenged by monitors as if received by telephone.
Following reception of an execution message, should contact be lest with the agency initiating the message, the crew would communicate with the next higher -headquarters up to and including SAC Headquarters o Should no ground contact be available, the airborne command post and/or any PACCS aircraft would be contacted.
Should all efforts to confirm the message prove abortive, crews were directed not to launch.
A *-*lira It can readily be seen that laeh of a deployment plan hindered rapidly establishing an SS3 ability at dispersal locations.
Maintenance spares and difficulties with radio accent also plagued the operation.
L hi i ^^ ^J An adequate deployment plan covering all aspects of high frequency operations at dispersed locations vas recommended.
Despite problems, however, the operation proved successful, especially"" considering the t*ne in which it was accomplished and the adverse conditions encountered. j# (j^ In general, no operations orders existed for dispersal of communications.
Crews followed instructions from the communications annex of the dispersal plan.
This procedure, however, was not adequate for positive control of dispersed units.
Thus, it was recommended that an operations plan with a current communications annex be published and kept current.
On 25 October, ADO informed SAC that a plan had been prepared, using a radar test facility at Moorestown, New Jer. sey.
The plan was expanded on 27 October to include long range radars at Thomasville, Alabama, and Laredo, Texas.
Approximately eight minutes warning would be available in the event missiles were launched against SAC Headquarters.
However, the Thomasville and Laredo radars possessed no computer ability and had little value in detecting launches except to confirm detection by Moorestown and to provide an approximation of the number of missiles fired.
J^T""\ On 27 October, a ""hot line"" voice circuit from Moorestown was installed in the SAC Headquarters command post.
This command requested that WORAD immediately inform SAC should the Moorestown tracker and/or reporting facilities become inoperable 29 p*f U U^s Despite improvisation of a Southern Missile Warning System, it became apparent that a serious gap existed in missile detection and warning from the South.
Thus, one of the paramount requirements, in the aftermath of Cuba, was that of a complete radar system providing omni-directional warning against missiles.
Electronic interferenceto bombing-navigation radar systems on Chrome Dome sorties particularly plagued the ""Black Goat"" refueling area in the northeast.
The increase in interference reports coincident with the Cuban crisis pointed directly to Communist Bloc activity.
A strong possibility existed that jamming emanated from Communist bloc shipping in the New Brunswi ckNewfoundland area.
Chrome Dome sorties challenged the transmission and the station was unable to reply.
It seemed that overt attempts were being made to collect intelligence and test communications security.
In the wake of these incidents, all Chrome Dome crews were briefed on necessary security requirements and the need for reporting violations.
Crews were warned not to initiate unscheduled transmission to airborne or ground stations unless required for air. traffic control or flight safety.
A Soviet-Cuban intercept unit in Havana was reportedly attempting to intercept all radio communications, of American forces in the Caribbean, Mid-Atlantic, and Gulf coasts.
In general then, SAC took measures to reduce the volume of electrically-transmitted ""plain language"" messages and conversations.
J&) L , U— The large number of ""Hot News"" reports concerning interference, jamming and spoofing inundated the SAC Warning Center, requiring a special communications analysis team within the DOCE emergency staff.
If necessary, data was forwarded to the SAC Battle Staff and flying crews.
Thus, this experience indicated the need for special ability in electronic phenomena analysis that could be used in an emergency situation.
A great deal of effort was devoted to improving communications for dispersal locations.
The Cutan crisis taught that dispersal demands solid, reliable communications.
Radio transmission to dispersed sites is also mandatory in order to provide ""go"" notification should land lines be interdicted.
Warning and mobility were additional necessities under crisis situations.
The Southern Missile Warning System devised during the crisiswas inadequate.
The Cuban experience showed that predictions of the exact nature of war and crisis are more often than not proved wrong.
OSCUSSRB) 92 DKUSSBB1 Neither could it rely upon stop-gap communications,g., MAES, amateur or reserve transmission capabilities.
There was no question that SAC communications-electronics performed remarkably well in the Cuban crisis.
It showed what could be depended upon in an emergency; what might be discarded; and what must be added in order to shape an ability to meet any contingency. ^r i >■ us SSli 94 Chapter V INFORMATION POLICIES During the Cuban crisis the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Mr Arthur Sylvester, controlled the release of information to the public concerning participation of the military services.
He directed that no information, including pictures and films, would be released without his approval.
Accordingly, SAC notified all its field units to comply with the following DOD guidance in dealing with the public news media.
All press inquiries related to specific Cuban operations will be referred to Washington.
Transportation of media representatives in ships or aircraft not authorized.
Access to bases authorized on a normal basis, but access to operations areas may be restricted in order to safeguard operational information.
Identification of individual units in staging areas or in transit not authorized.
There will be no identification of type of aircraft used for aerial reconnaissance.
Until further notice newsmen will not be permitted to participate in flights aboard SAC tactical aircraft.
This restriction applies to any requests for flights previously approved by this headquarters but not yet completed.
In addition, media visits and normal community relations tours to alert facilities and missile sites will not be allowed until further notice.
However, General Power sought to have the DOD's position modified in order to strengthen the nation's current and future security in dealing with incidents of a similar nature.
Advised of DOD's disapproval, on 7 November General Power requested the Secretary of Defense to release the information on the basis of three main considerations.
It would lessen partisan attacks on Presidential policies, increase morale of military service personnel, and apprise the enemy of the nation's strength.
In spite of the CINCSAC's strong appeal, the Secretary of Defense never replied to his letter.
However, portions of the CINCSAC's proposals outlining the command's significant contributions to national defense were included in a November DOD news release after the Cuban crisis ended.
UNCLASSIFIED M*iMSMM%S& Chapter VI SU^^ARY 1 During the Cuban crisis SAC prepared and retained ou alert a force that unquestionably represented -.he most powerful instrument for destruction ever assembled.
Yet its primary mission during the crisis, as in the past, was to prevent war by convincing the potential aggressor that nothing would be gained, indeed all might be lost, by expanding a limited conflict into a nuclear war.
LeMay, reflecting on the military lessons of the Cuban confrontation, saw it as deterrence in action, an excellent example of the credibility of our nuclear delivery capability.
Only under the protection of the strategic nuclear force could the forces policing the quarantine operate with confidence.
The nature of the crisis afforded SAC an opportunity to take advantage of warning time and thus to bring its forces up to an unprecedented state of readiness.
Twenty-four hours after ^clarati on of A'' houTTsAC had 1436 bombers and lk5 missiles generated.
Jits.lwea^n'systems'Vithin }uCho'ur2 |Nbt enough tankers were available to support the rest.
PS^ In addition to the high state of readiness maintained over about a month period, several other ""firsts"" were recorded.
Also, the ei rmw Dfj dispersed lS3 of its second cycle B-47s to 32 alternate military and civilian airfields.
Fdrce""""l2g±s^Jt^^L^^h^as^^^^^^^l^iolSS^^^iX^ Tal'erTlSsspi^ffcatus ■W T o^7 one-half,^^frmfii2^'.on..l9^0ctober-to-'-a-peak'of logon's 'kovembSTJ Also for the first time, new Minuteman solid fuel missiles, of which there were none ready at the beginning of the crisis, went on alert at Malmstrom AFB, Montana, 2J October.
T^K* Certainly the salient feature of SAC's role in the crisis was its accelerated generation -of strategic nuclear power, but reconnaissance also paid an important role in determining Soviet intentions during the suspense-ridden days of early autumn.
Still, Cubans a uai^e situation and the cohddtdons^er which SAC generated its forces .ere unicue.
Ihe zoauor and atacf ar.ani.nous problem encountered by B-J2 organization* .conceded weapons availability.
Yet SAC Plane consignee to the hot erucitle of experience proved of good temper. ■ f ™° ta '"" lieV "" ,3d tha "" ddeqW ™ lD .ffl»^» It Although they had to aaxe spot decisions on situations not specifically covered.
Some. prohW recuired Mediate attention and some vera temporarily accepted and attacked after the co^and returned to no^al operations.
No GAM-77s were carried ""by units participating in the indoctrination program on 21 Oct 62.
Thus, the number of GAM-77s required on airborne alert increased from 20 to 28 by 2 Nov, and' remained at that level until 21 Nov.
This briefing, vith its accompanying, photographs, is included in the photo volume of this history and constitutes the pictorial record* of Soviet military accomplishments in Cuba.
The best unclassified summary of .the introduction of Soviet arms into Cuba that has appeared to '""-••date was made to the House Armed Services Committee by SecDef McNamara on 30 Jan 63.
Due to the sensitive nature of this Security Service mission, the historian has been able to include only a bare outline of this mission.
Msg, JCS 2324-62, JCS to SAC, I27230OZ Sep 62. "" : """" ^""'-^ "" : '^r: 5.
Msg, Zippo' IO-698, SAC to 2AP, 28/0322Z Oct 62; See Ex 3 for >l mission recaps.
See also SecBef McNamara s statement before House Armed Services Committee, 30 Jan 03.
Powell, Ch, ;;occn Br, DO, 20 Nov 62 . ---:-■ The historian in this early period has been forced to rely ^-^■U i^erviev -i lieu of documentation.
The basic Operations ^ree^stating Brass Knob requirements and some 20 other documents ^ov'i tcTexist and to bear on early operations were at the time ■if their preparation placed iri a special sensitive category and :-.ave not been downgraded.
Interview, John Bohn, Ch, DXIH, with General Thomas S Power, CINCSAC, 15 Nov 62.
T-ate-view, Robert Kipp, Historian, with Maj Richard S Heyser, 27 Nov 62.
On 29 Oct Maj Heyser with several other reconnaissance specialists and General LeMay were called to meet with President Kennedy.
McCoy to AFSSO SAC, Ij/lSk^Z Oct 62, 3-lkl6k; Msg, 4080S¥ Laugnlm 10 AFSSO SAC, 17/1953Z Oct 62, B-i4l66.
Msg, SCO 62D 1444, AFSSO SAC ro AFSSO McCoy, 18/IOI5Z Oct 62 ; Msg, AFSSO McCoy to AFSSO SAC, 17/201SZ Oct 62Msg, SSOM-19-10-01, AFSSO McCoy to AFSSO SAC, I9/OOI5Z Oct 62oee also mission on map in photo volume.
ST SSQM 2210 ^ '^SO McCoy to AFSSO SAC, 22/l6l8Z Oct 62. xo vas the only time thiu camera was used in October.
See also photo alleged ~v v,uoans 00 oe of crash scene, in photo volume. ^los Angeles Times, 5 Nov 62.
The order had no douoo oeen received oy telecon earlier because SAC sent a Zippo SS S 0ct°62 ^ W±nS CanCellin g fli ^* on 28/ 68.
Blanchard, IG, 2 9 Oct 62, to T/oi'r v V n Dessert ^/ sst Sxec Off, ACS/l, to AFSSO SAC, Attn T3°256-62) Compton > Letter of Transmittal, "" 15 Nov 62 (AFCIG69.
Report ""OLX Flying Time Nov 62]' Ex 2, Hist of 4080SW, Special Operations Nov-Dec 62; also p 18 same history.
Hist of 55SRW Dep Comdr for Ops, Oct 62, B-89856. li0 ' SSo^f IS^O^f 3 T^ ^ 2T/ ° 3 °5 Z Oct 62; Msg, _. u-o 50J., 2Aj 00 303ARS, etal.
DPL, to DXIH, ""Historical Coverage of ouoan Crisis,"" 9 A ov c2. 3f tcll ^f-' , ^ hronolosicai L -3ting of Major Actions,"" to IOM, DOPIM to DXxH, ""Historical Coverage of Cuban Crisis,"" 5 Nov 62.
I0M, Col George Matsko, Ex DPL, to DXIH, ""Historical Coverage of Cuban Crisis,"" 9 Nov 62.
Schva^ztrauber, Ex IG, to DXIH, ""Historical Coverage of Cjban Crisis/' 2 S cv 62.
Chronology of IcAF in the Cuban Crisis. -__.g, C 1361, 16AF to SAC, ""Fran General-Wade to General Power,"" -■':■■/ 0930Z Oct 62.
DO, lo Nov 62 (statistics taken from Control Center display panels by SAC Support Battle Staff historian); Msg, JOPREP 11-lSO, SAC to JCS arid DIA, I7/23HZ Nov 62.
Memo, ""Proceedings of SAC Readiness Committee Executive Session,"" ""by Lt Col K hi.
Msg, JCS 7o00, JCS to CINCLANT, 28/2249Z Nov 62, Ex 74 ; Msg, JCS 7601, JCS to SAC, 28/2314Z Nov 62; Msg, JCS 7&02, JCS to CINCLANT, etal., 28/2322Z Nov 6;2, Ex 75 141.
Report, ""Liquid Oxygen/Liquid Nitrogen Conversion ,"" by BM3F, 26 Oct 62.
IO-385 for MACS, SAC to MAAMA, 24 Oct 62; Msg, DM 99016, SAC to MAAMA, 2o Oct 62.
Jlcg, 3SQ-30-10-26, BSD to SAC, '''Technical Evaluation of Malrnstrorn 43.
Px-Lctior;3,| extracted from SACM 55-7, 4 May 62. ccn 2 Pane ti oris, [-'■ extracted from SACM 55-7, ' h May 62.
S AFSC/SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability of Ballistic Missile launch Complexes, 4 May 6l.
A Schriever, Comdr APSC, ""Teamwork, Missile Force Generation,"" 19 Nov 62.
Msg, DO/DM 8519, SAC to BSD & 15AF, ""Technical Evaluation of Malmstrom Flight 'A, '"" 2o Oct 62. 2k.
Msg, BSQ-30-10-2o, BSD to SAC, ""Technical Evaluation of Malms tram Flight A,"" 0111Z 31 Oct 02.
Chapter IV 1. xOM, DOCEPP to DXIH, ""Circuit Activation-Deactivation Schedule Cuban Crisis,"" 29 Nov 62, w/Atch 1, ""EMC and.
Msg, DOCS 8507, SAC to AFLC, ""Return of SAC Mobile Multiplex Equipped Communications Vans,"" 2302Z 26 Oct 62.
Msg, DCCE 98476, SAC to Alfa Two, ""HF SS3 Monitor Requirement At -s-47 Dispersal Bases,"" 2010Z 25 Oct 62.
