Kennedy announced on television that the Soviet against employing such a display of force, the Union had placed offensive nuclear missiles in administration wanted to prove it would back up Cuba.
The Soviets had staged a sealift to Cuba, statements of policy with actions. which had begun in July of that year and continued Publicly the crisis lasted for six days—from over the next few months, which constituted a Kennedy’s speech on October 22 until the official major military deployment involving more than one Soviet statement on October 28 that the missiles in hundred shiploads and containing several thousand Cuba would be dismantled and removed from the vehicles and more than twenty thousand men.
For United States policymakers, however, the crisis policymakers interpreted these actions as contradicbegan on October 16 at 11:45 A.M. during the first tions of explicit Soviet pledges and statements that meeting of the group of advisors that became Soviet aid to Cuba was defensive and would remain known as the ExComm.
The group served the presso. ident almost twenty-four hours a day as the United The United States employed political pressure on States managed the situation. bilateral and multilateral levels—through both forWhen they were presented with the evidence of mal and informal channels.
It also applied military the missiles, United States government officials were surpressure while policymakers sought to resolve the prised and angered by the Soviet deception. crisis short of war.
The United States succeeded in Kennedy personally assembled a politically diverse presenting a firm and resolved stance, but it stopped group of advisors comprising representatives of the short of a bellicose response.
The administration, public and private sectors that he believed would and particularly the president, was not interested in contribute to a successful resolution.
They were men beginning a military confrontation with the Soviet he depended on regardless of rank or political affiliaUnion, but the United States was strongly committion, men he believed served their country and his administration above all.
The hawks included Taylor Acheson, the Joint Chiefs (without United States Marine Corps Attorney General Robert F Kennedy Commandant David Shoup), McCloy, Nitze, and, iniSecretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon tially, Dillon and McCloy.
The doves were Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Gilpatric, Ball, Thompson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk (who was absent durSorenson, Stevenson and Lovett.
The others were ing a large part of the deliberations) indecisive, shifting their opinions as the days wore Under Secretary of State George Ball on.
The president mandated, and his advisors Soviet expert and Ambassador at Large Llewellyn agreed, that the crisis remain secret until the United “Tommy” Thompson2 States formulated a plan.
Consequently, to avoid Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara leaks, the circle of people in government who knew about the crisis remained extremely tight.
The group Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric met almost continuously for the two weeks of the General MaxwellTaylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs crisis.
It broke up into smaller groups for purposes of of Staff analysis and debates while experts presented information, but the composition of the general group Assistant Secretary for International Security Affair remained consistent.
Paul Nitze The Soviets placed missiles on an island that the The Central Intelligence Agency members United States had viewed as its backyard since the included Deputy Director Marshall Carter for the late nineteenth century.
U.S.-Cuban relations first day and Director John McCone, who returned to though certainly strained by 1962, had been closely Washington on October 16, thereafter.
McGeorge Bundy,advisor on national security affairs Repeated offers to buy Cuba culminated in the Presidential Counsel Theodore “Ted” Sorenson Ostend Manifesto of 1854, which stated that the United States had the “right” to acquire Cuba.
On January 1, 1959, Cuban rebels took control of Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Edwin the government.
The United States officially recogM Martin nized the new regime on January 7.
Not long after, Deputy Under Secretary U Alexis Johnson U.S.-Cuban relations began to deteriorate.
Tensions increased steadily, and the two nations went headAmbassador Adlai Stevenson, United States representative t to-head in public forums.
Cuban Prime Minister the United Nations Fidel Castro refused to back the United-States in its USIA Deputy Director Donald Wilson Cold War with the Soviet Union.
In April 1959, President Dwight D Eisenhower publicly refused to meet State Department Director of Intelligence and with Castro during his trip to the United States, Research Roger Hilsman instead leaving Washington to play golf.
By December Castro had declared himself and his revolution Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, who left Communist and had received substantial Soviet the deliberations after a naval quarantine was backing.
Soon the United States reduced trade with chosen as the United States policy response but served as Cuba and refused to purchase sugar from Cuba Kennedy’s personal emissary to France and West above world sugar prices.
The ExComm was primarily divided into two Trade between the United States and Cuba dimincamps—the hawks and the doves3—with the hawks ished quickly.
In congovernments were not “on equal footing” and trast, Soviet imports from Cuba rose during the because Cuba was coerced into the contract by a same period from 0 to 48. percent.
Many United States government offiSoviet bloc countries accounted for 73. percent of cials and analysts feared that the Soviet Union Cuba’s trade in 1961, while just three years earlier it would request a United States withdrawal from Guantánamo had been a mere 2. percent.
Tensions culminated in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in expropriation of all United States property in Cuba (1960– from Cuba.
This proposition was never brought to 61) and the 1962 United States trade embargo.
Further exacthe negotiating table, and President Kennedy mainerbating the relationship was the 1961 Bay of Pigs tained during the ExComm deliberations that it episode.
Supported by the CIA and personally would be rejected “out of hand.” approved by President Kennedy, anti-Castro Cuban The Soviet placement of missiles in Cuba went exiles attempted to invade Cuba.
The invasion beyond actual military and strategic importance; it failed, and the United States government withdrew its air supwas a modern, post-nuclear affront to United States perceived port of the exiles after they reached the island. interests dating back to the early nineteenth cenAlthough Kennedy made a public apology and the tury.
On December 2, 1823, President James Monadministration pursued diplomatic negotiations to roe delivered an address to Congress in which he secure the release of captured exiles from Cuban asserted that the United States viewed the Western jails, the crisis contributed greatly to strained relaHemisphere as its sphere of influence and that Eurotions.
Moreover, the Kennedy administration pean expansionism in the Western Hemispher employed policies that had the potential to cause would be regarded as “dangerous to the ouster or death of Fidel Castro.
The United States would respond States also encouraged the political and diplomatic in whatever manner was necessary to protect itself. isolation of Cuba with the declaration by the OrganiIn May 1904 President Theodore Roosevelt’s zation of American States in January 1962 “Roosevelt Corollary” to the Monroe Doctrine that Cuba’s government was incompatible with the refined the United States view of European expansionism by inter-American system.
These incidents and poliasserting that the United States had the “right” to cies created an atmosphere of mistrust and misapintervene in the Western Hemisphere and Caribprehension, with the Soviets and the Cubans bean.
Thus, the United States has long considered expecting an invasion and the United States fearing the Western Hemisphere a special region of influincreased Soviet-Cuban ties and military build-ups ence.
Cuba’s importance to the United States is a result Although the Monroe Doctrine was originally diof its geography and politics. it is ninety miles from rected at Western European expansion, subsequent the tip of Florida, closer than Puerto Rico to the interpretations were directed at the Soviet Union coast of United States.
It lies on the Windward Pasand the possibility of Soviet expansion in the region. sage, the Straits of Florida, the Yucatan Channel, and The 1962 decision to put missiles in Cuba made the shipping lanes from the east coast of the United Cuba the first Soviet ally to receive ballistic missiles.
It has direct access to the strategic sea lanes The United States viewed this policy as a direct atof South and Central America, the Caribbean and tack against its public and private perceptions of rethe Western allies of the United States.
It was also the only President Kennedy intended to address the Soviet country that maintained both Soviet and United States milidecision immediately and firmly.
His administration tary installations and by which Soviet naval vessels believed that the missiles would affect global perfreely passed.
Guantánamo Bay Naval Base, coverceptions of United States strength and resolve, causing allies ing forty-five square miles, 1 percent of Cuban terriand adversaries to question United States ability and committory, trains more than 40,000 United States military ment to global alliances.
Built after the Treaty of Paris in Cuba would threaten the global power structure that ended the Spanish-American War, Guantánamo that the United States sought to maintain. was leased in perpetuity to the United States.
The The missile balance also contributed to uneasy Castro government has long maintained that the relations between the United States and the Soviet agreement for the base is illegitimate because the Union.
Three tration realized that Soviet missile superiority, which days later he asked Congress for standby authority had been a campaign issue in 1960, did not exist— to call up reserves.
On September 13 Kennedy reitthat the United States, in fact, was ahead.
In October 1961 Deputy Secretary passed a joint resolution on Cuba stating that the of Defense Roswell Gilpatric was selected to give a United States would “prevent by whatever means speech disclosing United States armed strength and revealmay be necessary, including the use of arms, the ing that the missile gap was actually reversed—the Marxist-Leninist regime in Cuba from extending, b Soviets were at a military disadvantage, not the force or the threat of force, its aggressive or subverUnited States.
The United States briefed its allies, sive activities to any part of this hemisphere.” including allies who the United States knew had Although Kennedy and his administration repeatbeen penetrated by Soviet intelligence officers, in edly declared that the United States would not order to reinforce its position. attempt additional military action against Cuba, the belligerent statements Kennedy made throughout September 1962 did not persuade the Cuban and United States POLICY RESPONSE Soviet governments that Cuba’s safety was ensured.
Kennedy questioned whether the United States mistake was The ExComm began by trying to understand why “in not saying sometime before this summer that if the missiles were deployed in Cuba.
If the United States could understand the motiwould alter the geopolitical and psychological situavations of the Soviets, it could better manage an end tion, showing the world unequivocally that the to the crisis and communicate more effectively with United States was unable to control its sphere of the opposition. influence, the Western Hemisphere.
These missiles would tell United States allies that the United States could not United States Deliberations stop Soviet influence ninety miles off the coast of Florida, in a country that had been a United States territory Dean Acheson told Charles de Gaulle that the Soviets and, for more than sixty years, a United States satellite.
The placed missiles in Cuba because they believed that perception that even the Western Hemisphere was they could get away with it.
The United States considered that even this The first hypothesis was based on the Soviet question in the minds of allies or adversaries would Union’s strong commitment to maintaining a posihave altered the global balance of power. tion in Latin America and, specifically, to supporting The third hypothesis raised the possibility that the social and political revolution in Cuba.
It was the missiles were placed in Cuba simply to be realready sending great amounts of aid to Cuba. moved.
The missiles could be used as bargaining chips to secur Soviet government saw an opportunity to defend a the Soviet borders with Turkey or traded to obtain a firm ally and decided to take it. more positive settlement of the Berlin arrangement Constant discussions were going on in Congress for the Soviets.
If the United States made military in the White House, and in the Cuban exile commuconcessions, it would diminish its prestige.
On September 4 President statements suggested that they would “trade Cuba Kennedy stated that “. . . the Castro regime will not for Berlin” support this hypothesis. be allowed to export aggressive purposes by force or The fourth hypothesis, advanced by Nitze and the threat of force.
The Soviets knew that the missile gap did cymakers immediately discounted this motivation. not exist, but they traded on the fact that the United The United States knew it did not intend to invade States believed it to be true.
The newly announced Cuba and believed it had communicated this intenUnited States military superiority made them vulnerable. tion to the Soviets and the Cubans.
The Soviets believed the United States thought change the balance of missile power.
Bases in Cuba it was in its interest to launch a first strike against for Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles and interCuba.
Although the United in Khrushchev’s eyes, the loss of Cuba would “have States would still retain a 2-to-1 military superiority been a terrible blow to Marxism-Leninism,” diminover the Soviet Union, the missiles in Cuba would ishing Soviet “stature throughout the world, but substantially change the appearance of that superiespecially in Latin America.” 13 ority.
Kennedy noted later that “appearances conThe placement of missiles in Cuba was first distribute to reality,” and the United States could ill cussed in April of 1962 between Anastas Mikoyan, afford the appearance of weakness or decreasing Soviet first deputy premier and special envoy to strength.
Cuba at the end of the Cuban missile crisis, and The fifth hypothesis assumed that the Soviets Khrushchev.
Khrushchev continued personal diswanted the United States to discover the missiles cussions with advisors throughout the spring.
By and attack the island, thereby splitting the allies and July some Presidium memfueling anti-American sentiment through the world. bers were let in on the discussions with Cuba, but Questioning this theory, however, President there was no written correspondence.
In the end they decided that the mate. answers to the question were the perceived balance The Soviets also believed that the missiles would of military power and a basic testing of Kennedy’s repair the strategic imbalance in deliverable miswill.
Deploying missiles on the United States periphery ment and demonstrate its inability to control its would establish Soviet strength, countering the U.S. sphere of influence.
During his United States advisors, the Soviets believed that the risk they 1959 United States tour, Khrushchev asked, “How would [the were taking was not great.
Rusk reminded the polintellectual, not prepared well for decision-making icymakers that McCone “suggested some weeks ago in crisis situations.”11 that one thing Mr Khrushchev may have in mind is that . . . we don’t really live under fear of his nuclear Soviet Motivations weapons to the extent, that . . . he has to live under fear of ours.
The MRBMs had an estimated ability to hit one-third of the United States, including the DisUnited States Response trict of Columbia, St.
The IRBMs stationed in Cuba On Tuesday, October 16, members of the ExComm were estimated to be able to hit southeastern Canassembled in the White House Cabinet room for ada, all of the United States, Mexico, Central Amertheir first meeting.
CIA analysts and photo reconica, Panama, and most of South America. naissance intelligence experts made a formal preThe United States policy was not one that “came out of the sentation.
After the initial presentation of the U-2 blue”; it was publicly and privately reiterated by photographs, the ExComm discussions turned to the many advisors.
It not believe that the Soviets were attempting to alter was, he said, “an effort to materially change the balthe military balance.
At the 6:30 P.M. meeting on that first mous about the United States response, they agreed that the day, he urged the president to consider the consepolitical implications of the missiles were serious quences of an air strike against Cuba, saying, “The and that their emplacement was a deliberate chalconsequences of these actions have not been lenge to United States prestige and influence.
In total there would be forty launch siles changed the global military balance, but he did pads—San Cristó bal and Sagua la Grande would believe that they had serious political ramifications, each have twelve, and Guanajay and Remedios and, consequently, the United States had to respond would each have eight. to their emplacement.
After months of reassurThe weapons transfers were accomplished in two ances against such an action, the United States phases, with the defensive weapons first and the ofwould not tolerate a Soviet action carried out in such fensive missiles and weapons later.
He said, believe that addressing Castro on this issue would “hen we said we’re not going to and then they be useful.
Approaching Castro would have afforded go ahead and do it, and then we do nothing, then . . . the Soviets advance notice.
After all might have responded defensively, thereby forcing a this is a political struggle as much as military.” 32 faster or more difficult military confrontation if he Soviet expert and newly appointed United States Ambassador had not perceived the approach to be genuine 36 to France Charles Bohlen attended the meetings on The ExComm members next discussed the alterthe first two days.
The hawks believed that dent he noted that “no one can guarantee that this the Soviet missiles had strategic as well as political can be achieved by diplomatic action—but it seems value.
Advocates Sorenson worked on composing such a letter for of military action against Cuba pointed out that miliseveral days, he concluded that it was impossible to tary action was the only option that would physically write a letter to Khrushchev “to which his reply remove the missiles.
Proponents of this alternative mainDiplomatic advances were not discounted comtained that the missiles were not defensive or placed pletely, although they were not considered without for the sake of Cuba but were, in fact, designed to other concurrent actions.
They were rejected outenhance the Soviet position and to intimidate the right as a preliminary to United States actions.
A private diplomatic approach would be this plan called for a limited military embargo of time consuming, but the administration feared the Soviet shipments to Cuba, enforced by a naval possibility that nothing would be accomplished in a blockade of the island.
Further, it was draBringing the issue to the United Nations Security Council alone matic and forceful pressure, which would be was discounted because, as a permanent member, understood38 yet, most importantly, still leave [the the Soviet Union had an automatic veto and, ironiUnited States] in control of events.” 39 cally, Soviet Ambassador Valerian I Zorin was servBoth of these alternatives constituted direct coning as the chairman of the Council. frontations with the Soviets.
The naval blockade Another alternative, which seemed especially athowever, would be somewhat less provocative as it tractive in light of the possibility of disengaging the did not entail the immediate risk of casualties.
It Soviet-Cuban alliance, was to approach Castro dicould be graduated and tightened, and, although it rectly.
The ExComm considered sending a message would be a show of force, it would not be immedithat would highlight the problems for Castro.
In addition, the United States United States saw it as “action the Soviets . . . had planned military maneuvers off the coast of threatened with attack from the Florida that could be used to cover the preparations.
The United States would point to Soviet Taylor, and General Curtis LeMay, criticized the polstatements suggesting the possibility of “bargaining” icy because the Soviets could take advantage of it.
Soviet “support and these missiles, They correctly concluded that it would not remove against concessions in Berlin, and elsewhere, and the missiles.
It could easily drag on while the world therefore . . . threatening to bargain him away.” 35 debated its legality and legitimacy.At the same time, This approach was not rejected, but it was “set the Soviets could continue their missile construcaside” for the time being as Kennedy believed this tion and build-up.
Furthermore, if the Soviets to be a U.S.-Soviet confrontation and crisis.
Since attempted to “run the blockade,” the United States the weapons were Soviet-designed, Soviet-built, would be forced into firing the first shot.
He argued that the United States had strongest advocate,” arguing that limited pressur warned the Soviet government for months against could be increased as the circumstances warranted. placing offensive weapons in Cuba.
The president “Further, it was dramatic and forceful pressure, had specifically discussed this in his public statewhich would be understood yet, most importantly, ments of September 4 and September 13, 1962.
At the first prevent “by whatever means may be necessary” ExComm meeting, the majority of advisors encourCuba from endangering United States security.
They perceived the United States Acheson stated, the Western Hemisphere had, since as threatened strategically and believed it would the Monroe Doctrine, been in the United States military and have to respond in a quick military manner that left political sphere of influence.
The doctrine unequivono room for debate; a surprise attack on Cuba would cally stated that European interference in that have removed the missiles and proved to the Soviets sphere will not be tolerated by the United States.
For and to the world that the United States stood by its Acheson, these warnings negated the “surprise word.
The United States had warned the Soviet attack” suggestion of the Pearl Harbor analogy.
For Union repeatedly against emplacement of missiles the president and the attorney general, however, in Cuba, and now the United States should respond these statements and warnings were not enough to in a forceful manner, according to advocates of the justify a surprise attack.
The joint Chiefs of Staff, Acheson, andTaylater characterized President Kennedy’s decision lor remained strong proponents of a surgical air against the attack as based on “his belief in what is strike against Cuba, while other advisors changed right and what is wrong.”47 their opinions sharply.
The final option the ExComm considered was a Advisors quickly pointed to the ramifications in general invasion of Cuba.
Deputy Secbelieved that the United States response should begin with retary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric pointed to the such extreme action, though several advisors saw it “points of vulnerability around the world,” suggestas an opportunity to “take Cuba away from Castro.” ing that “precautionary measures” might have to be This response was quickly discounted as risking a taken.
McNamara was also congive the world cause to indict United States aggression and cerned with the consequences and ramifications of interventionism for years to come. a surgical air attack, suggesting that United States forces Mindful of previous crises during which the presiaround the world must be put on alert.” 42 dent had not received complete information, PresiUnder Secretary of State George Ball was among dent Kennedy set an informal agenda for the those concerned with the costs of such a response.
ExComm meetings encouraging discussion by all On October 17, the second day of the meetings, he present regardless of rank.
Open discussion of all became the first firm opponent of an air strike. alternatives was encouraged, with advisors presentBall said that the bombing of Cuba would be in dising and updating reports, analyses, and suggestions tinct contradiction of United States traditions and history The president believed that his presence had a conRobert Kennedy agreed and became the staunchest straining effect on the discussion, arresting interacadvocate of this philosophy.
Kennedy believed that tion between less senior advisors and their the United States response must be consistent with United States valsupervisors and overwhelming the possibility for ues.
Discussion quickly centered on Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs Philips whether the immediate United States response should be a Talbot were also called to the White House in a pubblockade or an air strike lic manner as decoys.
Government officials did On the third day of the crisis, Thursday, October everything they could think of to avoid publicity.
During the meeting, which had “I know there is something going on that you don’t been planned weeks before, Gromyko told Kennedy want to talk about.
But if security is all that tight, that the Soviets would do nothing about Berlin or a maybe you’d better tell all those big wheels from German peace treaty until after the November 6 across the river to get their cars off the street.” 54 congressional elections.
He said that United States hostilities After that the limousines were left in the basement against Cuba could lead to problems between the garage Soviet Union and the United States.
The Soviet On the evening of Thursday, October 18, when Union, he continued, had given Cuba assistance for the State Department gave a dinner party for purely defensive purposes.
At that point, Kennedy Gromyko, the ExComm was divided into two clear stopped him, saying that the United States had no camps—air strike versus blockade.
At the beginning intention of invading Cuba and the Soviet Union’s the group was divided almost evenly.
McCone, Dilsupplying of arms to Cuba was having a profound lon, Taylor, Acheson, and Nitze favored a strategic air effect on the people of the United States and was a strike.
Kennedy then read blockade, but by that time he also favored an air Gromyko his statement of September 4, which strike.
Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Gilpatric, declared that Soviet placement of offensive weapThompson, Ball, and Lovett, however, believed that ons in Cuba would have serious consequences and the United States must pursue a blockade, at least that the United States would go to any length to stop before resorting to more drastic military action.
The Cuban aggression and Soviet expansionism in Latin air strike proponents suggested an advance warnAmerica.
He did not ask Gromyko directly whether ing to both the Cubans and the Soviets through conthere were offensive missiles in Cuba.
If Gromyko tacts in the Swiss government. was puzzled by the president’s actions, he did not Soviet expert Llewellyn Thompson, resuming an appear so.
Upon leaving the White House, Gromyko argument he had supported in earlier meetings, described the meeting as “useful, very useful.” 50 maintained that the missiles were placed and conAs the days wore on, the meetings and debates trolled by the Soviets.
Certain people, from government anapolicymaker in this crisis, he believed, would be lysts to reporters, began to be aware that a major futile.
Since this was a dramatic departure from prepolicy issue was under discussion, although the vious Soviet military policy (they had never before were not quite sure of its content.
The president placed missiles outside the Soviet Union), Thompordered the armed forces to stand at DefCon 2, a son argued, the plan must have originated in the stage of military preparation that is one step away Kremlin.
Furthermore, attacking the fied its position, it publicly defended the build-up as Soviet missiles meant killing Soviets, and it was part of long-planned naval activities in the Caribunlikely that Khrushchev would not respond in kind bean—Philbriglex-62.51 Arthur Sylvester, informasomewhere in the world.
At one point during Kennedy said, “can let these things go by without the deliberations W Averill Harriman, assistant secdoing something.
They can’t, after all their stateretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, was summents, permit us to take out their missiles, kill a lot moned to a private anteroom in the west wing of of Russians and then do nothing.”56 the White House and left there as a decoy to encourRobert Kennedy, continuing an argument that he age journalists to speculate about a crisis in the Far and others, including McNamara and Ball, supEast rather than in Latin America.
Instead, he suggested that ment officials were remaining in Washington when the president should begin with responses that they were scheduled to be in other places.
Troop offered the least risk of war and increase pressure if movements and mobilizations were being quesnecessary.
The blockade was a limited action that tioned, even though they were covered somewhat could be tightened or supplemented with an air by the naval exercises.
A turning point occurred scheduled campaign stops in Illinois while his adviwhen Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon sors continued their discussions, but questions were shifted his opinion away from support of an air being raised about what was going on.
What could Around 10:00P.M. the advisors left the State Debe the justification for the limited response, or “slo partment to meet with the president.
In the course of the meeting less provocative response, it was not in accord with the advisors were not able to answer all of the presiinternational law or with United States traditions.
The history dent’s questions, and their own opinions began to of foreign policy provides numerous examples of the shift again.
The president sent them back to the importance to governments of freedom of the seas.
The next Indeed, the United States had fought the War of day the advocates of the two plans split up to write 1812 to protect American access to the seas. recommendations outlining the steps each policy Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach would require.
Presidential Assistant Theodore and State Department Deputy Legal Advisor Leonard Sorenson was asked to draft a speech that would Meeker were responsible for creating a legal framejustify the blockade.
Although the the Latin American countries that could assist in the administration already believed that it was imporblockade and the military procedures that would be tant for its actions to have a legal basis, Thompson used to stop ships.
The advocates of immediate miliemphasized the importance of this point in dealing tary action were required to draw up a list of riotwith the Soviet government.
MoreState departments were entrusted with the task of over, a blockade would not require a declaration of building the legal defense for the blockade. war.
Meeker agreed that United States actions were valid on The deliberations were not over, however.
On Frithe basis of “self-defense,” but he maintained that a day, October 19, the opponents of a blockade conblockade or “defensive quarantine” 59 would be continued to raise criticisms of the plan and to argue sidered “use of force” prohibited by Article 2 of the futility of such action.
At 1:20 of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent P.M. an alert went out to Atlantic and Caribbean with the Purposes of the United Nations. bases and commands warning them against possible attacks.
High-level policymakers were canceling There are, however, exceptions to the “use of appointments and speaking engagements.
Both advisors ments exception, stated in Article 52 and Article underscored the statement in Article 2, which 52, sanctions “appropriate” actions for the mainoutlaws “use of force” that is “inconsistent with the tenance of regional peace and security.
They suggested believed that the blockade with a regional sanction that the quarantine would be “legal” in the context would provide a solid legal basis.
He also felt that of Article 2 as it supported the aim of maintaining the United States could, without the sanction, international peace.
Furthermore, within the sancdefend the blockade in view of a state’s right of self tion of the regional institution, the OAS, a “defensive defense quarantine” would not be illegal.
Sorenson began a An Organization of American States sancdraft that announced a blockade but suggested that tion, under the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocthe United States would increase the pressure of the ity, or Rio Treaty (a treaty to which Cuba is a blockade and proceed to more offensive actions if signatory), established cooperative relations and a the Soviet build-up continued. forum to deal with internal and external conflicts among the American states.
Meeker argued that this The Presidential Decision treaty would legitimize a quarantine of Cuba.
If the inviolability or the integrity of the territory or the sovereignty or political indepen2.
He taken for the common defense and for the mainsuggested that the president should consider protenance of the peace and security of the Contiposing that Cuba be demilitarized, neutralized, and nent. its territorial integrity guaranteed by the demobilization of United States forces at Guantánamo Bay Naval Base.
For the purposes of this treaty, the meaAdditionally, either as an alternative or as an accomsure on which the Organ of Consultation may panying proposal, the president should consider disagree will comprise one or more of the following: mantling the obsolete Jupiter missiles in Turkey and recall of chiefs of diplomatic missions; breaking Italy. of diplomatic relations; breaking of consular relaKennedy discounted both options.
He did not tions; partial or complete interruption of ecowant to give up Guantánamo at that time, and he nomic relations or of sea, air, postal, telephonic refused to be perceived as trading away an ally for and radiotelephonic or radiotelegraphic commuthe safety of the United States, whether the missiles nications; and the use of armed force in the Mediterranean were militarily useful or not.
Primarily, the United States could not and would not The advisors recognized that the language used to negotiate under threat.
A ter John Diefenbaker, West German Chancellor Konstraw vote revealed that the ExComm remained rad Adenauer, and British Prime Minister Harold split, with six advisors voting for a surgical strike Macmillan.
Presidential letters, sent through U.S. and eleven advocating a naval quarantine within a embassies, went to forty-three heads of state. context of international negotiations.
The president gave a final, last-minute considerThat morning the president ordered the United States misation to an air strike during a meeting with General siles stationed in Turkey to be defused.
This renWalter C Sweeney, Jr., commander-in-chief of the dered them incapable of firing without a direct Tactical Air Command, on the morning of Sunday, order by an authority.
Sweeney explained that an air attack date the responsibility of the crisis into the hands of could not be certain of destroying all the missile the executive and to prevent, to the best of the sites in Cuba.
In fact, he said, approximately ten administration’s ability, escalation through mistake, percent of the missiles would remain, necessitating misperception, or miscalculation of an unauthoa United States invasion.
The air the United States strategic position or diminish its security strike plan as outlined by the military included By the fall of 1962, only Air Force General LeMay bombing several populated areas as well as military believed that the Jupiters were “good military weapinstallations.
In May and June 1962 the bomb the missiles sites and destroy the bases.
State Department had broached the subject with the Once the president made his decision, time and Turkish government; both times the Turkish governenergy were channeled into reviewing the speeches ment refused to discuss it.
Although in August 1962 to be made and deciding on the exact presentation Bundy had pursued the subject of how to remove the president would make.
Should he state that he knew that an air strike would not necessarily the United States would continue its blockade remove all of them either, thereby forcing an escalawhether it received regional approval from the OAS tion to higher levels of military confrontation.
Once the United States went forKennedy decided against showing the enlarged ward with an attack, there would have been little photographs on the grounds that the viewer would recourse.
The quarantine bought some time. probably not be able to discern the missile sites in The president was scheduled to make a statethe photographs.
Robert Kennedy later admitted ment on Monday October 22, but the administration that the first time he looked at the photographs he was not sure it could keep the crisis from reaching had to take the photo reconnaissance analysts at the press.
Alfred Friendly of the Washington more than the clearing of a field for a farm or the Post also had a fair idea of what was going on.
Although the public would have with the request that they wait on the story until the seen later stages of construction, the president did president had gone public hours later. not want to present questionable evidence.
Kennedy also sent personal envoys to French communiqué condemning secret military preparaPresident Charles de Gaulle, Canadian Prime Ministions.
The speech discouraged The legal advisors urged policymakers to support Soviet advances in Berlin, stating that the United the United States position with the other available avenues of States would resist any hostile retaliations anyinternational legal posture.
McNamara formally approved the procedures and Later that day President Kennedy met with leadauthorized air force interceptors flying in the United ing members of Congress, many of whom had been States to carry nuclear weapons. flown back to Washington.
McCone, Rusk, and On Monday, October 22, the political and military McNamara began the briefing with a description of preparations continued.
John McCloy flew back to the intelligence reports and a report of the U.S. the United States from Europe to join the Stevenson response.
Believdirective was ordered to the Atlantic fleet, and the ing it slow and ineffective, they called for stronger air force missile crews received maximum alert action.
One hundred fifty-six Inter-Continental BalGeorgia and Senator J William Fulbright of Arkansas listic Missiles were readied for firing.
The , went so far as to call for an invabomber force was dispersed, with B-47s sent to sion. forty civilian airports and the B-52 bomber force President Kennedy later suggested that the conordered into the air.
During the following month a gressional leaders were responding as the executive significant portion of the B-52s were in the air at all advisors had at first.
In addition, the force on the ground carried a gone through the five-day period we had gone full load of fuel and bombs and was ready to take off through—in looking at the various alternatives, on fifteen minutes notice.
He planned United States response of a quarantine would conemphasized the OAS right to take collective actions tinue in any event.
Congressional support was to guard the security of the region and Article 52 of important to Kennedy, but he had already decided the UN Charter, maintaining a state’s right to make that the executive branch would formulate a regional arrangements. response without contacting Congress.
The United States did not point to Article 51 of The State Department was also preparing briefthe UN Charter protecting the right of all nations to ings.
Secretary Rusk left the meeting with Congress self-defense because that article allowed a broad for a meeting with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly interpretation of self-defense.
Dobrynin was given an advance copy of tions and pleas of self-defense had been established the president’s speech.
Information Agency:73 Kennedy concluded with a statement reaffirming the United States commitment to freedom and peace, “Our This government as promised, has maintained goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication the closest surveillance of the Soviet military of right; not peace at the expense of freedom, but build-up on the island of Cuba.
Within the past both peace and freedom, here in this hemisphere, week, unmistakable evidence has established the and, we hope, around the world.
God willing, that fact that a series of offensive missile sites is now goal will be achieved.” in preparation on that imprisoned island.
The During the president’s speech, the State Departpurpose of these bases, can be none other than ment continued addressing world opinion to gain a to provide a nuclear strike capability against the world consensus favoring or at least understanding Western Hemisphere. . . . the proposed United States actions.
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson requested that the Security Council convene t This urgent transformation of Cuba into an address the “dangerous threat to peace and security important strategic base—by the presence of of the world caused by the secret establishment in Cuba” of long-range offensive missiles.
He delivered these large, long-range and clearly offensive this request to the chairman of the Security Council, weapons of sudden mass destruction—constiSoviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin.
The United tutes an explicit threat to the peace and security States had ready a draft resolution calling for the disof all the Americas. . . . mantling of the missiles under the jurisdiction of the UN Observer Corps.
If this were done, the blockade This secret, swift and extraordinary build-up of would be called off.
Communist missiles—in an area well-known to Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American have a special and historical relationship to the Affairs Edwin Martin briefed the ambassadors of the United States and the nations of the Western OAS, while Secretary Rusk met with members of the Hemisphere, in violation of Soviet assurances, nonaligned and neutral nations.
McNamara and Ball also held briefings that evening for the correspondents of the State Department and Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be t the Pentagon.
Martin estimated that the ment of Guantánamo Bay, and a diplomatic United States would get fourteen votes—the miniapproach consisting of negotiations at the UN, mum necessary to approve the collective action through the OAS, and in bilateral discussions with under the Rio Treaty (two-thirds of the twenty-one Khrushchev.
The United States did not know if nuclear warheads The nations discussed the blockade throughout the were on the island, so the administration shaped its day.
In fact, two-thirds of ambassador, under instructions from his governthe Soviet warheads were either on the island or en ment to boycott the OAS for reasons relating to an route to it.
Thirty-six warheads for use on mediumearlier border dispute, was unable to participate in range missiles and twenty-four launchers were in the proceeding.
Deciding, however, to take a stand Cuba, as well as nine Luna short-range, nuclearon what was viewed as one of the most important tipped missiles with six mobile launchers.
Moredecisions the OAS would ever make, he abstained over, the local Soviet commander in Cuba had peron a paragraph and voted with the majority.
Urumission to fire a nuclear retaliation in response to a guay alone abstained, making the vote nineteen to U.S.-ordered invasion of the island.
At 11:56 A.M. the United States Embassy in Moscow U.S.-SOVIET NEGOTIATIONS transmitted the response by Chairman Nikit Khrushchev to President Kennedy’s public stateOn Tuesday, October 23, the UN Security Council ment:78 held its first meeting on the Cuban missile crisis United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson denounced the easures outlined in your statement represent Soviet actions in Cuba, while Soviet Ambassador serious threat to peace and the security of peoValerian Zorin accused the United States of risking ples.
The violation of Charter of United Nations, path of Soviet ambassador introduced a resolution calling violation of international norms of freedom of for condemnation of the United States for violating navigation on high seas, path of aggressive the UN Charter and increasing the likelihood of actions both against Cuba and against Soviet world war.
The Cuban ambassador also condemned Union. the United States actions, announcing that Cuba would never accept UN observers on the island.
Statement of Government of United States AmerThe United States estimated that it could depend ica cannot be evaluated in any other way than as on seven votes from its allies naked interference in domestic affairs of Cuban among the permanent members, France, Great BritRepublic, Soviet Union, and other states.
Charter ain, and China, and Venezuela, Chile, and Ireland of United Nations and international norms do not who, by rotation, were sitting on the council.
The give right to any state whatsoever to establish in Soviet bloc on the Security Council consisted of international waters control of vessels bound for Romania and the Soviet Union, which, as a permashores of the Cuban Republic. nent member, had an automatic veto.
The other alternate members during the rotation were neuIt is self-understood that we also cannot recogtral.
We will be discussing this nothing the President could tell Gromyko that matter in the Security Council.
Kennedy asked if the terms of the quarantine, the basis of which was Soviet ships were continuing on their course toward established by the vote of the Organization of Cuba.
That evening the president met with British That evening the president signed the interdiction Ambassador David Ormsby-Gore.
The gested that Kennedy should release the aerial photomaterials to be stopped included SAMs, bomber airgraphs proving the United States position.
This would help to craft, bombs, air-to-surface rockets and guided misrally public opinion behind the United States position.
McNamara, as secretary of important congressional elections on November 6.
Any ships headed The president agreed with the ambassador on this for Cuba would be interdicted.
The president point and decided to publish enlarged versions of reserved to himself the right to order each ship to be the pictures the next day. intercepted or boarded.
Again, as with the order t defuse the Turkish missiles, by completely centralizThe quarantine line was drawn at 10:00 A.M. on ing the orders the President aimed to reduce the Wednesday, October 24, by nineteen United States ships ability of government officials to take matters into operating as Task Force 136.
If the Soviet ships their own hands and unwittingly increase the levels bound for Cuba continued at their current speed, of tension. two ships would be intercepted before noon.
More The United States asked its African allies to refuse than twenty Soviet ships bound for Cuba had been landing rights to Soviet planes seeking to refuel on tracked by navy reconnaissance planes.
This was especially important for President Kennedy received a warning from Senegal and Guinea, the most practical refueling Khrushchev stating that the Soviet Union would not stops for planes en route to Cuba from the Soviet accept the United States “ultimatum:”85 Union.
Both nations disavowed the Soviet buildup in Cuba and agreed to refuse landing rights to Soviet Having posed these conditions to us with these planes. conditions, you, Mr President, have challenged In Washington, Ambassador Dobrynin met with us.
Even at that moment but advancing an ultimatum and threatening that the president asked if “there was some way we can unless we subordinate ourselves to your avoid” it.
At 10:25 A.M., Reference to the decision of the Organization of however, a report stating that the Soviet ships had American States cannot in any way substantiate stopped “dead in the water” was received.
Seven the demands now advanced by the United States. minutes later the report was confirmed.
The fourThis organization has absolutely no authority or teen ships closest to the quarantine line had stopped basis to make decisions like that of which you in the water or had turned back toward the Soviet speak of in your letter.
The president was determined to afford both Consequently, we do not recognize these decinations the time necessary to negotiate their way sions.
If the ships have orders to turn around, the principles of international law, strictly observe we want to give them every opportunity to do so. the norms regulating navigation on the high seas Get in direct touch with the Essex and tell them not and in international waters.
We observe these to do anything . . . give the Russian vessels an norms and enjoy the rights recognized by all opportunity to turn back.
You cannot find which had been tracked in the area, and then such a morality and such a law. . . . attempt to force their way through the line.
The president ordered the Soviet ships followed but not The Soviet Government considers that violation boarded.
Of course, we shall not be At 1:00 P.M. the administration released the phosimply observers of piratical actions of American tographs of Soviet bases in Cuba.
We will then be forced on our cially important in London where public opinion part to take the measure we deem necessary and was running against the United States administration.
McNamara announced that U Thant, attempting to mediate between the two the ships Gagarin and Komiles were going to reach governments, proposed the simultaneous suspenthe interdiction line within one hour.
A Soviet subsion of the quarantine and the arms shipments. marine had moved into position between the two This, he maintained, would facilitate and establish ships.
The United States Navy planned to meet the Soviets the groundwork for an immediate summit meeting with an aircraft carrier supported by anti-submarine between Khrushchev and Kennedy.
Essex would signal Khrushchev responded to the secretary general the the submarine by sonar.
Khrushchev decided to approach the United States governhas placed and is placing medium and intermediment in an unofficial manner.
Westinghouse International, to meet with him on Wednesday in the Kremlin.
In cussion, Khrushchev presented the Soviet view to a due course, Sir,you will have your answer man he viewed as an informal channel to the U.S. government.
You are in the courtroom of world “offense and defense,” he admitted what his ambasopinion right now and you can answer yes or no. sadors and official statements had been denying, You have denied that they exist and I want to namely that there were missiles and other offensive know whether I have understood you correctly. weapons in Cuba.
You will would also sink the American vessels if the United have your answer in due course.
I am prepared to wait for my answer umn in the Washington Post suggested that there until hell freezes over, if that’s your decision.
And were “three ways to get rid of the missiles already in I am also prepared to present the evidence to this Cuba:”—invasion and occupation, total blockade room. and what he termed a “face-saving agreement,” a trade of the United States missiles in Turkey for the Soviet With that Stevenson turned to a set of easels missiles in Cuba. behind him and presented the enlarged photographs of the Soviet missile sites to the Security Council.
Stevenson said, “We kno Soviet tanker, the Bucharest, was intercepted but the facts, and so do you, Sir, and we are ready to talk was allowed to pass through the quarantine line about them.
Our job here is not to score debating without a United States boarding.
The Security Council decided that since it was only a matter of time until adjourned later that day and did not meet again a ship was boarded, contingency plans would have until the crisis had ended. to be made.
State Department, and the Pentagon agreed that the Joseph P Kennedy, Jr., stopped the American-built, first ship to be boarded must not be a Soviet ship Panamanian-owned, Lebanese-registered freighter nor the ship of a Western ally, but preferably should Marcula.
It had been tracked since the previThat day at the United Nations, Ambassador ous evening.
The encounter had been specifically Zorin denied the presence of Soviet missiles in planned by the White House; it was selected as a Cuba, challenging Ambassador Stevenson to present neutral ship sailing under a Soviet charter.
Kennedy stepped up the psychological and politiYou, the Soviet Union, have sent these weapons cal pressure.
From Florida to Washington, contingency plans were made in the event that the United States was I remind you that the other day you did not deny forced to bomb and invade Cuba.
On the concow. trary, the Soviets are rapidly continuing their conThat evening the White House received a long struction of missile support and launch facilities, personal message from Khrushchev.
In it, he and serious attempts are under way to camouflage debated the offensive character of the missiles and their efforts.”89 discussed the total destruction and devastation that Early that afternoon, John Scali of ABC News was would occur in a U.S.-Soviet nuclear confrontation:91 contacted by Fomin, who urgently requested that Scali meet him for lunch.
I director of Soviet intelligence operations in the have participated in two wars and know that war United States.
The missile sites would be dismantled under UN supervision and sent back to the You are mistaken if you think that any of our Soviet Union, Castro would state publicly that he means on Cuba are offensive.
However, let us not would not accept any further offensive weapons, quarrel now.
It is apparent that I will not be able and the United States would give an unconditional to convince you of this.
Fomin various effective radiuses and various power, but urged Scali to send this proposal to the White House, using only these means.
These missiles are a observing that Zorin would also be prepared to purmeans of extermination and destruction.
He dictated a memorandum, however powerful cannot be offensive. . . . indicating what Fomin had said, and gave it to the secretary of state.
I say precisely tives of the two governments could work this attack, and not destroy, since barbarians, people matter out with U Thant and with each other.
My who have lost their sense, destroy. impression is, however, that time is very urgent.
Dobrynin was puzzled about the United States reluctance to This indicates that we are normal people, that we accept the missiles in Cuba on the same level that correctly understand and correctly evaluate the the Soviets viewed the United States missiles in Turkey.
We, however, want to live and on the ends of the rope in which you have tied do not at all want to destroy your country.
We quarrel with moment may come when this knot is tied so you, we have differences on ideological questight that even he who tied it will not have the tions.
But our view of the world consists in this, strength to untie it, and then it will be necessary that ideological questions, as well as economic to cut the knot.
We were very grieved by the fact . . . that a landing took place, that an attack on Cuba This letter arrived in four sections.
The ExComm was committed, as a result of which many debated the legitimacy of the letter and the possibilCubans perished. . . . ity of the Soviet government proceeding with its proposal.
Acheson did not believe that the Soviets If you are really concerned about the peace and would go through with the deal.
He viewed it as a welfare of your people, and this is your responsipersonal plea from Khrushchev, dispatched without bility as President, then I . . . am concerned for the consent of the Politburo.
Moreover, the preservation of world for more than the United States was willing to give, peace should be our joint concern, since if, under it also did not specify how the missiles would be contemporary conditions, war should break out, withdrawn.
The ExComm decided to regard the letit would be a war not only between reciprocal ter as an actual proposal.
The Soviet experts in the claims, but a worldwide cruel and destructive State Department were instructed to analyze it in war. conjunction with the memoranda on the Fomin discussions.
In a formal and precisely composed response, which was If assurances were given by the President and broadcast over Moscow Radio, Khrushchev government of United States that the USA would requested a quid pro quo.
If the United States wanted not participate in an attack on Cuba and would the Cuban missiles dismantled, they would have to restrain others from action of this sort, if you dismantle the missiles in Turkey:92 recall your fleet, this would immediately change everything.
You say that it worries think that he and the government of Cuba, eviyou because it lies at a distance of ninety miles dently, would declare demobilization and would across the sea from the shores of the United appeal to the people to get down to peaceful States.
Our sentilabor. . . . nels are pacing up and down and watching each other.
Do you believe that you have the right to Let us therefore show statesmanlike wisdom.
You would declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its forces and You have stationed devastating rocket weapons, will not support any sort of forces which might which you call offensive, in Turkey literally right intend to carry out any invasion of Cuba.
We agree t lem: Rudolf Anderson, the U-2 pilot who flew one of remove those weapons from Cuba which you the early flights that discovered the missiles, was regard as offensive weapons.
Earlier the ExComm had and to state this commitment in the United decided that, in the event of a United States casualty, it would Nations.
Your representatives will make a staterespond with military force against the SAM site that ment to the effect that the United States, on its had shot down its pilot.
In the message the part . . . will evacuate its analogous weapons ExComm had just received, Khrushchev specifically from Turkey. . . . stated that the missiles were in Soviet control:93 We, having assumed this commitment in order to The weapons on Cuba that you have mentioned give satisfaction and hope to the peoples of Cuba and which, as you say, alarm you, are in the and Turkey and to increase their confidence in hands of Soviet officers.
Therefore any accidental this security, will make a statement in the Secuuse of them whatsoever to the detriment of the rity Council to the effect that the Soviet GovernUnited States of America is excluded.
These ment gives a solemn pledge to respect the means are situated in Cuba at the request of the integrity of the frontiers and the sovereignty of Cuban Government and only in defensive aims.
Turkey, not to intervene in its domestic affairs, Therefore, if there is no invasion of Cuba, or not to invade Turkey, not to make available its terattack on the Soviet Union, or any of our other ritory as a place d’armes for such invasion, and allies then, of course, these means do not also will restrain those who would think of threaten anyone and will not threaten.
For they launching an aggression against Turkey either do not pursue offensive aims. from the Soviet territory or from the territory of other states bordering Turkey.
Here was a confirmation that the Soviet SAMs in Cuba were fully operational and had attacked and The United States will make the same statement killed a United States Air Force officer.
It shaken—the crisis was escalating and capable of will declare that the United States will respect the getting out of control.
The Soviet standing order, it was learned later and undertakes not to intervene in its domestic “to fire on any aircraft that flies overhead in waraffairs, not to invade and not to make its territory time,” was followed.
The local Soviet commanders available as place d’armes for the invasion of had twenty minutes to decide once the U-2 was Cuba, and also will restrain those who would spotted.
Scali cautioned Fomin that it did not The advisors debated whether Khrushchev had matter what anyone wrote without the authority of been outvoted or overruled.
Perhaps the first letter present the White House in a cautious light and to had indeed been written without the knowledge of refute Lippmann’s proposal.
Reston argued that the the other members of the Soviet government; when Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba as bargaining they learned of the letter, they unanimously vetoed chips to negotiate the removal of the United States missiles in the overtures it contained.
Llewellyn Thompson did Turkey or even the missiles defending Berlin, and not believe this to be true.
Instead, he theorized that therefore, to trade them was exactly what the Sovithe Soviets had construed Lippmann’s proposal as ets had intended. inside information from the White House.
Kennedy also instructed although Scali had denied its validity to Fomin, they Rusk to prepare a contingency plan.
Secretary Rusk suggested that addressed—the build-up must stop, the weapons the United States could accept the proposal and must be rendered inoperative, and all shipments have Turkey reject it.
In that way the Soviets would must be stopped—before negotiations and arms honor their agreement, while the missiles would control efforts could continue remain in Turkey.
In fact, the Jupiter missiles constituted Khrushchev correspondence and ignore the formal less than three percent of the United States capacity t letter.
He argued that the United States letter should accept deliver a first strike.
The president had been pursuthe Soviet proposal clearly, specifying the U.S. ing a tentative course toward removing the missiles, understanding of the proposal and thus avoiding a but no clear decision had yet been reached.
The president Rusk had informally discussed the removal of the agreed that that might be a viable alternative and missiles with a Turkish government official. sent the attorney general and Sorenson to draft the Although Turkey did not object to the United States military letter.
The success of the endeavor depended on assessment of the missiles, the domestic costs of whether Fomin was actually acting as a representaremoving the missiles so quickly would be high, and tive of his government when he met with Scali.
The Turkey preferred to wait for the stationing of Polaris United States government did not reject the Soviet offer; it submarines before removing the Jupiters.
Obsolete simply accepted a previous one:98 missiles were now hostage to a crisis resolution.
The president said, “I am not going to go to war over I have read your letter of October 26th with great worthless missiles in Turkey.
I don’t want to go to care and welcomed the statement of your desire war anyhow, but I am certainly not going to go to to seek a prompt solution to the problem.
Trading and for all weapons systems in Cuba capable of them for the Cuban missiles would make United States allies offensive use to be rendered inoperable, under and adversaries think that their doubts about the effective United Nations arrangements value of “extended deterrence” were well founded.
Alliance security would be sacrificed at the cost of Assuming this is done promptly, I have given my United States security.
The United States was in a cripermit them to work out . . . an arrangement for sis confrontation with the Soviet Union because of a permanent solution to the Cuban problem the importance of perceptions.
It could not allow the along the lines suggested in your letter of October impression to be created that it had traded an ally or 26th.
You would agree to remove these weapons sysbegan to fear that the initiation of an air strike tems from Cuba under appropriate United would be a likely response.
The president decided Nations observation and supervision; and that the United States would agree to the trade, but undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the he preferred that it be a private agreement between further introduction of such weapons systems the two governments negotiated by Robert Kennedy into Cuba.
President Kennedy had been anxand continuation of these commitments— ious to remove those missiles from Turkey and to remove promptly the quarantine measures Italy for a long period of time . . . and it was our now in effect and to give assurances judgement that, within a short time after the criagainst an invasion of Cuba.
I am confident sis was over, those missiles would be gone. that other nations of the Western Hemispher would be prepared to do likewise.
The conhe demanded an answer the next day tinuation of this threat, or a prolonging of this During discussions years later,McNamara said discussion concerning Cuba by linking these problems to the broader questions of European it was important to frame as it and world security, would surely lead to an intenwas framed, because . . . sification of the Cuban crisis and a grave risk to dealing not with a military problem, but with a the peace of the world.
And if had not framed the we can quickly agree along the lines outlined in withdrawal from Turkey as did, [the United this letter and in your letter of October 26th.
States] would have created another political probThe letter was transmitted and received by the lem. would have divided the Alliance.
Soviets would have faced a weakened Alliance, Robert Kennedy took a copy of the text to Dobryand this would have been a danger to the Allinin.
He told Dobrynin that the United States knew ance.5 that the work in Cuba had been continuing at increasing rates.
Furthermore, the death of Rudolf The president refused to approve a military escaAnderson had put the crisis on another level.
The president did, however, order that the United States was ready to begin military twenty-four troop-carrier squadrons of the United States Air action shortly.
It was estimated that a Dobrynin said he believed that the Soviet leader60,000–100,000 person ground force would be necship was committed to its course of action.
The army and marine corps however, question Kennedy about the Turkey-Cuba units were already in Florida or in the Panama Canal trade.
The United States military was prepared for any contingency. there could be no quid pro quo or any arrangeThe United States government waited impatiently and ment made under this kind of threat or prespessimistically for the Soviet response.
On Sunday afternoon tling of these means. . . . at 5:00P.M. , however, Khrushchev’s response was broadcast over Moscow radio and The letter also discussed the dangers of the delivered to the United States Embassy there:107 nuclear age and the possibility for better relations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
Khrushche I have received your message of October urged caution in future military relations, stressing 27,1962. 1 express my satisfaction and appreciathe necessity to avoid provoking a fatal step. tion for the sense of proportion you have disDobrynin called Robert Kennedy to arrange an played, and for realization of the responsibility immediate meeting.
He said that the Soviet governwhich now devolves on you for the preservation ment had agreed to the United States proposal.
The missiles of peace throughout the world. . . . would be dismantled and shipped back to the Soviet Union.
Dobrynin also conveyed that Khrushche In order to eliminate as rapidly as possible the wanted to send his best wishes to the president and conflict which endangers the cause of peace, t the attorney general. give an assurance to all people who crave peace, The president ordered the overflights of Cuba disand to reassure the American people, all of continued and instructed the navy not to halt an whom, I am sure, also want peace, as do the peoships.
He also arranged for a watch of the Cuban ple of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Government, exile groups to forestall any behavior that might in addition to earlier instructions on the disconendanger the agreement.
Kennedy’s immediate tinuance of further work on the weapons conresponse was released to reporters and read over structions sites, has given a new order to Voice of America:108 dismantle the weapons, which you describe as offensive, and to crate and return them to the I welcome Chairman Khrushchev’s statesmanSoviet Union. . . . like decision to stop building bases in Cuba, dismantling offensive weapons and returning them Cuba and the Cuban people were constantly to the Soviet Union under United Nations verificaunder the continuous threat of an invasion of tion.
I should like to say clearly once more bution to peace. that we could not remain indifferent to this.
The Soviet Government decided to render assistance We shall be in touch with the Secretary General of to Cuba with means of defense against aggresthe United Nations with respect to reciprocal sion—only meant for defensive purposes.
It is my earnest hope that the governments of the world can, with the solution of the Cuban crisis, I regard with respect and trust the statement you turn their urgent attention to the compelling made in your message of October 27,1962, that necessity for ending the arms race and reducing no attack would be no attack, no invasion of world tensions.
This applies to the military conCuba, and not only on the part of the United frontation between the Warsaw Pact and NAT States, but also on the part of other nations of the countries as well as to other situations in other Western Hemisphere, as you said in your same parts of the world where tensions lead to the message.
Then the motives which induced us t wasteful diversion of resources to weapons of render assistance of such a kind to Cuba disapwar. pear President Kennedy insisted that the United States governIt is for this reason that we instructed our officers ment resist any attempt to present the resolution as —these means as I had already informed you eara United States victory.
He did not want to raise the stakes the United Nations, as your message says, so that for the Soviets or risk a change in the resolution the United States will be able to remove the quaragreement.
In a letter to Khrushchev on December antine measure now in effect. . . . 14, however, President Kennedy reiterated his insistence that United States “assurances against an invasion of Mr Chairman, both of our countries have great Cuba” were contingent on assurances that offensiv unfinished tasks and I know that your people as weapons be removed from Cuba and not reintrowell as those of the United Sates can ask for nothduced, and that Cuba itself commit no aggressiv ing better than to pursue them free from the fear acts against its neighbors.
Modern science and technology have government were not pleased with what they pergiven us the possibility of making labor fruitful ceived as a Soviet betrayal.
Khrushchev later admitbeyond anything that could have been dreamed ted that Castro was not informed of the U.S.-Soviet of a few decades ago deal regarding the missiles in Turkey.Castro issued a statement demanding that the United States end the I agree with you that we must devote urgent “blockade,” economic pressure on Cuba, harassattention to the problem of disarmament, as it ment by Cuban exiles, overflights of Cuban terrirelates to the whole world and also to critical tory, and raids by exile commando groups and areas.
Perhaps now,as we step back from danger, withdraw from Guantánamo Bay Naval Base.
Furwe can together make real progress in this vital thermore, he refused to allow on-site UN supervision field.
But we should also work hard to see if wider measures of disarmaI consider my letter to you of October twenty-sevment can be agreed and put into operation at an enth and your reply of today as firm undertakings early date.
The United States government will be prepared on the part of both our governments which to discuss these questions urgently, and in a conshould be promptly carried out.
NOTES The author acknowledges the guidance of Professor Roger John F Kennedy Library, Boston.
The advisory group that served Kennedy throughings, 11:50 A.M.–12:57 P.M.), 14. out the crisis was known later as the Executive Commit8.
McGeorge Bundy Proceedings of the Cambridge 123; see also Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers Conference on the Cuban Missile Crisi , CSIA Working , 1970, 493.
The Political Graham T Allison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the History of the Nuclear Weapon , 47; 1988), 418.
The Swiss government seemed a likely choice for Times , 545. such a task as it houses, even to this day, the United States Interest 25.
Abel, The Missile Crisi , 60. embassy, dealing with U.S.-Cuban relations on a limited 27.
Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 45. ence and International Affairs, Kennedy School of Govern59.
Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 24. be interpreted as a violation of international law.
The purpose of the exercise was to liberate a mythchairmanship. ical Republic of Vieques from a dictator named Ortsac 75.
Ibid., 126. aircraft carriers, twenty destroyers, and fifteen troop carri77.
The exercise was scheduled to take place on the Five permanent members—the five Allies of World War II, island of Vieques off the coast of Puerto Rico.
Cordier was chosen because he had been a deputy and ten rotating members are elected by the permanent to U Thant, and Rusk believed that he could be discreet. members for two-year terms based on geographic distri98.
Ibid., 72. gests that the attorney general warned that if the Soviets 88.
Dobrynin replied that the “Soviet Missile Crisis, 176. government would not publish the correspondence.
Informal translation by the American Embassy in that your government never intended to put missiles in Moscow.
The United States embargoes all exports to Cuba except nonsubsidized foodstuffs, medicines, and medical Aug.: The Cuban government nationalizes the property supplies. of companies owned or partially owned by the United States.
The United States maintains that Soviet-bloc miligrounds that the United States reduction of the Cuban sugar quota tary aid to Cuba has totaled more than 28,000 tons since was, in effect, “economic aggression” against the Cuban the revolution. government.61 Aug.: The United States releases an analysis of the Jan.: Cuba demands that the United States reduce its nationalization, concluding that more than $1 billion was embassy personnel to a total of eleven within two days. expropriated.
The United States and Cuba end diplomatic relaSept.: The Cuban government expropriates U.S.-opertions; their affairs are turned over to the Swiss and Czechated banks in Cuba.
The United States protests this action. oslovakian embassies, respectively.
U.S.-Cuban agreement regarding Guantánamo Bay Naval Capehart’s proposal for a United States invasion of Cuba.
The Kennedy administration asserts that the Mar.: President John F Kennedy reduces Cuban sugar Soviet military aid to Cuba is defensive.
President Kennedy says that United States armed forces Sept.: A Soviet-Cuban joint communiqué announces will not intervene in Cuba to overthrow Castro.
Castro mobilizes the Cuban armed forces against Sept.: Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin promises a United States invasion.
Miro Cardona, a Cuban exile leader, announces a Asia before the November 1962 election.
Dobrynin also says that the Soviet Union will not give a third power the seaborne invasion of Cuba.
The unsuccessful invasion, ability to start a nuclear war that would involve the Soviet which involves Cuban exiles supported and trained by the Union.
President Kennedy says at a press conference that United States, becomes known as the Bay of Pigs Invathe Soviet aid to Cuba is defensive, but he maintains that sion.
The United States denies involvement in the invasion the United States will do anything to stop Cuban aggresbut expresses sympathy for the rebels.
The Cuban governsion and Soviet expansion in Latin America. ment captures 1,113 rebels.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk tells nineteen Latin American allies that the United States will work to stop the Sept.: The United States Congress prohibits United States aid to any counexpansion of communism in Latin America. try providing aid to Cuba unless the president determines that such assistance is in the national interest.
Castro announces that he is “a Marxist-Leninist and policy toward Cuba.
President Kennedy announces an embargo on shipSept.: The Soviet Union repeats the warning that Cuba ments of all goods except medical supplies to Cuba. will be protected by Soviet military forces.
The United States estimates that Cuba has received Sept.: President Kennedy repeats his warning against more than $110 million in military and technical services Cuban expansion and offensive weapons in Cuba but says from the Soviet Union. that the weapons in Cuba are defensive.
On orders contained in a National Security In a meeting with Under Secretary of State Chester Council memorandum, representatives of the State Bowles, Dobrynin denies the possibility of offensive misDepartment attempt to discuss withdrawing the United States Jupisiles in Cuba. ter missiles deployed in Turkey.
Senator Barry Goldwater attacks the “do nothing” policy of the Kennedy administration.
Senators Goldwater, Strom Thurmond, and John Tower, and former Vice President Richard Nixon call Aug.62: The National Security Council issues a second for a United States blockade of Cuba. action memorandum ordering the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Director John McCone does not agree, but he is away on A Cuban exile group shells beach-front buildings in his honeymoon and is only able to cable his disapproval.
Congress passes a resolution authorizing the use Congress and his cabinet to discuss the issues. of force if necessary to stop Cuban expansion in Latin Secretary of State Dean Rusk meets with Ambassador America.
Alpha 66, a Cuban exile group, claims responsibilKennedy’s speech. ity for a raid in Cuba on October 7.
Reconnaissance photographs taken from U-2 United States situation, announcing a “defensive quarantine” of flights over Cuba disclose long-range missile sites in Cuba.
Cuba, and showing photographs of the Cuban missile CIA Directors Lieutenant General Marshall S Carter and sites.
Ray Cline are notified; they, in turn, notify the others in any threat or to any action that endangers its citizens. the chain of command.
President Kennedy is informed of the missiles and alert throughout the world. forms an advisory board, inviting officials from his cabiOct.: The United States submits a resolution to the OAS net, the Justice Department, the CIA, the Department of citing Article 6 of the Rio Treaty of 1947 authorizing memDefense, and the State Department and other experts t ber states to proclaim and enforce a blockade individually meet in the Cabinet Room.
All participants are instructed or collectively if the “integrity or sovereignty or political to work on solutions in absolute secrecy.
The OAS unaniUnited States Ambassador Foy Kohler meet to discuss a wide range mously approves the United States blockade. of topics, including Cuba and Berlin.
Ambassador Dobrynin meets with Robert Kennedy to disThe Castro government asserts that United States planes were flycuss the events.
Dobrynin repeats the Soviet pledge not to ing “provocatively and repeatedly” over Cuban territorial place missiles in Cuba and denies the existence of miswaters. siles in Cuba.
Under Secretary of State George Ball presents the The ExComm agrees that, in the event of a U-2 casualty, first sustained argument against an air strike on Cuba. the United States will hit a surface-to-air missile site in Oct.–20: The president’s advisory group, now called the Cuba.
The CIA presents evidence to the ExComm that four Secretary McNamara, supported by lawyers from the jusMRBM sites are “fully operational,” the rest have “emertice and State departments, presents a case for a blockgency capability,” and technicians are continuing to ade.
General Maxwell Taylor presents the option of improve the sites. immediate military action in the form of an air strike.
Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko meets with McNamara orders the naval quarantine in effect.
Gromyko repeats the Soviet denials Castro addresses the Cuban people, telling them that the regarding offensive missiles in Cuba.
He mobilizes the Cuban milibut he reads Gromyko the text of his press release of Septary. tember 4.
Two Soviet ships, which would be intercepted ing that the transfer occurred at the beginning of October. before noon stop dead in the water.
U Thant, acting secretary general of the United Nations, Sweeney, Jr., commander in chief of the Tactical Air Comproposes that President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev mand; Sweeney says they could not be certain an attack suspend all action while a summit is convened to discuss would eliminate all missile sites.
Under Secretary Ball briefs the representatives of he does agree to maintain communications channels. forty-six NATO, SEATO, CENTO, and nonaligned nation Oct.: Ambassador Adlai Stevenson challenges Soviet allies.
Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American Ambassador Valerian Zorin in the Security Council to den Affairs Edward Martin briefs OAS allies. the Cuban missiles.
Zorin refuses to respond, and StevenThe United States formally requests a meeting of the UN son produces the reconnaissance photographs; the SecuSecurity Council. rity Council adjourns.
Khrushchev says that he will temporarily keep Robert Kennedy, meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin, Soviet ships away from the quarantine line. asserts that the United States will feel forced to go to war In his Washington Post column, Walter Lippmann suggests if the Soviets do not withdraw the missiles immediately. a U.S.-Soviet missile trade—the Jupiter missiles in Turkey He adds that the missiles in Turkey will be withdrawn for the Soviet missiles in Cuba. within a few months.
The American-built, Panamanian-owned, LebaOct.: Premier Khrushchev announces the withdrawal of nese-registered, and Soviet-chartered freighter Marcula is the Soviet missiles. stopped and boarded by the United States Navy.
The United States receives a letter from the Soviet November 20: President Kennedy announces that the U.S. government offering to trade the missiles in Cuba for the naval quarantine of Cuba has been lifted. missiles in Turkey.
ExComm members, especially military representatives, 1963 begin to encourage the air strike option.
Following a Cuban decision to block international President Kennedy refuses to bargain “under fire” with verification of the missile withdrawal, the United States the missiles.
The United States withdraws its Jupiter missiles United States nor its allies will invade Cuba if the missiles from Turkey.
An Agenda for Avoiding Garthoff, Raymond L Reflections on the Cuban Missile CriNuclear War.
Westview Bonsal, Philip W Cuba, Castro and the United States Pittsburgh: UniPress, 1983. versity of Pittsburgh Press, 1971.
Soviet Reactions to Certain United States Courses of Action in Merrill Publishing Co., 1971.
Appendix 2, 87th Congress, 1st sesLittle, Brown and Company, 1990. sion, March-July 1961.
Selected DocuThe White House Presidential Advisory Committee, 10 ments and Chronology.
John F Kennedy Library, National Archives of the Miroff, Bruce Pragmatic Illusions.
Parkinson F Latin America, the Cold War and the World John F Kennedy Library, National Archives of the Powers, 1945–1973.
Westview Press and Carnegie Endowment for InternaWohlstetter, Albert, and Roberta Wohlstetter.
