Subscribe to Download → Download free samples Resource Examples Click any of the example images below to view a larger version.
Following several exchanges, Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed to compromise.
Also known as the Missile Scare, the confrontation happened from 16 October to 29 October 1962.
Despite the short time frame, the escalation of tension between the United States and USSR was considered to be the closest event towards another world war.
At the time of the crisis, Cuba was ruled by Fidel Castro, whose governance was supported by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
Post war crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion Following the end of the Second World War, the United States and its allies in Europe had grown concerned with the expansion of Communism.
In Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union had expanded its sphere of influence.
Meanwhile, China was under a civil war, and French Indochina was in chaos.
After a series of corrupt presidents and uprisings since Cuba’s independence in 1902, Fidel Castro led the attacks against the government on 26 July 1953.
The revolution was completed on 1 July 1959, when Fulgencio Batista fled the country and was overthrown.
As Batista’s regime grew more repressive, support from the United States started to waver.
The United States had stopped sending him weapons and he was finding it hard to equip his army.
Following the successful coup of Castro against Batista, the US, under President Dwight Eisenhower, began to allocate additional funds to the Central Intelligence Agency for the disposal of Castro.
The United States had planned to out Castro using Cuban exiles in Miami, Florida.
By the 1960s, tensions between the United States and Cuba gradually escalated due to Castro’s nationalisation policies and counterrevolutionary bombing raids.
This resulted to the United States cutting off its diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961.
Meanwhile, Premier Nikita Khrushchev began to solidify Soviet-Cuban relations.
Composed of 1,400 Cuban exiles, the brigade was divided into five infantry battalions and one paratrooper battalion.
On 17 April 1961, newly elected United States President John F Kennedy launched Operation Mongoose, also known as the Bay of Pigs invasion.
As a result of the failed invasion, Castro’s rule over Cuba was solidified.
Post war crisis and JFK’s response to crisis in Berlin From 4 June until 9 November 1961, the Berlin Crisis ensued between Soviet-controlled East Germany and Allied-occupied West Germany.
Khrushchev released the Berlin Ultimatum which demanded the withdrawal of Allied armed forces from Berlin.
The crisis culminated the building of the Berlin Wall which physically divided East and West Berlin.
On 13 August 1961, the Soviet-supported East Germany began the construction of the Berlin Wall.
The Soviet Premier viewed him as young and intellectual, but too weak to decide in a situation of crisis.
According to United States intelligence, the Soviets produced about 75 ICBMs by October 1962.
For the total number of warheads, the United States had 27,000, while the Soviets had around 3,600.
Moreover, the United States was also leading in terms of missile defensive capabilities, naval, and air power.
However, the Soviets had considerable advantage in conventional ground forces including field guns and tanks.
Soviet Missiles in Cuba Following the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the United States had been deploying U-2 surveillance over Cuba.
In September 1962, analysts from the Defense Intelligence Agency observed surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba arranged in a Soviet pattern.
On 9 October 1962, United States reconnaissance missions over Cuba resumed.
The report was strengthened by the CIA and MI6’s double agent to GRU, Oleg Penkovsky.
The following day, McGeorge Bundy, National Security Advisor of the United States met President Kennedy and reported the U-2 photographs.
The EXCOMM was composed of nine members of the National Security Council and other five advisers.
On the same day, Kennedy notified his brother and United States Attorney General, Robert Kennedy, about the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
In response, Robert Kennedy contacted Soviet Ambassador to the US, Anatoly Dobrynin.
As instructed by Khrushchev, Dobrynin responded that the missiles were purely defensive in nature.
Khrushchev also assured the Kennedy administration that the Soviets had no intention of disrupting the US-USSR relations.
Do nothing Through diplomacy, ask the Soviets to remove the missiles Offer Castro to split with the USSR, or invade Cuba Invasion of Cuba Air strike the missile sites Impose a quarantine to Cuba in order to block them having any more Soviet missiles The Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed in the full scale invasion of Cuba and overthrowing Castro.
He assumed that attacking Cuba through an airstrike would give the Soviets a green signal to invade Berlin.
On 18 October, JFK met Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, who reiterated that the missiles had no offensive purpose.
The following day, 19 October, U-2 spies confirmed four operational sites in Cuba.
United States Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara supported the naval quarantine.
Instead of using the term ‘blockade’, the Kennedy administration used ‘quarantine’ to not impose an act of war.
Before Kennedy’s speech, United States delegations met the leaders of Canada, United Kingdom, West Germany, and France.
Before his televised speech, Kennedy called former president Eisenhower.
At exactly 7 pm, Kennedy addressed the American public about the discovery of missiles in Cuba and the United States response.
His speech placed the United States under DEFCON 3 or defence readiness condition.
USS Newport News served as the flagship of the quarantine, supported by USS Leary.
On 23 October, the United States Ambassador in Turkey, George Wildman Ball informed Turkey of the possible trade off of nearly-obsolete United States missiles in Italy and turkey in replacement of Soviet withdrawal from Cuba.
On 25 October, Castro reiterated that all its weapons were defensive and that Cuba had the right to self-defense.
On the same day, the People’s Daily of the PRC declared that they support the Cuban people.
In West Germany, newspapers revealed that they feared Soviet retaliation in Berlin.
On the same day, 25 October, an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council was conducted under the request of United States Ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson.
Also in the morning of 25 October, Soviet tanker Bucharest crossed the quarantine border to Cuba.
USS Essex and USS Gearing did not stop the tanker after confirming the absence of military material.
Throughout the quarantine, the United States intercepted 14 ships presumably carrying weapons.
On 26 October, the United States passed a massage to the Brazilian government to inform Castro that there would be no invasion if the missiles were removed.
Castro and Khrushchev in 1960 The following day, the CIA reported that four missile sites at San Cristobal and two missile sites at Sagua la Grande were operational.
The Soviet would remove its missiles from Cuba, if the United States would remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey.
On the morning of 27 October United States time, a U-2F piloted by Major Rudolf Anderson was shot down by a SA-2 surface-to-air missile launched from Cuba.
Later on, the Soviets claimed that the act was an isolated decision of the Cuban military.
After a series of negotiations, JFK was almost persuaded to take Khrushchev’s proposal.
Despite the opposition of the EXCOMM and repeated plea of the Turkish government, JFK drafted a compromised letter.
The letter included the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba under the supervision of the US, removal of United States quarantine measures, and non-invasion of Cuba.
Without involving the Politburo, Khrushchev drafted an acceptance letter and had it delivered over Radio Moscow.
After deliberation between the United States and USSR governments, United States missiles in Turkey and southern Italy were removed.
Meanwhile, the Soviet broadcast announced the dismantling of missiles from Cuba.
Through aerial reconnaissance, the dismantling of missiles was observed by the United States government.
On 20 November 1962, the United States announced the end of the quarantine.
At that time, the United States removal of Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey was not made public.
As a result, many Soviets were under the impression that Khrushchev had lost the conflict.
We provide high-quality teaching and revision materials for UK and international history curriculum.
