Paul Antonio, Russel Ikin Picture Researcher Sam Atkinson, Tom Broda, Kim Bryan, Mary Lindsay, Ferdie McDonald, Sue Nicholson, Paula Regan, Nigel Ritchie, Carey Scott, Giles Sparrow, Steve Setford, Alison Sturgeon, Claire Tennant-Scull, Miezan Van Zyl, Jo Weeks Editorial Assistants Tamlyn Calitz, Manisha Thakkar United States Editor Christine Heilman Indexers Indexing Specialists Ltd.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
Color reproduction by Media Development Printing Ltd., UK Printed and bound in Singapore by Star Standard PTE Ltd.
Simon Adams, Lindsay Allen, Robin Archer, Debbie Brunton, Jack Challoner, Nick McCarty, Thomas Cussans, Erich DeWald, Brian Fagan, Emma Flatt, Abbie Gometz, Reg Grant, Alwyn Harrison, lan Harrison, James Harrison, Michael Jordan, Ann Kay, Paul Kriwaczek, Keith Laidler, Siobhan LambertHurley, Sarah Lynch, Margaret Mulvihill, Liz Mylod, Owen Miller, Sally Regan, Nigel Ritchie, J A.G Roberts, Natalie Sirett, Giles Sparrow, Paul Sturtevant, Jenny Vaughan, Philip Wilkinson.
Angus Lockyer, Department of History SOAS, UK; How We Know Dr. lain Morley and Dr.
MYA— 5000 BCE 12 Introduction and Timeline 14 Our Remote Ancestors 16 The human family tree from our earliest relatives to the dominance of Homo sapiens.
The Art of Communication 20 The emergence of speech, language, and artistic ability in early humans.
The Ice Age 22 Climate changes that began about 1. million years ago and how they affected humans.
Out of Africa 24 The migrations from Africa that resulted in human colonization of Earth.
Hunters and Gatherers 50 The prehistoric way of life—foraging and hunting for food.
The Spirit World 52 Early rituals and beliefs in the afterlife. ll EARLY SOCIETIES 54 First Harvest 56 The development of societies based on agriculture and the domestication of animals.
Village Life 58 The cultivation of domestic crops and livestock brought about the first settled communities.
Rites and Rituals 40 Unraveling the mysteries of megalithic structures such as Stonehenge.
Precious Metal 42 From copperworking to the Bronze Age, the impact of the discovery of metalworking.
Town Planning 44 The development of increasingly complex and expanding communities.
The Cradle of Civilization 54 The rise of complex societies between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in Mesopotamia.
The Divine Pharaohs 56 Egypt's Old Kingdom, which flourished on the banks of the Nile River, over 2000 years BCE, and saw the construction of the pyramids.
Mysteries of the Indus 58 The cities and civilization that developed in the Indian subcontinent's Indus Valley.
The Writing on the Wall 62 The independent development of writing systems throughout the world, including cuneiform and hieroglyphs.
Egypt in Order and Chaos 64 The rise and fall of ancient Egypt from the order of the Middle and New Kingdoms to the chaotic Intermediate Periods.
E RAMESES Il 66 The Realm of Osiris 68 The cult of the god Osiris, and the extensive rituals surrounding death and the afterlife in ancient Egypt. ll EGYPTIAN ARTIFACTS 70 Building for Eternity 72 The architecture of ancient empires, including the monumental tombs of ancient Egypt and the ziggurats of Mesopotamia.
People of the Jaguar 74 The first great civilizations of Mesoamerica and South America—the Olmecs and the Chavins.
Europe’s First Civilization 76 The Minoans, who flourished on the Mediterranean island of Crete during the Bronze Age.
Bronze Age Collapse 78 The diplomatic and trading community of civilizations that existed in the Middle East, and the mysterious collapse of the Bronze Age system.
Conquering Sea and Desert 82 The complex network of trade routes that developed over the Mediterranean Sea and across the deserts of Arabia and Africa.
The Persian Empire 92 The Achaemenid empire of Persia, the extent of which was on an unprecedented scale, stretching across Asia to the Mediterranean.
The Greek City-States 94 The great city-states of ancient Greece, including Athens, Sparta, and Corinth. ll ALEXANDER THE GREAT 96 The Greeks in Asia 98 The aftermath of Alexander the Great's conquests in the Middle East and Asia, and the cultures that adopted Greek ideas.
The Unification of China The ""Warring States"" period, which gave rise to the Qin state.
The Centralized State Han Dynasty China and the development of its highly efficient civil service.
South of the Sahara 18 The trading centers and empires of Africa, including Great Zimbabwe, Songhay, and Mali.
B ELIZABETH | The 30 Years War The most devastating and costly war the world had yet seen.
E STALINGRAD Total War War in the Atlantic, North Africa, and the turning tide against Nazi Germany.
End of the Colonial Era The assertion of independent rule by the former colonies in Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia.
E BERLIN WALL The Sixties Sexual equality, radical politics, and pop music—the decade that changed attitudes.
As a result, I hated it, and never saw the connections between the various strands of the subject.
I now realize that history is important and that we can all learn from the triumphs—and mistakes—of our ancestors.
Both utterly fascinating and hugely informative, History is a reference book that teases out the sparks of wars and revolutions, and uncovers the deep roots of great civilizations.
It brings the subject to life, painting broad pictures of history’s great sweep, aiming to excite and enthuse the reader by focusing on the most interesting, exciting, and dynamic people, events, and ideas of the past.
The photographs, maps, and graphics throughout History are spectacular, compelling you to dip in and discover what each page will reveal.
This image shows some of the ancient standing stones at Callanish, Scotland, where 20 stone circles jut out from the bare, peaty landscape.
The primary purpose of these stones, which have weathered through 4,000 years of human history, seems to have been to mark a curious lunar event that happens only once every 18.61 years—those early astronomers must have been persistent.
One of the joys of this book is that most subjects, however vast in scale, are presented within self-contained spreads.
Some describe hundreds of years of ancient Egyptian civilization, or momentous periods of upheaval like the religious Reformation in 17th-century Europe or the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century.
Others take as their theme much shorter periods of history, such as the English Civil War or the Russian Revolution.
There are also spreads devoted to “Decisive Moments”, key events that proved to be historical turning points, for example the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, which triggered World War I, or the 1755 Lisbon earthquake, which shook Europe to its very foundations.
A key strand in the book focuses on the ideas that have changed the world, exploring concepts such as democracy, evolution, and globalization.
It also features biographies of some of history’s most important and influential individuals from Alexander the Great to Adolf Hitler.
And, as an enthusiast of science and technology, I am delighted to see coverage of the crucial innovations, inventions, scientific discoveries, and theories that have had an impact on the human story, from metalworking to the internet, and DNA to global warming.
MYA—5000 BCE Evidence of the earliest hominins, the ancestors of modern humans, has been found in Central and East Africa, and dates back millions of years.
Discoveries of early human remains reveal the remarkable ability to adapt to Earth’s changing environment that has been so significant in the evolution of our species.
MYA Emergence of an early ancestor of modern humans, Ardipithecus ramidus, in Ethiopia.
A Homo sapiens skull 30,000 va 150,000 YA Emergence of first Homo sapiens, Africa; subsequently coexists with Homo erectus in Asia and Homo neanderthalensis in Europe and Middle East. b Neanderthal skull 30,000 ya Cro-Magnon cave art and decorated artifacts in Western and Central Europe.
Mammoth-bone v house -a 20,000 YA 10,000 scc 10,000 BCE Rising temperatures, retreating ice sheets, rising sea levels.
Evidence of early sheep and goat 1 domestication in | northern Mesopotamia.
Ice Age populations live by hunting and gathering, building shelters from available resources.
Jomon pottery p ORIGINS Measured against the estimated 4.5-billion-year age of Earth itself, the Neanderthals.
By about 24,000 years ago, Homo sapiens, socially humans—anatomically modern humans in particular—evolved remarkably more sophisticated, had become the sole human species.
Modern man—Homo sapiens—appeared only about 150,000 in the Middle East, about 6,000 years ago, settled and increasingly years ago, rapidly migrating from African homelands to join other human complex societies emerged.
With them came the first cities and the first species—Homo erectus in Asia and, across Europe and the Middle East, states.
It was the birth of civilization as we know it today. 8000 scc 6000 scc 5000 BCE 4000 sce 4 Obsidian Li SH < b J | $T 4000 BCE 73 ao heme | | i | | First use of plow in Mesopotamia.
I 1 6000 BCE Early town cultures, such as the Halafian in southwest Asia, flourish.
B ncs *« warka vase, Uruk ih Gold from Varna A 5500 BCE World's earliest irrigation system, Mesopotamia.
W Domesticated cattle Nekhen ivory > 5500-4500 BCE 4500 BCE Linearbandkeramik Js Introduction of ~ 4 farming culture J irrigation techniques flourishes, Central E in Indus valley.
Stone circles and rows of standing stones built in north and west Europe.
Halaf figurine > OUR REMOTE ANCESTORS Ka BEFORE ""iss No one knows when human beings first appeared.
THE HUMAN FAMILY Humans are classified as primates, a group that includes apes and monkeys.
Our closest living relatives are chimpanzees, with whom we share almost 99 percent of our genes, but this tiny genetic difference is what makes us so far SM n removed from apes.
CHIMPANZEE OUR ROOTS Sahelanthropus tchadensis 18 >>, found at the southern edge of the Sahara in Chad, and dating to between 6 and 7 mya, may be the earliest human ancestor.
Although very early, this skull seems more advanced in some ways than later species and it is unclear how it fits into the evolutionary story.
Other very early ancestors about whom very little is known include Orrorin tugenensis and Ardipithecus ramidus.
THE MOLECULAR CLOCK Evolutionary biologists have developed a way of dating the evolution of more than 60 primate species.
The clock starts with the last common ancestor of all primates about 63 mya, and dates the split between chimpanzees and humans to about 6. mya.
The “cradle of humankind” Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania is the most important prehistoric site in the world, where many finds that have furthered our knowledge of early human evolution have been made.
The oldest artifacts found at the gorge— stone flakes and tools—are 2 million years old.
Possibly around 1. million years ago and certainly by 500,000 years ago—the date is uncertain—early humans tamed fire, perhaps by taking branches from a blazing tree caused by a lightning strike.
The control of fire enabled humans to live in cold environments, and in deep caves, and provided protection against predators.
The use of fire to cook also led to a greater variety of foods in the diet.
STEPHEN JAY GOULD, EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGIST, 1992 Our Remote Ancestors The evolution of modern humans extends back millions of years.
It is not easy to trace, as our evidence comes from scattered, unrelated finds, making it difficult to form a cohesive picture. n the 19th century, Charles Darwin, the father of the theory of evolution by natural selection , identified tropical Africa as the cradle of humankind.
A wide range of fossil finds provide evidence of a remarkable diversity of early hominins that flourished in this area.
HOMININ The term used to refer to all early humans and their ancestors, including Homo erectus, Homo ergaster, Homo neanderthalis and Homo sapiens.
Also includes all the Australopithecines, Paranthropus boisei, and Ardipithecus.
Earliest ancestors One of the earliest known human ancestors is a small forest-living primate named Ardipithecus anamensis, which flourished in Afar, Ethiopia, some 4. mya.
Ardipithecus was probably the ancestor of the T va f Australopithecines—highly diverse hominins that appeared for the first time one million years later.
The earliest found, Australopithecus afarensis, was famously nicknamed “Lucy” by the archaeologists who found her in 1974.
As such, “Lucy” is an important link between us and our treedwelling ancestors.
The next generation By 3 mya, the Australopithecines had diversified into many forms.
They flourished throughout much of sub-Saharan Africa, especially in more open grasslands.
Nimble and fleet of foot, species including Australopithecus africanus were skilled at scavenging meat from predator kills.
The first humans Ancestors of modern humans appeared about 2 mya in eastern Africa, quickly spreading to the west.
Tools dating from 1. mya have been found in a dry stream bed at Koobi Fora on the shore of Lake Turkana, Kenya.
It is not known who the tool users were, but they may have been some of the earliest humans, possibly a group who paused here and butchered antelope.
Handyman Clearer evidence of the earliest toolmakers and their descendants has been found on the ancient lake beds at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania.
The tools PALEOLITHIC A period covering the time from the first use of stone tools about 2. mya to the beginning of agriculture in about 10,000 BCE. iy E our ^ The dominance of Homo sapiens is a comparatively recent development.
Homo habilis used the simplest stone technology, which was refined by Homo erectus into stone axes and cleaving tools for particular tasks such as butchering animals.
The Neanderthals | were the first to mount scrapers, spearpoints, and knives in wooden handles.
Modern humans developed more sophisticated technology, punching off parallel-sided blanks from carefully prepared flint nodules.
They turned these blades into scrapers, chisels, and borers to work antlers, bone, and leather.
FLINT HAND-AX are thought to date from about 1. mya, and were made by Homo habilis , who left what could be the remains of a camp by a lake, including a scatter of stone tools and broken animal bones.
Homo habilis probably slept in trees, in relative safety from lions and other dangerous animals.
In this predator-rich environment, humans were both the hunters and the hunted.
The evidence from the Olduvai camp suggests that Homo habilis was breaking up parts of animal carcasses scavenged from predator kills.
At about the same time, what could be termed the first true human had appeared.
Large-brained, with a receding forehead, and prominent brow ridges Homo ergaster had strong limbs similar to those of modern humans.
MYA— 5000 BCE ) Homo ergaster was closely related to Homo erectus, the first humans to spread out of tropical Africa into Europe and Asia as part of a general radiation of mammals and their predators some 1. mya.
Homo erectus was a skilled hunter and a brilliant opportunist, quick to take advantage of different environments—a key factor in the success of the human species.
They were well established in Western Europe by at least 800,000 years ago.
Warmer conditions than today may have attracted Homo heidelbergensis to Northern Europe by 400,000 years ago.
At about the same time, small bands of early humans were using long-shafted, aerodynamic wooden spears to hunt wild horses and larger game at Schóningen, Germany, and at Boxgrove in southern England.
Human family tree New discoveries of fossils that add to our knowledge of human evolution are being made all the time.
The size and shape of the skulls help us to understand the abilities of our ancestors.
Brain size Is measured in cubic centimeters , with an average modern human brain measuring 1,400 cc.
Little is known about the species, except that it may have been bipedal.
Ardipithecus kadabba was one of the earliest species to be placed on the human tree.
Fragmentary remains include large canine teeth found in Ethiopia, which are similar to those of the australopithecines.
The remarkable finds at Schóningen are the earliest preserved wooden tools yet discovered.
Each group probably returned to the same locations to hunt and forage at different times of the year.
Adapting to different environments By 500,000, early humans had adapted successfully to a wide variety of tropical and temperate environments, moving as far north as China, where numerous fragments of an evolving Homo erectus have come to light in Zhoukoudian Cave, near Beijing.
The ability to use fire was crucial in making settlement possible in cold locations Australopithecus anamensis 4.3-4 mya Sites Africa Brain size Unknown Australopithecus anamensis is little known as few remains have been found.
The jawbone from Kenya resembles that of a chimpanzee, while the teeth are closer to human teeth.
They were identified as those of a young adult who walked on two feet with a rolling gait, slower than that of modern humans.
This bipedal posture—an important human anatomical feature that appeared before 4 mya—allowed our ancestors to live away from forests in open terrain.
Its facial features appear to have been more human than earlier australopithecines.
The species may descend from the australopithecines. during the climatic swings of the Ice Age, but population levels remained very low and the survival of early humans must have been precarious at times.
The Neanderthals By 200,000 years ago, Homo neanderthalensis had evolved in Europe and Eurasia.
The Neanderthals had large brains and more rounded heads than their predecessors.
Their body shape was also more recognizably “human,” but it is believed that their reasoning power and speech were not as developed as those of Homo sapiens.
Boiser flourished in the dry savanna areas that existed in Africa at that time and may have died out after climate change.
The skull was thick and the face long, with a ""modern"" projecting nose, a massive jawbone, and large teeth.
They were, however, expert hunters, who pursued animals such as bison with wooden and stone-tipped spears.
They made sophisticated tools and dwelt in caves, rock shelters, and open camps.
Theirs was a tough life in savage environments, and they probably lived for 30—40 years.
Most experts agree that Neanderthals were not the ancestors of modern humans.
The appearance of modern humans Intense controversy surrounds the origins of Homo sapiens—ourselves.
Most geneticists use DNA evidence to argue that modern humans first appeared in tropical Africa by about 180,000 years ago.
The earliest fully modern human fossils come from Huerto, Ethiopia, and date to about 160,000 years ago.
From Africa, Homo sapiens spread across the Sahara and into southwestern Asia by 100,000 years ago.
No one knows when humans developed the abilities that set them apart from their earlier ancestors, but they were fully developed by 45,000 years ago, when the first modern humans settled in Europe alongside the Neanderthals.
The skull had a large brow ridge like Homo ergaster and Homo erectus but its brain was larger.
From 150,000 ya OUR REMOTE ANCESTORS The arrival of Homo sapiens may have spelled the end for the Neanderthals.
EXTINCTION AND SUCCESS Although Neanderthals and Homo sapiens lived alongside one another, DNA evidence suggests they did not interbreed.
Neanderthals died out, perhaps at the hands of Homo sapiens, who were successful in adapting to every corner of the globe.
More than any other species, humans have used their skills to their own advantage.
The species had a large brain and short robust build with powerful limbs.
Our brain size is larger than earlier humans’, and it is perhaps this which has enabled us to thrive in a variety of environments around the world. 350,000-24,000 ya Homo neanderthalensis may have lived alongside modern Homo sapiens AFTER Pu 19 BEFORE Little is known about the development of human speech and conscious thought.
A BRAIN FIT FOR THE JOB The brain size of our early ancestors grew gradually over millions of years, allowing increasing levels of sophistication in communication and culture.
They turned the simple signs and grunts of our ancestors into increasingly sophisticated communication.
Archaeology and studies of human anatomy help to indicate when these important traits evolved.
The hyoid bone is found in the neck and is required for speech to occur.
Finds such as these fossilized pieces of 400,000-year-old Homo heidelbergensis hyoid bone from Atapuerca, Spain, help date the first human speech. ur knowledge about when and 0 how speech evolved remains a controversial area in the study of early human history.
Articulate speech is an important threshold in human evolution because it opened up new vistas of cooperative behavior and the enrichment of human life.
From archaeological evidence alone, it is difficult to know accurately when speech first developed.
Homo habilis had a slightly more humanlike frontal lobe than earlier australopithecines.
Other clues are found in the position of the larynx —unlike all other mammals, the larynx of Homo sapiens is positioned low, permitting a wide variety of vocal sounds.
Homo erectus, from around 1. million years ago, was the first human with a lower larynx, and finds from Sima de los Huesos, in Atapuerca, Spain have shown that Homo heidelbergensis had developed a hyoid bone—a small, U-shaped bone that lies at the root of the tongue, between the larynx and pharynx—about 400,000 years ago.
It was only about 300,000 years ago, however, that the base of the skull evolved, physically allowing fully articulate speech to develop.
The Neanderthal debate Neanderthals may have had some capacity for speech and communication, and were apparently capable of considerable intellectual reasoning.
The discovery of a hyoid bone in Kebara Cave, Israel, dating to about 60,000 years ago, intensified the debate about Neanderthal linguistic abilities.
The Kebara hyoid is almost identical to that of modern humans, which has led some anthropologists to claim that the Neanderthals were capable of fully articulate speech.
Others disagree, pointing to the high position of the larynx, which would limit the sounds they could make.
Some believe that Neanderthals had the communication skills of modern infants.
The controversy is unresolved, but most scientists agree that Neanderthals did not have the advanced linguistic and communication skills of Homo sapiens.
Blombos beads The great leap Human language may have evolved because of the need to handle increasingly complex social These 75,000-year-old perforated shell beads from Blombos Cave, South Africa, are perhaps the oldest known human ornaments in the world. information, perhaps about 250,000 years ago.
As group sizes increased, so did an ability to learn language that could be used to articulate social relationships.
It was only later— perhaps around 40,000 years ago during a time that has been referred to as the “Great Leap Forward""— that modern humans developed language of the kind we would recognize today.
Cultural explosion Connected to the development of speech is the arrival of cognitive This includes qualities such as perception of our place in the world, intelligence, and moral codes that come with more elaborate societies.
None of these advances would have been possible without sophisticated speech.
We don’t know when Homo sapiens acquired the conscious thought and the abilities we have today, but it was at least 40,000 years ago, and most likely in tropical thought in early humans.
It appears that conscious thought evolved after modern human anatomy, for Homo sapiens flourished in tropical Africa at least 160,000 years ago, long before the appearance of the elaborate art traditions of the late Ice Age.
First artists The creation of art requires reasoning and an ability to plan ahead and express intangible feelings.
Some of the earliest known decorated artifacts, which were found in Blombos Cave in South Africa, are about 75,000 years old (see left) and are very basic.
The great bulls at Lascaux cave in France, and the polychrome bison at the cave at Altamira, in Spain, reflect human societies with complex religious beliefs and relationships with the spirit world.
Although we do not know exactly what these paintings mean, it is clear that they had great symbolism for those who painted them.
This knowledge would have been passed down through the generations by speech and song.
For all later human societies, art has remained an important way of expressing our beliefs and knowledge of the world.
HOW WE KNOW Research into the brain can reveal some evidence about the development of speech.
Soft brain tissues do not fossilize, and are only preserved in casts of the inside of the skull case.
The earliest signs of development of Broca's area, the part of the brain that controls speech, occur in Homo habilis about two million years ago.
Homo erectus also shows signs of development in Broca's area, perhaps an indication of slowly evolving speech.
Unless a well-preserved hominin brain is discovered— which is unlikely—the amount that we are able to discover from Broca's area is limited, and tangible evidence from hyoid bones will still be needed to learn about fluent speech.
AFTER Sophisticated levels of speech developed as society became more complex.
POWER THROUGH SPEECH Speech and language enhanced cooperation between hunters, which led to the greater success of human societies around the world.
Groups could plan game drives, negotiate exchanges of toolmaking stone, and share intelligence about food and water supplies.
PASSING ON KNOWLEDGE Speech and writing allowed knowledge and cumulative experience to be passed on from generation to generation.
ABSTRACT THINKING Today, symbols such as road signs are part of an internationally understood language we use every day.
As our knowledge of the human brain grows, so does our understanding of how speech developed. 21 lj THE ART OF COMMUNICATION E E 4.
MYA—3000 BCE BEFORE Over millions of years, Earth has experienced a range of temperatures and climatic conditions that have played a part in the extinction or survival of whole groups of species, and changed the face of the planet.
THE ICE AGES There is geological evidence (seen in rock surfaces and textures) for four major ices ages in Earth's history.
The earliest of these is believed to have occurred around 2. to 2. billion years ago during the Proterozoic period.
HOT PLANET Temperatures in the past were generally far higher than today.
THE BIG CHILL The abrupt cooling about 1. million years ago that led to the last Ice Age, known as the Pleistocene epoch, probably resulted from small shifts in Earth’s tilt toward the Sun.
The Ice Age Much of human history unfolded during the dramatic climatic shifts of the most recent Ice Age, which began about 1. million years ago.
Our ability to adapt to changes in climate has been crucial to the development of civilization but, adversely, may be the cause of future global warming. ontrary to popular belief, an E Ice Age is not a continual deep freeze, but a period of constantly fluctuating climate conditions punctuated by periods of intense cold.
The earliest millennia of the last ice age—the critical period when our remote ancestors first colonized Africa— are little known.
The information gleaned from deep-sea cores and ice borings gives us a much clearer picture of ice-age climate after Earth's magnetic field, generated deep inside our planet, abruptly reversed some 780,000 years ago.
Deep-sea cores from the Pacific Ocean reveal at least nine major glacial periods that have come and gone over the past 780,000 years, the most recent of them ending in abrupt and irregular global warming between HOW WE KNOW DEEP SEA AND ICE CORES Layers of sediment build up over time on ocean beds, and annual layers of ice are added to polar caps.
By extracting cores of ice or deep sea sediment and looking at the composition, scientists can build a picture of climate change.
Increases in atmospheric CO, and CH, — both greenhouse gases—can be detected in the ice and indicate warming.
Similarly, the ratios of oxygen isotopes in the shells of microscopic marine animals reflect changes in sea temperature.
The Vostok ice core from Antarctica provides evidence for the last 420,000 years, and shows that major shifts in temperature occur about every 100,000 years. 10,000 and 15,000 years ago.
Sea cores give only a general impression of Ice Age climate change, but, as a rule, cooling proceeds relatively slowly and warming unfolds rapidly, as was the case at the end of the last cold period.
Glacial periods in the past have been longer than interglacials—brief, volatile intervals of warmer conditions during the Ice Age when the climate was as warm today.
These increases in temperature are caused by changes in Earth's path around the Sun and its rotation on its axis.
We are currently experiencing an interglacial period caused by these natural phenomena that began about 10,000 years ago.
Environmental change The Ice Age witnessed dramatic shifts in global climate and major changes in natural environments.
During glacial periods, huge ice sheets formed over Scandinavia, and covered most of Canada and parts of the United States as far south as modern Seattle and the Great Lakes.
Low 150,000 100,000 50,000 0 Years before present the Pyrenees, on the Andes, and on Central Asian mountains and highaltitude plateaus.
South of the Scandinavian ice sheets, huge expanses of barren landscape extended from the Atlantic to Siberia.
These environments suffered nine-month winters and were uninhabitable by ancestors of Homo sapiens, who lacked the technology and clothing to adapt to the extremes of temperature.
It is no coincidence that Homo erectus, with their simple technology and limited cognitive skills, settled in more temperate and tropical sea levels around the world dropped at the beginning of the last Ice Age as water froze to form the ice caps of present-day Antarctica and the Arctic. environments.
The cold caused sea levels to fall dramatically as more water was converted into ice.
Huge expanses of what are now continental shelves were exposed, linking land masses— Siberia was part of Alaska, and Britain was joined to Europe.
Only short stretches of open water separated mainland Southeast Asia from Australia and New Guinea.
During interglacials, sea levels rose, ice sheets shrank, and forests moved northward as the steppe-tundra vanished.
Humans moved north, following the animals they hunted and the plants they foraged, and adapting to a broad range of forested and grassland environments as well as arid and semiarid lands.
The number of meters Humans and the elements The Ice Age climate was volatile and the world's environments changed constantly, which meant that the opportunism and adaptive ability of humans was continuously challenged from one millennium to the next.
These challenges may even have been A harsh world Temperature variations up to 10,000 years ago meant that humans could only survive by adapting to the changing conditions.
The levels of CO, in the atmosphere have also been recorded and are linked to temperature rises, as can be seen here. a factor in human evolution.
Our earliest ancestors originated in tropical Africa and were basically tropical animals.
During long periods of the ice ages, the Sahara was slightly wetter than today.
The desert can almost be seen as a pump, drawing in animals and early humans during wetter periods, then pushing them out to the margins when the climate became drier.
This was the ecological effect that allowed Homo erectus and the animals they preyed on to cross the desert and spread into more temperate environments some 1. million years ago.
A major interglacial raised temperatures, peaking around 400,000 years ago.
By that time, Homo erectus was thriving in north Europe, but they could not adapt to the extreme cold of the glaciation that followed around 350,000 years ago.
The few hunting bands living there probably moved southward to more temperate regions.
By around 250,000 years ago, there are traces of early human settlement in Europe and parts of East Asia.
The final interglacial peaked about 128,000 years ago, when Neanderthals were thriving in Europe.
After 50,000 years ago, modern humans had mastered all the global environments and were living in even the coldest and most extreme parts of the world.
Based on past shifts, this warmer phase could last 100,000 years, although the influence of humans may affect this.
Earth is currently experiencing a warmer phase but is still affected by fluctuations in temperature and natural phenomena such as El Niño.
Such short-term events were a factor in the rise and collapse of early civilizations.
THE EL NINO PHENOMENON El Niño is a reversal in the flow of water in the Pacific Ocean that causes dramatic changes in the weather every two to seven years.
El Niño is one of the most powerful influences on climate after the seasons.
The phenomenon originates in the Southwest Pacific and results from interactions between the ocean and the atmosphere.
Major El Nifios have powerful global effects, causing monsoon failures, and drought or flooding elsewhere.
EL NINO PERIOD OF STABILITY As temperatures rose after the Ice Age, humans adapted to a rapidly changing world of shrinking ice sheets and rising sea levels.
After 5,000 years of irregular warming and cooling, the world entered a warming period that has lasted into modern times.
The Vostok ice core tells us this period is among the most warm and stable of the past 420,000 years.
MONSOON SEASON, INDIA THE FUTURE The overuse of fossil fuels has increased global warming.
LIFE IN THE FREEZER The last glaciation of the Ice Age, when many areas were covered in ice, lasted from 100,000 to 50,000 years ago.
During this period, sea levels were far below modern levels and Siberia and Alaska were linked by land.
This was followed by a slightly warmer period before a return to extreme cold about 18,000 ICY LANDSCAPE years ago.
ORIGINS OF MODERN HUMANS The original ancestors of modern humans evolved south of the Sahara Desert in tropical Africa.
The scattered human population was very small, and groups developed in isolation from each other.
EARLY MAN ON THE MOVE Early Homo erectus fossils «« 19 indicate that they had settled in western Europe by 800,000 years ago.
Neanderthals «€ 19 spread into Europe and western Asia by 200,000 years ago.
FLINT HAND-AXES This technology, developed in Africa 2. million years ago, was used for millions of years «€ 17.
FLINT HAND-AX ] 0 0 0) 0) 0 The number of years I since small groups of humans began to leave Africa.
By 60,000 years ago genetically modern Homo sapiens were colonizing the Earth.
Mammoth cave painting The walls of Lascaux Cave in France are alive with bison, mammoth, wild oxen, and stag.
Out of Africa Every human today is the descendant of a small group of modern humans who left Africa around 60,000 years ago to explore the planet.
We can see the legacy of these journeys today in the diversity of races and cultures around the world. ixty thousand years ago, modern humans were confined to tropical Africa and a small part of southwestern Asia.
These were people with the same physical and mental abilities as ourselves, hunter-gatherers capable of adapting to any environment on Earth, be it one with nine-month winters and subzero temperatures, or steamy tropical rainforests.
Then, during the last cold period of the last Ice Age, the most significant of all human migrations out of Africa began.
Toward the end of the Ice Age 15,000 years ago, this vast population movement was complete.
Late Ice Age hunting bands had settled all of mainland Africa and Eurasia and had crossed, or were about to cross, into the Americas.
Homo sapiens had mastered tropical waters with canoes or rafts, had drifted or paddled to New Guinea and Australia, and penetrated as far south as Tasmania.
Survival of the fittest Earlier forms of humans such as Homo habilis and Homo erectus had long vanished from Earth, forced into extinction on marginal lands where food was not plentiful, or killed by the newcomers, with whom they could not compete.
Colonizing the planet was not a deliberate project, undertaken by men and women set on occupying new lands or exploring the world that lay beyond their hunting territories.
Rather, the complex population movements that took modern humans to the limits of the harsh late Ice Age world came about as a result of the necessities of hunting and plant collecting in a great diversity of natural environments.
In more northern climates, meat was the staple food, while tropical and temperate groups made considerable use of wild plant foods.
The secrets to survival were adaptability—the ability to adjust to sudden changes in climatic conditions by technological innovation—and sheer ingenuity, mobility, and opportunism.
People responded to food shortages, drought, or extreme cold by moving elsewhere in a world where the total global population was perhaps no more than five million people, scattered in small groups over hunting territories large and small.
Many people may not have encountered more than a few dozen fellow humans during their lives, although we can only speculate about this, as the population figures can only be educated guesses.
Evidence of migration Dozens of archaeological sites—caves, rock shelters, open camps, and huge garbage heaps, or “middens,” of seashells and freshwater mollusks— document the great journeys made as humans spread around the globe.
The techniques of molecular biology are another way in which we can learn more about the movement of these early humans.
By comparing certain strands of DNA (the substance found in every human cell that determines the characteristics we inherit), we can MILLION The estimated l human population of Earth 500,000 years ago. work out how Earth was colonized by Homo sapiens, and when splits in the population occurred.
This was a complex process involving constant movement by small numbers of people.
All people alive today have their ultimate roots in the so-called “African Eve” of some 150,000 years ago.
This name stems from the fact that MtDNA was passed from mother to offspring through every generation since the first Homo sapiens.
Human migration This map shows key sites for our early ancestors, as well as the routes that Homo sapiens is thought to have taken from Africa around the world.
The earliest known settlement in South America dates from about 13,000 years ago.
Finds from the site, at Monte Verde in Chile, include stone tools for chopping, scraping, and pounding. us Hill Big game hunters The people associated with Clovis hunted big game.
Their presence in America about 12,000 years ago coincides with the extinction | of several large species ‘including mammoths, ‘mastodons (a mammothlike species), and giant sloths.
Site of early Homo sapiens find J Site of early Hominin find SS Beringia Land Bridge This archaeologist holds the remains of Homo erectus, which dates from about 1 million years ago, and was found on this site.
The first modern humans in China occupied this site by about 40,000 This mammoth bone ~ Carving found at Dolni Vestonice was made by ; wo hunters between 28,000 A and 22,000 years ago. — years ago. 3 a i £ (2 5,0 D0 YEARS AGO, | IUE 9n . t Ü © | a “Sia.
This area of northeastern Africa is rich with early hominin remains and continues to yield finds that provoke new theories about our own evolution.
Tourists today visit a landscape of strange formations where over 20,000 years ago there was a lake and much human activity.
Stone tools and animal bones found in the area have shown us much about the first Australians.
Klasies River Mouth Caves in South Africa were occupied by hunter-gatherers 120,000 years ago and have revealed some clues about how they lived.
MYA— 5000 BCE Sometime after about 50,000 years ago, when glacial conditions in the north had improved and the climate was more temperate, modern humans moved into Europe and Asia.
Tiny numbers of people were involved—in the hundreds—but by 45,000 years ago they were well established in the eastern European plains and in the Don Valley, now in Ukraine, and were moving rapidly across Central and Western Europe.
The Neanderthal controversy Homo sapiens had settled alongside Neanderthal bands that had already been in Europe for about 200,000 The longest journey The first Homo sapiens left Africa to colonize the planet about 60,000 years ago.
By the end of the Ice Age 10,000 years ago, they had reached all the continents except Antarctica, adapting to different conditions wherever they went. years.
DNA research on Neanderthal bones suggests that the newcomers did not interbreed with them, as had previously been believed.
One theory is that Europe's indigenous inhabitants died out because they lacked the adaptability, mental abilities, and technology of modern humans.
They survived in some parts of southeastern Europe until as late as 24,000 years ago before becoming extinct.
A thriving European culture From about 40,000 to 10,000 years ago, a remarkable array of sophisticated, cold-adapted hunter-gatherer societies flourished in Central and Western The bone house This reconstruction of a shelter built from mammoth bones is based on the remains of a dwelling that was found by archaeologists in modern-day Ukraine.
It demonstrates the ingenuity and adaptability of early humans to local conditions and resources.
These Cro-Magnon people— named after a rock shelter near Les Eyzies in southwestern France—were opportunists.
They relied for their subsistence on a range of plant foods and fish, taking advantage of salmon runs, for example, when the rapidly changing climate of the late Ice Age allowed.
Their success came not only from their superior mental abilities, but also from their ingenious multipurpose flint tools, which worked almost like a modern Swiss Army knife.
They used carefully shaped flint nodules to produce standardized, parallel-sided blanks, which they then turned into points, scrapers, and other tools.
One of these artifacts—a chisel— allowed them to cut grooves in reindeer antlers, thereby “unlocking” a new technology for manufacturing harpoon heads, spear points, and other hunting weapons.
Barbed, antlertipped spears were especially effective on reindeer and other game.
The Cro-Magnons produced other revolutionary items, including the spear thrower—a hooked stick that vastly increased the distance a spear could be thrown.
They successfully used this new technology to hunt a wide range of Ice Age animals, including bison, mammoth, and woolly rhinoceros.
These people were also skilled artists and developed a distinctive visual tradition, which amplified their elaborate rituals and beliefs.
One of the most famous examples of their art comes from the cave paintings of Lascaux in southwestern France, which are on a huge scale, and renowned for the skill of the artists who created them INVENTION THE NEEDLE The eyed needle was a groundbreaking invention.
As early as 30,000 years ago, late Ice Age people in Europe and Asia made needles from polished bone and ivory slivers, perforated with sharppointed flints.
They sewed tailored, layered garments that enabled them to work outside in freezing temperatures.
It is believed that, like modern Inuits, they used cured and softened animal pelts, sewing the seams with fine thread made of animal and plant fiber.
For the first time, people had the skills to live in harsh environments like the Eurasian steppes, where there is little rainfall and dramatic changes in temperature with hot summers and very cold winters.
Despite these skills, the Cro-Magnons appear to have moved south into sheltered locations, only moving north again as temperatures rose.
Some of them constructed elaborate dwellings, like the intricate mammoth bone houses at Mezhirich in modern Ukraine , built partially into the ground and roofed with hides and sod.
Toward the end of the Ice Age, about 12,000 years ago, human society became more elaborate, as populations grew larger and new areas were colonized.
Siberia and the tundra Homo sapiens migrated north from southwestern Asia and colonized the river valleys of Central Asia around 45,000 years ago.
Small bands lived permanently in the bitter cold of the steppe-tundra—a windswept landscape featuring low-growing vegetation— that extended from central Europe all the way to Siberia far to the northeast.
Enduring long winters, each band anchored itself on shallow river valleys like those of the Don and Dnieper in Russia, subsisting for the most part on animals such as the saiga antelope and large game, including the arctic elephant and the mammoth.
ADAPTING TO CHANGE Study of the genes of modern populations can help to show how the early humans colonized the planet.
Mitochondrial DNA, inherited through the maternal line back to a fictional ""Eve"" , can be traced from an ancestral tropical African population to today.
From this evidence we know that 99. percent of the genetic code of modern humans is identical throughout the world.
The Between 35,000 and 18,000 years ago, some hunting bands moved northeastward across the steppetundra into the Lake Baikal region of Siberia and farther to the northeast.
Some moved to, or formed, new groups, while others moved to find new hunting grounds or natural resources.
A variety of circumstances linked to hunting and survival contributed to the movement of tiny numbers of these late Ice Age bands differences in facial features and coloring are down to minor genetic mutations that have taken place over the last 150,000 years.
Amazingly, the world's population outside Africa can trace their genetic history back to perhaps as few as 1,000 individuals who made the journey out of that continent.
Chromosome mutations can be used to show when groups arrived in different parts of the world and to construct a genetic family tree that goes back to the Ice Age. across an extremely inhospitable landscape.
Such natural population movements led to vast areas of the globe being colonized.
Even earlier, from around 60,000 years ago, other groups moved east from northeast Africa and southwestern Asia into what is now India and Pakistan, and into the tropical forests of Southeast Asia.
We know little of these movements—the groups probably skirted the Eurasian OUT OF AFRICA A hunter's tool kit As humans traveled around the globe and experienced different environments and climates, they adapted their weapons and tools to survive.
The bones display a unique mix of primitive and more advanced characteristics, and date to about 18,000 years ago.
With a small skull , large brow ridge, and a delicate face, Homo floresiensis had slight legs like some early hominins, yet modern teeth.
Questions have been raised over whether this is a separate species or a small Homo sapiens.
Others suggest this is the remnant of a Homo erectus population, or the descendant of humans who drifted to the island, then developed unique anatomical traits in isolation.
Unless more remains are found, Homo floresiensis may remain an intriguing, unsolved mystery. deserts and settled in northeastern China by 25,000 years ago, after the warmer south part of the continent had been explored.
Sunda, Sahul, and Asia During the late Ice Age, a huge continental shelf—an area of land connecting the continents that is now covered by higher sea levels—known as Sunda extended from mainland Southeast Asia far into the Pacific.
Only short stretches of open water separated New Guinea and Australia from this now-sunken land.
Homo sapiens arrived in mainland Southeast Asia before 50,000 years ago.
By 45,000 years ago—the date is controversial— a few hunting bands had crossed open water to Sahul and colonized what is now Australia.
Modern humans had settled New Guinea by about 40,000 years ago, and crossed to the Solomon Islands by about 5,000 years later.
Huntergatherers had settled throughout Australia, including Tasmania, by 30,000 years ago.
This was the outer limit of human settlement of the offshore Pacific until outrigger canoes and open-water navigation techniques allowed people with domesticated animals and root crops to make the lengthy open-water passages Oldest footprints Hundreds of human footprints, preserved for over 20,000 years, have been found at Lake Mungo, Australia.
The evidence of human life at Lake Mungo in Australia reveals details of hunter-gatherer life about 40,000 years ago.
It is important as it captures a moment in time and a lifestyle that remained largely unchanged for thousands of years.
Reaching the Americas Archaeologists have disputed the date of the first settlement of the Americas for over a century.
Genetic and dental evidence links the two areas and backs up this theory.
There are also linguistic ties that hint at population movements from Siberia to Alaska.
But it is not known precisely when and how the first settlement took place.
Until about 10,000 years ago, a low-lying land bridge, Beringia, * joined Siberia to Alaska Clovis points North American hunters made these flint spearpoints over 11,000 years ago.
Most scientists believe that the first Americans were Siberian hunters who crossed this bridge into Alaska at least 15,000 years ago, toward the end of the Ice Age.
Route south More controversy surrounds the route by which the first Americans penetrated the heart of North America, something which is thought to have taken place at least 13,000 years ago.
One theory favors a movement south along the continental shelves of southeast Alaska and British Columbia, which was then a landscape of steppe-tundra.
Another common hypothesis claims a rapid movement south along a narrow corridor between two ice sheets, one mantling the Rocky Mountains and the other extending east toward the Atlantic.
The controversy is unresolved, but we know that small numbers of early American hunter-gatherers were south of the ice sheets, and some as far south as Chile, by at least 13,000 years ago.
The early Americans are best known from the remains of kills of bison, mammoth, and mastodon in North America.
They are often labeled “biggame"" hunters, which is misleading, as they relied on plant foods and adapted to temperate and tropical areas, as well as the bleak lands at the margins of retreating ice sheets.
They did prey on indigenous species of large mammals, but, by 10,500 years ago, most of this “megafauna” was extinct, probably as a result of drier climatic conditions, perhaps speeded by some overhunting.
Early evidence The archaeological record of the early Americas is sketchy.
Key sites include a 12,000-year-old rock shelter in Meadowcroft, Pennsylvania, a scatter of stone tools from a site at Cactus Hill, Virginia, and a well-documented foraging camp at Monte Verde, Chile, dating to about 13,000 years ago.
The first welldefined culture is that of _ the Clovis people, famous for their fine flint tools, who flourished between about 11,200 and 10,900 years ago.
One controversial discovery is a 9,500 yearold skull from Kennewick, Washington State, which is believed to have caucasian features and may be an indication that some of the first settlers in America came from Europe.
AFTER b By 10,000 years ago humans had spread to every continent and had learned the skills needed to survive in different environments.
Later explorers found their ""new world"" already inhabited by the descendants of those first settlers.
ADAPTING TO CHANGE American Indian societies adjusted to warmer, often drier conditions, by intensifying the search for food, whether it be fish, game, or plant foods.
Dutch settlers arrived in Manhattan in the 1800s and traded with the native population before establishing a permanent settlement there.
EUROPEAN SETTLERS IN AMERICA AN ISOLATED CULTURE The culture of the Australian Aboriginals developed in virtually complete isolation.
Like other huntergatherer societies, they have a complex relationship with their environment and elaborate spiritual beliefs.
INVENTION Atlatls are throwing sticks or spearthrowers, first developed by Cro-Magnon hunters over 20,000 years ago.
Spear throwers increase a spear's range and velocity—useful qualities for hunters who rely on stalking to kill their prey.
Such weights, often called “bannerstones,” are often found on native American sites, as they arrived with the first inhabitants of the region.
MYA— 5000 BCE Hunters and Gatherers Hunting and foraging for food was the only way of life for all humans up until 12,000 years ago.
It was a successful lifestyle that, in some ways, had significant advantages over a life of farming.
Today, only a handful of hunter-gatherer societies survive, in the Amazon Basin and Africa. e have been able to understand more about the hunter-gatherer diet from surviving artifacts such as carved stone and bone tools and decorative items , and also from hunting scenes in rock paintings, such as those at Lascaux, za BEFORE Hunting and gathering, or foraging for food, is the fundamental way that humans and their ancestors lived.
The success of the species depended on their ability to use Earth's resources to their own advantage.
HUMAN SCAVENGERS Evidence from bones and flints has shown that early humans may have eaten the remains of animals killed by other predators rather than hunting for most of their food.
A process of trial and error would have been necessary while learning what foods were good to eat and what could potentially be harmful.
HAZELNUTS CHANGING TO SURVIVE Human societies throughout the world had to adapt to radically different environments.
Predictability, seasonality, abundance, and distribution of food resources such as fish and nuts affected their choice to live a nomadic or more settled existence.
Rare finds of wooden digging sticks and flint sickle blades show that people dug for tubers and harvested wild grasses.
Broken animal and fish bones, and fossil plant pollens, reveal details of the hunter-gatherer diet, as do deep shell middens crammed with the discarded shells of edible mollusks.
In addition, the few surviving hunter-gatherer societies can tell us first-hand about the dynamics of human existence before agriculture and animal domestication.
Mammoth hunters Most huntergatherer bands were constantly on the move, camping near lakes and other strategic locations during the times of year when a particular plant food ripened or game was close by.
At Dolní Vestonice, in what is now the Czech Republic, mammoth hunters lived in oval bone-and-timber huts Gathered food The hunter's equipment The earliest weapons took the form of simple flint arrowheads.
Arrows would have been used about 8,000 years ago for hunting. serrated edge Wild plant foods, whether grasses, nuts, or tubers, were the dominant staple for most ancient hunter-gatherer societies.
In most societies, women did the gathering. overlooking a river valley and nearby swamps.
Other carvings of bears, lions, and mammoths indicate a culture of some degree of sophistication.
A similar date has been given to the Venus of Willendorf found in Austria.
It has been suggested that these figurines represent fertility and the success of the hunter-gatherer group they are associated with.
Stone age transition The line between nomadic hunting and gathering and settled farming is not always clear.
Many communities may have stayed in one place while hunting, or moved around and cultivated crops.
Ten thousand years ago, bands of Mesolithic fishers and hunters lived by the Baltic Sea, which at that stage was newly uncovered by retreating ice.
Their diet mainly consisted of fish, supplemented by birds, plant foods, and game, caught HARPOON POINT flints stuck in groove of wooden shaft 50 FLINT ARROW MESOLITHIC ARROW reproduction shaft flight of duck feathers using stone-tipped arrows, antler harpoons, and wooden spears.
Many groups in this area occupied the same settlements for generations, living along shorelines that shifted constantly.
Another site that has revealed details about a community that was hunting and gathering while on the move throughout the year is Star Carr in northeastern England.
In 9000 BCE, a small group of Mesolithic people settled on waterlogged ground by a lake there.
The wet conditions preserved flint tools, the remains of the elk and red deer they hunted, and the barbed spear points they used to kill them.
Teeth and seeds tell us the site was occupied every year from March to June.
These people adapted successfully to a rapidly changing post-Ice Age world by maintaining a flexible way of life.
Lepenski Vir in modern-day Serbia was also repeatedly used over many generations and has yielded a lot of information about a culture between two lifestyles.
The site, used from as early as 6000 BCE, was situated on the banks of the Danube River, and the group's reliance on fishing was heavy.
Revisited for several hundred years, Lepenski Vir provides a portrait of a gradual changeover from nomadic life to more permanent settlement.
The seminomadic lifestyle of Lepenski Vir meant that people lived there for part of the year while also traveling to other areas.
Finds at the site discovered some distance away provide the evidence for this.
A continuing way of life Five thousand years ago, much of East and southern Africa was home to nomadic hunter-gatherer bands, which subsisted on a wide variety of animal and plant foods.
Some sites, such as Gwisho in Central Africa, have revealed well-preserved wooden arrowheads and digging sticks, as well as traces of brush shelters.
Many of these groups regularly visited rock shelters, including those at Nachikufu in present-day Zambia, Pomongwe in Zimbabwe, and Oakhurst rock shelter HUNTERS AND GATHERERS INVENTION | BOW AND ARROW Bows and arrows appeared during the late Ice Age and came into widespread use by about 10,000 act.
At first, these would have been simple wooden bows used with stoneor bone-tipped arrows.
The composite bow, made of sinews and bone or wood laminated together, is known from 1500 act, and reached North America in the first millennium ce.
INUIT BOW Hunting in the field A modern San hunter takes aim with bow and arrow.
His success depends on meticulous stalking to approach his quarry at close range.
Many early hunters used vegetable poisons on their arrows, pursuing wounded animals for hours to kill them before predators struck. in South Africa.
Modernday San have long been in contact with farmers, but the ancestry of their culture extends back to ancient times.
As in other traditional hunter-gather cultures, the women are responsible for much of the food collection and hunting smaller animals, while the men hunt large prey.
From about 10,000 &ct there was a general transition from the huntergatherer lifestyle to farming.
Some groups continued to forage for food, perhaps partly due to conditions in the part of the world they lived in, making growing crops or staying in one place impossible.
Another reason may be that farming needs more time spent devoted to food production and carries a greater risk of starvation if crops fail.
Some groups, such as the Haida people of North America and the Aboriginals in Australia, seem to have retained the hunter-gatherer lifestyle.
HAIDA HOUSE CULTURAL COMPLEXITY In areas of exceptionally rich food resources, much more elaborate hunter-gather societies developed after about 3000 years ago.
In the Pacific Northwest of North America, for example, rich salmon and coastal fisheries and abundant lumber led to the development of complex societies under powerful chieftains.
INNOVATION By 2000 years ago, the Norton people in North America had developed sophisticated art styles and an elaborate harpoon weaponry for hunting seals.
By 1000 ce, the ancestors of the modern-day Inuit had settled in Canada.
MYA— 5000 BCE BEFORE There is little evidence that early humans before Neanderthals buried their dead or believed in a higher power.
NEANDERTHAL BELIEF Neanderthals << 19 first buried their dead at least 60,000 years ago.
CONSCIOUS THOUGHT Homo sapiens is unique in thinking and planning ahead, and in conceptualizing ideas.
Such cognitive abilities first appeared around 50,000 years ago, and perhaps even earlier «€ 21.
A wealth of grave goods Two 25,000-year-old hunter-gatherers buried in Sungir near Vladimir in Russia lie surrounded by spears, bracelets, brooches, and thousands of ivory beads. The Spirit World Ever since humans became conscious of their own frailty and mortality, they have sought the answers to the eternal mysteries of life.
Theories about the purpose of our existence and questions about what happens after we die will always be a part of the human experience. the beliefs of humans were world, and the practices surrounding engraved antler tools . before the advent of writing. burial are always significant.
The The cave engravings and paintings However, from the material remains art of early humans found in caves depict a wide range of animals, some left to us, we can piece together some and on bone carvings are indications of them long extinct, such as the of the ideas of the particular culture of their beliefs outside of their mammoth and woolly rhinoceros; that created them.
The main ways everyday existence. others, like wild horses, European in which we know about prehistoric From about 40,000 years ago, the bison, and reindeer are more familiar religion today are from images painted Cro-Magnons of western Europe today.
Death is often tradition that survives on cave walls environment where people survived I t is difficult to know what thought of as a link to another and on beautifully carved and pU Y S THE SPIRIT WORLD [im for much of the year on meat.
This reliance on hunting may have been inspired rituals that became the focus of cave art.
By contrast, human figures in cave paintings are rare, and when they do occur are highly stylized or masked.
Impressions of human hands and undecipherable signs do, however, appear on the walls of caves including Altamira in Spain, and Chauvet, Niaux, and Lascaux in France.
Magic and ceremony Generations of archaeologists have argued over the meaning of CroMagnon cave art, which flourished until about 14,000 years ago.
In many huntergatherer societies, shamans were believed to act as intermediaries with the spiritual world, using trances and hallucinogenic substances to pass into the realm of the supernatural.
They were thought to communicate with ancestors, as well as retelling stories, and legends.
Late Ice Age shamans may have conducted ceremonies in caves, often painted with murals, where the acoustics lend themselves to chanting and singing, and in other less accessible caves far from daylight, where they may have felt closer to powers outside their immediate environment.
Surviving clues In cultures that have survived up to more recent times we may find further clues to past beliefs.
The American Indians and Australian Aboriginals live in worlds where the living and supernatural realms are treated as a continuation of one another.
Both enjoyed elaborate ceremonial lives that included initiation ceremonies and seasonal rituals, as well as HOW WE KNOW Shamans—doctors, priests, or medicine men-still exist in some cultures, including this tribe from the Sepik Region of Papua New Guinea , where the shaman is believed to possess supernatural powers.
By observing their practices and rituals, it is possible to draw some useful parallels with early societies.
Archaeologist David Lewis-Williams argues that much of the cave art of the San huntergatherers of southern Africa was painted by shamans in hallucinogenic trances.
These types of drugor trance-induced experiences are still seen today in a few societies. commemorations of ancestral spirits.
Hunter-gatherer societies that we know about today are almost universal in possessing complex beliefs and world views that are intimately connected to the natural world around them.
Although we do not know that people in ancient cultures shared these rituals and beliefs, some of the artifacts and clues we have indicate this as a possibility.
The female figurines of hunter-gatherer societies may have been made as objects of worship, and related to a fertility cult.
Carved antlers and bones similarly may have been connected with religious belief.
Grave goods One of the earliest and most lavish burials found was in Sungir, Russia.
The sheer richness and diversity of the artifacts accompanying the bodies Aboriginal dreamtime Australian Aboriginals enjoy a complex relationship with the supernatural realm that permeates their living world.
Their art, such as this example from a cave wall, depicts mythic animals and humans and forms an important part of their spiritual beliefs—known as the Dreamtime. shows that these people lived in a complex society with a strong hierarchical structure, and that they were concerned with what happened after death.
One of the individuals, a girl of about eight years old, was found with the remains of over 5,000 ivory beads, which, it is estimated, each took over one hour to carve.
The fact that such wealth accompanied the burials may indicate a religion in which these objects were needed to accompany the dead on a journey to another life.
In other cultures food was left with the dead, suggesting a belief in an afterlife in which sustenance is required.
Some of the earliest buildings relating to religious belief may come from Catalhuyok in Turkey from 7000 BCE, where murals are indications that the spaces were used for ritual purposes.
The grave goods placed in the pyramids of the Pharaohs to help them in the afterlife are further indication of a strong belief in another life.
CELTIC BELIEF Deities connected with death, fertility, and birth are shown on the Gundestrup cauldron, dating from 2nd-centuryBCE Denmark.
The shift from a hunter-gather lifestyle is revealed by the number of farming tools and pottery objects that were made at this time.
Flint hand-ax made by Homo heidelbergensis in Europe about 500,000-300,000 years ago.
Carved rock from approximately 75,000 years ago, discovered in Blombos cave near Stilbaai, South Africa.
Considered to be one of the first examples of art, the piece is made from red ocher with a deliberately engraved design.
Cro-Magnon flute, C 45,000 years old, discovered in a cave at Divje Babe, in the Idrijca valley in western Slovenia, and thought to be one of the earliest musical instruments.
Arrowheads such as this were created by skilled artisans by pressing a bone or antler tool against the edges to create a finely flaked thin artifact.
Carved pillar, c 9000 CE, from the Góbekli Tepe archaeological site in southeastern Turkey.
Stone sculpture, 6000 BcE, showing both fish and human characteristics, from Lepenski Vir, Yugoslavia.
Quernstone, a simple hand FOUNDATION STONE EGYPTIAN COMB mill to grind cereal crops.
Serrated flint, antler harpoon, and flint point mounted on a wooden shaft, made by modern humans during and after the late Ice Age, 18,000-10,000 years ago.
Egyptian dagger, 3500-3100 BCE, from Gebel el-Arak, Egypt, with scenes of battle and hunting carved on the handle, made from hippopotamus ivory, and a blade of the highest quality knapping.
This is an example of one of the earliest three-dimensional representations of humans from ancient Egypt, found in graves of the predynastic period.
Goddess figurine, from El’ Ma'mariya, Egypt, 36003500 BCE, made from painted terra-cotta.
As well as being useful, pottery was often strikingly painted and engraved as seen in this example.
Carved spearthrower in the shape of a mammoth, from the rock shelter of Montastruc, Tarn-etGaronne, France.
Approximately 12,500 years old, this tool is carved from reindeer antler.
Foundation stone engraved with cuneiform writing from the famous Sumerian city of Ur.
This 4,000-year-old brick cone was placed in a mud-brick wall to record the foundation of a building.
Carved from ivory, the animals indude elephants and snakes; wading birds and a giraffe; hyenas and cattle.
MYA— 5000 BCE 56 BEFORE As the glacial period of the Ice Age << 2223 came to an end, conditions around the world improved for human life and the hunter-gatherer lifestyle began to die out.
OUT OF THE ICE AGE Many of the advances in civilization were spurred on by global warming, which gave new opportunities to humankind.
EXPANSION Human populations increased and spread as areas that had been glacial became temperate.
First Harvest Everyone in the world lived by hunting and gathering 12,000 years AGE OF TRANSITION After the Ice Age, large game animals died out in many areas, and people turned to smaller animals and wild plant foods.
Following a drought about 15,000 years ago, hunting bands in southwest Asia began planting wild wheat, barley, and other grasses to supplement strains of what grew in the wild.
BEGINNING OF FOOD PRODUCTION Although people still lived as hunter-gatherers, moving around seasonally in search of food, by 12,000 years ago some groups had begun to exploit and control their own food supplies. ago.
But only 6,000 years later, virtually every human society with the ability to farm and herd animals produced its own food. griculture was not ""invented"" by one person in a sudden flash of genius.
Hunting groups would have been aware that seeds germinated when they were planted in the soil.
The switch from the huntergatherer lifestyle to one of agriculture and animal domestication was one that happened independently in various cultures around the world.
It was partly prompted by climate change and was a momentous step forward for humankind— civilization as we know it today stems from the changes that took place from about 12,000 years ago.
In the area known as ""the Fertile Crescent,"" which includes Turkey, Syria, and Iraq, people began to domesticate goats, sheep, and pigs by living in close proximity to wild herds and controlling HOW WE KNOW The remains of domestic and wild animals can tell us a lot about the diet and lifestyle growth patterns in teeth, one can establish the age and sex of an animal and whether it was wild or domesticated.
For example, the teeth of people from Abu Hureyra show heavy wear associated with eating ground cereals.
NEOLITHIC The last part of the Stone Age period, beginning 10,000 BCE in the Middle East, 5500 BCE in central Europe, and 4500 BCE in northern Europe.
The introduction of farming is a key characteristic of the Neolithic. of our ancestors.
Plants were gradually adapted from their wild varieties into crops that were tended and harvested.
Einkorn, a variety of wheat, was the first domesticated cereal and was grown in the Fertile Crescent.
The genetic changes to cereal grasses and animals that resulted from domestication occurred over a relatively short time.
Key sites for early farming include Gobekli Tepe, Jericho, Gatalhüyók, and ‘Ain Ghazal.
In Abu Hureyra in the Euphrates Valley , a small foraging settlement became a compact farming community of mud-brick houses separated by courtyards and narrow alleyways.
As the plants they had sought out became harder to find due to the drier climate, tae people there began to cultivate the cereal rye.
They (9 1E b Corn, domesticated in central America by 5000 &cE, developed from a wild grass, teosinte, and is still found in Mexico.
As it spread throughout much of the Americas, farmers developed strains that adapted to local conditions such as arid environments. »5 d ""A vt DO BCE KEY 7 Areas where farming originated Spread of agriculture © Sites of early farming Llamas were the only pack animal in the Americas, used by Andean traders for carrying textiles, fishmeal, and other commodities between the lowlands and highlands. also continued to hunt gazelles, and keep sheep.
Analysis of bones (see left) has revealed that the number of domesticated sheep gradually outnumbered wild animals, and ground cereals became part of the diet.
At Gobekli Tepe in Turkey, examples of what may be the earliest stone temples, dating from 9000 BCE, have been discovered.
This was a community on the verge of becoming a permanent village with structured belief systems.
Farmers in the Andes grew numerous potato varieties, adapted to different microenvironments high in the mountains.
Farmers in the Yangtze Valley in southern China had domesticated wild rice by at least 8000 BCE, probably at about the same time as along the Ganges River in India.
Chinese agriculture became highly organized and intensive over later centuries, especially in the south.
Northern Chinese farmers had to contend with frequent droughts and floods.
People may have first planted cereals as a way of preserving their plant-gathering way of life.
Sheep were domesticated early, by 10,000 gce, probably as a result of close association between hunters and wild herds.
Voracious eaters, goats provided flesh, skins, milk, and other by-products for their owners.
It expanded across the Mediterranean, then northward, developing with slight variations in the associated crafts and architectural style as it spread.
Farming the Americas The ancient native American population developed an expertise with wild plants.
By 4000 BCE, many huntergatherer groups in the Americas were The spread of agriculture From around 10,000 BCE cultures began to live by farming.
It seems to have occurred in isolation in other parts of the world over the next 8,000 years.
In the Andes Mountains in South America, hunters experimented with the cultivation of potatoes and other indigenous root vegetables.
Corn was domesticated from teosinte, a grass native to Central America.
They were tamed in several locations, including the Sahara and southwest Asia.
TIME TO INNOVATE Not everyone was needed in order to produce enough food to feed the community.
This was stored for times of need or traded, creating new trading possibilities.
Farming fed more people within smaller areas, promoting growth in population.
GETTING MORE OUT As populations increased, so did the pressure on the land.
If favorable areas could not be sought out, new techniques had to be developed, such as the irrigation systems used in Egypt.
MYA— 5000 BCE BEFORE water or milk), people in the first permanent village settlements lived on the meat and produce from their domesticated herds and supplemented their diet with wild game and wild plant foods.
One of the key features of these settlements, which marks them out from early hunter-gatherer sites, is the existence of storage facilities for food.
This indicates that communities were planning for the season ahead and storing grain over the winter.
These early farmers would have lived from harvest to harvest, and the danger of starvation was always present.
In TEMPORARY SETTLEMENTS Hunter-gatherer sites, such as hunting camps, were seasonal and impermanent.
This lack of material objects means that our evidence of this lifestyle is meager.
Early human populations were nomadic, moving around in search of food, as it became available.
LIFE ON THE MOVE Up to about 10,000 years ago, life revolved around the constant search for food.
New areas were gradually colonized as groups of people sought to exploit new sources of food.
Tools, such as the digging tool, shown left, developed as part of this transition.
LIFESTYLE OF THE HUNTER The way of life of the hunter-gatherers was highly successful and adaptable.
At Abu Hureyra, Syria , several hundred farmers lived in close proximity to their fields and each other.
In another early settlement, 'Ain Ghazal, in modern Jordan, herds of goats were kept and wild animals were hunted.
By 8000 BCE it had become a small walled town, whose inhabitants lived in INVENTION for grave goods or ceremonial purposes.
Fired clay vessels are a feature of all early farming cultures around the world.
Bowls were used for cooking and eating; large jars and round-bottomed pots held liquids or stored grain.
Most early vessels were made by joining clay coils, or by shaping a pot from a clay lump.
Pots, such as this particularly sophisticated example, first appeared among the Jomon people of Japan before 10,000 8c, and in Mali, West Africa, at about the same time.
Most pottery was for strictly utilitarian purposes, but skilled potters also made fine-walled, elaborately decorated vessels beehive-shaped houses with stone foundations and plastered floors, many of which had private courtyards and ovens.
Another highly successful, long-lived, and large settlement was Catalhoyuk in Turkey , which thrived from 7000 BCE and was inhabited for over 1,000 years.
Its population lived in rectangular houses, built very close together, which were entered through the roof.
One reason for the site's success may have been its trade in the highly-prized black volcanic glass, obsidian, used to make cutting tools.
Surviving day to day Cereal grains were the staple diet in all early farming communities across southwest Asia.
Apart from bread or gruel (commonly oatmeal boiled in some ways, they had been better off as hunter-gatherers, as gathering food is less labor-intensive than producing it.
However, the benefits of farming—the ability to support more people from a smaller area—allowed populations to grow and society as we know it today to flourish.
Specialization People now lived in crowded villages, with the same neighbors for generations.
Men were probably responsible for herding animals, perhaps some of the work in the fields, and hunting, while women prepared food, and were responsible for foraging and food storage.
Within such communities specific roles developed, as not everyone was required to find food.
At the same time, some people became part-time specialists such as shamans and spirit mediums, canoe builders, and potters.
A network of family members would have helped each other in times of crop failure.
Ancestors were associated with the fertility of the land and were worshipped.
Some of the dead at Jericho were decapitated and buried beneath the floors of their houses.
Their relatives then modeled the revered ancestor’s features in clay on the skulls and buried them in pits.
At ‘Ain Ghazal, collections of clay figurines were also buried in a deliberate fashion.
The rise of community life In the first villages, people would have lived in close communities like this modern-day Tuareg village in Mali, Africa, on an island in the Niger River.
Domesticated animals including goats and sheep would have been corralled and kept in areas between the houses.
VILLAGE LIFE Shrine figure This ancestral figure from ‘Ain Ghazal, dating from 7250 BCE, seems to stare into eternity.
It stood on a house platform and was probably dressed in robes or costumes commemorating a revered ancestor.
AFTER PE The establishment of villages and farming communities led to population growth and new challenges for those who lived in them.
HEALTH RISKS Growing population densities led to unsanitary conditions.
INTENSIFICATION Higher populations led to greater intensification of farming methods, such as irrigation.
MYA—3000 BCE BEFORE As human mental abilities developed, so did beliefs in powers greater than humankind and some kind of afterlife.
Farming communities such as Catalhóyük, Turkey, had rooms for ritual associated with the dead.
The most visible mark of Neolithic beliefs are the spectacular megalithic structures built after 4500 BCE in much of the Mediterranean world and in Western Europe, including Spain, France, Britain, and Scandinavia.
These include chambered tombs, “menhirs” , stone rows, and stone circles.
Henges consist of a circular or oval area enclosed by a bank, but usually have their associated ditch on the inside rather than the outside of the bank, and fewer entrances.
Some contained wood or stone circles— Woodhenge in Wiltshire, England, is perhaps the most famous example of a wooden circle.
Here, the only West Kennet The stone passageway in the West Kennet long barrow, in southern England, leads from a small forecourt to side chambers for the dead.
Rites and Rituals The megalithic structures of the Neolithic period are awe-inspiring even today, and their mystery adds to their appeal.
Frequently associated with burials and seeming to follow lunar, solar, or cosmic alignments, they are strongly tied to rituals linking humans to the wider landscape they inhabit.
Creating Stonehenge In an earlier phase, Stonehenge consisted of a low circular bank with a ditch running along its inside and a row of timber posts along the inner side of that. remaining evidence of the wooden structure is the post holes into which the timber posts were set.
Stone circles are most commonly found in southwestern England, western Scotland, and northwestern France, perhaps due to the supply of suitable stone blocks in those areas.
The stone circle at Avebury, in Britain, is among the largest that survive.
The stones may have indicated astronomical alignments and had religious significance.
Similar purposes have been suggested for sites of standing stones and rows, such as the rows at Carnac, in France.
The barrows contained a number of bodies, which may have been exposed before final burial.
Some, such as the one at West Kennet, in England, were built with internal stone chambers and used over several generations.
Newgrange in Ireland and Gavrinis in Brittany are other examples of chambered tombs.
Cigar-shaped ritual enclosures with empty interiors are often associated with barrow sites.
Center of a sacred landscape The most famous of all the megalithic sites is Stonehenge, England, which was developed, altered, and used over hundreds of years.
Like other Neolithic monuments from 3000 BCE in northern Europe, it was part of a large sacred landscape that included sites of celebration and worship.
Hills, lakes, mountains, rivers, and trees were all considered a part of the landscape that defined human existence.
Many megalithic structures were constructed at the center of such a landscape and Newgrange The entrance to the burial mound in Ireland's Boyne Valley is blocked by this curb stone decorated with the concentric patterns that are common to megalithic art in northwest France and Ireland. would have been visible from a distance; when newly dug, mounds in chalkland areas would have been quite conspicuous.
Stonehenge is close to another circular structure, Durrington Walls, as well as Woodhenge, and a number of burial mounds, including those in the town of Amesbury.
Then, in about 2950BCE, a simple earthwork enclosure was dug containing a circle of wooden posts.
Burials have been found around Stonehenge, along with finds that include amber and bone beads, showing that it was a site central to the rituals of life and death.
Those who performed the rituals that took place here were thought to be able to communicate with the dead and would have been important members of the community.
These structures not only reflect developed beliefs, they also indicate an awareness of the natural world; some, such as Stonehenge, may have been built to mark the summer and winter solstices—critical events in farming societies.
They are also striking feats of engineering and organizational ability.
The megalithic structures in Europe are echoed around the world in later cultures.
They can be seen at sites in many countries, including the United States and Japan.
MOUNDBUILDER SITES Elaborate funerary cults grew in North America after 1000 act.
Public ceremonies marked the solstices, and the first harvest was celebrated in plazas surrounded by temples on top of earthen mounds.
FUNERARY CUSTOMS Elsewhere around the world, funerary customs also played an important role in society.
Japan's Kofun culture of the 3rd century ce and later is remarkable for its keyhole-shaped burial mounds.
UPHOLDING TRADITION The tradition of building elaborate sacred sites is still common today in cultures around the world in the form of Christian cathedrals, Islamic mosques, Buddhist temples, and even in the monuments erected to commemorate American presidents.
MYA— 5000 BCE As settlements became more complex, trade and ties between communities grew and material culture became more developed.
BEFORE METAL Flint was used to make the hardest and sharpest tools and weapons for thousands of years.
From simple chopping devices, humans went on to produce tools for particular tasks, including scrapers, cutters, and hand-axes «€ 17.
PERMANENT SETTLEMENTS As agriculture spread throughout southwestern Asia after 8000 BcE, settlements became more permanent.
With permanent settlement came closer ties to the land and to a specific territory and its resources.
EARLY TRADE Most communities exchanged commodities such as grain, building materials, and toolmaking stone.
The village of Catalhóyük in Turkey, for example, specialized in trading obsidian, a highly prized volcanic glass used for making tools, particularly sharp knives.
OBSIDIAN RITUAL AND WORSHIP Both ritual and social life soon became more elaborate.
At Catalhóyük, what appear to be family shrines, where people commemorated their ancestors «€ 32 and worshipped a fertility goddess, have been excavated, revealing distinctive goddess GODDESS FIGURINE figurines made of clay.
The advent of copperworking around 8,000 years ago was the beginning of a long association with metals, and a significant watershed in human history, which led to even further innovation. t seems that humans have always had a fascination with rare and beautiful materials, from exotic shells used as jewelry to shiny metals.
Nebras th NO Aa 1 Pu I C A ORE A rock containing naturally occurring mineral from which valuable metals or other constituents may be extracted. tempered metal for stronger edge > £6 these dating back to the 6th millennium BCE have been found in Turkey and the mountains of Iran.
Those found in surface outcrops are easy to identify by their distinctive green color.
F to extract the metal) that opened the door to a world of innovation, and the development of stronger and more practical items.
They are made from bronze with copper nails and ivory detail on the handle.
They soon began to use holes lined with clay, then crucibles (containers designed to withstand the heat of the fire), to produce the metal more efficiently.
Trading up The use of copper not only stimulated technological advances, but also led to significant cultural developments.
As copper ore outcrops are patchily distributed, copper items and metal ingots of standard shapes and sizes became valued as tradable items.
Culturally advanced in other ways, lowland Mesopotamia had no native metal or ore, which meant that both copper and gold, the two most prestigious ornamental metals, were imported from Anatolia (modern Turkey) and the Iranian Plateau.
The traffic in these materials grew quickly, and growing lowland Mesopotamian towns began to exchange grain and other commodities for imported artifacts and ornaments.
The finds represent the oldest known gold artifacts in the world and date from the end of the 5th millennium sce.
The grave of one individual contained almost 1,000 gold objects, including beads and rings.
Hole for thread complex levels of social organization arose, with specialty roles developing within the community—from baker to potter, and weaver to metalworker.
Copper tools and ornaments Many of the innovations in copperworking came about as an indirect result of improved agricultural methods.
Efficient arable farming in the Nile valley enabled villages to develop and thrive, maintained by a surplus of food.
More efficient farming methods meant that not everyone was needed for food production, and so more Hammered decorative detail Beginning of bronze The first copper-tin alloy—bronze— was produced in around 2500 BCE, although it did not come into widespread use until much later.
Bronze is harder than copper and therefore more suitable for practical applications, such as weapons, armor, and tools. had been established by this time, and objects made from copper were traded all over southeastern Europe.
Rich graves have been discovered at Varna, on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria, | HOW WE KNOW a In 1991, the frozen body of a man dating to Arsenic, found in his hair, showed that he around 5550 Bce was found preserved in a had worked with copper.
He was nicknamed Ötzi, after the unfinished bow and arrows, and a flint knife Otztal Valley of the Alps where he was were found alongside his body.
Scientific analysis has revealed many containing the primitive wheat einkorn, was the tattoos found on his body may have details about his life and violent death. preserved in his intestines.
Otzi was fleeing attackers—a flint arrowhead lies in one shoulder and he parried a dagger attack with his hands before dying.
Otzi's PRECIOUS METAL AFTER The use of metal, from bronze to iron and steel, has transformed human civilization.
BEAKER CULTURE Between 2800 and 1900 Bce, at the beginning of the Bronze Age, people of the Beaker Culture (so named for the distinctive shape of the pottery) lived across a large area of northern Europe.
TOOLS COPPER TRADE As one of the raw materials for bronze, copper needed to be transported in increasingly large quantities.
Handles on each end for carrying, and a uniform size, made ingots of the metal easier to transport, and trade and quantities easier to control.
This copper ingot found in a hoard from Cyprus dates from about 1200 act.
COPPER INGOT BRONZE AGE A period defined by the use of bronze as the most important material for making tools and weapons.
IRON AGE Iron was introduced in around 1200 &cE in the Middle East and eventually became used more than bronze, as it is tougher and more suitable for use in tools and weapons.
EARLY STEEL Iron can be smelted only at about 2,900°F , though the metal can be worked at lower temperatures.
GOLD FEVER In January of 1848 a work crew camped on the American River at Coloma near Sacramento, CA found a few tiny nuggets of gold.
This discovery set off a mass of migration as half a million people from around the world descended on California in search of instant wealth.
MYA—5000 BCE BEFORE The first settlements that developed from villages to towns were in modern-day Iraq.
Longdistance trade of volcanic glass and brightly painted pots was one of the factors that led to larger villages and towns and to greater contact between settlements.
Female figurines, like the one shown here, are characteristic of this society.
MESOPOTAMIA Mesopotamia, which was also part of Iraq, was settled by village farmers as early as 6000 ct.
The communities living in the INVENTION The wheel originated in Mesopotamia in the 5th century sce and is believed to have developed from the potter's wheel.
It is one of the most important inventions in human history as it revolutionized transport.
By the 5rd millennium the use of wheels had spread east, where burials with wheeled carts took place.
Chariots pulled by domesticated horses came into use in the Black Sea region of Europe and northern Mesopotamia after 5000 Bce and became valued by armies on the move.
The scene below shows wagons with solid wheels and is taken from the Sumerian Royal Standard of Ur dating to c 2600 act. south relied on long-distance trade for many commodities, and on irrigation and wetland agriculture.
MORE COMPLEX SOCIETIES By 4000 8ce, village life in southwestern and east Asia was firmly established.
Society became more ` stratified, with a growing ar g social chasm between the rulers and the ruled.
HALAF FIGURINE Treasure from Iraq Naked men bearing offerings of fruit and vegetables approach the shrine of the goddess Innin , an Earth goddess, on a carved stone vase of 5000 BCE found in her temple at Uruk.
In 2003, looters stole the vase from the Iraq Museum in Baghdad; it was later recovered.
Egyptian market Village markets with their visiting traders were a major part of community life at a time when all information was exchanged by word of mouth, and merchants brought news of the outside world.
This modern-day Egyptian village is little different from the first villages thousands of years ago.
Town Planning Four thousand years after agriculture began, many farming villages in southwest Asia had grown into towns with over a thousand inhabitants.
In southern Iraq, Egypt, and elsewhere, a few strategically placed communities became towns with neighborhoods, public buildings, and sacred precincts. he world's earliest towns developed in Mesopotamia, perhaps as the result of a need to organize the construction of irrigation channels and canals fed by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.
At first, the towns were little more than agglomerations of villages and related families, but they soon became major centers of trade and vast irrigation works that transformed the countryside and produced several crops a year.
Each clustered around temples and sacred precincts built on top of mud brick pyramids called ziggurats.
Its rulers governed satellite villages extending at least 6 miles from the temple, but most people lived in the town, partly for protection, and also because everything was governed from the center.
The growing town was the hub of major trade networks that brought metals, lumber, and other commodities from the highlands far upstream, in exchange for grain from the south's fertile soils.
Uruk may even have maintained outlying colonies as far Nekhen votive An ivory statue from Nekhen in Upper Egypt depicts an early ruler wearing a ceremonial headdress. away as the Zagros Mountains, several hundred miles to the north, to ensure control of major trade routes.
Mesopotamian legends called Eridu the dwelling place of Enki, God of the Abyss, the fountain of human wisdom.
The people believed that Enki had created order from the chaos of primordial waters.
In its heyday, around 5,000 years ago, Eridu lay in a fertile landscape near the coast.
The First Egyptian towns In 4000BCE, Egypt consisted of a valley of farmers living in small communities spaced along the Nile, which watered FIRST EGYPTIAN RULER HORUS AHA King Horus Aha, often called Menes, is a shadowy figure in Egyptian history.
His predecessor, Narmer, an Upper Egyptian chieftain, may have unified Egypt with decisive military victories, but it was Horus Aha who assumed the role of divine king, the living god Horus on Earth.
His power came from prowess in war and control of lucrative trade routes with Lower Egypt, even Mesopotamia. their fields.
It was a competitive world of small kingdoms, the largest of which were based on growing towns like Abydos and Nekhen in Upper Egypt.
While Abydos was a sacred place—the ancient entrance to the underworld— Nekhen was a major pottery trading center.
Nekhen's chieftains may have been the forerunners of the Egyptian rulers called pharaohs , for they are known to have supervised agriculture, and, like later kings, may have been considered living gods.
Town hierarchy As towns grew, so society became increasingly hierarchical.
At the top was the ruler, who may have governed as a living god as well as a secular leader.
Beneath him were his immediate family and a small privileged class of high officials and priests.
Lower down the scale came artisans, lesser functionaries, soldiers, and the commoners who were the manpower upon which all of society depended.
Early Sumerian rulers and Egyptian pharaohs ruled by precedent (using the decisions of their predecessors rather than written laws), gave limited public TOWN PLANNING jg AFTER As the first towns became more complex, new ways of communicating within the community and with other sites became important.
WRITTEN COMMUNICATION By 5100 8cE, written scripts like this one were in use in both Egypt and Mesopotamia.
They developed from day tokens used for recording commercial transactions.
CUNEIFORM SCRIPT CENTERS OF TRADE In Egypt and Mesopotamia, cities grew rapidly to become major trading centers, with imposing public buildings.
As urban populations rose, cities became the hubs of larger kingdoms and empires.
At the same time, the volume of longdistance trade in commodities like iron ore and lumber grew quickly, as did the demand for gold, silver, and other precious materials.
GROWING AROUND THE YEAR By 30008cE, irrigation agriculture, which used simple canals to divert floodwater to crops, began to give way to more elaborate agricultural landscapes with networks of canals.
Life in early towns was unsanitary and chaotic with people living at close quarters. appearances, and lived in seclusion.
Perhaps the very fact that they were not often seen in public led to the perception that they had supernatural powers.
A divine ruler's power came from his ability to control the labor of thousands of commoners.
His authority came not only from a threat of force, but also from pervasive ideas and religious beliefs commemorated by art and writing on temple walls and reinforced by elaborate ceremonies.
The latter were often displays of power that required imposing settings and conspicuous burial places such as pyramids.
For reasons that are still not fully understood, by the end of the 4th millennium BCE in Mesopotamia, almost everyone lived in cities.
This was a rapidly changing world where wealth assumed increasing Egyptian towns In Egypt, town dwellers—even high officials—maintained close ties to relatives in areas surrounding the town.
Little detail is known about the first Egyptian towns, which developed toward the end of the 4th millennium BCE, but they probably began as connected groups of growing villages.
Different communities came together, perhaps for defensive reasons, under the rule of charismatic rulers.
Some early Egyptian towns, such as Nekhen, became important trading centers and river ports, ruled by chiefs who competed with their neighbors.
The roots of many of the most important cities in civilization began at this time.
Palette of Narmer Dating to 5000 Bce, this slate palette, from a temple at Hierakonpolis, appears to show an early king and the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt.
They began to develop greater powers of communication, create complex belief systems, and form cultured urban civilizations, particularly in the Middle East, India, Europe, China, and Central and South America.
Start of Bronze Age in southeast Europe-in | Minoan Crete and | Cyclades islands of Greece. |v Administrative tablet, Uruk, Mesopotamia P rs r3 2900 Early marble figurines made by the Cycladic culture of Greece.
Cycladic figure > Caral ruins as 5000-2750 First cities develop in South America; several settlements featuring temple complexes, such as Caral, emerge in coastal Peru.
Great Pyramid of Khufu, Giza > 2500 scc A Stamp seal from Mohenjo Daro, Indus Valley 2500 Indus Valley civilization reaches its peak.
Metalworking, in the form of copper, reaches across Europe to British Isles.
JS PFTP ry 2340 Sargon founds and rules the city of Akkad, uniting city-states of Mesopotamia into the first empire.
Sargon of Akkad y n FFIT, L Å Shipbuilding, 5thDynasty Egyptian tomb | 2300 | Beginning of Bronze Age in rest of Europe. | regional rulers of 2250 BCE 2100 3rd Dynasty of Ur revives Sumerian civilization in southern Mesopotamia; King UrNammu of Ur builds a ziggurat (stepped tower), now typical of Mesopotamian architecture, while renovating Ur's temple.
A Pepy Il, 6th-Dynasty Egyptian pharaoh 2200 First pottery in South America.
Middle Kingdom Egypt run by powerful officials, such as Sesostris | of Egypt conquers Nubia and extends southern | frontier of Egypt to the second cataract Beginnings of Shang state, China.
In Peru, ceremonial center of La Florida built. develops on the Yellow River, China.
Indus Valley civilization Old Kingdom of Babylon established in Mesopotamia.
Phaistos disk, Crete A Hammurabi, king of Babylon, defeats neighboring Elam and conquers and integrates kingdom | Babylon controls all of Mesopotamia.
Minoan civilization of Crete at its height; palace of Knossos built; Cretan Complex civilizations developed along the river valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates in the Middle East, the Nile in Egypt, the Indus in India, and later, the Yellow River in China.
Trade, increasing prosperity, and technological advances produced increasingly powerful centralized states, and in time, empires.
These factors also brought many of these 1755 Law code of Hammurabi of Babylon displayed on monumental stelae (memorial stones) in temples throughout Mesopotamia.
Coa TU Disintegration of Middle Kingdom Egypt; start of Second Intermediate Period. 1700 the Indus Valley 1650 Anatolian city-states Aryan people in India.
In Europe, ling Was most mM Crete, from around 2000 & BCE. . | 1700 scc 1600 scc ~~"") 1600 ~% | Mycenae, Greece, | emerges as center of civilization in 4 Aegean; development 7*1 of Linear B script by -] Mycenaeans.
Hattusha wr a | 1650-1550 g During Second Intermediate Period, J | Lower Egypt ruled by the Hyksos, a warrior elite of © Asiatic origins; | Upper Egypt ruled from Thebes by | native kings.
Rise of Egypt's New Kingdom, with new capital, Thebes, facing the Valley of the Kings.
Volcanic | eruption on island of Thera buries Minoan town of Akrotiri; Crete falls under Mycenaean control. unite as Hittite Old Kingdom, with capital Hattusha.
Arrival of 5000-700 BCE 1500 BcE 1500 Hittite Old Kingdom of Anatolia declines; kingdom of Mittani emerges nearby in north Mesopotamia.
Mycenaean Greece at summit of power, with trading links from the Levant to Sicily.
Mycenaean-style <q Minoan vase, Crete A Mycenaean gold Late 1400s Warfare between New Kingdom Egypt, Hittite New Kingdom, and Mittani for control of the Levant.
Kassite Babylonia, the Hittites, Mittani, and Egypt linked diplomatically and by intermarriage.
Shang-Chinese v oracle bone 1350 Amarna Period of Egypt; Amenophis IV styles himself I “Akhenaten,” founds d short-lived capital ElAmarna, advocates worship of Aten, the Sun, and instigates an artistic revolution.
Mid-1300s City of Ashur breaks free from Mittani; its rulers proclaim themselves kings of Assyria.
Rameses III battling the ""Sea Peoples” Kassite dynasty of Babylon ended when city is sacked by neighboring Elam.
Egypt battles with A Hatshepsut's temple, New Kingdom Egypt Hittite king Hattusili III agrees Treaty of Kadesh with Rameses Il of Egypt.
Olmec site of San Lorenzo destroyed; Olmec site of La Venta assumes leading role. d ¢.965 Solomon king of Rise of urban culture À Israel. «| in Ganges valley.
First First fortified hilltop 950s | ironworking south of sites in Western Europe.
Chavín politically and culturally dominant in Peru; Chavín cult of supernatural werejaguar reaches height.
Dark age throughout Wet rice and bronze Middle East. technology Sped 1030 to Korea.
Sargon Il of Assyria > 52 FLINT DRILL 3000-700 BCE BEFORE Archaeological evidence suggests that prehistoric hunter-gatherers were robust and healthy.
Their diets-mainly raw fruits, leaves, and vegetables, with some lean meat and fresh fish-were probably very well attuned to the needs of the human body.
MOVING AROUND As they were constantly on the move, and not living in large groups, hunter-gatherers probably suffered rarely from infectious diseases.
Life expectancy was low, but this probably had more to do with physical dangers than disease or want.
MEDICAL INTERVENTION During the Neolithic period, people began to make sophisticated stone tools and weapons.
Teeth in remains found nearby showed signs of skilful drilling to remove rotten dental tissue.
They lived close to their livestock, too, and this led to a proliferation of diseases that had not been a problem before.
Waste was another hazard, and water supplies quickly became contaminated.
An agricultural lifestyle brought with it diets very different from those of huntergatherers.
There was less variety, and a single crop— often wheat—usually dominated.
Repetitive tasks, such as | grinding grain to make flour, caused excessive wear to people's joints, leading to arthritis.
At the same time, more food was cooked, a process that can destroy vitamins and introduce toxins, while babies depended less on their mothers’ milk.
These changes led to populations of smaller stature and with weaker bones, as well as new conditions such as anemia and scurvy.
Often, serious bone fractures were successfully reset-remains show signs of regrowth.
Busy, booming cities were surrounded by fertile land given over to agriculture, and farming became so efficient that only a relatively small proportion of the population needed to be involved in producing food.
This led to the development of trade, mathematics and astronomy, writing, and a flourishing of cultural activities.
The price of progress Along with the many benefits of their way of life, however, people in early civilizations suffered from some ill effects.
Their diets were generally lower in fiber and higher in fat and salt than their hunter-gatherer predecessors.
There is evidence that this led to an increase in conditions such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and cancer—a trend that began with the rise of agriculture several thousand years earlier, and continues today.
In Central America, for example, early Maya people began relying on corn as a Sickness Hole in the head The earliest known surgery, dating back to 40,000 BCE, was trepanning—drilling a hole in the skull.
The practice occurred in Central America, Furope, and Asia. carried diseases such as the plague and typhoid.
Explaining disease No one in early civilizations could understand disease the way modern medical science does.
Thus, it was normal to attribute the causes of disease to supernatural forces.
People believed that they became unwell as the result of possession by evil spirits—demons—or because of angry gods or sorcery carried out by their enemies.
Just as explanations of disease appealed to the supernatural, so did most attempts to cure people.
In most cultures, priests and sorcerers were at least as important as physicians— and exorcism of demons, sacrifice to the gods, shamanistic rituals, and counter-sorcery were commonplace.
The Ebers papyrus, written in Egypt in the 2nd millennium BCE and China has the strongest tradition of using herbs and roots in medicine.
The story goes that he tested hundreds of different herbs, searching for ones with medicinal effects.
He is also credited with the introduction of tea-drinking— for its remedial qualities.
The therapeutic use of plants is found in almost every corner of the world.
The Olmec in Central America, for example , had areas of their gardens set aside for growing medicinal herbs.
Papyri from ancient Egypt list remedies involving plants such as thyme, juniper, frankincense, and Health The desire to stay alive and healthy is a basic human instinct.
It is no wonder, then, that people in early civilizations attempted to explain the origins of disease-and intervened to soothe pain, encourage healing, and effect cures.
This led to a population explosion, but at the price of a dangerously restricted diet.
As the Bronze Age gave way to the Iron Age in Europe and Asia after about 1000BCE, many killer diseases arose for the first time in human populations.
In both cases, and in many others, the pathogens (diseasecausing organisms) evolved to cross species barriers from livestock, and were able to take hold because people were living so close together in mostly unsanitary conditions.
Rats, fleas, and lice thrived, and Egyptian surgical instruments In ancient Egypt, sharp bronze and copper instruments were used when embalming the dead, as well as for operating on the living. discovered in the 19th century, contains a long list of “medical” incantations designed to turn away evil spirits. and garlic—although there were others that used beer and animals’ entrails.
Ayurveda (literally ""knowledge of life"") is a holistic system that uses a combination of religion and science to create physical, mental, and spiritual well-being.
Herbalism Healing based on supernatural beliefs is an example of folk medicine.
Many ancient treatments based on herbs or other plants evolved through trial and error, and are so successful that they are still used today for their analgesic , antibiotic, or antifungal action.
In Mesopotamia, for example , a willow bark extract was used to relieve headaches and reduce fevers.
People began to think rationally, organize their thoughts, discuss them with others, and derive theories.
This approach led not only to an encyclopedic knowledge of human anatomy and of a vast range of diseases, but also to well thought-out systems of diagnosis and treatment—the basis of modern medicine.
The god Pazuzu, who as “king of the evil spirits” can ward off disease, looks down from the top of the amulet.
Ci d Sr * tS | During the Ist millennium sce, medicine became more systematic, but supernatural explanations and nonscientific folk remedies prevailed until after the scientific revolution of tattoos on a well-preserved body, nicknamed Otzi after its discovery, tally very closely with important acupuncture points.
The Ayurveda system flourished restore health and well^ du | across the Indian subcontinent. being, and to relieve pain.
Priests dressed in fish skins perform exorcism rituals at the bedside of the patient, probably a mother who has given birth.
The lamp on the left indicates that this happens at night. u & j bod EE as Pazuzu, who has a dog's head, a scorpion's tail, and bird talons, chases the malevolent Lamashtu back to the netherworld.
Lamashtu, the demonic goddess who preys on pregnant women and babies, has the naked torso of an old womanwith a pig and a dog drinking from her breasts.
Purging demons The Mesopotamians had a complex belief system of supernatural beings and forces.
This Assyrian bronze amulet highlights the importance of these beliefs in explaining and treating disease.
Medicinal plants ] The health-giving or healing properties of many roots, seeds, and leaves have been recognized since ancient times and confirmed by modern medical science. ""a GINSENG Many of the ancient ideas about health and disease can be gleaned from the art, writing, and artifacts of the . time.
But equally important are i human remains, such as bones, d teeth, and other tissues.
Skeletal remains are the most valuable, because they decay very slowly.
They often show physical signs of deformity or malnutrition, and can also provide a physical record of certain medical interventions, including primitive surgery.
Further details can be revealed under the microscope and by carrying out tests.
Analysis of the chemical isotopes present and examination of the DNA can reveal subtle clues to what a person ate, how old they were, and how they lived and died.
The greatest Roman physician | and anatomist was Claudius Galenus EU — , who lived in the 2nd century ce.
His ideas about anatomy were based on careful observation, but many were false.
The locations medicine was derived in isolation, Greek thinkers were influenced by Egyptian medicine, which had many excellent herbal remedies.
A rich archaeological record documents the growth of irrigation, agriculture, trade, writing, towns, and complex societies.
IRRIGATION AND ORGANIZATION Settlements grew due to irrigation programs.
The organization and control needed resulted in more complex, layered societies.
SEAL SHOWING PLOWING WITH AN OX EMPEROR, DIED 2284 BCE SARGON OF AKKAD Seen traditionally as a great warrior-king, Sargon established the Akkadian dynasty and ruled 2540—2284actr.
He founded his capital city, Akkad, and created a centralized state that oversaw the first real empire in Mesopotamia.
It has been suggested that he established himself as a successful independent ruler first and then began his expansionist policies.
His military prowess could be explained by Akkadian techniques being more efficient than those of rival armies.
We know about Sargon's rule from an ancient document called the Sumerian King List.
BRONZE CAST HEAD, 23342154 BcE, OF AN AKKADIAN RULER, PROBABLY SARGON 54 One figure is shown larger than | TR everyone else.
It is likely that society—reaching its height this is the king, glass in hand, of sophistication slightly at his court, with this top row ahead of Egypt. depicting a banquet scene. he civilization of Mesopotamia thrived across an area that today includes Iraq, southwest Iran, east Syria, and southeast Turkey.
Mesopotamia is Greek for ""between rivers""—civilization here rested on a prime position between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers.
Civilization * was focused initially on city-states in the south, an area often called Sumer after the Sumerian language widely spoken there.
Certain city-states and city-based dynasties—Uruk, Kish, Akkad, and Ur—rose to control others for a LÀ Ls Adi Eh Tomb treasure The lavish jewels worn by Queen Pu-abi feature precious metals and for eating, and reeds—used — semiprecious stones from while before being for roofing and baskets in Ur's varied trading partners. dominated by vet others.
Irrigation This contrasts with Egypt and land-reclamation programs and its centralized rule, but bears some required well-drilled marshalling of similarity to the later lite of the Greek large numbers of people.
Great foundations for what is thought to be cities of the third millennium included the world’s first stratified Ur, Lagash, Kish, Eridu, and Uruk The Cradle of Civilization Mesopotamia, a fertile land embraced by rivers, was the site of the first complex societies.
By 30005cE, competing city-states of great wealth and sophistication were flourishing here, with advanced irrigation and agricultural schemes, established trade, the first known writing, and grand palaces and temples.
A place for everyone Mesopotamian society had a hierarchy and a centralized structure headed by rulers who were all-powerful but, unlike Egypt's pharaohs, were rarely thought to be divine.
Grand royal palaces appeared throughout the region in the Early Dynastic era.
We know of the sophistication and wealth of these palace cultures from discoveries such as the lavish, finely wrought Royal game This game board of 2500 BcE, inlaid with shell and lapis lazuli, was found in a royal tomb in Ur.
A court musician plucks at a lyre, decorated with the bull's head that appears repeatedly on examples of this apparently popular Mesopotamian instrument. ni Heavily laden people in the procession are shown stooping visibly under the weight of sacks filled to the brim with foodstuffs and other valuable merchandise. artifacts found in tombs at Ur where either royalty or priestesses (or figures combining both roles) were buried.
As in Egypt, to support such a society and its Some laborers appear to have owned land or received rations linked to their work for central government.
Standard of Ur This object, whose purpose is a mystery, was found in the royal tombs at Ur.
With 20-inwide wooden panels inlaid with shell, red limestone, and lapis lazuli, it reveals much about Mesopotamian life.
This figure is seen in a fringed skirt, while others sport woolen fleeces.
Rule and religion In common with other civilizations of the time, politics and religion were intertwined.
Rulers took a lead in directing religious matters, while priests and priestesses conversely took on “state” functions; some cities were ruled by priests.
Each city had a massive central mud-brick temple (such as the famous Ziggurat at Ur, see73), which was the home-on-Earth of the city’s god and where priests carried out rituals to win the god’s favor.
Keeping order was made easier by the people’s belief that they must do the gods’ bidding, to the extent that, when royalty died, palace staff entombed themselves with their king or queen.
Around 74 bodies were found in one grave at Ur. specialists were needed administration—a “professional” layer of experts such as bureaucrats, Og scribes, and FA merchants.
In & this urbanized B civilization, many citydwellers lived in impressive townhouses of locally sourced mud brick, mud plaster, and wooden doors.
A large labor force was needed to cultivate the land and run the great irrigation and building projects.
A world player Poor in natural resources such as metal and stone, the Mesopotamians, like the Egyptians, were forced to forge wideranging trade links Precious lyre Playing lyres seems to have been a part of court or temple life in Mesopotamia.
AFTER During the next millennium, a succession of cultures inherited the land between rivers.
AKKADIAN DECLINE As the Akkadian empire faded, local leaders won regional power in Kish, Uruk, and Lagash.
Irrigation systems were set up, temples rebuilt, and statues of Gudea were carved.
THIRD DYNASTY OF UR After the Akkadian era, the Third Dynasty of Ur fought off competing city-states to found a short-lived empire built on Akkadian achievements.
The kings of Ur revived central rule to create a Sumerian renaissance harking back to the region's former glories.
OLD BABYLONIAN ERA Since 19008ce, the city of Babylon, north of Sumer, had been emerging as a dominant power.
The Old Babylonian era saw the rule of Hammurabi and his famous law code, a rich source of information about life in the Babylonian state.
This drove much of the progress and expansion of their culture and gave them a leading profile in world politics.
Its art included exquisite jewelry, musical instruments, and beautiful stone carving dating back to 4thmillennium Uruk.
PRE-DYNASTIC EGYPT The period between early Neolithic settlement and 3100BcE is known as the Pre-Dynastic Era.
Evidence discovered in tombs suggests a wealthy society, and that people believed in an afterlife.
EARLY DYNASTIC ERA The Early Dynastic Era covers the Ist and 2nd dynasties.
Menes, or Horus Aha «€ 45, who united the kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt, is usually thought to be the first pharaoh.
However, Narmer may have come first, or Narmer may be another name for Menes.
NARMER A SENSE OF IDENTITY The Early Dynastic Era gave Egypt a strong sense of identity.
It brought a sudden (as yet unexplained) rise to greatness, with more complex irrigation programs, grander royal tombs, a centralized state headed by a king with a semidivine identity, and a form of writing.
Djoser was the second pharaoh of the 5rd dynasty and Imhotep was his 2 chief adviser and physician, | as well as being the leading genius of his day.
His step pyramid is seen as the building that helped establish the Old Kingdom as an era of remarkable achievement.
The oldest surviving building made from cut blocks of stone, | it was the first true Egyptian pyramid.
Giza's great tombs adapted Imhotep's design, but filled in the stepped sides to produce what we now think of as the classic pyramid.
Imhotep's skills as a physician were such that he was worshipped as a god in later ancient Egypt and Greece.
IMHOTEP a The Divine Pharaohs Egypt's Old Kingdom flourished on the flood-enriched banks of the Nile River.
Id Kingdom society was tightly controlled by a centralized government headed by a highly powerful ruler, the pharaoh.
Central to life, politics, and religion, which were all closely combined, was the idea that the pharaoh was a semidivine figure who acted as mediator between the gods and his subjects.
As a religious and political leader, the pharaoh not only oversaw elaborate religious rituals that underlined his links with the gods, he also headed a vast, highly organized political and administrative bureaucracy, peopled by an army of advisors and officials, chief of which was an officer called a vizier.
However, although their word was law, the pharaohs did delegate a significant amount to the governors and, as the Old Kingdom progressed (see AFTER), gave them more and more power.
Horus was strongly linked with Ra , creator of life and falconheaded god of the Sun.
The Sun cult became very important during the Old Kingdom and Ra emerged as a separate figure from Horus.
The pharaoh Khafre Khafre, also known as Khafra, Chephren, or Khephren, was the fourth king of the 4th dynasty.
This statue, showing him wearing a false beard and striped "" Is from his pyramid-tomb complex at Giza.
Through these connections, the pharaoh was the upholder of a justice system that aimed to reflect the cosmic order.
He was also, vitally, the figure who worked with the gods to ensure that the Nile brought silt-rich annual floods each year, keeping the Nile Valley fertile enough to support the great Egyptian state.
He was often depicted dressed in a kind of kilt and false beard, bearing a crook, flail, and scepter, and with the double crown of Lower and Upper Egypt on his head.
He was accompanied by the royal fan-bearer, and people fell prostrate before him.
Egyptians did seem to realize he was a flesh-and-blood human, but they stood in awe of his sacred power.
To the north, in Lower Bgypt, the Nile's tributaries fanned out to create a wide, fertile delta, home to a high concentration of people.
At the delta's south was the “capital city"" of Old Kingdom Egypt— Memphis.
Farther south, in Upper Egypt, the valley snaked away in a narrow strip, with towns clinging to its fertile banks.
The Nile's annual inundation left in its wake the rich black silt on which the Egyptians relied to grow their crops.
Vast irrigation programs were nemes"" headcloth, Population of builders This relief of an Egyptian shipyard is from a 5thdynasty official's tomb at Saqqara.
Ships were vital for travel along the Nile and for trade with some of Egypt's neighbors. devised to direct the waters to wide areas of agricultural land.
Marshlands along the banks provided waterfowl for eating and the papyrus reed, used for making writing materials.
The river waters themselves supplied fish and a means of getting from one place to another.
The Egyptians, surrounded by vast stretches of arid, inhospitable desert, were only too aware of how dependent they were on this massive floodplain, As a result, lookouts were posted along the Nile in southern Egypt to spot early signs of high or low waters that would affect the annual harvest.
Society's pecking order Society was fairly clearly divided into different levels.
At the top was the royal family, presiding over court and administrative officials, such as scribes, and also priests.
Built in the Old Kingdom led miserable lives at Giza, close to Memphis at the edge pressed into the pharaoh's service, of the desert, these are among the building vast constructions or growing greatest building achievements in crops to feed the cities, in return for history.
The Great Pyramid—the tomb just enough sustenance to stay of the pharaoh Khufu—was one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world, and the only one that survives intact today.
Just to the east of the pyramid lies the Great Sphinx, a massive part-lion, part-human statue, thought to have Khufu's features.
The Giza pyramids are one of the earliest examples of using quarried stone.
Huge blocks of limestone were transported from some distance away, cut with incredible precision, and lifted into place to make a perfectly fitted construction.
No one famous “step pyramid” at See ne knows exactly how this was Saqqara, Si, chiel ocr conecaben achieved.
Each pyramid and then in the colossal with great precision and to may have been surrounded royal pyramid tombs of the produce fine relief carvings. by a sloping bank, built alive.
However, evidence suggests that there was an independent local life, too, including markets where people sold produce and simple crafts.
The fact that anyone could, theoretically, gain high office also contradicts the idea of a total dictatorship.
The Egyptians created large areas for cultivation, using complex irrigation systems fed by the Nile. upward as the pyramid grew higher.
The stone blocks may have been moved up the slope manually by using rollers and levers.
A Middle Eastern power Egypt became a major player in Middle Eastern politics during the Old Kingdom period.
There is evidence of long-distance contact with many regions, including parts of modern Syria, Libya, Lebanon, and Sudan.
Contact arose because Egypt wanted to keep its borders safe, and to trade for materials, such as wood.
Borders cannot be maintained or crossed without negotiation, so Egypt must have started to develop the diplomatic skills for which it became famous.
The Great Pyramid of Khufu The largest and oldest of the three Giza pyramids, this is what many people now think of as the greatest ""true"" pyramid ever.
J H r t : r 5 x j J "" Zu Li iur. o Ly ay EM Al"" I i ma, * The Giza pyramid complex The vast size of these royal tombs reflects the divine Status of the 4th-dynasty kings.
The most distant tomb is Khufu's ""Great"" pyramid; in the center is Khafre's; the smallest pyramid, in the foreground, Is that of the pharaoh Menkaure.
There are countless theories about the Old Kingdom collapse; but no one knows for certain what happened.
It is also suggests that as the pharaoh lost control, others were able to take more power for themselves.
Royal authority weakened and Memphis lost some of its importance compared with other towns and cities.
Links have been made with Egypt's dependence on the Nile, saying that extreme flooding, drought, or both brought great destruction or famine.
This would have been especially disastrous if central authority was weak.
Threats to Egypt's borders may also have been a factor in the Old Kingdom's decline.
EARLY FARMING CULTURES Most notable was the Neolithic Mehrgarh culture, starting 7000BcE in modern Pakistan.
HARAPPAN PHASES The ""Early Harappan"" phase of the Indus Valley culture saw the first examples of the Indus script, more sophisticated agriculture, and growing trade links.
Indus Valley script Indus valley seals are rich sources of imagery, featuring animal, human, and mythical figures alongside samples of the undeciphered script. he Indus Valley civilization peaked between about 2600 and 1900 5BCE, in what is often called its “Mature Harappan"" period.
It flourished across an extensive area of present-day northwest India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, along the fertile Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra rivers.
Also in common with them, its people developed expert knowledge about how to harness and control the annual flooding patterns of the rivers.
Artistic skills The refined artifacts produced in the Indus Valley region clearly show this to have been an advanced civilization.
They include finely worked jewelry in gold and fired steatite ; figurines fashioned from bronze, terra-cotta, and faience; pottery; gold and Indus rulers This famous figure from Mohenjo-Daro is known as ""the priest-king"", despite no evidence of rule by priests silver ornaments; and seals.
These artifacts seem to tell us that there was not only skill, but also prosperity and an elite class, which hints further at a society with different social and economic levels.
There are quite a few different artistic styles, too, perhaps pointing to a diverse ethnic mix within the population.
Some Indus Valley artifacts, most famously the jewelry, have been found at sites elsewhere in the world, indicating widespread trading links.
The Indus people relied heavily on trading arrangements and their partners included Mesopotamia , Iran, and Afghanistan.
Trading practice was boosted by advances in methods of transportation, especially in boats suited to long-distance travel along sea routes.
Sets of weights have also been found among excavated artifacts, and the Indus people seem to have been among the first to or kings. develop a precise weights Mysteries of the Indus A fertile cradle of river-fed land, crossing parts of modern India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, gave birth to the Indus Valley culture.
People in its impressive, well-planned cities lived a refined life, but unlocking more about them is tantalizingly out of reach, as their script remains mostly undeciphered.
KEY — Area of Harappan culture o Harappan site @ Site of Mehrgahr culture — Hine A civilization on the floodplain The Indus Valley civilization spread over the farmland that helped to support it-created from a floodplain at the mercy of river inundations.
Similarities in the planning of its urban centers suggest complex, centralized organization.
Behind this system lay the kind of expert knowledge that explains why their city buildings were so impressive.
A large number of settlements are associated with Indus Valley culture.
The most spectacular, Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa , were probably the world’s first planned cities.
Here were broad avenues and narrow side streets lined with spacious townhouses, all set out in a welldefined grid pattern.
Remarkably, Indus cities thousands of miles apart were laid out in a similar way, suggesting a centralized state and local civic organization.
Whether there was such a structure, and other details about government and society, remain largely a mystery, as although many distinct symbols appear on Indus artifacts, they remain undeciphered and their secrets locked away.
Advanced sanitation Highly developed plumbing included drains , some of which were covered, and latrines.
To give each dwelling access to clean water, wells were built with high, sealed walls to avoid contamination problems.
Maritime trading connections with Mesopotamia were especially important to the Indus Valley civilization.
MOHENJO-DARO The city suffered severe flooding in the 1700s BCE, and was laid waste by unknown attackers.
Believed to be semidivine, the ruling Shang kings performed rituals to please their ancestors and gods.
The highly prized metal, which was produced on a huge scale, was cast for weapons, tools, and vessels used exclusively by the noble classes for religious rituals.
Early Bronze Age civilization in China was a rigidly hierarchical society, ruled by a supremely powerful king and his nobles.
The people of the Shang— the second of China's ancient dynasties—believed that the king was invested with divine power from his ancestors, whose spirits were able to shape contemporary life if appeased with offerings.
BEFORE In the Neolithic period , the Chinese began farming millet and rice, and keeping animals.
This required a static population, so people began to build houses, and to live together in villages.
NEOLITHIC HEMUDU In 1973, a Neolithic settlement dating from 5000 BCE was discovered at Hemudu, in southeast China.
The finds included terra-cotta pottery, wooden and bone articles, and the remains of pigs and buffalo.
There were also some whistles made from the bones of birds, possibly used to attract birds to snares.
The most exciting discovery was evidence that the people of Hemedu cultivated wet rice. è YANGSHAO CULTURE | The area of Yangshao, in the eastern province of Henan, was first excavated in the 1920s, and yielded some significant finds.
In the village of Banpo, which was occupied 4500-3750 ct, the inhabitants cultivated millet, used polished stone hoes and knives, and wore hemp and possibly silk.
They produced pots made of red clay, some decorated with spiral patterns, and others with human or animal designs painted on them.
Se YANGSHAO | CLAY POT The Shang state In addition to support from aristocratic clans with whom they had family connections, Shang kings ruled their state with the assistance of officials.
The Shang were frequently threatened by nomadic tribes from the inner Asian LONGSHAN CULTURE Soon after the discoveries at Yangshao, a completely different type of Neolithic pottery was found at Longshan, in Shandong province.
It was much finer than Yangshao ware, and was black, decorated with rings and grooves, and often elevated on a circular foot.
BRONZE AGE ERLITOU The Xia dynasty was long thought to be a mythological one, but in 1959, palacelike buildings, tombs, and bronze artifacts from 1900-1350 8ct were found at Erlitou, in Henan.
Shang kings waged wars against their neighbors, thereby obtaining slave labor and loot.
They established new settlements, and cultivated captured land for farming.
Despite being a warlike society, Shang civilization was based on agriculture and hunting.
The production of bronze, too, resulted in a relatively settled society, as a static community was required to mine and smelt the ores that contain copper and tin, the metals needed for bronze casting.
Shang capitals The Shang ruled over much of northern China and the center of the country.
At Zhengzhou, a defensive city wall 4 miles long enclosed a large settlement; the wall and the buildings within were constructed of stamped earth.
The houses and workshops that have been excavated, and the variety of artifacts found inside them, indicate that Shang society was highly organized and rigidly ordered.
Outside the capital of Anyang, at Shang dynasty China Key Bronze Age sites include the early capital city of Zhengzhou, which later moved to Anyang.
Pre-Bronze Age finds have been made at the Paleolithic site of Zhoukoudian, and Neolithic pottery has been discovered at Banpo and Hemudu.
KEY Palaeolithic site Neolithic site Bronze Age site Extent of Shang influence sess Chariot burials When an important person died, his chariot, charioteers, and horses were buried with him, Strong handles were necessary for such a heavy pot to be removed from the fire.
Xiaotun village, the remains have been uncovered of what was the ceremonial and administrative center of the late Shang state.
Burial customs At Xibeigang, just north of Xiaotun, 11 huge graves have been found, which may belong to the 11 Shang monarchs who reigned at Anyang.
Their bodies were placed in wooden coffins surrounded by goods important to the deceased.
The bodies of scores of slaughtered horses and human victims—possibly prisoners of war— were laid out on the ramps that led down to the burial chamber.
Bronze industry The most prized archaeological finds from the Shang period are the bronze objects, made primarily for ceremonial purposes.
The production of bronze was controlled by the king, and the quantity of bronze objects found indicates that it was a major industry, employing large numbers of skilled craftsmen.
Early bronze technology in the West allowed an object to be cast from a single mold, but early Shang vessels were cast in several molds and the parts assembled later.
Important finds of bronze vessels were made at the two capitals of Zhengzhou and Anyang.
These vessels had ritual functions; some were intended for the preparation of sacrificial HOW WE KNOW Sold in the 19th century as “dragon bones,” an ingredient of Chinese medicine, “oracle bones” are actually the shoulder blades of cattle.
Questions about the future would be scratched on the bones, to which a heated bronze tool was applied, and the resulting cracks were interpreted for an answer.
They provide fascinating evidence not only of events in the Shang period, but also of early Chinese writing.
Tripod shape is reminiscent of Longshan pottery Bronze ritual vessel This highly patterned vessel was probably used by the Shang for the preparation of meat offerings. as seen in this example found dose to Anyang. meats, others for the heating of wine.
Writing system Along with a mastery of bronze, a complete writing system was created by the Shang, which had a huge effect on their organizational capabilities.
Bronze dagger The highly ornamented handle of this dagger possibly depicts a stylized ram's head.
Weapons such as this were probably used for ritual and sacrificial purposes.
Considered a tyrant, the last Shang ruler, Di Xin, was overthrown by the state of Zhou in the 11th century sce.
Many of the achievements of the Shang period, however, remain central to Chinese culture.
CHINESE CHARACTERS The writing system created by the Shang developed over time into the Chinese characters in use today.
When combined together, the stems and branches formed cycles of sixty days or sixty years.
The Shang model, although modified, remains the basis for the traditional Chinese calendar.
ANCESTOR WORSHIP The Shang people worshipped many deities, most of whom were royal ancestors, and communicated with them through divination.
This veneration of ancestors has remained an essential part of Chinese religious practice in modern times.
DIVINATION STICKS m al z Zh GI 5000-700 BCE BEFORE People used symbols to keep records long before the invention of true writing.
TALLY BONES The earliest form of note-taking known in the Middle East, the tally bone dates back 50,000 years.
CLAY TOKENS From 9000 to 3000 &ct, people in the Middle East used clay tokens to record commercial transactions, sealing them into clay envelopes called bullae.
The seal was pressed on wet clay by stamping, or rolling in the case of cylinder seals.
HOW WE KNOW Hieroglyphs were deciphered in 1822-24 by French Egyptologist and linguist Jean Francois Champollion.
He deciphered the Egyptian scripts by comparing identifiable words, such as names, in all three scripts, allowing him to work out the sound of each Egyptian sign from the Greek.
ROSETTA STONE 62 ccording to ancient tradition, writing was either invented by an individual or handed down to humanity by the gods.
The Sumerian poem Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta describes how King Enmerkar invented writing instantly to record a message too complicated for his messengers to memorize.
We now know, however, that the development of writing was a gradual process, taking centuries.
Degradable materials, such as papyrus, bamboo, and parchment, have not endured, so the earliest surviving inscriptions tend to be found on monuments.
These texts, such as the hieroglyphs on Egyptian tombs, are too sophisticated to be the first use of writing.
Scribes used symbols made with wedge-shaped impressions pressed into clay or carved into stone.
Many languages and civilizations used cuneiform, from Sumerian to Persian. huge numbers, so the progression of their earliest writing can be traced.
At early stages, writing was made up of The Writing on the Wall Writing—the symbolic representation of spoken language—and its development represents a massive step forward in the intellectual evolution of humans.
Message from a temple This clay tablet was written in a temple of Mesopotamia in 3100-2900 act.
The script is a kind of proto-cuneiform—an early, pictorial stage in Mesopotamian writing development.
The tablet probably describes grain either distributed by or offered to a temple.
Barley was one of the most important commodities and was used to make bread and beer-the two staples of the Mesopotamian diet.
Drawing was a messy and time-consuming process compared to impressing standardized wedge signs, as was done later by cuneiform scribes.
People involved in contracts authenticated them by pressing their seal into the clay, rather than writing their names.
The walking symbol suggests the items specified elsewhere on the tablet were moved.
The absence of verbs makes it impossible to say whether the transport was to or from the temple in which the tablet was found.
A transaction tablet was usually sized to fit into the palm of the scribe's hand, although much larger cuneiform tablets do exist.
Egyptian hieroglyphs Formal writing in Egypt retained the use of pictorial symbols—hieroglyphs—for more than 3,000 years.
Before the invention of numerals, scribes had to draw a sign once for each item. pictures of the things it records.
Over time, these pictures were simplified and made abstract to make writing quicker and easier.
Many early scripts were logographic, meaning that each symbol represented an entire word or idea.
Modern Chinese writing remains logographic, using around 12,000 symbols that allow written communication between the many different dialects of Chinese.
Cuneiform and Egyptian hieroglyphic scripts, meanwhile, mixed logograms with symbols representing sounds.
Such sound signs were combined to form words, which reduced the total number Cuneiform signs were formed by pressing a stylus into wet clay, each time producing a wedge FROM PICTORIAL SYMBOLS TO CUNEIFORM The earliest cuneiform, or proto-cuneiform, was pictorial and drawn into clay.
At some point, all proto-cuneiform signs were rotated | — | Date 3200BCE 30005BcE by 90 degrees.
True cuneiform appeared when scribes began to form signs from impressed wedges.
Egyptian and Maya hieroglyphs remained pictorial for decorative use in religious writing and inscriptions on monuments.
For everyday use, however, the Egyptians developed a more efficient, abstract system called hieratic.
It was written with fragile reed pens, which restricted the shapes the scribe could form.
When written on papyrus, hieroglyphs were painted with brushes, allowing the scribe a freer hand.
Chinese writing also diverged, with different styles of calligraphy being developed for different uses.
Grammar was absent, so this writing cannot be read as language, but it aided the memories of people who knew its Egyptian scribe Education of scribes began in childhood, lasting at least 10 years, and included mathematics and accountancy.
It seems likely that others could have understood it with a little training.
Writing was soon taken up by the rulers of ancient societies, however, and adapted to reproduce spoken language, allowing them to write literary, religious, and scholarly texts.
Spread of the written word Cultures in the 3rd and 2nd millennia BCE were not really literate societies.
Once writing became abstract, rather than pictorial, only a small number of merchants, administrators, and elites would have had enough schooling to read and write.
Ancient rulers used writing to manage the information on which their states ran, not to disseminate it.
Royal political inscriptions might be combined with imagery, and it seems that the masses would have read only the images, while the writing was aimed at fellow elites and at posterity.
Assyrian kings, for instance, buried inscriptions in the foundations of temples, recording their exploits so that future kings rebuilding those temples would read them.
THE WRITING ON THE WALL AFTER Writing systems became simpler and more sophisticated, but the spread of written communication was slow until printing was invented during the European Renaissance.
PHOENICIAN ALPHABETIC SCRIPT ALPHABETIC SYSTEMS At first, written symbols represented a variety of words, syllables, ideas, or sounds.
The idea that every symbol should denote a sound was an innovation in the Middle East and led to the alphabet.
The first alphabetic writing, with each sign representing a consonant but with no vowels, appeared in the 2nd millennium BCE, using adapted Egyptian hieroglyphs.
The people of Ugarit in Syria developed a cuneiform alphabet, but the need for clay prevented it from spreading.
Alphabets became important in 1000—700 BcE, being used for Hebrew, Aramaic, and Phoenician writing.
AMERICAN SYSTEMS The earliest surviving American writing is on 6008cE Zapotec monuments in Mexico and records the names of sacrificed captives.
ZAPOTEC CALENDAR PRINTING The spread of written material was hampered by the need to copy by hand.
FIRST INTERMEDIATE PERIOD Egypt saw civil war, drought and famine, and oppression by local tyrants.
However, the greater powers of nonroyals at the end of the Old Kingdom ushered in some broader-minded thinking, including a better justice system for all.
HERAKLEOPOLIS VERSUS THEBES One of the competing factions was a dynasty of kings based at Herakleopolis, central Egypt.
REUNIFICATION In the 11th Dynasty, Thebes sealed its rise to prominence when Theban king, Nebhepetre Mentuhotep II , defeated his rivals from Herakleopolis.
Regions of control under Thutmosis Ill ® Fertile land in the Nile valley 64 raditionally, ancient Egyptian history is seen as periods of order and prosperity separated by “intermediate” periods of chaos.
Historians now think this is an overexaggerated contrast, but prosperous eras under strong centralized rule were certainly separated by times of division.
Through all of this, however, ancient Egyptian culture and ways of life continued with surprising consistency for thousands of years—far longer than those of any other ancient civilization.
Middle Kingdom Often said to last from Dynasty 11 to Dynasty 13, the Middle Kingdom saw Thebes becoming a major royal center, although the seat of government stayed near Memphis (see Keeping order Powerful figures called viziers, as depicted by this 12th-dynasty statue, headed the administration of the Middle Kingdom.
In the New Kingdom, one took control in Lower Egypt and another in Upper Egypt. also on irrigation systems (for example, at Fayum near Memphis) that benefited all.
The country’s defenses were strengthened and new trade routes sprang up.
Nubia, which came under Egyptian control, supplied not only gold and copper, but also the labor to mine these, as well as personnel for Egypt’s army.
The Middle Kingdom’s stability dissolved when local governors pushed for more power.
During this time, a people called the Hyksos gained control and ruled Lower Egypt as pharaohs.
Southern Theban culture prevailed, with Thebes being rebuilt and great temples erected to the sun god, Amun-Ra.
Royalty was now buried in elaborate underground tombs, centered on Thebes' Valley of the Kings.
Amenophis IV took sun worship to extremes, bending his kingdom to the cult of Aten—worship of the sun's disk alone—and renaming himself Akhenaten in honor of his beliefs . 4 7i 9 The number of diplomatic letters in the archive of El-Amarna, Akhenaten’s capital, recording Egypt's role as the world's leading power.
Just as the Old and Middle Kingdoms had dissolved, so did the New Kingdom.
It is unclear why outside threats again became impossible to hold back.
Rebellion and internal corruption may have played a part, but the truth remains a mystery.
Middle Kingdom Egypt had a distinct character, but it was not as different from the Old Kingdom as once thought.
In the 12th Dynasty, the royals regained a strong grip—perhaps as strong as in Old Kingdom times.
Egypt was now run more like a corporation than an extension of the royal family.
Greater rights for ordinary people included access to mummification , and more interest was taken in the poor and needy.
Marked here are major centers of royal, religious, and administrative control during the Old, Middle, and New Kingdoms. under pharaoh Amose I, and the New Kingdom (c.50—1069 BCE; Dynasties 18 to 20) began.
This era is often seen as a time of glorious ""empire,"" with a militaristic, nationalistic outlook and new heights of wealth and power.
The king's role as warrior-defender of his lands gained a new emphasis.
Egypt quashed threats to the throne, thanks greatly to warfare techniques borrowed from the Hyksos—especially the use of twowheeled, horse-drawn chariots that were fast and lightweight.
The lavish tomb contents of the pharaoh Tutankhamun were interred and the monumental buildings In-fighting Private armies abounded during the Intermediate Periods, gathered by the leaders of regional factions fighting endlessly for control.
This model army of Nubian archers is from the tomb of a governor of Asyut.
New Kingdom opulence Queen Ankhesenamun anoints her young king, Tutankhamun, in a scene taken from a gold-inlaid throne entombed with the pharaoh in the Valley of the Kings.
Tutankhamun's short reign continued the New Kingdom's grandeur and returned Egypt to its traditional religious practices after the Aten-cult worship of his predecessor, Akhenaten.
EGYPT IN ORDER AND CHAOS i NEFERTITI The most famous wife of Akhenaten , Nefertiti seems to have taken a prominent role in her husband's rule.
Art of the period frequently shows her alongside her king, sharing his worship of the r sun's disk.
Nefertiti may have died in 1338 BCE, when all record of her disappears.
Some believe that Smenkhkare, a mysterious figure who seems to have ruled jointly with Akhenaten for some of his reign, was in fact Nefertiti.
AFTER Egypt's New Kingdom had become a vast empire, increasingly difficult to police.
KUSHITE RULE By the 25th Dynasty, at the end of the Third Intermediate Period, Kushite rulers from Nubia, notably Piye controlled both Lower and Upper Egypt under their rule, so reunifying Egypt.
PEACE AGREEMENT WITH THE HITTITES, C.1258 BCE he greatest pharaoh of the New Kingdom era , Rameses II reigned supreme for almost 70 years and brought a stability and prosperity to Egypt.
Like a presentday international statesman, he skillfully used diplomacy, military strategy, and propaganda to promote Egypt and, maintain his empire.
The future Rameses II was born just before the 19th dynasty , and became its third pharaoh.
From his father, Portrait and cartouche This impressive statue of Rameses II stood in the temple of Luxor, in Egypt.
The oval carving, or cartouche, has symbols representing Rameses as king, and wearing the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt.
Seti I, Rameses inherited an established empire that stretched from modernday Syria in the north to Sudan (then Nubia) in the south.
Like his father, he had territorial ambitions in Syria, but he had to contend with the threat from the Hittite Empire further north in Anatolia.
Rameses claimed this as a singlehanded victory for himself, while others said the Hittites won decisively.
The truth is probably somewhere in between, with neither side winning outright or making any major gains.
Mindful of his role as a diplomat serving Egypt's wider interests, Rameses later underlined this new accord by making at least one Hittite princess one of his wives.
The new, friendly tone of relations between the two powers is also clear from the letters found in the archives of the Hittite capital, Hattusha.
Like the famous ""Amarna Letters"" from the reigns of Amenophis III and Akhenaten , this correspondence is written on clay tablets in Akkadian cuneiform script (the language of Rameses II as a boy This limestone fragment from a stele (commemorative pillar) Shows Rameses sitting next to hieroglyphs that indicate he is destined to become king of Egypt.
These lively letters are the earliest significant evidence of international diplomacy, painting a clear picture of long-distance trading, political agreements, and diplomatic and daily affairs.
The letters between Egypt and the Hittites, and specifically between Rameses II and the Hittite king, Hattusili III, with whom the 1258 treaty had been made, discuss issues from international politics to medical problems and wedding plans.
Artistic license An outstanding feature of Rameses' reign were his buildings.
Giant statues and images of the pharaoh swiftly appeared, and craftsmen wrote inscriptions praising him on every available surface.
He created the new capital city of Per-Rameses in the Nile delta, close to modern-day Cairo.
He also built the famous temples dedicated to himself and his favorite wife, Nefertari, at Abu Simbel, close to Egypt's modern border with Sudan.
The four massive statues of Rameses at Abu Simbel are among the greatest achievements of Egyptian art.
Their style was not subtle, but Rameses' creative lead helped the arts to thrive, as they had under his father.
An astonishingly modern document, it is seen as the first real international peace treaty, containing causes on advanced concepts such as amnesty issues for refugees and extradition for fugitives.
It is thought to be such a milestone in international relations that a copy of it hangs in the headquarters of the United Nations.
RAMESES' CLAIM THAT HE FOUGHT THE HITTITES SINGLE-HANDEDLY 1275 BCE Nile at Thebes, the southern capital where Rameses created many new architectural projects.
Keeping control Rameses II kept a tight grip on his lands and on his people.
Government records that survive from his rule build a picture of a highly organized leader with a strong interest in lawmaking and order.
With major centers at Per-Rameses and around Thebes, he ensured strong control over both Lower and Upper Egypt.
He appointed a tight web of able officials, including many old friends and many of his own very numerous children.
There seems little doubt that Rameses II was a major figure in Middle Eastern history, despite his undoubted skill for self-promotion.
His reign was the last great era of imperial glory for ancient Egypt, and he made his presence felt as far away as modern Turkey.
He left a wonderful record of art and history, and a real taste of the grandeur and power of the pharaohs.
Rameses’ mummy Discovered in the 19th century, the mummy of Rameses II was later unwrapped to reveal his body.
He was a tall man for the times, with a long narrow face, prominent nose, large jaw, and red hair.
TIMELINE 1302 BcE The future Rameses II is born to Seti |, whose family came from nonroyal stock, and his wife Tuyu.
The crown prince Rameses is made regent while still young, to ensure that he will succeed his father.
Often said to be his favorite wife, she certainly seems to have been one of his chief wives for around 20 years.
He begins his reign by traveling south to officiate at his father's funeral in Thebes.
The defeated pirates appear to have been absorbed into the pharaoh's army.
The building of Abu Simbel is probably under way. 1260s BcE A large number of Hebrew peoples may be living in Egypt, perhaps forcibly ""pressganged” into the pharaoh's service.
There may have been an historically important ""Exodus"" of these peoples from Egypt into Sinai at some point in the 1260s.
Another wife, Isetnofret, now seems to become Rameses' principal queen.
NEFERTARI (MURAL FROM HER TOMB) 1230 BcE Rameses probably marries another Hittite princess.
LIFE AFTER DEATH Items found in graves from predynastic Egypt (before 5100BCE) suggest that, even then, Egyptians performed death-related rituals.
PREDYNASTIC GRAVE GOODS THE ORIGINS OF OSIRIS Belief in Osiris is thought to have begun in the Nile Delta region and probably developed from the local god of a place called Busiris.
Initially, Osiris may have been a god of agriculture, linked with fertility and the afterlife.
He gained popularity throughout Egypt and by the middle of the Old Kingdom €€56—57, 24008ct, had become a dominant figure, associated with death and the resurrection of the ruler.
RIVALRY WITH RA Before Osiris, the cult of Ra (or Re), god of the Sun and bringer of life, held center stage.
Ra Is depicted with a falcon's head, RA, THE on which is carried the sun.
SUN-GOD In the 5th—1st century Bce, historians such as the Greeks Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus provided the first reliable data on mummies.
Since then, studying them has become an increasingly sophisticated science.
DNA is analyzed , and the mummy checked for the presence of diseases, to reveal more about its identity and the Egyptian way of life.
Imaging techniques, such as X-rays and CAT-scans , can reveal a great deal without causing permanent damage. or the ancient Egyptians, the need and desire to please their gods were driving forces that influenced most aspects of their lives.
They believed that the god Osiris judged them on the lives they had led and that those who had lived ""good lives"" would attain a happy eternity alongside the gods.
He was thought to preside over their complex burial rituals, including embalming and mummification , which they devised to ensure a passage through the underworld to an afterlife.
People came to believe that the pharaohs, Egypt's leaders, were reborn as Osiris after death.
This powerful link to the Egyptians' belief in kings as gods was reflected in the “rebirth” elements of their burial rituals.
Cult of the people After the collapse of the Old Kingdom , the popularity of the Osiris cult was assisted by the shift in government dynamics.
With the pharaoh no longer an all-powerful figure, local officials gained in importance.
In this slightly more democratic climate, the burial rites and the right to rebirth, once strictly confined to the pharaohs, were increasingly extended to ordinary Egyptians.
At the height of Osiris’s popularity, even mere mortals were believed to connect with the god at The Realm of Osiris Osiris figurine The god was traditionally portrayed partly bandaged, as if being mummified.
Myth also told that the jealous and vengeful Set trapped Osiris in a coffinlike chest and threw it brother's position as king.
His body was then reassembled and bound with bandages, and he so became the first mummy.
Isis revived Osiris by magic, and he traveled to the underworld to become king of the dead.
A matter of life and death From these myths it is clear that the Egyptians' burial practices, particularly mummification and embalming, were a reflection of Osiris' own sufferings and the journey his soul made to the afterlife.
Ideas about the soul and spirit were central to burial practices, and to beliefs in general.
The Egyptians came to believe that each human being consisted not only of a physical body, but also of three spiritual parts.
First, the Ka, was part of a kind of ""soul"" and the essential life-force—a person's in the Nile River, then took his found and hid the body of her It was said that Isis lovingly and buried them where she A jury of 12 gods sits in judgment of the deceased.
The deceased, Any, followed by his wife, walks into the ""court,"" ready for the weighing of his heart and judgment by the jury of gods above.
The growth of the cult of Osiris, king of the dead, was immensely important to the ancient Egyptians.
Osiris gradually became the dominant figure among a cast of potentially vengeful gods.
Family drama Despite his growing importance, Osiris remained part of a broad and complex family of divine characters, each with a vital role to play in the Egyptian belief system.
The ba formed another part of the “soul” and, in modern terms, an individual’s personality.
Finally, the akh was the form in which a deceased person existed in the afterlife, when the ka and ba were reunited.
It was typically believed that the ka and ba were released from the body at death and needed to find each other again in the afterlife in order to create a happy, eternal akh.
The released ka returned to the dead body, feeding off it to stay alive.
THE EGYPTIAN BOOK OF THE DEAD, 1240 BCE t a) The bird-goddess Ma'at, keeper of truth and harmony, daughter of Ra and linked with Thoth, perches symbolically atop the scales of justice.
Any's heart, depicted with the Egyptian hieroglyph for ""heart,"" lies in one pan of the scales of judgment. able to feed and survive to reach the arterlite.
This is why preservation was so important—to keep the “soul” alive after death. jackal-headed Anubis.
Osiris, the supreme judge of such ceremonies, sits among the jury of gods.
He is wearing the crown of Upper Egypt. i EI The scales are supervised by the The Feather of Ma'at lies in the other pan.
If the heart weighs the same as the feather, eternal afterlife is assured.
It was soaked with preservative salts, resins, and oils, ru | and decorated with Preserving the body i | protective charms, Embalmers washed the ‘aie 7 | called amulets.
They then removed the intestines, stomach, liver, and lungs and placed them in four vessels called canopic jars.
The brain was removed through the nostrils, but the heart, considered to be the source of intelligence, was left in place.
The body was then stuffed with shaped like a scarab beetle were especially potent as the insect's life cycle reflected the daily “rebirth” of the sun.
The body was wrapped in linen bandages, placed Organ storage The removed organs were placed in canopic jars to prevent decay.
The jar second from right represents Anubis, the main god of embalming. amulets or items from everyday life to provide comfort in the hereafter.
Thoth, chief scribe of the gods, notes the results of the weighing of Any's heart. linen (to keep its proper shape and appearance) in a coffin, and buried along with other Amun-Ra was an amalgamation of the sun god Ra and the god of the air, Amun.
Ammit, a strange beast that is part lion, crocodile, and hippopotamus, waits to devour any heart that is found wanting.
IDEAS THE CULT OF ATEN During the period of Egypt's New Kingdom , when Osiris worship was at its peak, the 18th-dynasty pharaoh Akhenaten created a breakaway cult of his own.
He decided to worship the Sun's disc, in the form of a god called Aten.
The cult, which some scholars cite as the first example of the worship of a single god , came to an end at the close of Akhenaten's reign, after which the old order returned.
Serapis was at first identified with Osiris, but then became entirely separate.
The belief in a god's rebirth and the idea that happiness in the next life could be achieved by being good can be reinterpreted as the concepts of resurrection and salvation.
The performance of rites to connect humans with a divine presence is related to the idea of sacrament.
These ideas are present in a variety of religions, including Christianity.
FREEMASONRY Osiris lives on today within the “secret society” known as the Freemasons.
Some of their beliefs and symbolism are connected to the figure of Osiris, partly as a way of evoking a sense of order and mystery rooted in ancient wisdom.
Any's heart is weighed against the feather of Ma'at, goddess of truth and justice.
Gilded sunshade with a handle decorated with lotus flowers, which was one of many objects found | by Howard Carter in the tomb of Tutankhamun in 1922.
Bronze ankh, the symbol of eternal life, which only kings, queens, and gods were allowed to carry.
Eye of Horus amulet, which was placed in tombs to grant protection in the afterlife.
Gold dagger and sheath, discovered in the tomb of Tutankhamun, and dating to 1337 Bce.
Statue of the gods Isis and Horus, dating from BELT Egyptian Artifacts Ancient Egypt has left a wealth of items that reveal a remarkable civilization.
Implements for everyday use tell us much about the domestic life of period, while discoveries in the tombs of the pharaohs have uncovered extraordinary treasures.
Pectoral bearing the name Senwosret II , and made of gold, carnelian, feldspar, garnet, and turquoise.
Belt made of electrum , carnelian, amethyst, lapis lazuli, and turquoise beads.
Gold bracelet belonging to Prince Nemareth, depicting Horus as a child, sitting on a lotus leaf and protected by cobras.
Lies DUAMUTEF QEBEHSENUEF IMSETY BRACELET 3000-700 BCE BEFORE Large-scale architecture was one of the earliest features of civilization.
PITS AND MOUNDS IN EGYPT Tombs in predynastic Egypt were simple, sand-covered pits.
Early royal tombs were elaborations of this model, covering a rock-cut chamber with a mound of sand.
FIRST MONUMENTS IN THE AMERICAS Mud-brick platforms called huacas appear along the coast of Peru «€ 74 from 40008ct.
Mortuary temple of Queen Hatshepsut After the Old Kingdom came to an end, fewer pyramids were built and attention shifted to the mortuary temples.
These were often built at the foot of cliffs, which were possibly viewed as natural pyramids.
Imost every form of ancient Egyptian monumental architecture can be interpreted as part of a temple.
The pyramids were not isolated structures, but parts of mortuary temple complexes.
Egyptians believed that their kings became gods when they died, so the tombs were dedicated to their worship.
The first pyramid, the Step Pyramid, was built 2667—2648 BCE (see Imhotep,56) for pharaoh Djoser of the 3rd dynasty.
It reveals a move toward the use of solar imagery in its imitation of the rays of the sun.
The ""Pyramid Texts,"" which were religious inscriptions on the walls of later pyramids, refer to the pharaoh ascending to join the god Ra on a solar barque—a mythical boat in which the sun rides.
The limestone coating was plundered in 1556 CE to rebuild Cairo after an earthquake. outer walls, the cliffs at the edge of the Nile Valley, held back the chaos that lay beyond.
Colonnades and hypostyle halls (halls with pillars holding up the roof) represented the riverbanks, with the columns denoting reeds, while the ceilings symbolized the sky, and were decorated with images of stars and the sun.
Pharaohs the Great Gallery is a high but steep and narrow passage leading to the King's chamber the Middle Chamber, also misnamed Queen's chamber, was never finished workers used this escape tunnel to leave after sealing the upper chambers gained such prestige from their building programs that some even appropriated the projects of their predecessors, erasing their names and claiming them as their own.
Most monuments had religious functions and were intended to legitimize the position of the rulers who built them by connecting them with the gods. * c * ATTE a ^ d-— i c A —_ AE ee any — — i ——— — architecture, although its structure was different from that of the Egyptians, also had a religious purpose and shared similar functions.
Mesopotamian gods were linked with particular cities, and temples in those cities were seen as their houses.
Divination—the practice of foretelling the future—was a key part of the religion.
The people believed that the gods controlled fate, so divination was used to determine the gods’ intentions, and rituals were performed in an attempt to negotiate a better future.
Astrology was a key part of this tradition, and ziggurats—the Great Ziggurat of Ur Ziggurats, such as this reconstructed example, were in constant use, with astrologers working all night, every night.
No one knows exactly how this ziggurat in Elam looked when new. mu iX — — I BENE TITTELIT] tall, stepped towers attached to major temples—were also used as stellar observatories.
In Mesopotamia, the construction of temples was seen as both the king’s privilege and his duty.
Mud bricks did not endure long, so temples were often renovated or rebuilt.
They were centers not only for the royal court but also for the civil service.
With a few exceptions, Mesopotamian kings were considered earthly governors appointed to rule on behalf of the gods, rather than being gods in their own right.
Symbolic riches Ancient temples were not simply places of worship, but also important centers of administration.
Most were part of large tracts of land that provided considerable income and trading power.
Before it was destroyed at the end of the 7th century BCE, thie temple of Ashur—the city at Assyria’s ancient heart—was the richest in the world.
The demonstration of power To build monumental buildings required enormous resources, organization, and labor.
These buildings acted as a potent demonstration of the ruler’s power over his subjects, and periods of CORVEE Most ancient societies used corvée labor to provide a regular supply of unskilled laborers.
Corvée laborers worked on state building projects for a set amount of time each year instead of paying taxes in the form of money or produce. prosperity usually show evidence of new construction.
When a kingdom lacked central authority, or access to resources, building stopped.
The Egyptian pyramids also provide evidence of ancient methods of construction.
Rather than hundreds of thousands of slave laborers or conscripts working seasonally, as had been previously thought, the pyramids were built by 20—25,000 professional craftsmen and corvée laborers who worked year-round.
Snefru's first pyramid was finished in only a few years, so he had first a new palace and then two more pyramids built.
The decreasing size of pyramids after the 4th dynasty is probably due to an increase in the number of projects, rather than evidence that the 4th dynasty's grand projects had bankrupted the kingdom.
BUILDING FOR ETERNITY Monumental construction has continued to the present day all around the world.
To them, everything possessed a spirit, and mountains were particularly powerful beings, so places of worship were constructed in their image.
GREAT PYRAMID, CHICHEN ITZA THE SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD A list of the Seven Wonders of the World— the most breathtaking achievements of human construction—was publicized in the Greek world from the 2nd century act.
Also on the list were the Hanging Gardens of Babylon in Mesopotamia, described as constructed in tiers, like a ziggurat.
THE TOWER OF BABEL The Biblical story of Babel may have begun as a reaction of Jewish exiles in 6th-century Bce Babylon to ziggurats.
The Babylonians saw ziggurats, with their stepped levels leading progressively upward, as pathways to the heavens, providing access for astrology.
Jewish writers were horrified by the thought of humans climbing to heaven, and wrote that a displeased God disrupted the project by diversifying and confusing the languages of the builders.
The city, which was well established by 25008ce, included pyramid structures built around the same time as those at Giza, Egypt.
VOTIVE OBJECT An artifact offered to a deity as a gift of some kind in order to thank or appease them, or enhance the success of prayers.
The jaguar, found across Mesoamerica and South America, was viewed with reverential fear by the early cultures of these regions.
It was often depicted as a ""were-jaguar,"" which combined often infantlike human and jaguar features, typically with a downturned mouth, large lips, and oval eyes.
It appeared as jade figurines and larger sculptures, and was carved into altars and other surfaces.
The wereJaguar's exact significance is unclear, but it may be a ""transformation figure"" used by shamans to connect with the gods or harness the animal's natural power.
FIGURINE OF SEATED MALE WITH WEREJAGUAR BABY 74 he years between about 1500 and 900BCE saw the first real stirrings of more advanced civilization in Mesoamerica.
Agricultural skill and productivity improved, pottery became more complex (possibly through contact with Andean cultures in South America), and the temple-pyramid emerged.
This was also the period when Mesoamerica’s first great civilization sprang to life—the Olmecs.
In Mesoamerica, the Olmecs established a blueprint for later cultures in the region.
At the heart of Olmec belief was jaguar-worship, which they shared with their South American counterparts. spread out over a wider area of Mesoamerica.
It seems that Olmec symbolism was adopted by various other groups in Mesoamerica, possibly as a result of trading links.
Olmec farming practices were not particularly advanced, perhaps because they did not need to be, since the staple crop, corn, grew in ready abundance.
The Olmecs were hunters rather than pastoralists, because there were no large herd animals in the region that could be domesticated.
Animals were not used for transportation and, unlike in Eurasia, there were no wheeled vehicles—which, in any case, would have been of little use in the wet and swampy Olmec heartland.
The rise of San Lorenzo The first important Olmec center was San Lorenzo, on a plateau above the Coatzacoalcos River in the southern Mexican state of Veracruz.
It was most likely a chiefdom rather than a city-state, with a hierarchy comprising an elite class, skilled workers, and laborers.
The buildings at San Lorenzo were erected on earthen mounds and arranged around open plazas.
They & included temples and houses made of poles and thatch, and the city seems to have had an advanced drainage system.
Bloodletting and sacrifice may have been part of ritual practice, but this is purely speculation.
Near the San Lorenzo site, 1 mile away at Cascajal, a stone dating from 900BCE has been found bearing symbols that may be Olmec writing.
Evidence of widespread destruction of monuments has led some experts to suggest that there was a major uprising or invasion.
Others think that environmental factors may have caused San Lorenzo’s decline.
La Venta The other major Olmec center was the city of La Venta, near the border of modern Tabasco and Veracruz states, which had a much larger population than San Lorenzo.
As at San Lorenzo, colossal stone heads and jaguar figures and imagery were found at La Venta, as well as templeceremonial complexes, including a giant pyramid.
The major buildings at the site were all precisely aligned, perhaps linked with ideas about astronomy.
Olmec art was accomplished, especially its stone carving, including many small jade figures.
Skilled relief carvings have been found at La Venta, along with other Olmec artifacts, including iron-ore mirrors that were worn around the neck.
These may have been used by Olmec leaders as evidence of their “special” powers, as the mirrors could have been used to start fires or even project images.
The Chavin of South America To the South, the Peruvian Chavin culture began to develop in the Andes region around 1000BCE, and then spread along a great strip of the Peruvian coast.
Chavín de Huántar may or may not have been the center or birthplace of the culture, but it was certainly of great importance.
At the heart of this sizable settlement, which could have been home to around 3,000 people, was a monumental ceremonial complex made of stone blocks and decorated with impressive relief carving. god, El Lanzon, with a human body, a catlike head, and serpentine hair.
Such depictions may be ""transformation"" images associated with religious ritual, perhaps signifying that priests could transform themselves into deities.
The buildings and site at Chavín de Huántar reveal the great engineering and architectural expertise of peoples in this part of the world, especially in the face of difficult terrain.
Flat terracing had to be created to build the Old Temple, just as the Olmecs had to reshape the plateau at San Lorenzo, and the later Zapotecs would master the ultimate challenge of building Monte Albán on top of an artificially leveled mountain.
As in Olmec culture, Chavín art often shows figures combining both human and animal features.
At the center of the Old Temple at Chavín de Huántar is a sculpture showing the great Chavín Chavín jaguar imagery Several well-preserved panels depicting jaguars— important in Andean culture as well as Mesoamerican— have been found at Chavin de Huántar.
They would have surrounded the impressive main plaza of this ancient site.
Olmec ritual These small Jade figures and upright artifacts are Olmec finds from La Venta.
The figures have the part-human, partfeline features of the were-Jaguar.
SOUTH AMERICAN CULTURES While Chavín culture was declining by 2008cE, other cultures (such as those of the Paracas and Nazca in Peru) were flourishing.
JAGUAR IMAGERY The jaguar remained important to the Maya culture, and also to the much later Aztecs.
Chavín culture Stretching from the Andes to the coastal plains of present-day Peru, Chavín culture developed the first coherent, recognizable style of Andean art.
NEOLITHIC SOCIETY Dating back to 65008ce, the Neolithic people of Crete probably originated in Asia Minor.
Their simple life centered around rearing livestock, growing 2 crops, and making basic pottery.
EARLY BRONZE AGE The earliest evidence of the Minoan civilization is 5000 ct.
During the 3rd millennium BCE, trading towns on the Cretan coast expanded.
Early trading partners included the people of the Cyclades (islands north of Crete — AN in the south-western ^ CYCLADIC FIGURINE Aegean), whose culture emerged at the same time.
On the mainland, too, Europe was entering the Bronze Age, with bronze reaching most regions in the 2000s act.
Made of clay, both sides of the disk feature symbols arranged in a spiral, and each symbol has been pressed into the day with a punch.
Discovered in the early 1900s during excavations of the palace at Phaistos on Crete, it has been dated to the period 1850—1350 gct.
Its meaning and usage is not fully understood but, as it features reusable stamps, some archaeologists believe it to be the earliest form of movable printing type, predating anything comparable by 2,000 years.
The Mycenaeans (see AFTER) modified Linear A to write the early form of Greek that they spoke.
But while this Mycenaean script has been decoded using knowledge of Greek, the Minoans unknown, preGreek language still remains a mystery, and most of what they wrote down appears to be economic records.
Seafaring traders An island location meant limited resources, so trade was crucial.
As skilled seafarers, the Minoans employed a range of sophisticated vessels.
They are often credited with having developed the first “navy,” albeit used for trade rather than war.
The Minoans’ impressive trading network gave them influence across the Aegean Sea in the eastern Mediterranean, and far beyond.
Minoan artifacts have been found in Egypt, modern Lebanon, Syria, Israel, and Cyprus.
Not only were Minoan goods widely are Minoan in style and feature typical Cretan symbols such as bulls.
Palace culture Minoan life was characterized by highly developed urban 4"" » settlements dominated by ""WE. splendid palaces, which mane were home to Crete's rulers.
The major cities on Crete were Knossos, Phaistos, Mallia, and Zakros, of which Knossos was the most opulent.
The cities, like those ol Mesopotamia and other civilizations of the time, were political, religious, Natural inspiration This jar is from the late Minoan period , when Mycenaean influence was evident.
Natural imagery was popular, and octopuses would have been a common sight. transported, but the Minoans themselves also settled in their trading destinations.
Murals excavated at Tell el-Dab’a in Egypt administrative, cultural, and trading centers.
Kings played both a political and a religious role and many government officials were likely to have been priests.
Minoan women This detail taken from one of the stunning, brightly colored wall paintings at Knossos, shows a trio of 2 refined Minoan ladies with attractively dressed hair, wearing fashionable clothes that left them exposed to the waist.
There is evidence that Minoan women took a significant lead in many aspects of life.
Minoan palaces themselves were vast sumptuous complexes with well-lit Minoan culture was its ""Kamáres The number of rooms | O00 thought to make up the famous frescoed palace at Knossos, “capital city” of the Minoan civilization.
Minoans worked as craftspeople, rooms arranged around internal courtyards.
The palaces had advanced drainage systems, similar to those in the Indus Valley , and plumbing that featured interlocking clay pipes and flushing toilets.
A culture of craftspeople Courtiers and wealthy families living in villas surrounding the palace would have owned exquisite artifacts and Knossos palace Around 1700 act, the Knossos palace complex was destroyed by an earthquake or an invasion.
When rebuilt, the palace was even more splendid, with stone steps linking the different buildings on its hilly site. gold jewelry for which the Minoans were famed.
Evidence suggests that many ordinary making items for home use and export.
The wealth that this industry created meant that they, too, lived in relatively sophisticated, multi-roomed houses.
Those that did not follow a craft worked the land, providing for the cities that powered Cretan society; tasks would have included tending the vines and olive trees that produced large quantities of wine and oil.
Mythology and religion Excavated artifacts give us an insight into Minoan religious practices and beliefs.
People appear to have been buried with possessions or offerings, showing a belief in an afterlife.
Cretan vases and frescoes are suffused with imagery featuring bulls, axes, snakes, and goddesses.
All Minoan gods were female and one of the most popular was the “Snake Goddess,” depictions of whom have been found in the ruins of houses and small palace shrines.
According to legend, his failure to sacrifice a bull sent by the sea-god Poseidon caused Minos’ wife to give birth to the Minotaur—a creature that was half-man, half-bull.
Minos trapped the Minotaur in a labyrinth, and young people were sacrificed to the creature every year.
Cretan frescoes also show young men and women leaping over bulls, which may have been performed for sport or for religious purposes.
Women in Minoan society Women played an equal role to that of men in Minoan society, and participated in all occupations and trades, including the priesthood.
Bull-leaping A Knossos palace fresco bull-leaping in which young men and women took turns somersaulting over a bull's back.
Dolphin fresco This beautiful fresco was discovered in a palace throne room.
The Minoans moved from a decorative artistic style in their early days to the naturalistic style of art seen here. reveals the perilous art of EUROPE'S FIRST CIVILIZATION HOW WE KNOW In around 1600Bce, the Santorini islands, near Crete, experienced a huge volcanic eruption.
Near the modern city of Akrotiri, on the island of Thera, archaeologists have unearthed a sophisticated, Minoanstyle city of town houses, frescoes, and fine pottery, frozen in time beneath 200ft of ash and pumice.
The eruption has been linked with the “lost city"" of Plato's Atlantis, the Bible story of the ten plagues visited upon Egypt, and the dedine of Minoan civilization.
The rich and highly successful Minoan civilization started to wane around 1500 BcE, but its complete decline took hundreds of years.
VOLCANIC ERUPTION The Thera eruption in 1600 Bce may have resulted in the loss of the Cretan fleet, making Crete more vulnerable to outside powers and influence.
Trade networks may also have been wiped out, causing ""ripple-effect"" damage throughout the whole region.
ARRIVAL OF THE MYCENAEANS By 15008ctE, the Mycenaeans, a late Bronze Age people from mainland Greece, had arrived on Crete.
The Minoan and Mycenaean cultures had already influenced each other through trade.
Their takeover may have been aided by an earthquake on Crete in the 1400s, which partially destroyed some Minoan cities.
JOINT DECLINE The Mycenaeans adopted much Minoan culture, and a wonderful fusion of Minoan-Mycenaean styles flourished during this period.
The flow of bronze The key to this stability was the need for supplies of copper and tin to make bronze for weapons and tools.
Copper was abundant, but the source of tin at the time was in distant Afghanistan.
The core territories were usually secure, but the borders were fluid and in constant dispute.
Between 1200 and 10505ce, the records of these powers hint at tumult and upheaval—then most simply fall eerily silent, signifying a dark age of history. based on intensive correspondence, dynastic intermarriage, and exchange of gifts.
Whatever the current political balance and regardless of who was fighting whom, bronze was delivered.
Diplomacy also allowed the empires to make peace when strategically necessary.
For instance, Egypt and Mittani initially fought over southern Syria, but Mittani made peace with Egypt to concentrate on the Hittite threat from the north.
The Hittites later came into conflict with the Egyptians, but formed an alliance with them to repel the Assyrians.
The Assyrians, formerly vassals of Mittani, were newcomers to the “Club of Great Powers,” and it was some time before these upstarts were fully accepted.
The first sign was that Mycenaean citadels in Greece were destroyed (see 77), most likely by northern invaders.
It seems that dispossessed Mycenaeans flooded outward looking for new lands.
This is probably the origin of the story of Troy , which equates to a kingdom in Anatolia known to the Hittites as Wilusa.
What follows in the scant records available seems to be a cascade of mass migration, disruption, and destruction.
Most likely, marauding Mycenaeans drew Hittite forces away from Hattusa, the capital, which was then destroyed by tribes of northern Anatolia, leaving the rest of the empire to fragment.
The Egyptians fought off invasions z by groups they called the “Sea Peoples,’ whom they blamed for the fall of the "" B Hittite capital The ruins of Hattusa, destroyed around 1180 BCE, were unearthed at Bogazkoy in central Turkey.
Hittite Empire, although many of these groups seem to have had connections to former Hittite territories, meaning they were probably displaced by the empire’s fall, rather than the cause of it.
Meanwhile, Babylonia’s wars with Assyria and Elam resulted in Babylon’s Kassite dynasty dissolving in 1154 BCE and Elam again disappearing from the records a few decades later, when its capital, Susa, was sacked.
This period is one of the most hotly debated subjects in ancient history.
The events are known from only a handful of sources, such as the Ugarit letters (see right) and the Egyptian accounts of the Sea Peoples.
The collapse represented only the removal of the top layer of culture, however—a dark age is simply a period in which the elite stop producing monuments and written records.
The political map was redrawn, but the lives of most people would not have changed.
Assyria and Elam were the only Bronze Age powers to return, but new kingdoms soon arose.
The patterns of the Bronze Age were still deeply ingrained, but the new technology of iron would soon allow states such as Assyria to break free of the old system of diplomacy and bid for world domination on their own.
BRONZE AGE COLLAPSE AFTER New kingdoms, including the Hebrew states of Israel and Judah, were founded in the former territory of the Bronze Age powers.
ARAMAEAN KINGDOMS Migrations were a key feature of the collapse, and the most significant migrants were the Aramaeans.
PHILISTINES These people settled on the coast of the Levant at the end of the 2nd millennium Bce.
They may equate to the Peleset—one of the ""Sea Peoples” mentioned by the Egyptians—and are the origin of the name Palestine.
Their architecture and culture appear PHILISTINE Greek, suggesting that they began FUNERARY as displaced Mycenaeans << 77.
MASK IRON-AGE ECONOMY Iron ore was more readily accessible than the ingredients for bronze, but the transition to an iron economy was highly disruptive, so the great powers stuck with bronze.
By the 10th century BCE, Assyria was making the change, and the emerging new states were already using iron.
HOW WE KNOW Correspondence survives between the king of Ugarit, a regional ruler of the Hittite Empire, and the king of Alashiya, on Cyprus.
The letters talk of hostile marauders plaguing the Ugarit area and are brought to a sudden stop soon after 1200 ck by the city's destruction.
They mention that the Hittites had called the bulk of Ugarit's forces away to fight elsewhere, leaving it defenseless.
The marauders are never named but, as many cities around Ugarit were left unscathed, it is possible that they were displaced Mycenaean Greeks looking for a rich port to loot, as with the suspected fate of Troy.
OLD ASSYRIAN PERIOD The Assyrian Empire's roots can be traced to the period 2000-1800 8cE when Shamshi-Adad I created a kingdom including the great trading city of Ashur, once an independent city-state.
Under Ashur-uballit | , Assyrian lands expanded over all of modern north Iraq, and Assyria came into conflict with Babylonia and the Hittites.
Like other Bronze Age powers «€ 7819, Assyria declined in the 11th century BCE, ASSYRIAN SOLDIERS but the state survived.
Rulers of the Iron Age By the 9th century scr, a great Assyrian empire dominated the Middle East and stayed in control for two centuries.
It is often seen as the first real ""world empire,"" and much of its success can be traced to a stable political system and skillful exploitation of new Iron Age warfare techniques.
With a vast workforce from all over the Middle East at his command and heavy tribute and taxes filling his coffers, Sargon built a new residence city called Sargon's Fortress in the Assyrian heartland— its palaces and temples bearing lavish stonework.
The Neo-Assyrian Empire built on the foundations of the Middle Assyrian period , during which Assyria commanded much wealth and resources, improving agriculture and irrigation, erecting impressive buildings, and establishing key administrative centres.
Legendary warriors The Neo-Assyrians were famed as fierce warriors and they showed innovative military prowess, which helped them to expand their territories.
However, military success in the Neo-Assyrian period was aided by the Assyrians' effective adoption of new Iron Age warfare techniques.
Their highly disciplined army featured a mix of chariots, infantry, and horseback riders.
This was the first army to use cavalry units, which, along with the Assyrians' use of iron weapons, gave them a great advantage over less advanced enemies.
The fighting forces mixed a standing army of professional soldiers (including foreign mercenaries) under the control of the king with provincial contingents mustered as part of | %5 regional tax obligations.
Creating an empire Famed too for the barbaric subjugation of their enemies, the Assyrians used impalement, mass execution, and the ruthless mass “deportation” of those who opposed them.
But such methods were also used by other powers throughout the Middle East.
The Assyrians certainly invented a new way of dealing with conquered people by moving them en masse to other parts of the empire and replacing them with other people from within the empire.
However, the Life in an Assyrian military camp This 9th-century relief from Ashurnasirpal Ils palace at Nimrud shows a priest, bottom left, preparing to predict the future by studying a sheep's entrails.
Foretelling the future was a prominent aspect of Assyrian life. population movements were more like resettlements than deportations, because the people were given land and state assistance.
This resettlement was the fate of the people known in Biblical tradition as the “Ten Lost Tribes” of the conquered Hebrew kingdom of Israel.
They were moved to the Upper Habur area of northern Mesopotamia and the Zagros mountains of southwest Iran.
SEMITIC A language group that includes Hebrew and Arabic, and a description of people from the Middle East who trace their ancestry to the biblical Noah and his son, Shem.
An Assyrian priest, recognizable by his hat, joins another man in butchering a sheep so that he can “read” its entrails.
Resettlement was designed to create a uniform population, although it created some hotbeds of dissent.
By the 7th century BCE, the royal entourage included scholars, craftsmen, and singers from Babylonia, Anatolia, Egypt, and Iran.
Stable foundations Military effectiveness was crucially backed up by a relatively stable political system.
The first was the royal bloodline, which was considered all-important, so that outsiders could not become king.
A crown prince and heir apparent was selected as soon as a new king took the throne.
There was always a successor, and he played an important role in running the empire.
If the king died unexpectedly, the succession arrangement was already in place.
Second was the way in which power was delegated from the king to local officials.
Assyria was organized into Food, probably a meat stew (perhaps from the butchered sheep), is being prepared on a stove.
Coded signs written by the gods were believed to be hidden in sheep’s entrails. f 5 M IF » A Regional power Assyrian governors often enjoyed great wealth.
RULERS OF THE IRON A servant sets out a bowl of soup, A fan is used by roasted animal the servant to cec ribs, and flat bread. protect the meal PHRYGIA | | | | ""EE from flies.
Sidon cS o P amascus Syrian Sieg Tyre “ Ves ert Babylon The Assyrian Empire ISRAEL Gt.
Strong were directly appointed good communication links, and varied trading links were developed with the by the king.
As the eunuch governors could not have children, there was no danger that they would try to start their own dynasty.
It ensured that the provinces raised taxes and sent troops directly to wherever they were needed.
ANAL EDS have been used by a powerful aristocracy from whom Sm ""i ae ae to bake bread or leading officials and army commanders of ari oven. roaa were drawn.
Shamash-shumuspectacular capital, ukin, whom he had installed as ruler of Babylon, wolf on the fold, Nineveh, aggressively CONQUEST OF EGYPT and Assurbanipal, the eventual victor.
An d h IS CO h O rts defended the empire's Assyria conquered Egypt «€ 65 in borders.
His campaigns the 7th century sce and endedthe — BABYLONIANS AND MEDES ; í included sacking rule of the Nubian dynasty.
LORD BYRON, FROM HIS POEM “THE DESTRUCTION OF SENNACHERIB,"" 1815 81 82 4000-700 BCE BEFORE By around 3000 ct trading centers were developing in the eastern Mediterranean, the Arab peninsula, and Nubia.
MEDITERRANEAN MARITIME CITIES By 3000BcE, the maritime cities that would become the heartland of “Phoenician” (a later Greek label) civilization were developing or well established along the eastern Mediterranean coast.
THE ARABS During the 3rd millennium Bc, states were flourishing in the better-watered parts of the Arabian peninsula.
Magan was valued for its copper and diorite, while it received goods such as textiles and wool.
Since ancient times, tales circulated about a “lost city” on the Arabian peninsula.
Archaeological discoveries in the 1980s and 1990s, using images taken from space, appear to have found this city and identified it as Ubar , in modern Oman.
Incense was so precious, and its trade so important, because it masked unpleasant smells and was used in religious ceremonies.
This is why the incense, gold, and myrrh brought to Jesus by the three kings were such special gifts.
INCENSE BURNER yre, Byblos, and Sidon formed the core of a great maritime trading network.
These citystates on the east Mediterranean coast, a region known as Canaan in the 2nd millennium sce and as Phoenicia to the Greeks, prospered between 1200-600 cr.
The Phoenicians used maritime trade to expand a relatively small land base and keep at bay powers looking to control them.
The Phoenicians' extraordinary seafaring prowess made them the control center for routes crossing the Mediterranean.
Their trading links extended to Mesopotamia and, through the Red Sea, to Arabia and Africa.
A vast network of trading posts included Carthage in North Africa and Gades in Iberia , close to the centers of tin production.
The “Phoenicians,” as the Greeks called them, are the same as the “Canaanites”; while the port of Ugarit was abandoned in the course of the collapse of the Late Bronze Age system, most other Canaanite cities survived intact and formed close trading links with the Philistines and other new arrivals.
Arab trade Important trading networks were also established in the Arab world at this time.
By the late 9th century BCE, there were major centers in southern Arabia , including the Minaean and Sabaean kingdoms, and in the north.
This made it easier to create settlements in the desert, based around large oases, and to travel across arid regions in search of new resources.
Secrets of the desert Camel trails marked out routes that became part of an ""Incense Road,"" carrying incense and spices.
Only the Arabs knew the secrets of traversing their dangerous desert routes.
This knowledge made them powerful and wealthy, and they did their best to shroud their trails and sources in fabulous myth.
The Kingdom of Kush A valuable nexus of trade routes was also thriving farther west, around the kingdom of Kush, in southern Nubia, bringing precious materials such as ivory and gold to the ancient world.
By the 8th century BCE, Kush and its capital, Napata, were enjoying a glorious period as a major trade center freed from Egyptian domination.
The value of Nubia's trade routes was one of the main reasons why Egypt had worked so hard, from about 2000 BCE, to exert control here, and the two cultures had a lasting impact on each other.
This stone slab from the Amun temple at Kawa shows a Nubian king called Ary, who may be the 8th| ~ century BCE founder of the ""kingdom of Kush"" , worshipping the gods Amun, Mut, and Khonsu.
Kawa Trade across the desert and sea ^ All manner of goods, from many different sources, were transported across huge distances by networks that meshed Phoenician-controlled e routes with the trade routes of Mediterranean, f Middle Eastern, African, and Arabian peoples.
For example, the 14th-century-&ct ship found wrecked off Uluburun (moder Mycenae, Canaan, Egypt, and | Assyria.
Phoenicia Cities Phoenician trade centers and routes Incense trade centers and routes Gold and ivory trade centers and routes CONQUERING SEA AND DESERT AFTER Further development of Phoenician and Arabian trading empires saw an even greater emphasis on travel by sea. —— ""3 — The Phoenicians first This beautiful gold band was found at Skilled seafarers and navigators, the WARSHIP TECHNOLOGY introduced this distinctive ""blackEnkomi on Cyprus, ancient Alashiya, and once Phoenicians built sophisticated multi-oared Warships were powered by a combination of on-red"" pottery to Cyprus.
They i À ; — Cypriots had evolved their own band’s mix of Middle Eastern and Mycenaean probably developed a bireme with two banks their battles with the Greeks 93 >>, biremes > version of the style.
GREAT EXPLORATIONS There are many tales of the Phoenicians’ | incredible long-distance voyages.
Arabian peninsula, the | Assyrian king Sargon II kined Pam eae oie +] in Khorsabad shows a ingdom of the Himy -| wood shipment being unloaded.
Assyria eclipsed that of the Sabaeans ‘imported top-quality cedar for its palace by the 3rd century a and remained the dominant Arabian state until the 500s.
African ivory to the Roman CARVING Empire and maintained a brisk trade in precious resins such as frankincense and myrrh.
Ma'rib city was its center—a major post along the Arabian incense road.
Vast empires rose and fell, systems of government that still influence society today were born, and great religions emerged.
Greece continues colonization of Mediterranean with colony of Massalia, founded in southern France.
Early 500s Much of Middle East controlled by short-lived empire of the Medes; Mesopotamian region dominated by NeoBabylonian Empire.
These were more than formidably wellorganized states and empires, with expansive, military, and materialistic ambitions.
Celtic La Téne culture emerges in Central Europe; Celts expand east and south and into British Isles.
In Central America, final phase of Olmec civilization, but Zapotecs flourish in Monte Albán.
They also gave rise to a series of global religions-Buddhism, Judaism, and Christianity.
Elsewhere, in Central and South America, Africa, and Japan, new civilizations were also emerging.
Rome crushes Carthage in Third Punic War; creates | province of Africa in its place; absorbs Greece.
Height of Adena | culture in Ohio. v Julius Caesar 90 Gandhara falls to steppe nomads.
Antiochus's sanctuary |v Commagene, Anatolia y Cleopatra 1 Kushans invade Buddhism spreads in coastal Southeast Asia.
Moche culture flourishes in Peru. a Nabataeans, allied ' with Rome, control First Chinese population census.
Petra, capital of Nabataea > [oM o) Buddha represented for the first time, Gandhara, northwest India.
Celtic cauldron, A Gundestrup, Denmark «ba WA A Fresco, Pompeii 73 Peak of Han Dynasty military success.
Embassy of Syrian merchants to China; German tribes invade northern Italy.
Angles, | Saxons, and Jutes migrate to Britain; Celts survive in Wales and Ireland.
The Hellespont Imm n T” ansi | was a narrow sea channel that had been both a This Greek depiction of northern nomads, known as the Scythians , demonstrates trading contact frontier and pivotal point of empires.
Hatra's circular layout reflected steppe lands from Siberia to southeast Europe.
The natural geographical zones of Eurasia have shaped the growth of powers, their conflicts, and their contacts.
In many ways, Mesopotamia remained the heart of the | ancient civilized world.
This was a fertile commercial crossroads and a gateway to the resources of the Mediterranean.
KUSHAN EMPIRE WORLD DOMINANCE | AU HIMYAR The Assyrians’ heartland lay in the upper part of T AL Mesopotamia, but in 8008ct they dominated *. a rem, ema their neighbors more than any state had done ATO DUET before.
They fought the mountain tribes to the ONE north and east of ^ their realm, but also developed diplomatic »relations with them.
Babylon was now at the Bisitun was a sacred mountain beside a site used successively as a staging post, garden, È i and palatial retreat.
The mountain towered center onthe which include both the earliest over the route from Babylon, on the low Mesopotamian plain, to the Iranian Plateau.
DESERTS AND FRONTIERS In the second half of the Ist millennium ace, the world's great powers became yet more mobile and ambitious.
The Indus River was a central link in the route between the Persian Gulf and the interiors of India and Central Asia.
Kushan statues such as this are relics of a tribal power that in 1-250 ce consolidated a huge land empire between the Hindu Kush mountains and the Ganges River.
The heart of the citybased empires remained in the south, from southern Europe through the Middle East to India and China.
Nevertheless, great changes in the seats of power of both settled and nomadic people took place.
Enormous population movements of which we are only Frontiers of Power dimly aware today seem to have moved frontiers in the European steppe, Central Asia, and northwest China.
At the same time, rulers resettled populations as a method of imperial control under the Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, Roman, and Han Chinese empires.
Limitless ambition The vast size of these empires was hard for their inhabitants to comprehend, but imperial powers used symbols to reflect the rich diversity of their lands.
Assyrian and Persian rulers described the varied resources and people of their territory in inscriptions.
Views of the frontier Each dynasty or empire developed its own ideas about the structure of the world.
During Assyrian and Babylonian rule from the fertile, low-lying plains of Mesopotamia, mountains were seen as wild, chaotic places threatening danger.
On the other hand, the mountainous homeland of the Macedonian Greeks and Persians helped to instill in them a hardy self-image.
For these empires, great rivers, such as the Danube and Indus, marked the limits of their realm.
Each of these imperial movements, from Assyria to Rome, encountered barriers to its empire-building.
The shape of empires A snapshot of the Eurasian landmass in 1 CE illustrates both the barriers to communication and unification, and the portions of land that were acquired and fought over by the main powers at that time.
Later states with global ambitions looked back on a series of civilizations whose heirs they presumed themselves to be.
Its apocalyptic destruction was often depicted in art in the 19th century.
THE FORCES OF CHAOS To the people of imperial city civilizations, invading nomadic tribes represented the forces of chaos.
NEW BABYLON The bulk of Assyrian lands were taken over by a dynasty ruling from the ancient city of Babylon «€ 55, 79, 90.
Greek historians, influenced by Persian views, describe how the Medes first developed a luxurious empire to match their Mesopotamian neighbors.
Of the Persians who attended their court, one individual, Cyrus, supposedly took over the Medes’ empire from within.
Contemporary chronicles unearthed in Babylon instead tell how Cyrus conquered lands surrounding Mesopotamia in the mid6th century BCE before moving on the capitals of the heartland itself.
Next to fall to Cyrus was the Babylonian king Nabonidus and his capital.
The empire of the Persian kings was one of an unprecedented scale. > kS g i us wee ~ y A r IT."" in central Asia in the east are less well documented.
With Cambyses' annexation of Egypt, the Persians— a small tribal elite from the Iranian plateau—had acquired a world empire within a generation, creating huge pressures on the leaders.
When Cambyses died, his brother Bardiya seems to have been recognized as king.
The structures included massive columned audience halls and smaller royal palaces built of stone and mud-brick.
ARMENIA m MH. bye Me Persian kings had annexed DIA ord"" zs a “Mev ‘ae Egypt, many Greek communities in Cappadocia Harran 4 CN (qu eng Tepe BACTRI a, p tp the Aegean, and extensive areas of oe a yi Ni T wt.
Eide on. %,, i7 Iranian E < Despite retreating from Greece, Cyrene ""o"" “I a) Plnascus E Plateau ARACHOSIA X Persia lost no further possessions ef hean cac MB Babylon a” ans.
Here, a royal heir in his court robe resembles the king exactly. monumental inscription carved into the mountain of Behistun that Bardiya was an imposter whom Darius had removed.
In the wake of this upheaval, Darius tried to create a harmonious image of the empire under his rule.
The architecture at his capitals of Persepolis and Susa incorporated peaceful images of all the peoples of the empire.
In a foundation document from Susa, Darius claimed that the building materials had come from farflung corners of his realm, from India to the Ionian coast, and that many subject peoples had brought the splendid structure to completion.
Encounters with Greece Darius and his successors emphasized harmony and productivity under their rule.
Texts on the Persian kings, written HOW WE KNOW Despite their success, the Persians left no sustained historical account of themselves.
The kings did, however, leave monumental statements on their palace walls about how they had wished to be seen.
Images and texts found in Darius l's palace at Susa show Darius boasting of massive excavations for a platform for his columned halls.
They show a Persian guard in colorful court robes. by Greeks in small states scattered across the edge of Persian territory, instead concentrate on conflict.
When Persian-held Greek cities on the Ionian coast revolted in the 490s BCE, Athens and Eretria sent help from mainland Greece.
Although some cities came to terms with the Persians immediately, other Greek states staged valiant resistance.
A world empire Despite withdrawal from Greece, Persia continued to wield The Cyrus cylinder Scythians of the steppe to the north, to fortresses on the frontier of Upper Egypt in the south.
The range of cultures encompassed by this scope stretched from the historic, settled cities of Babylonia, where an increasingly mixed elite resided, to newly emergent kingdoms on the Caucasus frontier, who sent detachments to the Persian army and copied elements of the Persian court in their architecture and luxury objects.
The difficulties of administering such a vast and varied empire were significant; even a journey between two of several royal capitals could take up to three weeks.
Official royal routes, supported by regular staging posts and carefully administered travel rations, provided a swift communication network.
Across this network, orders, letters, luxury supplies influence in the This clay foundation document inscribed in Akkadian ^ and expert Medeae , the traditional literary language of personnel were both poli a Babylon, gives Cyrus's carefully positive account of his transported. conquest of the city in the 540s Bce, in which he was welcomed by the locals as a better ruler than his predecessor, the Babylonian king Nabonidus.
The peoples who offered tribute to the Persian kings reached from need.
The ruling Persians spoke their own language , which was recorded only in the limited royal inscriptions appearing on monuments in the cites of the empire.
Official communication was in Aramaic, a lingua franca inherited from Assyrian administration, but only a few fragments of such parchment and papyrus documents have survived.
Letters from Egypt and records from Afghanistan illustrate how movements of officials and provisions were closely supervised by local administrators, under the authority of “satraps,” who were usually Persian governors appointed by and answerable to the king.
Such interconnections led to unprecedented transmission of ideas, goods, and people across vast distances.
Afterward, the East would be regarded as foreign to the West, and vice versa.
Unifying notions in Greek and Jewish communities are linked with their experiences in the Persian empire.
The Achaemenid period was a catalyst for the development of states and identities across the Middle East.
CYRUS Folkloric tales of fate and heroism surrounded the early life of Cyrus, the founder of the Persian Empire, and were passed on by Greek writers.
In his own words, Cyrus was “King of Anshan,” an old city on the Iranian Plateau.
He blended architectural styles from the lands he conquered in his garden-filled capital of Pasargadae.
Cyrus also adapted local ideas about kingship to cast himself as a desirable ruler in the subject cities of Babylon and Jerusalem.
Both Greek and Middle Eastern sources inspired a long tradition of viewing Cyrus as an ideal king.
EARLY CIVILIZATION Artifacts from Mycenae, Greece, are evidence of a rich Mediterranean civilization that existed before the rise of the city-states.
THE “DARK AGE” Between 1100 and 7508cE, ancient Greece was in a ""dark age"" about which little is known.
All of the future city-states were probably clusters of villages at this time.
EARLY ARCHAIC PERIOD At the start of the Archaic Period (c.0480 CE), increasing Mediterranean populations fueled the rise of cities such as Athens, Sparta, Thebes, and Corinth.
THE MAKING OF ATHENS By the 7th century sce, Athens was on the rise as a leading city-state.
Later, the Athenian statesman, Solon (c.0560 BCE), brought in laws that helped protect the rights of ""ordinary"" people.
Many of the architectural features of these city-states are shared by cities today.
Athens A major figure in the story of the citystate was the Athenian magistrate Cleisthenes who instituted major reforms in the system The Greek City-states The rise of the polis—city-state—in ancient Greece was a major development in world politics.
Although termed “cities,” population levels were low, and Sparta probably remained principally a cluster of villages.
What was important, and central to the city-state concept, was that the inhabitants identified with their State first.
So being a “citizen” of Sparta—a Spartan—was more important than being Greek.
Beyond this, the city-states often varied greatly in character, each shifting through various types of government at different times.
These included monarchy, tyranny (where there was one strong leader, not necessarily an unpopular one as implied by the modern use of the word), oligarchy (rule by a small group of people, typically nobles) and democracy.
The eligible male citizens participated to varying degrees in many of these forms.
This participation and idea of self-rule became one of the key characteristics of many of the citystates that came later. of rule.
He changed the Athenian tribal system and permanently altered Athens’ political structure.
Attica (the area around Athens) was divided into three areas—coast, highlands, and city—and the tribes were made up of citizens from each of these areas and subdivided further into demes, the smallest voting districts of the polis.
The 5th-century statesman Pericles moved Athens farther toward a new kind of democracy (see The acroterion was a decorative feature above the pediment.
These states were independent, self-contained entities bound by the rule of law.
The eastern pediment was filled with sculptures depicting Greek mythology.
Sanctuary of Athena This is one of several buildings clustered around the oracle at Delphi, a sacred site close to the Gulf of Corinth.
Theater at Epidauros This vast 4th-century theater was built at Epidaurus, a city-state in the Peloponnese.
The best-preserved theater to survive from ancient Greece, it seated around 12,000 people and has exceptional acoustics.
The theater of the ancient Greeks influenced the development of both drama and theater design.
With colonies in the Adriatic and Macedonia, its command of several important harbors made it an important seafaring and trading center.
GREEK PHILOSOPHER ARISTOTLE He wrote on a variety of subjects, including an exploration of what might be the best form of government.
In general, he had a great respect for the polis as a good way to govern and to make the most of people’s talents. hit A gold and ivory statue (now lost) of the goddess Athena by the famous sculptor Phidias stood in the center of the temple.
In his famous work, Politics, he analyzed many of the Greek city-states in 3 p / f n mE p sm.
Juried courts were set up, therefore moving judicial power from the city council to its citizens.
Its assembly became a democratic council where all male citizens, regardless of background or wealth, had an equal vote.
Athenian city-state life in the 5th a nd 4th centuries BCE also saw a remarkable flourishing of intellectual and artistic life.
Playwrights including Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides explored great philosophical themes The many columns were fluted, without bases and with square capitals at the top.
Distinctive three-stepped The great era of the Greek city-states came to an end, although the polis model survived.
This chaotic era brought more city-state conflicts that weakened their power.
Sparta and Corinth Athens's great rival, Sparta, had a dual kingship from two royal lines—these kings ruled concurrently.
Later, this rule was tempered by a council of aristocrats and an assembly of citizens —a society of equal male citizens willing to take arms for their state.
Sparta also differed from the other Greek states in relying heavily on a serf population known as helots.
In the 5th century BCE, a small, council-elected body called the ephorate came into being.
Conceived to oversee government processes, they eventually seized power for themselves and sidelined the monarchy for a time.
Another powerful polis, Corinth, commanded a strong strategic position geographically on the narrow strip of land connecting mainland Greece.
As the use of the phalanx formation became widespread , citizens who fought for their states expected some political say in return.
Rivalry between city-states was constant, particularly between Athens and Sparta.
Some events brought the states together, such as the Panhellenic games, which included the Olympic Games, and religious festivals.
THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE The 11th century ce saw the rise of Italian citystates such as Venice and Pisa.
By the 13th-15th centuries, other examples flourished at Florence, Padua, Hamburg, and Flanders.
There were rumors that -Alexander's mother, Olympias, tried to — have Philip assassinated before a son by another wife could grow old enough to acce, ed him.
One of his first acts on crossing to Asia Minor was to visit the site of Troy as an act of homage to his ancestor.
Later, in Egypt, his claims were raised a notch higher when a priest at the desert shrine of Ammon hailed him as the “son of Zeus,” the king of the Greek gods, who was believed to be an ancestor of the Macedonian kings.
Alexander’s selfimage as an heroic man of destiny chosen by the gods inspired his relentless drive to conquest.
Military leader Alexander’s army served him as the dedicated followers of a great fighting man.
His elite cavalry, the Companions, were a tight-knit group with whom he fought, ate, and drank as the first among equals.
He liked to spearhead the cavalry charge and was often the first to storm city walls during a siege.
He could be supremely reckless of his own safety, yet he was also thoroughly professional in organizing and motivating his cavalry and infantry in battle.
His decisive victories over numerically superior Persian armies at Issus and Gaugamela showed a shrewd eye for the weaknesses of an apparently This silver coin shows Alexander as the semidivine Herakles, distinguished by his lionskin cap.
On other coins he is represented as the horned god Ammon, the supreme Egyptian deity.
Alexander's close association with the gods and a suggested direct paternal link to Herakles, rather than Philip, enforced his own sense of destiny.
According to one written source, Alexander attended banquets in Persia dressed as gods.
The myth of his divinity was widely accepted and shrines were raised in his name.
Alexandria's lighthouse Alexander founded Alexandria as a Macedonian capital for Egypt.
Birthplace of an icon The Macedonians originated as hill tribesmen in the mountains of northern Greece, although Alexander was born on the coastal plain, at Pella, where his royal predecessors had established their capital. powerful enemy as well as an instinct for gambling on aggression.
He went on fighting, not just enforcing his claim to rule all the Persian domains, but also pushing farther into India.
Persian influence Alexander saw himself as spreading Greek civilization by the sword.
He founded Greek cities, the most famous of which was Alexandria in Egypt, and sought to Hellenize—to make Greek— the Persians whom he conquered.
But his adoption of the mantle of the Persian Empire created great strains with his Macedonian followers.
The Macedonian veterans were also jealous when new Persian followers found favor with Alexander.
Discontent came to a head in a series of mutinies that Alexander violently suppressed.
Noble savage His fame in antiquity was unequaled, yet he lett no creative legacy.
Alexander was a ruthless man who killed both in anger and in cold blood.
His father makes himself leader of all the Greek city states except Sparta.
She bears him a son who could threaten Alexander's claim to inherit the throne.
Alexander succeeds to the throne and has Attalus, the chief supporter of Eurydice, killed.
He visits the site of Troy and then conquers western Asia Minor, defeating a Persian army at Granicus.
He visits the orade of the god Zeus-Ammon at the Siwa Oasis and founds the city of Alexandria.
He suppresses a conspiracy in his army; his second-in-command Parmenion is among those put to death.
He bloodily suppresses a conspiracy by his royal pages, who oppose his adoption of Persian customs.
Reaching the Hyphasis River his soldiers mutiny and force Alexander to turn back, following the Jhelum, a tributary of the Indus River, to the sea.
Alexander is plunged in deep grief when his closest friend, and rumored lover, Hephaestion dies.
Anybody wishing to rule over it would have to take into account the legacy and traditions of Persia's Achaemenid rulers.
Divided into satrapies (provinces governed by men appointed by the king), it had several royal capitals.
The ceremonial capital of Persepolis was largely destroyed by Alexander, but its great stairways, decorated with reliefs of subject rulers bringing tribute, survive.
The Conquests of Alexander the Great In just ten years, Alexander conquered the Persian Empire, the largest empire the world had ever seen.
His own empire now stretched from North Africa and the eastern Mediterranean to the Indus valley in northern India.
KEY Empire and dependent regions of Alexander "" Route of Alexander the Great The Greeks in Asia The Achaemenid Persian Empire had ruled over an area extending from the Mediterranean to the Indus valley.
It was all conquered by Alexander the Great in less than ten years, his army bringing with it ideas and tastes from Greek civilization that took root and flourished alongside local traditions. efore his death, Alexander had placed the key provinces in B the conquered Persian empire under the control of trusted governors.
However, he allowed local systems of government, to which the people were accustomed, to continue.
Alexander appreciated the role of the Persians as an imperial people and, according to some accounts, tried to create a ruling race through intermarriage between his officers and Persian noblewomen.
The process of changing one mode of rule for another, he knew, was a delicate one and needed patience.
The body, an important talisman for Alexander's potential successors, was embalmed to be taken home, but it was diverted to Alexandria in Egypt, where it was exhibited in a glass case.
The smallest was the Antigonid kingdom, which ruled in Macedonia and Greece.
The richest and most secure was the PTA i, i ae ane F Bactrian deities This plate from Ai Khanoum shows the Greek goddess Cybele in a chariot pulled by lions in front of a Persian priest at a fire altar.
It lasted until 30 BCE, when in the reign of Cleopatra VII , it was annexed by Rome.
The three empires spread Greek ideas through their political institutions, town planning, and architecture.
Greek culture in Asia The Seleucid empire established many Greek-style cities to help control their huge territory.
Seleucus I had a new capital, Seleucia, built in Mesopotamia, on the Tigris, near Babylon, but the capital was soon moved to Antioch in Syria.
The Seleucids had a relaxed attitude to the religions practiced in their territories, and Greek ideas were accepted alongside old Persian, Jewish, and other local traditions.
By 1008ct the empire had been reduced to Antioch and a few other Syrian cities.
The distant Bactrian kingdom (in present-day Afghanistan) retained a magnificent Greek coinage, and archaeological sites such as Ai Khanoum (thought to be the city of Alexandria on the Oxus) reveal that Bactrian cities continued to follow Greek models with temples and other public buildings fronted by beautiful Corinthian columns.
To the west of the Seleucid sphere of influence, in present-day Turkey, Pergamum, an important new regional Admiration for Greek philosophy, poetry, and sculpture survives to this day, although it probably peaked in 18thand 19th-century Europe.he Apotheosis of Homer by Antonio Canova embodies the spirit of admiration for Classical Greece.
Philhellenism (love of Greek culture and the belief that theirs was the perfect way to order society) takes no account of the fact that Greek women had no vote or that Greek society depended on the labor of slaves.
Greek ideas and artistic styles were adopted in Asia, Egypt, and, most importantly, Rome.
GRAECO-BUDDHIST ART Aspects of Hellenistic culture also survived farther east, in Bactria and parts of northern India such as Gandhara.
GREEK-INFLUENCED BUDDHA; BACTRIA, 3RD CENTURY CE East meets West in Nemrud Dag, Turkey In the 1st century BCE, the king of Commagene, Antiochus |, built a mountain-top shrine where the fine statuary depicts both Greek and Persian deities and uses a combination of eastern and western artistic styles. power, was emerging.
It had its own acropolis, magnificent temples, a theater seating 10,000 people, and a vast library.
A NATION OF CITY-STATES After the destruction of the Mycenaean civilization (whose stories, including the Odyssey, were recorded by Homer), ancient Greece entered the Dark Ages, about which we know little «€ 94.
THE HOPLITE REVOLUTION The city-states relied on their armies for their protection.
Increased trade in the 7th century BCE began a military and political revolution.
The new rich could now afford their arms and supplied regiments of hoplites (armored infantry) alongside the aristocratic cavalry.
The need to act collectively in warfare led to a new form of government based on the shared interests of a broader section of society.
Slots in the device held volunteers"" names, and black and white balls were dropped down a tube to select them.
His severe penalties were designed to stop the aristocrats from taking the law into their own hands.
Since rural impoverishment had caused an agrarian and military crisis in Athens, Solon's solution was to abolish slavery brought about by debt, free the peasantry from feudal servitude, and make wealth rather than birth the prerequisite of political office, thus reducing the power of the aristocracy.
To encourage good governance , he created a council to prepare the weekly business of the lot from each of the 10 tribes, which supplied the smaller 50-member group of council leaders to administer the daily affairs of government.
Its composition was changed on a regular basis so that no one remained in power too long.
Jury members for the courts were also chosen randomly to avoid corruption.
Since Athens' defense could not be left to chance, these powerful officials, who controlled the army and the navy, could be reelected.
The effect of all these reforms was to reduce the powers of the aristocracy further while creating a united body Birthplace of democracy The Acropolis of Athens was its spiritual center.
However, as in other Greek polis, women, slaves, and foreigners were excluded from participating. citizen’s assembly , and a popular court of appeal for legal redress against abuses of power.
In 560BCE, the aristocrat Peisistratus took advantage of incessant internal feuding to seize power in a popular coup, initiating land reforms on behalf of the poor.
Athens’ democratic evolution Cleisthenes created a future for Athens’ citizens to match their potential.
As a further safeguard, ostracism was introduced to banish any “dangerous” leaders from the city for 10 years.
A brilliant orator called Pericles presided over a ""Golden Age"" of Athenian prosperity and cultural preeminence.
He consolidated the democratic ""constitution"" by compensating the poorer citizens for their time on jury service or attending the ecclesia, and limiting citizenship to those with two Athenian parents.
It was finally extinguished during the 2nd century BCE by an expanding Roman Empire.
AFTER It took a long time for the idea of democracy to become widely adopted; it was not until the mid-20th century that it became the most common form of government.
ROMAN DEMOCRACY Republican government in ancient Rome was based on elected representatives (representative democracy) rather than Athenian-style direct democracy.
The Athenians thought that representative democracy was tilted in favor of wealthier candidates.
During the campaign for the 2008 United States presidential election, the main candidates raised over $25 million each.
THE WORLD'S LARGEST DEMOCRACY India's democracy governs a population of over a billion people.
From Myth to History As Greece emerged from a ""Dark Age"" and writing was rediscovered, new ways of passing on knowledge and stories developed.
For the first time in the Western world, history was recorded in prose, rather than versethe poet became a historian and artistic license gave way to the goal of accuracy and explanation. uring excavations at the Palace of Knossos on the island of Crete in 1900, the British archaeologist Arthur Evans found a huge collection of written clay tablets.
When the script, known as “Linear B,” was deciphered, it turned out to be the first known example of early Greek writing.
The subsequent development of the Greek alphabet and writing led to the recording of history.
Before the 6th century BCE, history was BEFORE Epic narratives often lie between myth and history.
Such poetry was born out of an oral tradition and was common in many ancient cultures before written history.
Some parts of the story are fantastical and others may be based on real events.
ANCIENT BABYLON Scribes in Babylon «€ 55, 79, 90 recorded events relating to the history of their city from the 2nd millennium act.
The records contained references to earlier semilegendary times and were a mixture of fact and fiction.
Ancient Greece's most famous poet, Homer, is an important ME. | sns LL hi figure in the transmission of history in the Western world, although he probably never wrote down his own poems, and the subjects he used were a mixture of myth, folk memory, and fact.
The story of the Trojan War, which may have been an actual event of the 13th century BCE, inspired both his epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey.
In the first of these, two intense weeks in the story of the war are told.
The Odyssey tells the tale of the Greek hero Odysseus’s ten-year journey home from the Trojan War.
The actual events, if they happened at all, were not recorded in any surviving written accounts.
This meant that over the intervening centuries, the facts were mingled with myth and travelers’ tales to become the story we know today.
Fantasy and fact One 19th-century archaeologist, Heinrich Schliemann, became obsessed with the story of the Trojan War and was determined to find evidence that it had actually taken place.
Using the text of the Iliad as a guide, Schliemann found a vast city complex buried under various layers at Hissalik in northwest Turkey.
He was convinced that this was Troy, where the mythical Achilles had killed the a v NM uoc PEN HISTORY The word was first used by the Greek writer, Herodotus.
Schliemann's archaeological practices destroyed a great deal of the value of the site.
Later experts were appalled at what he had done and even questioned the authenticity of the many gold artifacts he claimed to have found.
Schliemann went on to find more treasures at Mycenae on the Greek mainland, including the mask that he Odysseus's voyage This 3rd-century-ce Roman mosaic shows Homer's Odysseus on his epic journey.
It is probable that it was in fact part of a royal burial treasure from a period before the Trojan War.
First written history An early Greek writer to break away from this mix of myth and reality was Hecataeus of Miletus , who is considered by some to be the first history writer.
In one of his works, he set down in writing stories that had been passed down orally from generation to generation as well as recording family genealogies.
He was interested in studying human nature and the world around him and recorded what he saw as he traveled the length and breadth of the ancient world.
Although he came from Halicarnassus (modern Bodrum in Turkey), he also lived in Athens for a time.
His travels allegedly took him to Egypt, Italy, Sicily, and Babylon, and his writing is full of entertaining detail about the customs and habits of the countries he visited.
Herodotus is remembered today because he was the first to write about events of his own time in prose rather than verse, and to organize his material systematically.
He inspired later historians to break with the old epic tradition and write in this style, recounting real events rather than the mythical exploits of heroes and gods.
His writing still depended, to some extent, on oral history and was colored by folklore and tradition.
He claimed to have authenticated his information, but critics in antiquity argued that it was not wholly accurate.
The later Greek historian and biographer Plutarch had a very low opinion HOMER There is no firm evidence about the life of the most famous Greek epic poet.
He is believed to have lived in Greece in the 8th or 7th century Bc, but we do not know what he looked like or where he originally came from.
Traditionally, he is said to have been blind and to have told his stories as he traveled around Greece.
His two great works, the Iliad and the Odyssey, began life as epic poetry, recited aloud to audiences.
Homer is still considered one of the most influential writers of the Western world.
I le S j ‘e -x LI rh — y “The Mask of Agamemnon” This astonishing burial mask was found at Mycenae in Greece by the archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in 1876.
He named the mask after the leader of the Greek troops during the Trojan War.
It is part of a collection of royal treasure dating from 1600 BCE. word for word, but rewritten to express Thucydides’s i personal opinion.
One 4 N^ famous example is the speech made by Pericles , in which the city of Athens and all its achievements are praised in a funeral oration for those who had died in the war.
Despite their shortcomings—the inaccuracies of Herodotus and the poetic embellishments of Thucydides—the two Greeks are rightly acknowledged as the first true historians in the West.
As well as recounting the events, Thucydides examined the long-term causes of the war and the moral issues it raised.
A striking characteristic of his writing is the use of long speeches, not reproduced Expressing a viewpoint The Athenian writer Thucydides also took a new approach to recording history.
It is thought to be a Bronze Age form of Greek used to record lists and inventories at Knossos. — z zi FROM MYTH TO HISTORY AFTER DOR Over the centuries, written histories, like the folktales that preceded them, have been shaped by the values of the times in which they were recorded.
THE EPIC PETET PE LADS TRADITION Old stories told in traditional ways connect powerfully with the listeners, as they are rooted in local landscape, history, and folklore.
In Cyprus, shepherds BEOWULF MANUSCRIPT still tell stories about one-eyed giants, horned gods, and Bacchanalian feasts in nearby river beds.
MODERN MYTH AND HISTORY Kathakali stories of Hindu myth, using to accompany oral texts, are still various Hindu divinities who may be unable to told in ancient Greece.
HOW WE KNOW This map, from a woodcut made in 1867, shows Herodotus's view of the world, based on the descriptions found in his writings, with Asia Minor and the Middle East at its center.
Although he did not venture far in modern terms—he was unaware of northern Europe, for example— he included an extraordinary amount of detail about the places he did visit, (Egypt, Africa, Italy, Sicily, and other parts of the Mediterranean), including the length of rivers and sizes of continents.
Just as in Mesopotamia and Egypt, practical knowledge was used to help make life easier.
Some individuals acquired skills in mathematics and astronomical observation, but they were used for practical purposes.
Mathematics, therefore, was used in commerce and construction, and knowledge of astronomy in timekeeping.
When it came to accounting for natural phenomena, however, ancient civilizations tended to be far less practical.
They relied unquestioningly on fanciful mythological explanations for everyday events.
Triumphs of Greek Science Science is an attempt to understand and explain the world around us.
The modern scientific method—a combination of observation, hypothesis, experiment, and theory—was established in the 17th century.
But its roots lie with the ancient Greeks, who were among the first to think scientifically and search for plausible answers to life's mysteries through logic and observation.
BEFORE Some of the scientific ideas of the Greeks had been considered by earlier civilizations.
RATIONAL THOUGHT In ancient India and China, philosophers thought about the world rationally, explaining causes of events by ""laws,"" rather than myth.
Natural philosophers These thinkers, or ""natural philosophers,"" employed logic and reason to question the accepted myths.
Like many of the Greek scientific thinkers, Thales pondered the nature of matter.
He suggested that all solids, liquids, and gases are ultimately made of water.
This makes some sense—water is one of Praising the gods This clay tablet was left at a temple, and was dedicated to god of healing, Asclepius, from someone who believed their foot to have been healed through traditional rather than scientific medicine. the few substances that we can observe directly changing between these three states.
Another philosopher, Anaximenes , suggested that air was the ""fundamental"" substance, while Heraclitus (535475 BCE) thought fire might fit the role.
This theory explained many common phenomena in terms of the movement and interaction of air, earth, fire, and water.
His ideas on geometry and number theory remain key to mathematics today.
In fact, the theorem was known long before Pythagoras, and there is no evidence that he even used it, or whether he even existed.
His reputation for mathematical excellence comes from later Greek writers, particularly Aristotle.
Modern academic study of Pythagoras' ideas shows that they were more religious than scientific.
Pythagoras and his followers saw mystical relevance in mathematics. and his student Democritus suggested that matter is made up of tiny, indivisible particles separated by empty space.
It is not important whether the theories were right or wrong, or even plausible, but that the people who constructed them were thinking rationally and philosophically, and were making observations to satisfy human curiosity.
That can be seen as the true essence of science, and it had been missing from almost all earlier civilizations.
Philosophers in the ancient civilizations of India and China also employed reason and observation in their attempts to understand the world.
They, too, formulated convincing theories similar to the theory of the four elements and atomic theory.
Science counts Thales, and many of the other natural philosophers, importantly used mathematics in formulating their theories.
Mathematics can be divided into geometry—the study of the relative position and size of objects, including Earth—and arithmetic— the study of numbers.
Geometry had been used to help astronomers and architects, while arithmetic formed the basis of commerce.
Some philosophers derived elegant mathematical proofs that provided insight into the nature of the world.
One of them, Pythagoras , went one step farther, suggesting not only that numbers describe reality, but that the world is literally made of numbers.
Pythagoras was fascinated by the mathematical relationships between everything, including musical notes.
The connection between mathematics and reality is still a central theme in science today.
Mathematics was also crucial to the scientific ideas of Plato , better known for his writings on ethics and politics.
He suggested that each element is made of atoms with a particular idealized geometric shape.
Plato supposed that the real world was an imperfect reflection of an ideal, “theoretical” and mathematically perfect world.
The Greek philosopher who had the greatest influence on the history of science was Many of the advances and ideas put forward by the ancient Greeks were lost in the centuries that followed.
In many cases, it was not until relatively modern times that they were considered again.
ROMAN SCIENCE Greek scientific knowledge was used by the Romans, although much was later lost and they tended not to be great theoretical thinkers.
ARAB SCIENTISTS The ideas of the Greek natural philosophers passed to Arab scholars.
In particular, the Arabs translated the works of Aristotle into Arabic.
He maintained that truth was to be found only in reality—an idea known as empiricism.
Using logic and observation, Plato and Aristotle deduced many previously unknown scientific facts.
Aristotle was perhaps the most prolific of the Greek natural philosophers.
He wrote texts on a range of subjects, including botany, zoology, astronomy, anatomy, and physics.
Aristotle’s theories were plausible and well thought out, but were based on common sense, rather The weight of the world Legend has it that the Greek god Atlas was made by Zeus to hold up the universe as a punishment.
This was the sort of idea that the Greek thinkers began to question, with their rational, scientific investigations and theories.
NEW NATURAL PHILOSOPHY Today, ancient Greek ways of thinking about matter and energy are still relevant; scientists of physics and chemistry ask much the same questions as Thales, Plato, and Aristotle. than rigorous logic and careful observation.
Later developments During the final phase of the ancient Greek period in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BCE, great thinkers began to come Marde applying the tools of Greek natural philosophy— mathematics and logic—to practical and technical challenges.
For example, Archimedes was a brilliant theoretical mathematician, but also a great engineer and inventor.
Further developments were made at institutions such as the Museum and Library at Alexandria.
Competition between centers of learning led to further innovations and the development of science.
The ancient Greeks’ scientific way of thinking extended to the study of medicine.
More than anyone, the physician Hippocrates , promoted a rational, scientific approach to medicine, giving it a firm footing as a professional endeavor.
He placed importance on the careful observation of symptoms, and rejected traditional temple medicine theories about illnesses and their cures.
Even today, the ethical ""contract"" between doctors and patients is known as the Hippocratic Oath.
We do not know whether Hippocrates was the author of the original, with promises to work ""for the good of my patients according to my ability and my judgment and never do harm to anyone"" It is preserved on papyri of later periods, such as this 3rd-century example discovered in Egypt.
One of these was a Latin-speaking people who settled in villages, including Rome, in the hills above the Tiber River in about 1000 cr.
In legend, Romulus and Remus, twin brothers who were suckled by a she-wolf as babies, founded Rome.
They became adept at working with the form and related structures such as the vault and dome, to help support monumental temples, amphitheaters, walls, aqueducts, viaducts, tunnels, lighthouses, and watermills.
The Rise of Rome Ancient Roman civilization arose from multicultural beginnings, while Rome itself began life as a group of villages on the hills above the Tiber River.
From these foundations arose the powerful Roman Republic, whose influence and territories spread around the world, with the great city of Rome at its heart. y 600BCE, Rome had become E a sophisticated city-state ruled by kings.
It boasted specialized crafts, a rich aristocracy, monumental buildings, and organized social systems.
The Senate was a council of elders composed of the heads of various clans.
The Assembly consisted of all male citizens of Rome; citizenship was granted only to those whose parents were native Romans.
The Assembly's main function was to grant absolute power to the monarch once the clan leaders approved the candidate for king.
Rome stood at the crossroads of major trade routes connecting Europe with Asia and North Africa.
Trade not only generated great commercial wealth for Rome, butt also brought the Romans in regular contact with several different cultures, such as the Greeks, from whom the Romans absorbed diverse influences.
The Romans' Etruscan neighbors also had a profound effect on Rome, so much so that from the middle of the 6th century BCE the Roman monarchs were Etruscan.
The Roman engineering The ancient Romans made considerable advances in building and civil engineering, mainly by clever development of principles obtained from other civilizations they came in contact with.
While using fired bricks, tiles, and stone to great effect, they also perfected concrete, developing a form capable of hardening under water.
From the 3rd century BCE, Roman builders became the first to use Etruscans gave the Romans the toga, art, certain religious practices, forms of stone arch , sewage systems, and chariot racing.
The Etruscans also passed the Greek alphabet to the Romans, who developed it to create the basis for many modern western languages.
He captured the city of Saguntum in Spain, allied to Rome, then advanced on Italy.
With Rome blocking the sea routes, Hannibal took 37 elephants and 55,000 men over the Pyrenees and Alps, as shown in this fresco.
Despite heavy losses, he won many victories but was defeated at Zama in North Africa.
Carthage was destroyed by the Romans, and Hannibal fled to Syria, where he later committed suicide. i m concrete extensively, constructing many large-scale engineering and building projects. was largely a transfer of power from the king to the wealthiest classes in Rome.
From the 3rd century BCE the Romans used slave labor on a large scale for building projects.
Rather than install a new monarch, the Romans dismantled the institution and Rome became a republic.
The early republic had two consuls (to counter overreliance on one individual), who were elected annually.
While the Senate was originally put in place to prevent despotism, it became the true decision-making authority.
These public meures were expected to show loyalty to the republic, self-sacrifice for the general good, and lead blameless lives as an example to others.
Military success Roman armies won extensive lands for the Republic in wars that gradually took place farther afield and with increasing scale.
Young boy and boar Figurine of a young Roman boy in a tunic leading a sacrificial boar.
The most significant free people were citizens, who were able to elect the consuls.
The Senate drew its members from the Patrician class; therefore, the Republic in its early form Mixing business and ritual This relief of the 1st century Bce shows animals being sacrificed to mark a census of citizens, which was done every few years.
To those who seemed to them “civilized” enough and close in kinship, they granted rights similar to those of Roman citizens.
Both these approaches were seen as effective ways of enforcing power and influence.
REPUBLIC A society not ruled by a monarch in which power is shared between the aristocracy and the common people.
Mounting problems Despite its extensive lands, by the 2nd century BCE, Rome was in a state of perpetual war, flux, and social discontent.
Farms fell into disrepair while their owners were away fighting, and debts were mounting.
While the city of Rome was at the heart of a growing empire, tensions arose as the republic’s existing social and political institutions struggled to address new problems.
It was an episode that signaled the beginning of the Roman Republic's decline.
The 1st century BCE saw Mx a mix of new gains and intensifying civil strife.
Some of Rome's former allies, having fought for the republic, became frustrated by Rome's domination over them and failure to grant them Roman citizenship.
They wore a toga with a narrow stripe . —— bæ pm — E — — | Plebeians The common “class” included every freeborn male citizen not a senator or equestrian.
It varied from the unskilled poor to wealthy merchants. — SS H— __ m Latins r Latins were freeborn citizens from parts of Italy outside Rome.
They had certain legal rights and were granted a form of Roman citizenship. ——_— MÀ M— — — n — Foreigners Freeborn inhabitants of Roman territory outside Italy were considered foreigners.
They had rights, but their status changed over time. bought and sold by their owners.
Slaves were considered personal property under Roman law. — — Slaves The non-free who had no rights and were la Roman social order Roman society had strict class divisions.
These were influenced by family background, wealth, citizenship, and freedom.
Women had virtually no rights and belonged to the same class as their father or husband. his rule increased patrician power.
During his dictatorship there were heightened levels of ^"" , corruption within the Senate.
The Romans were ultimately victorious and Spartacus was killed in around 70 Bce.
However, the uprising showed the dangers of employing slave labor on a massive scale.
This setback į slowed the career progress of the ambitious young patrician, for he was in his mid-30s before he achieved prominence.
Western hero This imperious statue of Caesar was made in 17th-century France and is now in the Louvre, Paris.
Caesar is a hero of Western civilization, partly through his own accounts of his military campaigns. i i ec y i "" — | ida.
He was a blatant womanizer notorious for his affairs with married women—he may have been the natural father of one of his eventual assassins, Marcus Brutus.
In pursuit of public office, he spent far beyond his resources and fell heavily into debt.
His political stance was that of a flamboyant populist, embracing policies such as the distribution of land to war veterans and the poor.
He was widely distrusted among the Roman elite as unprincipled in the pursuit of money and power.
The conquest of Gaul In 60BCE, Caesar made a private agreement with the wealthy and powerful general and politician Marcus Licinius Crassus, and 4 Pompey, Rome's most successful general, to work together to dominate Roman politics.
Caesar was the junior member of the alliance (the Triumvirate), but it earned him election to the consulship, the most n important office of state.
To align Rome with the solar cycle, 46 BCE was made into a 445day year.
JULIUS CAESAR AFTER BATTLE OF ZELA command in the Roman provinces of Gaul.
There he showed outstanding energy and ruthlessness in years of campaigning against the Celtic and Germanic tribes of the region.
Caesar went beyond the borders of his provincial command, making forays across the Rhine in Germany and north as far as the Thames River in Britain.
Rome's civil war In late 50OBCE the Senate, under the control of Pompey, the distinguished military leader, called on Caesar to disband his army after his ten-year command in Gaul had come to a successful conclusion.
Instead, Caesar led his legions across the Rubicon, the stream separating Cisalpine Gaul (the region to the south of the Alps) from Italy proper.
Easily occupying Rome, he took on Pompey in an armed struggle for control of the Roman world.
After two years of fighting, the battle of Pharsalus in August 48 proved decisive for Caesar.
Pompey escaped from the scene of his defeat, only to be murdered a month later in Egypt.
Although Pompey's sons, Sextus and Gnaeus, continued the civil war until 45 BCE, Caesar's outstanding military skills had won him the supreme power he sought.
Caesar's column Reform and power During his brief reign, Caesar revealed a zeal for innovation and reform.
He halved the number of Roman citizens dependent on handouts of bread from the state by resettling the destitute in colonies in Italy and abroad, and reformed the calendar, see above.
For example, the Republic had in the past appointed a temporary “dictator,” a leader with exceptional power Caesar's death Brutus steps forward to stab Caesar in this painting by 19th-century artist Vincenzo Camaccini.
DT ' A Caesar's supporter, Mark Antony, This column marks the place outside Rimini, Italy, where Caesar crossed the Rubicon in 49 BCE. ac d The heart of the republic The Forum, the heart of Rome, is where delivered a funeral oration over his body — | after the assassination.
A temple to | Caesar was later erected on the spot where he was cremated.
LE UEI to cope with an emergency, | but Caesar permanently | assumed the role, and advertised the fact on coins.
A group of senators led by Gaius Cassius Longinus and Marcus Junius Brutus, inspired by an idealistic attachment to the Republic, and the desire to defend their own privileges, conspired to kill him before he left Rome.
They stabbed him in the assembly hall, where he had come to address the Senate.
Ironically, his death brought about the end of the Republic his assassins were trying to | | | restore, and two years after his death, the Senate made him a deity.
He is remembered today as a skilled orator, | author, and military leader.
COIN SHOWING CAESAR 59 Caesar's daughter Julia marries Pompey; he marries his third wife, Calpurnia.
He is granted a five-year governorship of Cisalpine Gaul and Illyricum ; Transalpine Gaul is soon added to his command.
January 10, 49 Defying a call from the Senate to disband his army at the end of his governorship, Caesar crosses the Rubicon into Italy, precipitating civil war.
June 23, 47 The Ptolemaic Queen, Cleopatra, gives birth to Caesarion, probably Caesar's son.
August 47 Caesar defeats Pharnaces, king of Pontus and the Bosporus, at the battle of Zela.
March 45 Caesar defeats the last of Pompey's army at Munda in Spain, ending the civil war.
March 15, 44 Caesar assassinated by a group of conspirators set on restoring the Republic.
The end of the Roman Mediterranean, gained lands for Rome in the Middle — allies of Caesar, who in 45 BCE became dictator for FADING OF THE REPUBLIC Republic was a long East, and formed the First Triumvirate alliance with life—Rome's most powerful leader to date.
Friction between the two sparked civil POMPEY defeated pirates across the now led by Pompey.
The great structures for which Rome has become famed—from walls and aqueducts to amphitheaters and temples—appeared all over the empire, and many still survive today.
The street would have been lined along both sides with buildings for public use.
The Romans themselves did not consider that the republic ended with Caesar’s death, and when Augustus came to power he did not paint himself as an all-powerful emperor figure.
Instead, he claimed to have restored the republic and to have returned power to the Senate and the people.
Augustus represented himself as “first among equals” with his fellow senators, although, in reality, he held supreme power.
The Library of Celsus at Ephesus (Turke was built in the 2nd century ct as a monument to |a Roman senator and governor.
Date of conquest or annexation by Rome Boundary of Roman Empire Province boundary o Provincial capital y) The empire of Augustus started out with republican pretensions (rule by the Senate and Roman people), but while Augustus retained parts of the existing system, he grafted his own autocracy onto it.
The republic's system of rule, based on competition among aristocratic families, was replaced by an imperial one in which a single aristocratic family dominated.
A worldwide empire By the late Ist century CE, and the time of the emperor Trajan (ruled 98—117 CE), Rome headed an empire of great wealth, which stretched across a vast area that took in all of the Mediterranean, the Middle East, and a large chunk of northern and central Europe.
In the first two centuries of imperial rule, there were probably around 50 million people living in Roman lands.
The bulk of these lands were conquered during the days of the republic.
The empire consolidated these areas and added a few new provinces, although these new acquisitions were also the first to be given up later on.
Britain, Dacia , Assyria, and Mesopotamia were short-lived gains compared to other territories.
Roman rulers were quick to crush any rebellion or threat (from outside or from within), often brutally.
This is one reason why the empire was relatively stable during this time.
The expansion that was achieved was greatly helped by the work of emperors such as Trajan and Claudius.
Another major factor in maintaining these lands was the Romans’ legendary military might.
Crucially, the empire had a standing army, unlike during much of the republic.
An urban civilization Ancient Roman civilization was highly urbanized, with a vast network of prosperous cities, filled with beautiful buildings that usually mirrored the city of Rome itself, such as temples and a public forum.
The empire's extensive territories were divided into provinces ruled by governors called proconsuls or FROM REPUBLIC TO EMPIRE praetors, who ruled in the emperor's name.
By the 3rd century CE, separate leaders often attended to military matters.
Within these provinces, cities looked much like Roman ones and were run according to a Roman-style system of law.
The urban centers of imperial Rome were linked by an impressive transport and communication network made From Republic to Empire the structures of the republican system gave way to the empire, Rome found itself in command of st, worldwide territories.
The empire encompassed a diverse mix of peoples, and its politics, way f life, artistic achievements, and spectacular feats of engineering have had a lasting impact. possible by the Romans’ unique talent for engineering—new roads, bridges, viaducts, harbors, and aqueducts were built throughout the empire.
Rome’s huge empire meant | that it had at its command a INVENTION The empire was connected by thousands of miles of expertly made roads, typically consisting of stone slabs laid over rubble.
Vital for allowing soldiers to move around as fast as possible—which is why Roman roads are often straight—they helped to control the vast territories.
ROMAN EMPEROR EMPEROR AUGUSTUS Augustus was the Roman Empire's first emperor.
He was born Octavian, and was Julius Caesar's grand-nephew and adopted son.
He brought an end to civil war, and appeared to be restoring the republic to its glory days, but in reality ruled as an autocrat.
He held power for 41 years of relative peace, heralding the start of the empire that was to last for 4T 58 over four centuries.
Mf E The oculus is open to the elements—rainwater drains away through the floor.
Rings of concrete made with lightweight pumice stone become narrower toward the top. vast array of Z4 human and natural resources, and a diverse web of trading connections.
Throughout its many provincial cities and towns, the empire brought into being some of the really great works of ancient Roman architecture, engineering, and art.
Imperial-era buildings and monuments took the Romans’ love of impressive grandeur to a peak, proclaiming their wealth and power to the world.
It was built between72 and 82 CE to stage a variety of ""entertainments,"" including battle reconstructions, gladiatorial combat, dramas, and executions.
The pediment Is set above Corinthian columns to form a Classical entrance. built.
This was made possible due to expertise in arch construction and the discovery of cement to make concrete.
The immense load-bearing capacities of concrete, along with further advances in the application of architectural elements like the arch, meant that they could produce massive structures such as Rome's Colosseum, the enormous dome of the Pantheon , long aqueducts and viaducts , and harbors such as Caesarea Maritima in Judea in the Middle East.
Other monumental imperial structures include three famous sights in The number of spectators that could fit structures were Rome—the Forum Bronze household god The Romans worshipped a variety of ancestral gods as guardians of their homes.
Life in the Roman Empire Everyday life continued in many ways as it had done during the republic.
Male citizens had varying freedoms, while women were mainly confined to the domestic arena.
Slaves, with no The Pantheon Created as a temple in the 2nd century ce, the Pantheon in Rome is famed for its dome, the largest until modern times.
HOW WE KNOW In August 79 ce, a massive eruption of Mount Vesuvius buried the nearby Roman city of Campania (now called Pompeii) in southern Italy under 20 ft of ash and debris.
Excavation has revealed a perfectly preserved example of a sophisticated Greco-Roman city of around 20,000 people, with buildings such as a forum, amphitheater, and lavish villas.
Many human bodies left their shapes in the ash, from which plaster casts have since been made , showing Pompeii's people as they fell.
Port of Ostia This great trading seaport lay at the mouth of the Tiber, close to Rome.
Large merchant vessels unloaded goods onto barges to continue their journey into the city itself.
The floor, now gone, was raised by short pillars around which furnace-heated air circulated. freedoms at all, were essential for keeping the wheels of Roman life running smoothly.
In the country, up to a third of the population were slaves carrying out agricultural work to supply the towns and cities.
The wealthy lived in magnificent villas with toilets, running water, and central heating.
Often centered on a cool inner courtyard, these were filled with statues and artifacts and decorated with beautiful mosaic floors and wall-paintings showing skill in the art of perspective—famous examples survive at Pompeii and in Rome itself, such as the House of Livia.
These great houses were often designed and decorated by Greek artists living in these Roman cities.
Food and drink was consumed on an excessive scale that has become legendary, and was accompanied by music and dancing.
Many poorer townspeople lived in crowded basic apartment blocks known as insulae.
Remains of these buildings show similarities to modern apartment buildings, with uniform entrances and windows.
Business, pleasure, and worship Gathering for business or pleasure was a central part of Roman life.
Meeting x p Gold coins These coins, left in Kent, England, after the Roman invasion, represent over four years’ pay for a Roman Grooming kit Wealthy Romans were well-groomed.
The owner may Bright red ""Samian"" pottery, known for cleaner, and have intended to collect its distinctive red coloring, was used ear-Scoop. them in more settled times. widely during the early imperial period.
Silver ladle and spoon Roman silverware came in various styles and showed great technical mastery.
Mosaic Wealthy Romans enjoyed fine interiors in their homes, such as this late3rd-century mosaic from a villa in Sicily. places such as markets, public “forum” areas, bath houses, and even communal toilets were popular spots, with private squalor offset by public grandeur.
Meetings were often conducted outside, in open places, to discourage the secret plotting that characterized Roman rule.
This took the form of athletic games, gladiatorial combat, animal hunts, chariot races, plays and public execution of criminals.
In the early centuries, the Romans of the empire believed in a range of gods and goddesses , both state and “household,” to whom they built temples.
Laws of the land Augustus made some legal reforms, but the basic tenets of Roman law remained.
Citizens charged with crimes often had patrons to defend them, and criminal law was administered by Roman magistrates.
By the first half of the 2nd century CE, Roman citizens pleading a miscarriage of justice were entitled to appeal to a higher court based in the city of Rome.
A variety of problems beset certain parts of the empire, including starvation, plague, inflation, high taxation, and ""barbarian"" attacks.
Some regions, such as Gaul and Britain, started to assert their own interests and threaten imperial authority.
He created the first imperial college of four emperors to oversee four sections of the empire.
A SECOND ROME In the early part of the 4th century ct, Roman emperor Constantine (280337 CE) established a ""second Rome"" at Byzantium , renaming it Constantinople— a possible further cause of the empire's demise.
In its early days it resembled the ancient Greek hoplite army, which was primarily made up of men who volunteered to fight to protect their city.
The “classic” Roman army that we know most about today is that which Caesar began and Augustus honed.
By the reign of Trajan , this is the army that seemed unbeatable to its enemies.
A developing force In the days of the early Republic the army was staffed by volunteers from the aristocratic families.
They provided their own weapons and uniform and trained for five or six years.
Small units of men BEFORE The Roman army was shaped by confronting enemies with successful armies of their own.
GREEK HOPLITE FORMATIONS The ancient Greek hoplites fought in organized formations.
The hoplite ""phalanx,"" in which they stood closely together with their shields locked together, allowed them to form a united front against the enemy—something the Roman army used during the republic.
Young boys were trained as soldiers, and the aim of the state was to produce a perfect and invincible hoplite army.
Some of these values were echoed in the self-sacrifice demanded of Roman soldiers.
ALEXANDER'S ARMY Alexander the Great's army of 50,000 infantry and 4,000 cavalry marched an average of over 20 miles a day ««96-97. worked as a team.
They worked and lived together and fought with iron discipline, just as the Greek hoplites had done before them.
The general Marius made many reforms, including opening the army to all.
The practice of giving a piece of land to retired soldiers is also attributed to Marius.
Caesar oversaw a professional and well-led military force that Augustus maintained, with a stable number of legions to make up the army that would safeguard the empire.
If, however, they did take up with a local woman while stationed in a far-flung part of the empire, and they were together when the nickname “Marius’s Mules.
Modern studies have estimated the weight based on rations for 16 days and a full set of equipment.
At the end of a day spent on the march, they often had to set up a fortified military camp for the night, digging boundary ditches and setting up tents.
Skilled engineers within the ranks also built bridges and roads, if necessary, in order to reach their destination.
Training in physical fitness involved running, swimming, H""H Perhaps nowhere can the formidable organization and ruthlessness of the Roman world be better seen than in its army.
The professional standing army of several hundred thousand men at the height of the empire was a disciplined and well-trained fighting machine.
From this time, soldiers swore their allegiance to the emperor, which was key to ensuring their loyalty and in defending and protecting the empire's borders over the next two centuries.
PRAEFECTUS CASTRORUM The camp prefect, responsible for training and equipment.
IMMUNES Those who were excused from regular duties, including medical staff, surveyors, and armorers.
Life in the army Although the life of a Roman soldier was dangerous and brutal, for many it was an escape from a life of poverty.
It was also a way for those without money to gain political power and influence.
Young men were expected to do military service as part of their education.
Those from wealthier backgrounds saw the army as a step on the ladder to public office.
One striking example of the positive effect a successful military career could have is Julius Caesar, who, although born into he retired, she was given Roman citizenship in her own right.
Although the army was feared by many, it was scrupulously disciplined and generally dealt fairly with local people it came in contact with.
Supplies were paid for, rather than taken, and a good general would not allow his troops to loot and pillage at random.
They were expected to march up to 20 miles a day, carrying all their equipment, which may have weighed 60 Ib or more—earning them Army skills HOW WE KNOW These scraps of wood were found in a waterlogged trash pile near a Roman fort in northern England.
As well as personal letters from women and servants—including a birthday invitation—the tablets reveal details about the army.
Work rotas, accounts, and reports give us an idea of everyday life as a Roman soldier.
This roof tile, made by the 20th legion, features their charging boar emblem. wrestling, and throwing games.
Exercises designed to build stamina might last for two days without rest.
The men also practiced military drills and training, as in battle every soldier would be expected to follow commands and fight in formation.
One of the most famous of these was the “tortoise” , in which rectangular blocs of soldiers stood together with their shields facing outward and upward toward the enemy.
The life of a Roman soldier was tough, but the discipline, effective leadership, and organization were key to its success for so long.
The weighted javelin was designed to pierce armor and bend or break on impact.
Legionaries may have worn segmented metal plate armor (/orica segmentata) but auxiliaries would more likely have had little more than a leather tunic or a shield for protection.
Sword The gladius was a short weapon measuring about 20 in long, used for stabbing.
Dagger The pugio was a short stabbing knife measuring 8-10 in for hand-to-hand fighting.
Sandals Roman soldiers, who often marched 20 miles a day wore leather footwear with steel studs.
A belt carried the pugio and the gladius, but more importantly, a cover of metal studs that hung in front for protection.
The tunic was a short woolen garment that did not impede the wearer's movements.
AFTER I$ p e The Roman army changed over time as enemies threatened the empire.
The skills and legacy of the Roman army have influenced and inspired later fighting forces.
BARBARIANS AT THE GATE After the middle of the 3rd century ce, the army was forced to evolve to deal with new challenges at the frontiers.
COMMUNICATION NETWORK Much of the road network, built as the most direct route for the marching army, is still in use.
MODERN TANK WARFARE The tank has taken the place of the tortoise as a mobile fighting machine and an armored unit to hold places of strategic importance.
The total number, including auxiliaries such engineers, armorers, and doctors, may have been twice this size.
It shows the Trojan priest Laocoón and his two sons being attacked by snakes.
One of the stories relating to Laocoón was that he was killed by serpents, along with his sons, as a punishment from the gods for having broken his vows of celibacy.
The agonized facial expression of Laocoón Is one of the best examples of the increased realism in later ancient Greek art.
The human form is portrayed in marble in great realistic anatomical detail, although it remained within the idealized view of physical perfection.
The sons look inward and upward toward their father, > helping to create a balanced EN composition that focuses on i C The writhing serpents the sculpture's main F are shown wrapped around protagonist. human limbs in a confusing mass that heightens the sense of torture.
The twisting poses of the figures create a realistic sense of movement, and effectively express tortured writhing.
BEFORE Examples of early Greek art include striking symmetrical pottery and stone statues of idealized human forms.
EARLY POTTERY Between the 10th and 8th centuries BCE, the “Geometric” style dominated Greek pottery.
Its abstract, linear forms reveal the love of an symmetry and proportion that STYLE VASE was so important to Greek art.
ARCHAIC SCULPTURE The “Archaic” period (c.0480 BCE) Is famous for its kouros sculptures showing an idealized human form.
These forward-facing nudes show the same symmetry as early Greek pottery.
Bronze casting became popular in the 500s, which made side-on poses easier to create.
KOUROS FIGURE he art of the classical world a took the form of statuary, painted pottery, wall paintings and mosaics, and architecture.
In general, Roman art took the ideas of both the Greeks and the Etruscans (a people who dominated northern Italy by the 6th century BCE; see106) and developed it in new ways.
Generally speaking, art became more realistic over time, moving from the idealized form of the early period to the realism of the later Hellenistic renders fabric with great realism.
Polyclitus’ Doryphorus reveals a more realistic pose and musculature— informed by the Greeks’ study of the human body, aided by observing naked athletes.
It also displays a mathematically calculated ideal of beauty with perfectly proportioned limbs and body.
Realism Classical styles continued into the Hellenistic period, but, while sculptures such as the famous Venus de Milo retain an ideal of female beauty, works isses Art The art of ancient Greece and Rome-often known collectively as Classical Artbrought into being a wide range of different styles and approaches.
Images appeared depicting characters from everyday life, such as a woman at a market or a boy strangling a goose.
Classical black figure vase Greek vases often had dark figures against a red clay background, as in this example, or red figures on black.
The painters were highly skilled and the style evolved over time. has been lost (except for vase painting), but many surviving Roman wall paintings give an idea of the lost art.
Those from Pompei and Herculaneum illustrate a particular talent for creating threedimensional illusions of scenes such as mythological dramas on a flat surface, and for expertly rendering shading, highlights, and perspective.
The art of floor mosaics, using tiny pieces of colored stone , was invented by the Greeks, but is the Romans who are famous for their mosaic work.
Imperial Rome saw mosaic pavements and walls featuring ambitious schemes and imagery.
The Romans created monumental architecture and statues that celebrated the glories and wealth of their rule— CLASSICAL ART The art of ancient Greece and Rome has influenced many later cultures.
BYZANTINE ART Domed buildings, perfected by the Romans, became a distinctive feature of the eastern Byzantine empire.
The 6th-century ce church of Hagia Sophia, in the former Byzantine capital, Constantinople, Is one example.
Sculptors and painters, such as Raphael in Italy, gained a classical understanding of human anatomy, and architects created buildings informed by ancient Greek temples.
During the Classical period, sculpture began to show greater realism than the idealized style of earlier periods.
Myron's Discobolus (Discus Thrower) is a masterly attempt to freeze realistic movement, and the unattributed Apollo Belvedere statue bronze.
Before the Hellenistic era there had been little sense of “art” as a separate creative entity—statues were made to mark a grave, glorify a temple, or commemorate a war; vases often had practical uses.
However, wealthy buyers who had seen statues of famous figures now wanted a portrait of themselves, or figures to decorate their villas.
The art of Rome Many of the Greek statues that survive today are actually Roman copies.
In many ways the Romans simply copied the art of the Greeks, although they later went on to create their own artistic identity.
Ancient Greek painting Greek architect, Apollodorus of Damascus, showing a continuing connection between Greek and Roman art.
The Romans also used the Greek temple form, often placing it on a platform to make it more impressive and filling its panels with sculptures plundered from Greece.
Their grand villas overflowed with statues, while Roman leaders used the power of art as propaganda.
Without the Roman use of Greek art, much of its style and influence might have been lost to us.
Ancient writers told a famous tale about Zeuxis painting an image of grapes that was so realistic that birds tried to peck it.
Cultural coexistence The Ptolemies did not impose their culture on the Egyptians.
While the ruling class enjoyed a Greek lifestyle, in all other layers of society, Egyptian culture continued much as before.
Furthermore, the Greek rulers styled themselves as native monarchs, taking the title of pharaoh.
Ptolemaic rule If the Ptolemies' cooperative policy was a shrewd political strategy, it paid off, because their rule brought stability to Egypt.
Reforms were made to land location opened Egypt up to the trade and cultures of the Mediterranean.
With its library of legendary fame, it became the world's center of Greek learning.
The Romans By the middle of the 1st century BCE, the Ptolemaic dynasty was weakened by leadership rivalries.
Rome had been increasing its role in Egyptian affairs and was now effectively overseeing the country.
Octavian, the victorious Roman leader, incorporated Egypt as his own personal domain.
Alexandria continued to flourish and became a meeting point for Roman trade routes.
It also remained a center for Greek culture, visited by scholars from across the Greek-speaking world.
In the early days of Roman rule, the Egyptian government kept its strong Greek anc Roman Egypt Ancient Egypt's later history is one of fascinating change and diversity.
Ever since Mycenaean times (see ownership, and agricultural methods improved.
Regional administration was organized using the existing Egyptian “nome” system of administrative districts.
With an energetic flair for 4 5 ft -the reputed height of l the Pharos lighthouse at Alexandria, second only to the pyramids business, the Ptolemies also began to replace the Egyptian barter system with an early form of monetary banking, created royal monopolies on certain goods, and zealously explored trade opportunities.
Greek culture, but the title of pharaoh became identified with the far-off emperor in Rome.
The Romans probably retained much of the Ptolemaic system of administration, but they slowly introduced many of their own practices in agriculture and everyday life.
As Rome's power faded from the 4th century CE, Egypt came under the influence of the Christian Eastern Roman Empire based in Constantinople (once Byzantium, now Istanbul) and became a melting pot of different religious ideas.
Coptic Christianity During the Ist century CE, Christianity spread to Egypt.
By the later 4th century, it was the Roman Empire's official religion, and by the 6th, Egypt was strongly Christian.
A devout Coptic church developed, which later became the principal Christian church in mainly Muslim Egypt.
Copts held the “monophysite” belief that Christ was solely divine, and not both human and divine.
In the 3rd century sce, during Ptolemaic times, a great lighthouse was completed on Pharos Island, in the harbor of Egypt's cosmopolitan capital, Alexandria.
This towering structure—destroyed by an earthquake during the medieval period—was one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world.
During the 1990s, archaeologists made some incredible finds underwater, including possible masonry from the lighthouse, and the remains of some impressive ancient statues.
This image shows the recovery of a massive statue that may be one of the Ptolemaic kings.
In theory, Egypt was independent, but in practice it was controlled by Rome.
The Romans supported the Ptolemaic monarchs in return for financial favors.
Cleopatra’s father paid enormous sums to secure Roman backing, but this did not prevent Cleopatra’s older sisters Tryphaena and Berenice from plotting against him.
When her father died in 51 BCE, Cleopatra, as eldest surviving daughter, ascended the throne with a younger brother.
However, he and his chief minister Pothinus had other ideas—Ptolemy wished to be sole ruler, and by 49 BCE , Cleopatra had been deprived of power and exiled.
In 48 BCE, when the Cleopatra and Antony This silver coin shows Cleopatra on one side and her lover, Roman general Mark Antony , on the other.
A legendary beauty This 19th-century image depicts the glamorous Cleopatra of myth and legend.
In reality, her success as a leader and a lover owed more to her intelligence and charm than her looks.
Roman political and military leader Julius Caesar led a military campaign to Egypt, Cleopatra feared for her life.
During the same campaign, Ptolemy XIII drowned—pulled into the Nile by the weight of his golden armor.
Shortly Cleopatra as pharaoh In this relief from a temple at Dendra, Cleopatra is depicted in the style of a pharaoh, wearing the crown of Hathor and a vulture headdress.
F a 2 — r A b i » | © ET 4t s C LAE afterward, on the official pretext of negotiating a treaty, Cleopatra visited Rome.
For the next three years, Cleopatra was careful to avoid the power struggle that broke out after Caesar’s death.
Instead, she restored order and prosperity to her own kingdom, where she was a popular and efficient ruler.
By 42BCE the Roman general Mark E Antony and Octavian (the future emperor Augustus, see 112) vere in control of the Roman world.
They split power between them, Antony taking charge of the eastern Mediterranean.
He summoned Cleopatra to Tarsus . and once again, she set out to conquer a conqueror, dazzling the Romans with her style and guile. dic Ec ^ Antony and Cleopatra At Tarsus, Cleopatra and Antony became lovers, but T passion had yet to overrule E politics.
Before long, Antony had rejoined his Roman wife, Fulvia, in Greece, where she had fled after a failed rebellion against Octavian in Italy.
By 40BCE Fulvia was dead, which enabled Antony to seal another peace deal with Octavian by marrying his sister Octavia.
She was the first and only Ptolemy to learn Egyptian, the language of her subjects.
Cleopatra and Antony proclaimed themselves as living gods—she Isis (see below) and he Dionysus/Osiris—and their children as the rulers of lands currently dominated by Rome.
After this, Octavian had no difficulty in persuading the Roman Senate to provide the means for an all-out war against Cleopatra, who was clearly determined to set herself up as a rival power.
After her defeat by the Romans at the Battle of Actium, fought off the coast of Greece, she fled to Egypt with 60 treasure-laden ships, followed by Antony.
Besieged at Alexandria, Antony killed himself, and Cleopatra, perhaps aware of her likely fate as the star of Octavian's triumph, also took her own life, supposedly with a poisonous snake hidden in a basket of figs.
Her eldest son, Caesarion, was executed, but it is thought that the other children's lives were spared.
Cleopatra and Isis This limestone stele shows Cleopatra breastfeeding her son while making an offering to the goddess Isis.
In 37 BCE, Antony came back to Egypt, and, while still wedded to Octavia, married Cleopatra.
When Osiris was murdered by the god Set, Isis found his body and performed rites that would return him to eternal life.
Then she retired to raise her son Horus, magically conceived from her husband's corpse, until he was old enough to avenge his father.
While the myth of Isis may have arisen as a representation of the flooding of the rich plains by the Nile , the cult of the sorrowing wife and loving mother spread far beyond its place of origin.
Isis was adopted as a patron divinity of travelers, and had particular appeal to women.
THE GODDESS ISIS TIMELINE 68 BCE Birth of Cleopatra, third daughter of Ptolemy XII of Egypt.
OCTAVIAN 40 BcE Cleopatra bears twins, Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene.
Vast territories and exalted titles are assigned to Cleopatra and her children in a ceremony known as the ""Donations of Alexandria,"" which alarms Rome.
THE SELEUCID DYNASTY Alexander's conquests were partitioned after his death.
Alexander had dreamed of a Greek-Macedonian-Persian empire with its component cultures taking strength from one another.
This empire was almost as vast as its predecessor—the first Persian empire of the Achaemenids —but by the 3rd century BCE it had started to crumble as its many subjects asserted their autonomy.
These contacts denied Roman traders access to routes to China and India, leading to battles with the Roman armies.
They left little written record, so historians rely on their art and architecture, and foreign texts to paint a picture of the period.
Sassanid fortified settlement Built high above the fertile Iranian plateau, Takht-e Solalman, or Solomon's Throne, was one of the holiest sites of the Sassanid Persians.
It housed a Zoroastrian fire temple with an eternally burning flame. fire altars were erected to Ormazd, or Ahura Mazda, god of light, truth, and life.
Most Sassanid rulers, however, were tolerant of religions other than their own, and large populations of Jews and Christians inhabited the empire, especially in Mesopotamia.
In the early 7th century the Sassanids suffered a serious military defeat at the hands of the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius.
From this point, the weakened empire lay at the mercy of Islamic forces invading from the south.
Buddhist ideas, meanwhile, Sassanid plate This gold plate, typical of Persian artistic refinement, shows the king hunting on a camel—an image found on many Sassanid artifacts.
Despite this initial success, war with the Romans and their successors, the Byzantines , continued through four centuries of Sassanid rule.
The Sassanids built a rich civilization based largely on agriculture and trade.
Zoroastrianism, the traditional faith of the Persians, was elevated to the status of official state religion, and many new AFTER Persia was rapidly annexed by the Islamic conquerors, but Persian culture lived on in its art and literature.
Scholars of all religions made contributions to law, medicine, astronomy, mats, and philosophy.
Ferdowsi's Shahnameh, or ""Epic of Kings"" , is a key work from this time.
EARLY VEDIC PERIOD Many local dynasties came into being, and by the 8th century Bce, India was divided into many small, competing kingdoms.
LATE VEDIC PERIOD Around the 8th century gce, large urban states known as mahajanapadas started to take shape in northern India.
The northeastern Magadha area came to dominate the various warring regional powers.
Its strategic position in the Ganges valley aided trade and linked it with flourishing ports in the Ganges river delta.
NANDA DYNASTY In the 5th century gce, just a few states, including Magadha, dominated India.
By the 4th century, after countless wars, Magadha had emerged as the most powerful.
Ayodhya was an important city and the eastern capital of the Kushan conquerors.
India's First Empire From their northeastern heartland, the Mauryans came to dominate India's massive subcontinent with what became its first real empire.
The emperor Chandragupta won a great deal of new territory, combining smaller kingdoms and uniting—often rather loosely—vast regions of India Ashoka pillar This is one of Ashoka's famous polished sandstone pillars bearing edicts inscribed in Brahmi script to help spread his ideas among his people.
They are among the oldest deciphered original Indian texts. under one ruler tor the first time.
The empire embraced much of the Indian subcontinent and part of Afghanistan.
The lands into which Chandragupta expanded included parts of the Macedonian empire won by Alexander and by his successors the Seleucids.
His highly efficient and impressive centralized system also owed much The Ashoka lions Ashoka made this four-lion motif his symbol of imperial authority; it is now used as India's official emblem. to his minister, Chanakya, who produced one of the greatest treatises on politics, administration, and economics ever written—Arthashastra.
Chandragupta's legacy At the core of Chandragupta's newly won empire was its glittering capital at Pataliputra.
Under his sure hand, backed by strong military resources and an eftective secret service, agriculture and trade flourished.
As a convert to Jainism, he spent his final days in ascetic repentance for a terrible famine that struck his people, which he was grief-stricken at being unable to hold back.
Little is known of his reign, but it seems Sanchi gate Four magnificent gateways lead to the Great Stupa at Sanchi.
Dating from the first century BcE, these “torans” are decorated with intricate carvings that are one of the greatest artistic achievements of ancient Indian art.
They show scenes from the life of Buddha and feature motifs such as Ashoka's famous four lions.
He used the elephants in battles fought between Alexander's ""successors,"" notably in the to the battlefield, ran red with the blood of the many thousands fallen.
As his empire prospered, he promoted the arts and sciences and instigated a vast building program.
This included a great many stupas (mound-shaped shrines), built to house supposed relics of Buddha.
At some point in his reign, Ashoka converted to the fast-growing religion of Buddhism.
According to a story that mirrors the tale of his grandfather's repentance, he converted in remorse at that he successfully expanded Mauryan territories south into the Deccan, so that only the southern tip of India, plus the Kalinga area in the east (now in Orissa state), were not incorporated in the empire.
Bindusara’s son, Ashoka, the third emperor (c.5— 232BCE) was the last major ruler of the Mauryan dynasty and one of the great figures of ancient history.
It was Ashoka who brought the empire to its greatest extent, gaining the Kalinga region after a particularly bloody battle.
It was said that the waters of the Daya River, next “All men are my children.
By the 4th century BCE, scholars were developing the idea of using combinations of units of different sizes.
By the 1st century ce, they had devised a decimal-like system using the symbols shown here and refined the concept of zero as a “placeholder” to add and multiply numbers.
It was added to over subsequent centuries. the waste and bloodshed of the Kalinga War, turning his back on violence and embracing the peaceful Buddhist way of life.
He sent missionaries to spread the word far and wide throughout Asia, including Sri Lanka, and in so doing played a major role in the development of Buddhism.
He also spread the word through his edicts— sayings inscribed on stone pillars and rocks across India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Afghanistan.
These set out his principles of peace, morality, respect, and humane rule, and of being the father who guides his people's spiritual welfare.
End of an era The peace and prosperity of Ashoka's reign did not continue long after his death.
Subsequent rulers lost territories and prestige, and there were squabbles over the succession.
Small kingdoms arose in northern India, among them those of the so-called “Indo-Greek” rulers.
The most famous of these was Menander , who may have battled with the Sungas.
The 1st-3rd centuries ce saw the Kushans from the steppes of Central Asia ruling in the north while small dynasties came and went elsewhere.
As these crumbled, the way was paved for the great empire of the Guptas.
Great artistic achievements of this welladministrated, prosperous empire include the Ajanta cave paintings in western India.
ART, RELIGION, AND SCIENCE The Gupta era is often seen as the ""classical"" period of Indian culture, especially of Hindu and Buddhist art.
The Guptas had a strong Hindu leaning, but Jainism and Buddhism also flourished.
The dassic image of Buddha developed, with a peaceful, reflective expression and curls flat against his head.
Wealthy patrons also encouraged architecture, dance, drama, and Sanskrit epics, while great advances were made in mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, logic, and medicine.
GUPTA-ERA BUDDHA DEMISE OF THE GUPTAS Under the fourth Guptan ruler, Kumara Gupta , cracks began to appear in the empire as it faced incursions by Hephthalite nomads from the north.
Under the short-lived but ambitious rule of the First Emperor , the laws and infrastructure of imperial China first took shape.
BEFORE As China moved out of the Bronze Age, the Shang were defeated by the Zhou, the last of the pre-imperial dynasties.
THE ZHOU DYNASTY The Zhou dynasty lasted longer than any other in Chinese history.
During the Zhou period, bronze was widely used, and ZHOU BRONZE iron technology was introduced in China.
The terra-cotta army The First Emperor's mausoleum was constructed near Xi'an by 700,000 conscripts.
The scale of the mausoleum is a testament to the power of the First Emperor.
Today, the terra-cotta army Is visited by two million people every year.
QIN SHI HUANG ne of the territories to survive the Warring States period was the state of Qin.
The people of Qin were situated to the west of Zhou territory along the Yellow River valley—so far west that people said they shared the customs of the Rong and Di, non-Chinese groups regarded as uncivilized.
Instead, they argued that the interests of the state came before those or individuals, that rulers should apply strict laws and punishments, and that the use of war as an instrument of state policy was acceptable.
Lord Shang began a program of Legalist reform in the state of Qin, where all adult males were registered for military service.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, considering its emphasis on the infallibility of the head of state, the First Emperor was an advocate of Legalism.
During his reign, Li Si, the chief minister, put Legalist principles into practice and introduced measures that are still in effect throughout China today.
Among these measures were the abolition of the feudal fiefs , the standardization of the written script, the application of a strict legal code, Later Confucian historians have painted a picture of Qin Shi Huang as a ruthless megalomaniac, a reputation that can be traced to two notorious acts committed during his reign.
Yet whatever his failings as an ideal ruler, the achievements of the man who unified China for the first time cannot be underestimated. the establishment of official measures for weights and lengths, the issue of a unified currency, and even the regulation of the width of roads.
The Qin Empire Though the Chinese empire had already been created by the conquest of the Warring States, Qin expansion continued southward.
Expeditions were sent to modern Guangdong, on the south coast of China, and Chinese colonies were established there.
After campaigning against the steppe peoples in the north, the emperor ordered his general Meng Tian to construct a great wall to establish Pronounced ""Chin""—a Chinese | QI N dynasty and a likely origin of the English word for China. control over the Ordos region of Inner Mongolia, in order to help repel further incursions from the steppes.
As well as constructing works that enhanced China’s defenses, Qin Shi Huang also commissioned many grand public building projects—including palaces, bridges, and canals—to strengthen imperial rule in China.
An immortal tomb As he grew old, the emperor became increasingly obsessed with finding the secret of immortality.
According to the description recorded a century later by the Grand Historian, Sima Qian, the tomb contained a model of the empire, which had rivers of quicksilver and a mechanism for operating the tides, and was guarded by traps that would shoot any intruders after the tomb was closed.
Not far from this burial chamber (which has yet to be excavated) stood the terra-cotta army , a legion of life-size pottery soldiers that were constructed to defend the First Emperor in death.
Qin-dynasty coins Round coins with a square hole, similar to those used in China until the late 19th century, first appeared during the Qin dynasty.
Qin Shi Huang died in 210BCE on an expedition to the east of China in search of the island of Penglai, where immortals were believed to reside.
Fall of the Qin After the death of the First Emperor, his son took power, but he was never as effective a ruler as his father, and he was forced to commit suicide by his chief minister two years later.
China crumbled into civil unrest and much of Qin Shi Huang’s work was lost.
Revolts and uprisings led to the demise of the dynasty less than twenty years after it had begun.
The Legalist ideas of the Qin were rejected by the Han dynasty, but the influence of Qin Shi Huang was felt in China for centuries.
CHINA AS ONE Following the short-lived Qin dynasty, the expectation that China should be a unified state remained strong up to modern times.
The Han dynasty rejected Legalist principles in favor of Confucianism, and the influence of this philosophy in state affairs is still felt today.
LEGACY OF THE FIRST EMPEROR Historically, the rule of the First Emperor was seen in a negative light by scholars, and his cruelty and obsession with immortality were highlighted.
In more recent years, modern China has come to reevaluate Qin Shi Huang's aims and achievements in political and social terms.
QIN DYNASTY Qin Shi Huang’s son, the Second Emperor, fell under the influence of the eunuch Zhao Gao, who persuaded him to execute Li Si, his father’s first minister, by having him cut in two in the market place at Xianyang.
THE FIRST HAN EMPEROR Liu Bang, who came from a poor peasant family, rose to prominence as the leader of a rebel band.
At first he supported Xiang Yu, an aristocrat who hoped to revive the feudal states.
When Xiang Yu arrived, the city was looted and the royal family killed.
The rebel leaders quarreled, and for the next four years they campaigned against each other.
In 1972 the tomb of the Countess of Dai, dated 168BcE, was found at Mawangdui in present-day Hunan province.
The grave offerings included silk garments, lacquer bowls for wine and food, and wooden EE of her servants.
The beautiful E banner draped over her inner coffin is one of the earliest surviving B examples of Chinese painting on silk.
It depicts the route her soul would take on its quest for immortality—to the magic island of Penglai and then to the gates of paradise.
The tomb also contained silk manuscripts and a divination board, with markings similar to those found on bronze mirrors of the period.
Gaozu himself was the embodiment of the principle that a man of peasant origins but of outstanding virtue could become emperor.
He began his reign by announcing an amnesty and measures to restore peace.
But in the east and south he initially accepted the existence of ten kingdoms, whose rulers professed allegiance to him, although he later replaced them with members of his own family.
In the commanderies he rewarded senior officials, military leaders, and leaders of non-Chinese groups who had submitted to the Han, by conferring on them the rank of marquis.
This title allowed them to raise taxes for the state, retaining part of the money for themselves.
Promotion on merit Gaozu formalized the system of bureaucratic government introduced under the Qin.
The emperor was assisted by three senior officials, who were in turn supported by nine ministers, each with a defined area of responsibility.
Gaozu was contemptuous of scholars, but he recognized the importance of the Confucian ideals of education and public service.
The same year saw the most celebrated example of social mobility in Chinese history when Gongsun Hong, a former swineherd, was appointed chancellor.
Expansion of the empire During Wudi's long reign China made extensive territorial gains. of the modern provinces of Guangdong and Guangxi and north Vietnam.
All these military campaigns naturally cost money, so Wudi decided to augment tax revenues by imposing a state monopoly on salt and iron.
This provoked a complicated debate over the degree to which the government should interfere in the economy.
Decline and usurpation Wudi's successful reign came to a sad end, as the emperor in his later years became obsessed with his search for immortality, enlisting the help of the leading alchemists of the day.
In 138BCE Wudi sent an envoy, Zhang Qian, to contact the Yuezhi, the traditional enemies of the Xiongnu, in the hope of forming an alliance.
Wudi's greatest conquests were to the northeast and the south of the existing empire.
He soaked the bark of a mulberry tree and bamboo in water, pounded the mixture with a wooden tool, and then drained it through cloth, leaving only the fibers.
His invention was adopted rapidly for documents and books and subsequently spread to the Islamic world and the West. and the excessive influence of the court eunuchs.
One of the eunuchs’ main duties was the care of the numerous imperial concubines, any one of whose sons could be named to succeed the emperor.
This led to palace intrigues in which the eunuchs played an increasingly significant role.
The economy, meanwhile, suffered from financial mismanagement, and there was widespread tax evasion.
Their administrative structure was revived and retained by future Chinese rulers.
The Romans governed a sprawling empire populated by people speaking many languages.
AGE OF DIVISION The fall of the Later Han was followed by a period of division between north and south.
The Later Han In 25 cE Guang Wudi reestablished the Han dynasty, transferring the capital to Luoyang, which became the most populous city in the world.
This was an age of scientific and technological progress; major inventions included paper and an instrument that indicated the direction in which an earthquake had occurred.
Rebellions broke out, and Han generals, the most famous of whom was Cao Cao, contended for power.
Q o N iS ay e Q ý Taiwan 2000 km 0 2000 miles Han dynasty China Under Wudi, the Han extended their control over south China.
K ""TA | | Be as i ' e+ wu. 1 1 oe By Socrates’ time , Greek thinkers had begun to seek rational explanations, instead of adhering to traditional beliefs.
Exposure to new ideas through trade inspired thinkers to challenge traditional wisdom.
Greeks exchanged social, political, and philosophical ideas and dared to imagine novel ways of governing society and of understanding the world.
THE FOUNDERS The Greeks recognized seven sages as founders of their intellectual tradition.
The thinkers who lived and taught there prepared the ground for much of Western philosophy for the next 2000 years. hilosophy is a method a of rational inquiry used to attempt to understand the world and phenomena around us; it is also the study of the process of philosophical inquiry itself.
Three philosophers who taught in Athens are credited with laying the foundations of all classical thought— Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.
He did this by questioning what was meant by concepts such as ""good,"" ""evil,"" ""courage,"" and ^justice,"" to show people that their understanding of such terms lacked truth.
He wrote nothing down, but his logical style of argument is portrayed in the works of his followers, particularly Plato and the soldier and historian Xenophon.
At the age of 70 his constant questioning was thought to threaten the Athenian state.
Many of his writings, such as Symposium and the Republic, were composed as dialogues on subjects such as ethics and justice, the nature of reality, and the immortality of the soul.
He spent three years as Remembering mortality Epicureans used the skull as a memento mori (which means ""remember that you are mortal"") to remind them of the importance of enjoying life while it is still possible. ~ x ZENO THE STOIC Zeno Is said to have strangled himself at the age of 69, in accordance with the Stoic belief that a man has the right to determine his own death. tutor to Alexander the Great , whose conquests spread Greek ideas widely in Asia and North Africa. í Aristotle founded his own school outside Athens called the Lyceum.
His books, compiled from lecture notes, covered subjects ranging from poetry, drama, ethics, and politics to mathematics, physics, logic, zoology, and anatomy.
They remained the basis of Western and Islamic science and philosophy until the 17th century.
Many philosophical movements emerged from the work of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.
Among the most important were Skepticism, Cynicism, Epicureanism, and Stoicism—the last two had the most enduring influence.
SKEPTICISM A philosophical movement that denied the possibility of knowing the real truth with certainty.
CYNICISM A philosophy that taught that virtue and asceticism, rather than pleasure and indulgence, led to happiness.
Epicureanism and Stoicism Epicurus taught that good and bad should be measured by the pleasure and pain they bring, and that the point of justice is to increase human happiness.
He believed that the gods, if they exist at all, had no interest in human affairs and that there was no life after death.
The Latin poet Lucretius brought Epicurus’s ideas to the Roman world, where they strongly influenced writers like Virgil.
He believed that underlying all matter was energy, which he called divine fire.
Zeno claimed that universal human fellowship was more important than narrow loyalty and that man's duty was to accept what fate brings and to behave in accordance with nature.
Roman thinkers such as Seneca the Younger, Cicero, and Cato the Younger adapted Stoic ideas to the new realities of the Roman Empire.
The Roman values of bravery in battle, fortitude in the face of hardship, and the universal brotherhood of Roman citizenship owe their origins to the teachings of the Stoics.
Greek philosophical ideas became the common heritage of intellectuals in the Mediterranean world and beyond, well into the Roman period.
Pliny the Elder (born 24 CE) added to Aristotle’s natural history and Claudius Ptolemy gave Aristotle's astronomy MARCUS AURELIUS mathematical treatment.
The poet Horace was known as the Roman Aristotle for his analysis of literature and drama.
This had a profound influence on Christian theology, particularly through St.
Augustine , whose Neoplatonist ideas survived his conversion to Christianity.
He emphasized truth, justice, correct social relations, and obedience to parents, believing that the family was the proper foundation for society and good government.
The Emperor Marcus LATER EPICUREANISM In the United States Declaration of the right to ""life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness"" is an Epicurean ideal. elite, idealizing self-control and detachment Aurelius gave expression to Roman Stoicism in his book Meditations.
This schematic diagram of the world dating to 1000500BcE describes mythical beings inhabiting the corners of the world.
The perspective is centered on the city of A Wider Links across the ancient world were forged by merchants, rulers, and migrants.
Through increasing cultural exchange, societies gained knowledge Babylon in Mesopotamia , and real locations, labeled with their names, surround it in rough correlation to reality.
DISTANT CONNECTIONS Although some people traveled far in the ancient world, the knowledge of geography they acquired only gradually came to be expressed as maps or texts.
Instead, the powerful showed off their connections with monuments in the landscape, or by displaying possessions from distant lands.
THE WEALTH OF TRADE CITIES Since Phoenician times «€82-85, cities that could control trade had become wealthy.
Some city-states and kingdoms were built on their monopoly on goods such as incense or silk.
The most luxurious or prestigious commodities were often those that had traveled the greatest distance.
Silk that found its way from China to Rome changed hands many times en route, with each middleman taking his markup.
Ideas, stories, religions, languages, all traveled along the trade routes between the various lands.
But here, his identity is blended with the hero Verethraghna of Persian tradition.
Traces of trade The gradual spread of ideas and culture through trade and migration, although little documented, has left many archaeological traces.
Artifacts unearthed far from home, such as African ivory in Assyria , a hoard of Roman coins in India, or a Persian carpet in Siberia, provide clear evidence of long-distance trade.
The occasional shipwreck can represent a detailed time capsule of information.
It records journeys made across the Roman world and beyond before the Ath century ce.
Distances are distorted unrecognizably to preserve the order of places and routes in a clear itinerary.
Greek in Central Asia Common languages spread across vast, multicultural territories.
Such an exotic commodity from far-off lands would have conveyed status on its owner. from the Persian capital Persepolis, for instance, note the rations given to official travelers, and the official stops they made across the empire from Sardis in the west to India in the east.
In the E commercial world, itineraries S M were drawn up as guides for li S EN merchants.
One surviving B example, written by a Romanized author from Alexandria in Egypt in the lst century CE, describes the Red Sea and Indian Ocean.
It relates the ports and the goods, such as iron, gold, silver, myrrh, and slaves, available for import and export in each, and extends its account to the Ganges River and beyond, to China.
Such knowledge was consolidated into an accurate geographical picture of the world by Greek and Roman mapmakers.
In the 2nd century CE, Ptolemy of Alexandria compiled Geographia—a world atlas that laid out instructions on charting the world with lines of latitude and longitude.
It featured North Africa, India, Taprobane , and Sinae , including its capital, Chang’an.
Physical links The transport networks of the ancient world were not so much constructed as evolved as common routes over millennia.
In places, however, roads were cut deliberately by mobilizing forced labor.
More often, a route was marked less by a physical road than by a maintained string of stages or settlements.
States that expanded over wide areas needed to maintain regular communication by supporting these networks as a crucial aspect of their KEY — Roman Empire and client stat — Han Empire E Monsoon winds Trade routes F MEL UU oli Wealth of a caravan city Petra was the capital of the Nabataean Arabs, who controlled the supply of luxury goods between Arabia and Mediterranean markets.
The wealth of such a trade hub is evident in the surviving colonnades, temples, and tombs. control.
Likewise, to send letters across their vast empire, the Persians developed a swift messenger system whose reputation for speed spread well beyond their empire.
Xenophon, the Greek historian of the 4th century BCE, described relays of horses at stations spaced at one-day intervals and manned by officials.
Whenever a letter arrived, the officials immediately sent it on with fresh riders and fresh horses.
Imagining new worlds The imagination was important in forming ideas of the world.
Old tales of exploration were remembered by the next wave of adventurers.
CLASSICAL WORLD VIEWS Scholars relied on Classical views of the world for centuries after they were first produced.
The Greek historian Herodotus wrote that the gold emerging from east of Persia was mined with the help of giant ants.
ARAB CARTOGRAPHY The Muslim cartographer Al-Idrisi created a map for his patron, Roger Il of Sicily, in the 12th century.
Al-Idrisi’s map is oriented with south at the top, reflecting the outlook from Sicily toward the lands of Islamic rule.
This map was one of the triggers for the pioneering Renaissance voyages that were to introduce the Old World to the New.
AL-IDRISI'S MAP Nexus of trade By1 ce, the world's trade routes had extended, through many intermediaries, from western Europe to China.
China was largely self-sufficient, but imported desirable goods, such as spices from Southeast Asia and cavalry horses from Central Asia.
It is also thought that Celtic ancestry may be rooted in the Eurasian steppes.
The Hallstatt Celts seem to have been one of Europe's first Iron Age cultures and appear to have been wealthy and powerful.
Their chieftains’ graves contained valuable items such as bronze buckets and jewelry, suggesting trade with Greece and domination of several major European trading routes.
CELTIC QUEEN BOUDICCA Queen of the Celtic Iceni people of eastern England, Boudicca led a bloody uprising against occupying Roman forces after the Romans ignored the will of her dead husband, King Prasutagus.
The king had left his estate jointly to his daughters and to Rome, but Romans seized his entire kingdom and mistreated his family.
Although the Celts were not one cohesive people, and were composed of numerous and fairly diverse groups, they displayed a common culture.
This culture was typified by organization into tribes or clans, a nomadic or village life existence, and a strong warrior tradition.
The Celtic otherworld was peopled by gods and supernatural beings, such as Cernunnos, horned god of virility, nature, and plenty.
The Celts believed that people journeyed to the otherworld after death, and great feasts were held as preparation for chiefs' burials.
Celtic mythology featured a strong belief in an afterlife—an “otherworld” realm less like a heaven and more of a parallel with the real world, much like the ancient Egyptian Celtic Warriors Fierce warriors and skilled ironworkers with a love of feasting, the Celts swept across much of Europe during the 1st millennium scr.
Their advance brought them in contact with many of the cultures that shaped history, including the Greeks and Romans.
By the 200s BCE, Celts and their culture were prevalent across a large swath of Western and Central Europe.
They met with varying fortunes, sometimes victorious and sometimes defeated.
Where they did triumph, there was a significant exchange of cultures between the Celts and those they had conquered.
Tribal structure Celtic society was an agricultural one of fortified villages, and was organized into many inter-fighting tribes or clans.
Tribal structure was hierarchical, with a king or chief at the head; followed by noble-warriors and priests ; commoners, many of whom were farmers; and slaves.
They came from leading families and were exempted from paying taxes or taking part in fighting.
The different tribes had cultural, rather than political, common ground.
This lack of political cohesion was ultimately a weakness . , Beliefs and mythology ; \ The Celts were illiterate, even at their height, but had a powerful oral tradition of storytelling and poetry.
Epic poems of war exploits and glories are an especially important Noble horsemen may be riding away after rebirth in the cauldron.
Their helmets have symbolic decoration such as crescent shapes, boars, or birds.
A godlike figure appears to dip a man into, or remove him from, a cauldron, perhaps as an ""Otherworld"" rebirth or initiation ritual. elements of the natural world were central to Celtic beliefs.
The Celtic tribes lacked ME with the Carthaginians lingered on for longer in \ The rituals performed by druids often unity and were constantly | | «82-83 and native Celts, Ireland and other pockets where E ue took place outside, especially in woods. fighting with each other.
Motifs from the natural world are CARTHAGINIAN COIN IBERIA It is likely that, during the 4thimportant in Celtic art, too.
The Celts ROMAN RULE GERMANIC VICTORY 6th centuries ce, the AngloN were skilled metalworkers and they By the Ist century ce, the spread of Roman power Germanic tribes fought against both the Romans Saxons further supplanted the ER — had ended Celtic domination in Italy, Gaul (after and the Celts, and successfully pushed the Celts Celts in England.
IRIS the Gallic uprising by Vercingetorix had been put out of the Rhine Valley.
Celtic churches legions from this area for his conquest of Gaul. strongholds were increasingly pushed into the played an important role in the early spread of The Romans fought for control of Iberia , margins of their former lands.
Gold and bronze were popular for luxury items—the Celts are Gundestrup cauld b d ith » | s a found in a Danish peat bog O sesse WI Wa famed for wearing gold torcs (neck in 1891.
It dates from about the 1st century acE, and it bands with sculpted ends), as well as may have had a ritual purpose.
STRABO, ANCIENT GREEK HISTORIAN AND GEOGRAPHER, 1ST CENTURY BCE bracelets and impressive brooches.
Weaponry, war, and dominance Because a talent for warfare and horsemanship was central to Celtic culture, great artistic skill was poured into weaponry, armor, harnesses, and chariots.
Some particularly fine weapons were borne principally as badges of honor and rank, or used for ceremonial purposes rather than in active service.
Chariots were used widely in earlier times and skilled horsemanship was greatly prized.
Some Celtic tribes painted or tattooed themselves with plant dyes to look more alarming to their enemies.
Although it subsequently dwindled, Celtic culture persists today and Celtic languages are still spoken in Brittany , Wales, Scotland, Ireland, and the Isle of Man.
Gundestrup detail Warriors on foot with Musicians blow on long Celtic This is one of the panels on the Gundestrup shields and spears, marching trumpets.
This style of trumpet cauldron, decorated with a scene of gods and men. toward the left, may be dead was held vertically and Celtic mythology linked cauldrons with feasting soldiers approaching a ritual had a mouth shaped like a boar's and regeneration, and this particular panel, and the rebirth in the cauldron. head.
Ornate items have been discovered at sites in Central and Western Europe, and are distinctively decorated, often with images of animals and plants.
Dating from the 2nd century Bce, this was probably for display rather than battle, as it is made of thin bronze and intricately decorated.
Bronze dog figurine, which probably had some mythological or religious significance.
Harness decoration, which was discovered in a grave in northern France.
Carved metal spoon, dating from the 6th century ce and discovered in Kilkenny, Ireland.
Base of the Gundestrup Cauldron , showing the ritual slaying of a bull.
Enamel ornament, CEREMONIAL DAGGER JAVELIN HEADS which would have decorated the chariot of a high-ranking horseman.
The Stanwick Horse Mask, a chariot fixture dating to the Ist century CE and discovered in Yorkshire, England.
Enameled chariot hardware found in Wales and dating from the Ist century ce.
The decorated bronze surface of the back of a mirror, featuring a symmetrical clover leaf pattern, possibly belonging to a high-ranking woman.
Bronze ornament of the Ist century cE discovered in Ireland; its function remains unknown.
Gold coins dating from 1st century ce, and probably originating from northern France.
BRONZE ORNAMENT Z8 BEFORE The steppes and prairies covering much of the Eurasian interior, especially in the west, were suited to varying degrees of farming and grazing.
BRONZE AGE STEPPE CULTURE By the Bronze Age «€ 43 the Eurasian steppe peoples were living a mainly agricultural life.
Earthen burial mounds called kurgans were a major cultural feature from central Europe to Siberia.
KURGANS ON THE STEPPES MASS MIGRATION By 2000 BcE a major movement of steppe peoples into adjacent lands seems to have begun, linked to altered agricultural practices and a search for better farming conditions.
HOW WE KNOW Pazyryk is a valley burial site in the Altai Mountains, in modern Kazakhstan, dating from the 5th to 3rd centuries Bce.
Much of what we know about the Scythians comes from grave goods discovered in royal kurgans at Pazyryk.
The western area begins in Hungary and stretches north of the Black Sea to the Altai Mountains in the east.
The eastern portion, which > is mostly at a higher altitude, runs east from the Altai range across Mongolia to Manchuria in China.
The western steppe, such as the fertile lands around the Danube, is wetter and greener.
Moving eastward, summers become hotter, winters colder, and rain more scarce.
Tribes of the eastern steppe often migrated west or south to areas of higher rainfall and fresh grazing pasture.
Scythian horseman The Scythians are famed for creating beautiful artifacts, especially in gold, and for being formidable horsemen.
It dates from the 4th century BCE. skills were supplemented by a talent for fighting.
Steppe society was organized into “kinship” groups (effectively extended families) and tribes.
Such gatherings were usually temporary, formed for a specific purpose, such as defense or attack.
Riding to victory The early history of the horse’s domestication is unclear, but by 7OOBCE, horses were extremely important on the steppes, and were bred in large numbers.
They were Nomads of the Steppes The steppes-grasslands stretching from Eastern Europe to China—have been home to nomadic and seminomadic groups for millennia.
The history of the steppe people has been influenced by geography, while their territorial ambitions brought clashes with a range of powers that changed the world map.
It also brought various groups in contact with each other, which is why there are many cultural similarities between the different steppe peoples.
We do know that the steppe tribes spoke Indo-European languages, and that am m es p Ama, 9 , af i S e they kept domesticated animals, such as cattle and sheep.
They often used animal caravans and rivers to transport goods, and their superb horsemanship Mongolian herdsman Nomadic pastoralism involves moving herds of domesticated animals over large distances.
In some steppe regions it has changed little in thousands of years. ideal animals for people who had to move over vast distances to find suitable pasture for their livestock, because they provided not only transportation but also meat and even milk.
Crucial to the development of their fighting prowess were the composite STEPPE BELIEFS Steppe peoples were heavily influenced by the expansive skies of the open steppelands, which, as a major navigational guide, played a huge role in their lives.
Some peoples certainly believed in a sky deity, a “heaven,” and an afterlife, and shamanistic practices may also have been widespread.
Shamans are people thought to have the power to cure sickness and communicate with the spirit world.
Mirrors, a traditional shamanic tool, are believed to reflect secret truths and ward off evil spirits.
The composite bow is a short bow that is easy to fire from a horse, yet very powerful.
The stirrup, which probably originated on the steppes around the 2nd century BCE, made it easier to ride well in full armor.
Steppe armies were skilled at launching sudden mounted attacks—usually raids rather than attempts at territorial conquest—and overran rival settlements with ease.
The popular idea of invading hordes is misleading— a few fierce horsemen galloping in would seem overwhelming to an agricultural village.
They wore felt caps and, except for some members of the aristocracy, no armor.
The Scythians possessed sizable territories at different periods, including a large area of the Middle East.
One group, the “Royal Scythes,” controlled an area around southern Russia, where stunning grave finds of gold artifacts point to a well-developed Scythian culture.
THE AMAZONS, the famous female warriors of Greco-Roman legend, may have been based on Eurasian steppe women, who some believe took an active role in raiding and fighting.
Kushan head This sculpture shows the mix of Greco-Roman and Indian influences that infused much of Kushan art.
Steppe nomads often integrated with people living in areas they invaded.
Some aspects of their culture seem to have been adopted from the Chinese regimes they attacked.
Steppe peoples continued to make their mark on groups across Eurasia, from displaced Germanic tribes to rising Islamic powers.
THE HUNS Between the Ath and 5th centuries CE, pastoral steppe nomads known as Huns controlled huge swaths of Europe and Asia, conquering other tribes they encountered, including the Germanic Ostrogoths.
In the mid-5th century, some of those peoples fought back successfully against the Huns, and the Eastern Roman Empire also closed its borders.
HUN DINARS TURKIC TRIBES By 500ce, the Turkic people (originally nomads in the Altai Mountains) dominated much of the Asian steppe.
However, they remained a major presence, playing a key role in Middle Eastern history and the rise of Islam.
South American cultures were more advanced in their use of metals, but it was a Mesoamerican culture—the Maya—that left the most powerful and enigmatic monuments.
It flourished over a wide swath of Central America, especially the Yucatán and Guatemala's steamy lowlands.
The Maya built huge, often pyramidal stone temples, such as those at Tikal in Guatemala, and showed a great talent plotting the positions of the sun and moon and predicting solar eclipses.
A great central plaza is surrounded by monumental platforms, pyramids, staircases, and terraces.
The architecture at Monte Albán shows influences from another significant Mesoamericans often built their cities on precise, ritually significant grid patterns.
Perhaps the best known of these cultures was that of the Maya people, who with their stunning temples and scientific knowledge created one of the most extraordinary early American civilizations.
BEFORE The advanced societies of Mesoand South America in the Ist centuries ce built on the legacy of earlier cultures, the Olmecs in Mexico, and the Chavín in Peru.
Cities also featured palaces, open plazas, terraces, and courts where a sacred ball game was played.
This seems to have been a strenuous affair in which the participants used their heads, hips, and shoulders to direct a rubber ball at its target.
They practiced forms of ^auto-sacrifice"" (selfmutilation involving the piercing of body parts), but more extreme scenarios involving torture and human sacrifice seem to be highly inaccurate and sensationalized.
Writing and the calendar While the Olmecs developed a form of writing, some consider that the Maya should be credited with the first “real” Mesoamerican writing because theirs was more closely connected with actual speech.
The Maya also had a sophisticated calendar—probably using earlier Olmec concepts.
This incorporated advanced astronomical knowledge that included Moche stirrup-spouted jar The Moche often combined different animals in their artifacts—this jar has the head of a deer, feline fangs, and a snake's body. cultural center, that at Teotihuacan , a huge city northeast of present-day Mexico City that flourished 300—600 CE and had cultural links across Mesoamerica.
The people of southern Peru’s Paracas peninsula were a mainly agricultural people, but were also extraordinarily talented weavers and embroiderers.
Their art is preserved in the beautiful cloaks that the Paracas wrapped around mummified bodies.
The Nazca people lived on Peru’s southern coast, with an important center at Cahuachi in the Nazca Valley.
They created irrigation systems to support intensive grain production, as well as puzzling “lines” in the desert that remain a mystery today.
On Peru’s northern coast, the Moche built a great administrative and religious complex at Sipán.
Formidable warriors and inventive artists, they also created advanced valley irrigation techniques.
Mesoand South America continued to give rise to a variety of new cultures, while Maya civilization underwent a major shift.
The Maya culture lived on, and today there are around 6 million Maya in Mexico, Guatemala, and Belize.
M i ANS Cw BEFORE In earliest times, much religion seems to have been related to fertility or the seasons.
As people's social organization changed, so did their conception of their gods.
Male and female figurines with exaggerated features may be related to a desire for fertility and prosperity.
Ritual sites that contain animals—either their physical remains, or images—suggest the worshippers were preoccupied with the supply of animals for food and materials.
HIERARCHY OF GODS Early religion often involved polytheism—the worship of many deities.
Individuals with power over others were sometimes given the status of a god.
The deified ruler may have been seen as the earthly embodiment of a certain god, or may have been worshipped as a god in their own right, giving his or her subjects protection in return.
Rulers deified in their lifetime or after their deaths became more common in the Mediterranean world after the 4th century ace.
Below, the Roman emperor Claudius is being deified right after his death in 54 ce.
Greek gods Found in the Mannella region of southeast Italy, this Greek day sculpture from the first half of the 5th century BCE features the Greek goddess and daughter of Zeus, Persephone, and the god of the underworld, Hades.
Gods and Goddesses Gods and goddesses were believed to be responsible for many aspects of the human experience in the ancient world.
The importance of a god was determined by their place in a hierarchical order.
While some of their many gods held sway over a large area, others were gods of a single city or feature in the landscape, such as a river.
The deities, who were often depicted with human features, influenced almost every aspect of life.
Even the weather was believed to be the result of the current mood of an individual god or goddess.
Social or political changes could influence the way in which godliness was perceived.
As societies became more complex, the relationships between the gods became more elaborate and many cultures developed a belief in a “pantheon” of gods—gods linked through a hierarchy of power, family ties, and mythological stories.
Where cultures made contact, people often related to each other through shared religious links, typically associating gods of similar character.
The Roman gods Jupiter and Juno equated with the Greeks’ Zeus and Hera, for instance.
Seals transmitted religious images across great distances. diviners, and oracles.
In return the worshippers offered the gods gifts, sacrifice, or ritual tributes to secure their good will.
A god was recognized as supreme either by being given prominence by a ruler or city, or by being identified with key symbols in human life, such as a parent, or natural phenomena, such as the sun, sky, ocean, or storms.
Gods became supreme gods when people came to think of them as “father” of a family of gods.
One such god was Zeus, who was partfather, part-monarch of a quarreling cohort of Greek deities.
A god could also be promoted to supreme deity if their city or people became dominant.
Gods in the landscape A wide world of gods was imbued in the landscape itself, although physical evidence of their worship is hard to find, as it can be nothing more than a cluster of plaques by a spring.
An ancient description of Persian religion revealed the practice of open-air rituals, and many Persian tablets record gods related to nature.
Fertile places were revered across Asia and were the sites of gardens and Buddhist temples.
Mountain sanctuaries could be the MYSTERY RELIGION One of many diverse religious cults involving a belief in death and regeneration or resurrection, which often required personal secret initiation.
Early Christianity included many elements of a mystery cult. focus of cults, such as that devoted to an ancient “Mother of the Gods” on mounts Sipylos and Dindymene in Anatolia.
The towering Buddhas in the cliff-face at Bamiyan in Afghanistan were sited strategically to overlook a major road to the East from Rome through Persia.
Gods could migrate with travelers, soldiers, and merchants across the entire Roman Empire.
In London, temples to a rich variety of immigrant gods have been Zeus’ temple The 5th century Bce temple of Zeus at Olympia in Greece contains a huge goldand ivory-covered statue of the supreme god.
MONOTHEISM Within pantheons of gods, lesser deities may diminish and disappear.
Both Judaism and the Zoroastrianism of Persia have roots in earlier, polytheistic religions.
UNIVERSAL RELIGION In antiquity, it was common for people to regard gods as the figureheads of their culture.
Their religion was part of their ethnic identity, so it was not encouraged in foreigners.
In multicultural kingdoms, tolerance of many beliefs was a fact of life.
The gods included Serapis, who was first popular with the Greeks of Egypt , then hitched a ride with Roman settlement across Europe.
Mithras, also worshipped in London, may have begun as the Persian Mithra.
Such gods with “exotic” or Eastern origins, often the focus of “Mystery” cults requiring initiation, were popular with the shifting populations of the Roman world.
BEFORE Faith in a spiritual dimension to human existence probably evolved separately in many parts of the world among bands of Paleolithic hunter-gatherers.
ANIMISM The earliest belief of the huntergatherers is known as animism.
In animism, all of physical nature has a spiritual counterpart and everything becomes part of a chain.
Each object, living or inanimate, is a link, but the links are fluid so that a man can become a bird, an animal can be disguised as a rock, and a bird can transform into a cloud.
The power for these changes stems from a world of vaguely defined guardian spirits.
MANY GODS As tribes became settled into farming communities, pantheons of more clearly identifiable gods emerged.
GREEK GOD ZEUS Each god was responsible for overseeing a part of the temporal world, and still acting as the guardian of his or her domain—such as Zeus, the Greek god of thunder and lightning and also the ruler of Mount Olympus.
THE NEXT WORLD The belief in an afterlife may extend back even farther in time than animism, because Neanderthal << 19 burial sites sometimes included medicinal herbs and other items, which could suggest that they thought the deceased was embarking on a journey to another place.
PANTHEISM A doctrine or belief presenting the natural world, including humankind, as being part of the divine.
It is the predominant belief in Hinduism, but is rejected by beliefs that hold that God is transcendent—a being above the created world—such as Christianity and Islam. hough many different religious sects and movements have flourished briefly throughout history, five great faiths have emerged and spread sufficiently to become major world religions.
Hinduism The oldest of these five religious faiths is Hinduism, which has a range of very diverse traditions but no formal system of beliefs.
These were the Vedic gods, who feature in the Vedas, the 3,000-year-old sacred texts that are central to the development of Hinduism.
JAMES FRAZER, FROM ""THE GOLDEN BOUGH,” 1922 no fixed abode,” later known as Hebrews, came together under Moses and settled in Palestine.
Hinduism and Buddhism spread across Southeast Asia, while the Middle East Holiest of holy sites Christianity, Islam, and Judaism view this site in Jerusalem as holy.
In the foreground people can be seen praying at the Western Wall, and behind it is the Dome of the Rock mosque. and Puranic literature, including the great texts of the Mahabharata and Ramayana.
Buddhism Buddhism emerged not as a belief in a god, but as an ascetic way of life.
Its teachings involve the belief that death marks the transition to a new earthly life—reincarnation.
The only way to escape this painful cycle of death and rebirth, known as samsara, is to achieve perfection, which is accompanied by an extinction of passions, or nirvana.
The first monotheistic faith Judaism, the monotheistic (see above right) religion of the Jews, evolved from the older, ritualistic, temple-based cult attributed to Moses.
When one of Alexander's successors, Antiochus Epiphanes, tried to introduce aspects of Greek cults, the resulting uprising led to a dynasty of priest-kings, the Hasmoneans.
Followers of Jesus Christ The second major monotheistic religion, Christianity, arose from Judaism.
There is no evidence that Jesus envisaged RELIGIOUS FIGUREHEAD JESUS Jesus of Nazareth was the inspiration for the religious movement of Christianity, which derives from Greek christos, synonymous with Hebrew messiah, meaning ""a chosen one” Jesus probably saw himself as a social reformer, but to some Jews under Roman occupation he became the deliverer predicted in Jewish scripture.
For much of his life Jesus moved around the Sea of Galilee, accompanied by a local band of disciples and followers.
Only after his journey to Jerusalem and his death by crucifixion did his following grow and his messianic fame spread.
Tradition has it that this omnipotent deity, also the God of Islam and Christianity, was first recognized by Abraham—one of the patriarchal ancestors of the Israelites. founding a religious movement.
It was only through his death on the cross, during which Christians believe he atoned for humanity's sins, that the early Church emerged.
The first Christians met in private houses and had no formal dogma; only after several decades did formal places of worship appear.
Rather than destroying the religion, however, persecution had the effect of reinforcing the convictions of its devotees.
It recognizes the transcendental god of Judaism and Christianity, but by the name of Allah.
The Prophet Muhammad promoted a doctrine based on personal divine revelation, which was incorporated into the holy book of Islam, the Qur’an.
Traveling faiths From their Asian beginnings, Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all spread out across the globe, carried in some cases by conquering armies, in others by migrants, traders, and missionaries.
From around 600BCE, belief in reincarnation was established and Hinduism spread on a wave of popular fervor from India into Sri Lanka, Cambodia, and Malaysia.
One of the many ascetic philosophers of his day, he achieved enlightenment— an awakening to the ultimate truth—at Bodhgaya and subsequently wandered for the rest of his life teaching Buddhist philosophy and gathering a community of disciples or sangha.
He taught the Eightfold Path to enlightenment, which includes disciplined guidance on all aspects of morality, wisdom, and meditation.
BUDDHIST WHEEL OF THE LAW devoting itself to a particular deity or aspects of a deity.
The largest and most universal of these were the Vaishnava and Shaivite movements, worshipping the two main creator deities, Vishnu and Shiva.
Despite a multitude of different facets, Hinduism became a powerful cohesive force among people who were disparate in language, culture, and social position.
Paths of Buddhism In the centuries after the death of Gautama Buddha , members of the Indian sanghas elaborated his teachings and paved the way for the development of a host of schools.
One of the principal branches, Hinayana Buddhism, following the ancient “way of the elders"" or Theravada, arose in the 4th century BCE and spread mainly south and east from India into Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos, and Thailand.
The other main branch, Mahayana Buddhism developed later, in the 1st-3rd centuries CE, and became the dominant element in 300—500 CE, spreading mainly north and east.
Among Mahayana's splinter sects is the influential Vajrayana school, also sometimes called tantric Buddhism.
Other more austere Mahayana schools were carried by itinerant monks through China and thence to Japan, where further adaptation resulted in Zen Buddhism.
The faith has been described as the “Vagrant Lotus"" because its history has been one of migration from one culture to another.
As a result, the Buddhism of India stands in sharp contrast with that found in Japan and Korea.
Jewish diaspora The spread of faith often went hand in glove with politics, and Judaism was no exception.
JEWISH STAR OF DAVID T GKO a L The process intensified when the Roman general Titus sacked Jerusalem in 70CE, causing many inhabitants to Hee.
By the end ofthe lst century the local population had largely recovered, rebuilding its faith through observance of the Torah.
The emperor Septimius Severus instituted a tax on self-identified Jews and forbade conversion to Judaism.
Jews continued to use the trade networks of the empire, however, establishing themselves wherever trade took place.
Jewish populations became particularly concentrated in Asia Minor and in Mesopotamia.
Footsteps of Christianity The Roman Empire was also largely responsible for the spread of Christianity.
Paul was able to move freely across Europe and establish Christian cells in Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, Thessalonica, and elsewhere.
Even before the reign of Constantine, Christianity had extended rapidly into Syria and northwest into Asia Minor and Greece.
In the 2nd century a thriving community of Greek-speaking Christians was established in the Rhone valley in France, and by 200cE the Church was also well established CHRISTIAN CROSS Religious symbols The Aum symbol represents the sacred Hindu syllable for God.
The wheel of the law represents both the teachings of the Buddha and the cycle of death and rebirth.
MUHAMMAD Born in Mecca, Muhammad succeeded in ridding southern Arabia of polytheism and replacing it with the worship of a single God, Allah.
In Islamic doctrine he is the “end of a line” of prophets, the ultimate deliverer of divine revelation.
To the northeast, beyond the imperial frontier, a language barrier slowed progress, although by the 3rd century a church was founded at Edessa in modern Turkey.
However, most missionary work was focused on Western Europe—in Italy, France, and Spain.
Britain probably felt little influence until the mid-3rd century, but by 400CE it was largely Christian.
Originally an opponent of the early Christians, he was converted ¢.33 CE and became the leading Christian apostle, or missionary, especially among the non-Jewish communities.
D ow y LI P 7 V SPREADING THE FAITH AFTER b > Faiths spread throughout the world, and DISPERSION REGIONAL DIFFERENCES a regional changes occurred where some The Jewish diaspora continued, and by the middle Buddhism evolved into various regional forms as EATI r1 religions were adopted by new cultures. ages France and Spain had become two of its most its influence extended through Central and Southeast | < V important centers.
During the 19th century an Asia, China, Japan, and most recently, the West.
New Hindu schools have — the old European communities were virtually By the 11th century, Christianity had split into two, arisen, aiming to make its thought more universal. annihilated.
Peter's in the Vatican City, taught the essential unity of all religions andthe population of Palestinians.
Its replacement, which is . topped by a magnificent dome designed by Michelangelo, took over a century to build.
The Hagia Sofía in Istanbul, Turkey, is a magnificent example of Byzantine architecture.
In 1935 ul Was ""rust into the Å "" | Mount Kailas, on the border between Tibet and Nepal, is a holy place for Buddhists and Hindus alike.
Pilgrims trek up the | Humla valley round the | mot Ini tain In, bt i hy.
AT , 0 1000 miles This map charts the principal routes at Lalibela is one of eleven churches |. along which the faiths of Hinduism, carved from volcanic rock high in The city of Varanasi in Buddhism, and Christianity expanded Ethiopia's Amhara Mountains.
The The vast Potola Palace that towers the Indian state of Uttar AO during their early development, 13th-century church is a place of above Lhasa, Tibet, dates from 1645.
Pradesh is one of the holiest Borobudur including smaller branches on which Christian pilgrimage and has been Once the seat of the Tibetan government, pilerimage sites for Hindus, The great Buddhist shrine more isolated outposts arose.
In most dedared a world heritage site. it houses the tombs of past Dalai Lamas, who come to bathe in the at Borobudur, Java, is topped instances the newly introduced religion — ; the spiritual leaders of Tibetan Buddhists, sacred waters of the Ganges with bell-shaped stupas was not the only faith practiced in the and is a major pilgrimage destination. and to cremate the dead. containing images of Buddha. region, but in many areas it became the dominant one.
Much was at stake, but foremost was the struggle for leadership of the western Roman Empire.
Constantine went into the fray inspired by his Christian beliefs, while Maxentius put faith in pagan gods.
Maxentius, being in Rome and having senate backing, perhaps had more legitimacy, but Constantine planned to take the city and claim the western empire as his alone.
He had a much smaller army than Maxentius, and its strength lay in a mobile cavalry that performed best in the open.
However, before the battle, he apparently experienced a religious ""conversion,"" which he may have felt put the Christian God on his side.
Accounts include visions of a flaming cross in the sky and orders to place Christian symbols on his soldiers' shields.
As the battle began, Maxentius, fighting in the name of Mars, the Roman god of war, emerged into the open, giving Constantine the advantage.
Maxentius had already dismantled Milvian Bridge to halt his Fighting for Empire This 16th-century fresco from the Vatican depicts the events at Milvian Bridge.
In the center, the brightly lit Constantine can be seen pushing Maxentius and his troops into the Tiber River.
Imperial standards bear crosses and, in the sky above, angels join in the battle. opponent, so he and his troops had to cross the Tiber River using a bridge made from boats.
In the ensuing battle, Constantine's cavalry disrupted enemy ranks with expert charges.
Maxentius's troops had nowhere to go but into the Tiber, where many, including their leader, drowned.
The next day, a triumphant procession, led by Constantine, marched through Rome with Maxentius's head on a spear.
Some view Constantine's “conversion” with cynicism, but he may have seen his victory at Milvian Bridge as a symbol of the power of Christianity.
The influence of the faith had been gathering pace for three centuries, assisted by imperial edicts of religious tolerance.
A few months after the battle, Constantine issued the Edict of Milan, which returned confiscated property to Christians and increased their status and political standing.
THE FADING OF ANTIQUITY Under the pax romana, the Romans ruled a Mediterranean empire that was united by -a Greco-Roman classical culture x based on the value of the city. & his classical civilization came to be threatened in places by recurring civil wars, economic pressures, and the wholesale influx of non-Roman people that took place toward the end of the 2nd century ct.
FRONTIERS CRUMBLE ""Barbarian"" pressure built up along the Rhine and Danube rivers in the 3rd century ce, leading to continual incursions.
The Romans had been fighting against a tide greater and older than themselves for a long time.
By the 400s, the Huns controlled a sizable territory in Eastern Europe.
Attila aimed to maintain a steppe empire placed strategically on the Hungarian plains, at the doorway to Western Europe.
He was, however, a ""puppet"" child king with a tenuous claim to leadership, and was emperor of only the western empire of Rome.
He was removed by Germanic chief, Odoacer, who, though often portrayed as a barbarian warlord, was actually a former Roman commander in Italy.
Collapse would not occur for some time, and it is important to note that while the western empire declined, progress often pushed such groups into other lands—sometimes Roman territory—where they became allies of the empire and helped defend the Romans against Huns and other tribes.
Cooperation and conflict In fact, it was not unusual for Germanic groups to become official Roman allies, or “federated” people gaining certain Roman-style rights.
The 5th century ce saw a massive shift in the world's map as the western Roman Empire faded, and a patchwork of new ""barbarian"" kingdoms dominated Europe.
The eastern Roman Empire flourished as the Byzantine culture evolved there.
It has been viewed alternately as a time of decline or one of transition. the eastern Roman Empire, established in the early 4th century CE by Emperor Constantine , thrived.
The time can be seen in a positive light and in some ways as one of continuity, rather than bleakly as the end of refined ""civilization"" when Europe was plunged into chaos.
The great migrations By the 4th and 5th centuries CE, a variety of peoples—many from Eurasia's northern steppe lands—had gained a strong foothold in European and Middle Eastern territories once dominated by the Romans.
In the later 4th century CE, westwardmigrating Hunnic people defeated and forced semi-sedentary people living around the Black Sea area to flee.
Their Showing Roman soldiers striking heroic poses and in command of the Situation, this is a powerful piece of imperial propaganda.
The last emperor Romulus Augustulus is seen as the last emperor of Rome's western empire. simple “barbarians versus Romans” scenario where one side rose and the other fell.
Within the imperial system there were commanders and statesmen of Germanic blood.
At different times, barbarians either sided with or fought against the Romans, as well as other barbarian groups.
For example, the Goths defeated Emperor Valens in 378, at the Battle of Adrianople , crushing the imperial army so severely that the Danube borders were left open Distinctive beards, hairstyles, and clothing mark out the barbarians, who are all shown in agonized submission.
THE DECLINE OF ROME The 5th and 6th centuries saw incursions from Goths, Visigoths, and Vandals, among other groups, contributing to the pressures on the Western Roman Empire.
Writhing figures struggling closely together convey the chaos and drama of hand-to-hand battle.
This fine carving includes an incredibly detailed rendering of lorica hamata—a kind of metal-link armor worn by certain Roman soldiers.
All the Romans in the relief are shown in armor, with clean-shaven faces wearing expressions of calm superiority.
Death of imperial general Stilicho, who had kept Germanic tribes at bay.
Rome is sacked by the Vandals. for many years; Romans and Germanic people united to defeat Attila the Hun at the Battle of Chalons in 451; the Visigoths had been Roman allies while also having a Gallic kingdom, but were then pushed south into Spain by Franks.
On some occasions the Romans tolerated, or were forced to accept, the settlement of barbarian groups on their lands.
Where barbarians took over former Roman territories, they sometimes sought to supplant the old Roman aristocracy (as with the Vandals in North Africa), but in other places coexisted peacefully with them.
There was much cultural cross-fertilization between the Romans and barbarians.
Another factor in the gradual fading of Roman power was the spread of plague and disease from the east.
This led to severe shortages in the army and fewer people in general to support society.
Various bouts of plague had spread through the empire in the 3rd century.
Other factors include a general decline in population, inflation, civil war, self-serving Roman corruption, and imperial overcultivation leading to loss of good agricultural land.
These have variously been seen as reducing prosperity and resources, hastening the fading of the great urban centers of “classical” civilization and learning.
RELIGIOUS CHANGE The rise of Christianity also played a major role in the new order.
Germanic peoples was at odds with the more orthodox Christianity traditionally held by Roman peoples.
AFTER >» The Roman Empire lived on in the east for 1,000 years as the Byzantine Empire, while new forces shaped the Western world.
LATE ANTIQUITY Distinctive communities that combined Germanic traditions, Latin Christianity, and aspects of Roman culture began to emerge in the post-Roman west, such as in Anglo-Saxon England.
Warrior tribes founded great empires in China and the Middle East, and in Europe the feudal system took hold, dominated by the might of the Christian church.
Chimü portrait beaker > Byzantine army defeats Umayyads at Akroinon and expels Umayyads from Asia Minor.
WARRIORS, TRAVELERS, AND INVENTORS Few would have predicted that the states chaotically established across powerhouse.
Other societies—in the Americas, India, and prove anything other than destabilizing.
Yet it was Christian Europe that would clearly marginalized, an obvious backwater.
The process was never certain, but the results Tang and later dynasties, was superior in every sense, a technological were decisive.
Magyars destroy Moravia (eastern Czech Republic) and begin to raid western Furope.
Baghdad lose effective fy” 1044 power to their Turkish troops, the Mamluks.
Crusade trebuchet p 1066 Battle of Hastings leads to the Norman conquest of England.
Incas under Manco Capac settle in Andes near Cuzco; Aztecs enter Valley of Mexico.
Francis of Assisi pe --— ""EVIL Mongols capture Zhongdu . [oa ATs) Dominican and Franciscan monastic orders founded.
A Architecture of Delhi WARRIORS, TRAVELERS, AND INVENTORS “The title Khan means in our language ‘Great Lord of Lords.
MARCO POLO, FROM “THE TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO,” c 1298 I 1261 Byzantines retake Constantinople from Crusaders.
ES Ottoman helmet 1349 Chinese settlement of Singapore; start of Chinese settlement of Southeast Asia.
Prince Henry of Portugal y 1375 Catalan Atlas, the first atlas of known trade routes, produced.
Portuguese under Prince Henry the Navigator capture 1436 Portuguese explorer passes Cape Bojador, to begin period of exploration of West African coast.
FiriAWdURmMw pue — c "" Avicenna's medical encyclopedia Known as the “Prince of Physicians,” the 11th-century Persian scholar Avicenna was a hugely influential figure both in the Middle East and in Europe, where his work The Canon of Medicine continued to be used as a standard medical text until the 16th century.
BEFORE As the study of the Bible came to dominate intellectual activity in the West, knowledge of classical Greek learning declined.
At Aristotle's Lyceum and Plato's Academy, students listened to their lecturers discuss philosophy and science.
ROMAN TEACHER AND PUPILS DECAY OF CLASSICAL KNOWLEDGE The dassical approach continued into the early medieval period, but by now knowledge of the Greek language had largely died out in the West.
Some fragments of classical knowledge were preserved in texts such as the 6th century philosopher Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy.
FRANCESCO PETRARCH, ""REMEDIES FOR FORTUNE FAIR AND FOUL,” 1565 » Diffusion of Knowledge Knowledge of classical Greek and Roman culture declined in Western Europe in the early medieval period, but survived in the East.
Before Charlemagne, society lacked many of the basic educational skills; most priests were barely literate and the royal court had difficulty finding educated men to act as scribes and copy out manuscripts.
To fix these problems, Charlemagne created schools and assembled the greatest scholars of the age at his court.
A Northumbrian scholar, Alcuin of York, was recruited as head of the palace school.
Latin once again became the formal language of communication across Europe.
The Arab inheritance Charlemagne's reforms were primarily concerned with creating an educated clergy capable of reforming the Frankish church.
Works of classical Greek science and philosophy remained essentially unavailable in the Christian Europe.
In Arab Spain, North Africa, and the Middle East, however, the situation AVERROES Born into a learned and cultured family in the city of Cordoba Averroes was an expert in Islamic law and Astrolabe manual Muslim scholars are shown using the astrolabe, an instrument for locating and predicting the position of the Sun, Moon, and stars.
The astrolabe was introduced into Christian Europe via Muslim Spain in the 11th century. was very different.
The Arab societies inhabiting these regions had inherited many aspects of classical Greek culture.
To Islamic scholars, Aristotle was ""the Philosopher"" and his works were standard texts.
In 1153, he was invited to the court — of the Almohad caliphs in Morocco, where hew worked as a judge and physician, and wrote — important works on medicine, philosophy, — and law.
The Persian scholar Avicenna produced a huge range of material covering almost every area of knowledge, from metaphysics to medicine.
Averroes , a renowned philosopher, scientist, and lawyer, composed a series of commentaries on Aristotle that for centuries formed the key source for Aristotle’s philosophy in the West.
The 12th-century renaissance The diffusion of knowledge from East to West accelerated during the 12th century.
In Spain, the Christian reconquest of lands previously held by Muslim rulers encouraged the spread of Islamic learning.
In the 13th century, the Spanish king Alfonso X established a program of translation of Greek and Arab texts in Toledo, previously capital of the Muslim caliphate of Cordoba.
Other important hubs for the exchange of ideas included the Christian crusader kingdoms that were established in the Middle East in the 12th-13th centuries and the Greek empire of Byzantium , which fell into the hands of the crusaders in 1204.
By the 13th century, Latin translations of the most important classical texts were available to European scholars.
Scholasticism The rediscovery of ancient philosophical works combined with the ongoing development of Christian theology led to the scholastic movement of the later Medieval period.
Scholasticism was not a philosophy in itself, but rather a tool for learning that placed emphasis on logic and reasoning.
The works of Plato RHETORIC Derived from the Greek word for ""orator,"" rhetoric is the art of persuasion through spoken or written language.
It was an important art in classical Greece, where public speaking was central to political life.
Medieval universities evolved from earlier cathedral schools and monasteries, and were created to study theology, law, medicine, and the arts.
Most universities did not have a central campus—classes were taught at masters’ homes or in churches.
In a university such as Bologna in northern Italy, where law was the most popular subject, students hired and paid the lecturers m | rN LS Ba DIFFUSION OF KNOWLEDGE T i AFTER The growth of universities and the scholastic movement led to the humanist and intellectual movements of the Renaissance.
HUMANISM P X The key intellectual PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA movement of the Renaissance, humanism emphasized human reason and dignity rather than the Christian humility and obedience to authority that had been the focus of the medieval Church.
Renaissance humanists, schooled in Greek and Latin from an early age and often learning Hebrew and Arabic as well, studied the poetry, grammar, rhetoric, and ethics of the classical authors in their original languages.
An Old English translation was added in the 10th century— the oldest surviving version of the Gospels in English. themselves.
In Paris, where the main subject was theology, the Church controlled the payment of staff.
It took six years to earn a bachelor of arts degree, and a further 12 years for a master's degree and doctorate.
By the 14th century, universities had become central to intellectual life.
In this way, the universities signaled a move away from an intellectual world entirely dominated by the Church.
Monastic scribe Before paper became common, scribes used parchment or vellum for their work.
Vellum was created by scraping down calf or sheep skins and smoothing the surface with a pumice stone or chalk.
During the period of division that followed the fall of the Han dynasty «€128-29, Buddhism spread quickly, despite attempts to suppress the religion by Confucian officials.
However, it was not until the Tang dynasty that Buddhism was at the height of its influence in China.
The first Sui emperor, Wendi, built Chang'an sui pynasry , a new capital FIGURINE city, and enforced a clear legal code.
His son, Yangdi, carried out a costly program of canal building and launched ill-fated attacks on Korea.
THE GRAND CANAL The Sui emperor Yangdi commissioned a Grand Canal to run from Hangzhou to Beijing.
The total length of the canal was 1,490 miles , and it remains the longest canal in the world.
Although judged to be a shrewd and ruthless ruler, she gave extravagant he reign of the Tang dynasty in China is widely regarded as a golden age of Chinese imperial power and culture.
He took the capital Chang'an the following year, though it would be a further six years before the whole of China fell under his control.
Under the title or Emperor Gaozu, Li Yuan inaugurated a new dynasty, which ruled over China tor the next three centuries.
Taizong's reign Gaozu's successor, the Emperor Taizong, was an intelligent and hard-working ruler, and his own reign became synonymous with a period of prosperity.
Taizong improved the system of government that his father had established, and reformed the administrative system.
State schools and colleges were set up, and government examinations were designed to ensure that the most talented individuals were placed in the highest official positions.
For Taizong, this not only had the advantage of China's Golden Age monk, perhaps curious to hear Xuan Zang's impressions of foreign countries.
Buddhism continued to have a great influence on Chinese society until its suppression in the late Tang period.
Expansion of the empire The Tang dynasty saw a remarkable period of Chinese expansion.
Taizong also launched expeditions against the kingdom of Koguryo in north Korea, though he died before he had established Chinese control over the area.
At its greatest extent, in around the year 750CcE, Tang China claimed more land than the precedine Han dynasty, its borders reaching even farther west, south, and east than those of modern China.
The peak of the Tang dynasty saw the flowering of Chinese art, architecture, and poetry.
Silk Road caravans brought exotic goods from distant lands, and Chinese culture became the most cosmopolitan in the world. support to Buddhism and other foreign religions, and engaged in costly frontier campaigns.
Unlike those drawn from China’s rival aristocratic families, career officials had no power base of their own with which to threaten the Tang dynasty.
Sweeping reforms were made to the bureaucracy; large granaries were constructed to stockpile rice; military campaigns were fought against the Turkish, Tibetan, and Khitan peoples; a new network of frontier defenses was introduced, with permanent forces of professional soldiers; and contact was made with ambassadors from as far west as the Middle East.
All of these measures led to a rich, powerful, and cosmopolitan state; China had reached a golden age.
Thousands of merchants, artisans, and diplomats from distant lands took up residence in the capital, Chang'an, which became Buddhist faith. the world’s largest city.
Covering more than 30 square miles , more than one million people lived inside its walls, and another million beyond them.
Linked by a network of roads and canals to the rest of the empire, Chang’an was the terminus of the Silk Road , and traders from across Asia came to its great \ A — markets.
Foreign cultures were welcomed, and within the city walls were Daoist temples, Buddhist monasteries, Zoroastrian shrines, and Islamic mosques.
Flowering of the arts Xuanzong was a great patron of the arts, and during his reign Chinese painting and literature reached new i e Three-glaze figurine Developed in the 7th century, sancal glaze, was widely used on vessels and figurines and is typical of the Tang dynasty.
Li Bai and Du Fu, known respectively as the Poet Immortal and the Sage Poet.
Li Bai cultivated a reputation for eccentricity; many of his poems celebrate the joys of wine and women.
The poems of Du Fu, by contrast, À M dealt with more serious moral * and historical issues.
Landscape painting evolved under the poet artist Wang Wei, who painted evocative winter scenes, A and Wu Daozi developed a Chinese style of Buddhist sculpture.
The court painter Han Gan was best known for his depictions of horses, a subject that continued to inspire artists in later periods.
The decline of the Tang In the 730s CE Xuanzong's control over his government began to slip.
The emperor, who was 72 years old by this time, had ceased to play an active role in government.
He had become infatuated with Yang Guifei, who was his son's concubine and a famous beauty.
After Xuanzong made her imperial consort, she persuaded him to promote her cousin Yang Guozhang to a senior position at court; when Li Linfu died, Yang took his place.
Among the professional soldiers who had been given commands along the frontier was an officer named An Lushan.
The INVENTION The Diamond Sutra, the oldest surviving example of a printed book, was found in a walled-up chapel at Dunhuang on the Silk Road.
Seven strips of yellow-stained paper printed from carved wooden blocks are pasted together to form a scroll over 13 ft long.
CHINA'S GOLDEN AGE AFTER | As ambitious officials jostled for power, the Tang dynasty was severely weakened.
THE LATE TANG After the fall of Xuanzong, successive emperors tried to revive China's fortunes, but to no avail.
Powerful families evaded tax and the burden fell increasingly on those who were less able to pay.
Huang Chao, the rebel 9 | leader, captured Chang’an and ES forced Emperor Xixong to flee.
The emperor returned once the rebellion had been quashed, but his authority had collapsed.
SUPPRESSION OF BUDDHISM The increasing wealth and influence of Buddhism led to a growing campaign of criticism headed by Confucian scholars in the early 9th century.
His military escort demanded the execution of Yang Guifei, blaming her for the emperor's misfortunes, and Xuanzong had no option but to accept.
Though An Lushan was eventually defeated and the rebellion brought to an end, the Tang dynasty never recovered its former strength and glory.
Its extraordinary achievements in the arts and sciences outstripped developments in Europe at the time.
However, aggression from the Jurchen people to the north gradually led to the surrender of northern China.
The dynasty continued to rule in the south as the Southern Song, but was finally ousted by the Mongols in 1279.
CHINA DIVIDED Between the rule of the Tang and the Song dynasties, the Qidan Liao controlled the northeast of China, while the south fragmented into the Ten Kingdoms.
Some of the magnificence of the Tang era returned to Chinese culture during the Song dynasty.
Artists experimented with brush effects, and landscape, animal, and bird paintings were particularly prized.
Song dynasty architecture was also renowned, particularly for its tall structures and pagodas, palaces, and temple roofs.
The administrative and technological advances made by the early Song led to economic prosperity.
Instead of carrying around large sums of copper coinage, Sichuan merchants began to trade in bills of exchange.
These notes proved so successful that the government issued its first paper currency in 1024.
The country's infrastructure was also greatly improved during the Song period.
The construction of an integrated system of internal waterways extended both the communications and trade networks.
Large junks with four or six masts were developed, the magnetic compass was first used for navigation, and seafaring skills were improved.
This led to an increase in maritime trade with the rest of East Asia, as well as with India and the east coast of Africa.
The innovations of the Song period affected China's population and urban growth.
New methods of rice farming increased food output and allowed the population to double.
Kaifeng became the greatest city in the world; in the 12th century its levels of trade were nearly 50 percent more than those of London at the turn of the 18th century.
Examinations and officials Under the Song, the examination system established by the Han dynasty was revived and expanded.
Quotas were set for the number of candidates who could pass, and steps were taken to guard against cheating and to ensure the anonymity of candidates.
In 1002, 14,500 men came to Kaifeng to take the imperial 1 P examinations.
The system attempted to ensure that talent, not birth or wealth, enabled a candidate to pass.
More than 60 percent of successful candidates for the jinshi degree came from families that had not gained an appointment for an official in the bureaucracy for three generations.
However, poor families were still unlikely to foster a successful candidate, as applicants needed to be wealthy or literate to enable them to prepare for the examinations.
From early in the Song period, scholars and officials were constantly proposing ideas for reforms to rectify the problems of the day.
In 1068, Emperor Shenzong entrusted Wang Anshi, China's most famous reformer, with tackling the nation's problems.
He identified the main cause of the state's weakness to be a shortage of funds, and raised money by imposing a government monopoly on tea, challenging wealthy families who were evading taxes, and offering interest-free loans to peasants INVENTION A 9th-century Daoist text warned that mixing charcoal, saltpeter, and sulfur formed a dangerous combination; some who had done so had caused explosions and burned down buildings.
To reduce the cost of the standing army, he required every household to supply men for a local militia.
These reforms caused an outcry, Wang Anshi was dismissed, and the controversy that his acts had aroused permanently weakened the dynasty.
The Southern Song The dynasty also had to deal with the challenge of non-Chinese regimes to the north.
In 1115 the Jurchen, a seminomadic people from Manchuria, established the Jin dynasty.
In 1125 they overran the Qidan Liao, and two years later they captured Kaifeng.
The Song court was forced to flee south, bringing an end to the retrospectively named Northern Song.
Although militarily weak, the Southern Song was also a period of continuing economic growth and social change.
NeoConfucianists borrowed concepts from Daoism and Buddhism, and their ideas were synthesized by the scholar Zhu Xi.
Neo-Confucian values were partly responsible for a deterioration in the rights of women during the Southern Song period.
The remarriage of widows was discouraged, and women's property rights were curtailed.
Footbinding—the practice of permanently disfiguring a young girl's feet to produce a supposedly attractive shape in later life—became well established during the Song period.
Song porcelain The Song period is often regarded as the high point in ceramic production in China.
Chinese porcelain was first manufactured in the 7th century, a thousand years before the secret of its production was discovered in Europe.
True porcelain is made from kaolin, or China clay, the name deriving from Gaoling in Jingdezhen.
Song porcelain was the most refined ever produced, and was characterized by the simple elegance of its shape, and its purity of color.
The most famous Northern Song wares were created near Dingzhou in northeast China.
After the fall of the Northern Song, manufacture was transferred to Hangzhou.
In the south, Jingdezhen in Jiangxi was designated a center for the manufacture of imperial porcelain in 1004.
THE MONGOLS TAKE CONTROL The Mongols destroyed the Jurchen Jin dynasty in 1224, gaining control of north China.
The first European to record his journey was the Franciscan monk John of Plano Carpini, who reached Mongolia in 1246.
MARCO POLO, THE TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO, 1298 efore he became known as E Genghis Khan—a title he took in 1206 to proclaim his leadership of the Mongol tribes—the future warlord and conqueror was known simply as Temujin.
Born around 1162 to a minor chieftain in the mountains of eastern Mongolia, there was little in Temüjin's early life to indicate he would one day be ruler of the world’s largest unbroken empire.
When he was just five years old, his father was murdered and his family disinherited by their clan.
For much of his childhood, Temujin was forced to eke out a precarious nomadic existence with his siblings and their indomitable mother, Hoelun.
These early years must have done much to forge the great warrior and leader that Temüjin was to become.
As the eldest male, Temüjin was the head of his family and quickly learned to make useful alliances.
Having proved himself as a warrior by retrieving some stolen horses, Temüjin claimed a wife, Bórte, from a neighboring tribe.
He is said to have used her dowry of precious sable furs to win the favor of Toghrul Tar A LP 1 uF i"" d'a ta "" Khan nw li mS N rw I/ jini ia wt / j \ x í IM MIA furent yy | Engraving According to a contemporary Persian chronicle, the Mongol emperor was a tall, longbearded man with red hair and green eyes.
This Is how a 20th-century French artist depicted him. ia i or ere zi Jeila farg + Homage to a chief Genghis Khan receives the homage of his vassals in this 14th-century Persian miniature.
The white horse tails flying from his tent signify peace and diplomacy.
Battle scene This Chinese painting depicts the Mongol cavalry in action on a mountain pass.
Genghis Khan's highly disciplined army comprised battalions, or tumens, of 10,000 warriors, in turn divided into 1,000-man regiments.
AT (also known as Ong Khan or “Prince King”), an old ally of his father’s and leader of the Turkish-speaking Kerait people.
When Borte was kidnapped, Temüjin called on Toghrul for help in rescuing her.
Soon afterward, Borte had a baby, Jochi, who was acknowledged as Temüjin's son and heir—despite the possibility that he had been conceived while Borte was in captivity.
Campaigns and conquests Having reclaimed his family's status and secured Toghrul's patronage, Temüjin began to earn his military reputation.
Together with Toghrul, he harassed the Chinese empire north and west of the Great Wall.
Sometimes he joined forces against other nomadic tribes, notably the neighboring Tatars, at the behest of the northern Chinese Jin dynasty.
Another crucial ally at this time was his ""sworn brother"" Jamuka, of the Tangut tribe based in Xi Xia in northeast China.
WORDS ATTRIBUTED TO GENGHIS KHAN BY A CHINESE MONK, 1224 Mongol quiver This ornate quiver was designed to hold the arrows that mounted Mongol horsemen were capable of aiming and firing at a full gallop.
Mongol boys received intensive training in both horsemanship and archery. former allies Toghrul and Jamuka, Temüjin made himself lord of all the Mongol tribes.
For more than three decades Genghis Khan led the Mongol confederation in a string of victories and in campaigns that ravaged large areas of Asia and subjugated many millions of people.
Chataio was the name used by the Venetian traveler Marco Polo to describe northern China when he journeyed through the empire in the reign of Kublai Khan, Genghis Khan's grandson.
In 1227, while on campaign in Xi Xia, Genghis Khan fell from his horse, became feverish, and died.
The vast empire he left to his sons stretched from Iran and Kazakhstan in the west, across central Asia and northern China to the Sea of Japan.
Warrior and statesman In conquering this huge empire, Genghis Khan frequently resorted to psychological warfare, using spies, propaganda, and terror as much as military force.
Genghis Khan introduced a humane law code, the Yassa, across his empire, and outlawed the custom of kidnapping women.
FOUNDER OF YUAN DYNASTY IN CHINA KUBLAI KHAN Genghis Khan was grandfather of another famous Mongolian emperor, Kublai Khan.
While on his deathbed, the old warrior laid a hand on the young Kublai's head, a gesture interpreted as a sign of future greatness.
Having inherited Mongolia and northern China, Kublai Khan added southern China to his dominion.
He is celebrated as a unifier of China and the founder of the Yuan imperial dynasty.
He is also the ""Great Khan"" of Marco Polo's travels, who entertained the Venetians and gave them passports for their journey.
This means that Temüjin, his siblings, and his mother have to hunt, fish, and gather wild berries for their survival.
Temüjin rescues her with the help of his patron Toghrul and ally Jamuka.
Although Temüjin acknowledges him as his son, his paternity is questioned by other members of his family.
In the process, the Silk Road cities of Samarkand, Bukhara, and Nishapur are utterly devastated.
In keeping with his request for a secret burial place, his supporters slaughter every living creature that crosses the path of the funeral procession.
Each of Genghis Khan's surviving sons inherits his own khanate, which they rule under his third son, Ogedei, the new Great Khan.
YUAN DRAMA The earliest Chinese plays, which were sung, spoken, acted, and mimed, were written by Chinese scholars in the Yuan period.
Allegedly, the plays contained protests against the Mongol presence, and the popular response to them was said to have contributed to the collapse of the Yuan dynasty.
SUPPRESSION OF THE HAN According to Mongol law, the indigenous people of China, the Han Chinese, were the lowest class within Chinese society.
In the 1340s, a disastrous flood of the Yellow River and the conscripton of thousands of Han peasants for forced labour led to widespread rebellion, and the Yuan dynasty was finally overthrown in 1368.
During their rule a new capital city was created at Beijing, and the Forbidden City was built within its walls.
The Ming period also saw China construct a defensive barrier against the outside world—the Great Wall. hina under the Ming enjoyed € relative stability and saw the development of a sophisticated bureaucracy, but also witnessed a period of imperial tyranny.
In contrast to some Western nations of the time, where royal authority was challenged, imperial power under the Ming grew unchecked.
Hongwu, the first Ming ^ id bt, emperor, began life as a ""aX poor peasant.
During his ft N, reign he reorganized the vj ^ army and attempted to m reform the land and v SRL tax system.
In Fer"" 1380,Hongwu Typical Ming vase The distinctive cobalt blue glaze of Chinese porcelain, developed by the Yuan, was perfected under the Ming. post of chief minister, revised the legal code, and ensured that imperial power could not be challenged in court.
This was supported by a surveillance system operated by spies, secret agents, and the “Brocade Guards,"" who carried out major purges of corrupt officials.
Urban growth under Yongle Hongwu's son usurped the throne in 1403 and reigned as Emperor Yongle.
He transferred the capital to Beijing, and began building a magnificent walled palace complex there, the Forbidden City , which nobody was allowed to enter without permission.
Beijing became the main bureaucratic and military center, but other cities and towns also grew apace.
Suzhou and Nanjing became famous for their sophisticated social life and lavish festivals.
Jingdezhen turned out blueand-white porcelain and Hangzhou produced silk.
Many of these cities were connected by the Grand Canal ; Linging, one of the main ports on the canal, handled 1. million shiploads of freight annually.
The spread of printing and the demands of a more literate public led to a publishing boom.
Classic novels such as The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Water Margin, and Journey to the West (otherwise known as Monkey) came out for the first time in print, and books with colored woodblock illustrations were published.
Frontier strategy After Yongle's death, the Ming dynasty was threatened by a new group of ethnic outsiders—the Mongol-speaking Oirat peoples—who began a massive invasion into Chinese territory in 1449.
Emperor Zhengtong rashly counterattacked, but his forces were ambushed at Tumu and he himself was taken hostage.
The The Great Wall In 1474, construction began on the brickwork Great Wall that we know today.
More than 1,500 miles long, the wall stretched from the Jiayu Pass in the west to the Yalu River in the east.
Oirat failed to take this opportunity to capture Beijing, and Zhengtong was eventually released.
Nevertheless, the Tumu incident heralded the end of the expansionist policies of the Ming dynasty; from that point on, frontier strategy became much more defensive.
Lacking the military resources to control the steppe regions that had been the source of the Oirat incursions, a barrier was built to contain the The Forbidden City In 1406, Yongle transferred his capital from Nanjing to Beijing.
CHINESE EXPLORER ZHENG HE Ming rule saw the creation of a vast imperial navy.
Between 1405 and 1433, the Muslim eunuch Zheng He commanded seven ambitious maritime expeditions.
On subsequent voyages, he reached Hormuz on the Gulf of Oman, and ships from his fleet put in at Jidda in Saudi Arabia.
Zheng He's voyages took him to 37 countries, and resulted not only in increased trade for China, but also in the capture of pirates that had plagued Chinese waters.
An account of Zheng He's voyages was written by the Muslim scholar Ma Yuan.
Brick and stone were laid over the earthen walls first constructed by the Qin dynasty (see BEFORE) to create the Great Wall.
Trade with the West begins Portuguese merchants first reached China in 1514, and in the 1550s they established a trading station at Macao on the southeast coast.
In 1604, two Portuguese ships carrying 200,000 pieces of Chinese blue-andwhite porcelain were captured by the Dutch.
The contents were put up for sale in Europe and the auction set off a craze for Chinese porcelain.
AFTER | The decline of Ming power and authority was a protracted affair.
ADMINISTRATIVE SEAL DECLINE AND FALL By the late 16th century, the Ming dynasty was in decline.
Weak emperors were dominated by their advisors, who increasingly influenced political decisions.
Economic problems prompted peasant rebellions, and in 1644 rebel forces under Li Zicheng took Beijing.
By 8,000 act they were producing distinctive jomon pottery—possibly the first pottery made anywhere in the world.
JOMON POTTERY ASIAN INFLUENCES Around 3008ce, the arrival of rice from East Asia revolutionized Japanese society.
Rice cultivation required a peasant workforce living in settled communities.
Large landowners became regional rulers who fought for access to water and fertile land.
FUJIWARA JAPAN Japan's line of sacred emperors is historically attested after the 3rd century ce.
During the Heian Period , power devolved from the emperor to the Fujiwara clan, which controlled the imperial court and dominated Japan until the rise of the samurai.
Bushido sought to unite learning and military prowess, and emphasized frugality, loyalty, mastery of martial arts and, above all, honor. welfth-century Japan was a country with an elaborate, subtle, artistic culture that was developed at the imperial court in the capital, Kyoto.
Among the . most powerful of them were two long-established families of high standing, the Minamoto and Taira.
Their ancestors had been imperial princes who, in the 9th century, were dispatched from Kyoto to uphold the emperor's authority in distant provinces.
There, fighting men flocked to serve them, and the two families became leaders of powerful warrior clans.
From their provincial bases, in the 12th century the Minamoto and Taira returned to compete for supreme power in the capital, Kyoto.
Gempeii Wars As the dominant family at the imperial court, the Taira at first had the upper hand.
But, between 1180 and 1185 a series of fierce conflicts, known as the Gempei Wars, ended with the Minamoto family triumphant.
Warfare between samurai followed brutal but elaborate rules—for example, it was customary to cut off the head of a warrior you killed in battle and return it to his family stuck on a spiked board. court at Kamakura, far to the east of Kyoto.
Shogun rule The rale of the shoguns, which was to continue until the mid-19th century, established the samurai as the dominant military and social elite.
Originally rough fighting men at odds with the elfete culture of the court, the samurai evolved into a striking mixture of the savage and the refined.
The ideal warrior was as capable of dashing off a poem as he was of slicing off an enemy’s head with his two-handed sword.
In theory he subscribed to an Fighting men The dominant social position of men who were devoted to war as a way of life inevitably spawned violence in a country that had no external enemies.
In 1274 and again in 1281, China’s Mongol ruler, Kublai Khan attempted to invade Japan by sea from Korea.
The samurai united to repel these invasions, of the Samurai Fujiwara fan Decorating fans was a typical activity of the refined court ladies.
The samurai, an elite class of armored warriors, dominated Japan from the 12th century.
Their fighting prowess and tradition of loyal service to the death—enshrined in the chivalric code of bushido—are the stuff of legend.
The Tale of Genji Murasaki Shikibu's long novel The Tale of Genji was based on the author's experiences as lady-in-waiting at the imperial court in the early 11th century.
It paints a vivid picture of Kyoto courtiers devoted to amorous intrigues and the delicate expression of emotions in verse.
Divine wind The second attempt by the Mongols to invade Japan met with disaster.
The buffalo horns decorating the helmet are made of carved, gilded wood.
THE FIRST SHOGUN MINAMOTO YORITOMO Minamoto Yoritomo was involved in the feud between the Minamoto and Taira clans from an early age.
In 1160 his father, Minamoto Yoshitomo, was executed by the Taira and he was exiled from the capital, Kyoto.
Although defeated in his first battle at Ishibashiyama in 1180, he went on to triumph both over the Taira and rivals within his own clan.
He became shogun in 1192, marking the beginning of Japan's long feudal age.
The helmet, or kabuto, has a leathercovered sweepback to protect the neck.
The throat defense Is attached to the mask, or mempo, that covers the lower face. although they were helped by bad weather.
For the rest of the time, if the samurai were going to fight, it had The shoulder to be against one another. guard, or sode, is suspended above the arm defense.
Civil war In 1333, a major civil war began when the emperor Go Daigo challenged the rule of the shoguns.
The most ruthless of the samurai, Ashikaga Takauji, expelled Go Daigo from Kyoto and enthroned an alternative emperor, who duly appointed Takauji as the first Ashikaga shogun.
Go Daigo set up a rival court at Yoshino and samurai across Japan took up arms in favor The arm guard, or kote, combines metal plates with chainmail.
The resulting civil Dp. i war lasted 60 years, before the third Ashikaga shogun, Yoshimitsu, restored m if Tete | jit E T UA Y | | | | j a TM | |) a | f if where their personal advantage peace to Japan in 1392. w pl ini (ii i D Y FF FTE Golden age A, Ambitious and forceful, Yoshimitsu T ^ Es 2A ided ld f pou T1 i |i ^t te lad T presided over a go S age o Japanese W t A “vy | culture.
He made his court at Kyoto a vr "" i The skirts, or kusazuri, of the armor are split for ease of movement. we the site of a cultural renaissance, Ti patronizing the refined, stylized “Noh” drama , collecting ink splash paintings, and promoting Zen, a distinctively Japanese variant on Buddhism that profoundly influenced the arts.
Yoshimitsu spent lavishly, The greaves, or suneate, protect the samurai's lower legs Warrior's armor Samurai fought without shields, depending on armor for protection.
The magnificent helmets and body armor were intended for display as well as defense.
This fine example TT » dates from the 19th century, when the samurai PTE shi had mostly ceased actual fighting.
THE RISE OF THE SAMURAI building a pavilion coated in gold and surrounded by splendid gardens.
In 1402 he negotiated formal trade links with the emperor of China, enabling him to import Chinese artifacts for his cultured capital.
Violence erupts again But Yoshimitsu, and his equally cultured successor, Yoshimasa, presided over an unstable society.
The daimyo, powerful and brutal warlords who had little allegiance to the shogunate, controlled vast areas in the provinces.
While Kyoto practiced refinement, from 1467 Japan descended into permanent civil war between the private armies of rival daimyo.
AFTER | In the 16th century, warfare in Japan entered a new era with the introduction of firearms.
The fighting finally ended under the shogun Tokugawa leyasu, who reunited the country.
CHRISTIANITY The arrival of Europeans in Japan from 1543 brought both guns and Christianity.
Francis Xavier flourished until the 17th century, when Christianity was banned and converts were persecuted.
FRANCIS XAVIER In the 16th century, ambitious daimyo sought to end Japan's endemic civil strife by unifying the country under a single strong ruler.
Odu Nobunaga and his successor Toyotomi Hideyoshi took control of much of Japan in the 1560s-1590s.
Buddhism became central to spiritual and political life during this period.
A NEW DYNASTY In 1392, a Koryo general called Yi Songgye seized power, declaring himself the first king of the new Choson dynasty.
This provided the opportunity for the Neo-Confucians to sweep aside the economic power and ""corrupting"" political and moral influences of Buddhism.
Although it appeared to be abstract, Neo-Confucianism was an intensely pragmatic philosophy that defined the way in which humans should relate to one another socially and the way that society, and the king in particular, should interact with the wider natural world.
The role of the ideal Neo-Confucian sage-king was to bring order to heaven and earth according to the requirements of li, and most importantly, to harmonize all aspects of human behavior with the underlying universal order.
This was an ideal that Sejong ambitiously sought to realize in a way that no other Korean king before or since has done.
This new ruling class, which combined pharmacology, agriculture, and astronomy.
Rain gauges, such as this stone, iron, and bronze example, were designed in the 1440s, long before such equipment was used in Europe.
Each gauge -— was standardized to 16. in in height and 6. in in diameter.
Sejong had them installed in every county so that local magistrates could record rainfall and contribute to knowledge of the climate and improvement of agricultural techniques.
In addition to maintaining his own ruling dynasty and strengthening the bureaucratic state, Sejong placed much importance on ensuring the well-being of his people through innovations that improved their lives.
Sounds for the people It is easy to identify King Sejong’s most important innovation—the invention of the phonetic alphabet for the Korean language, called han’gul.
As far as contemporary Koreans are concerned, it is a central aspect of everyday life and a source of national pride, but when the king first introduced the alphabet in the mid-15th century, the new writing system seemed to the intellectual elite of the time to be a vulgarization of written language.
Writing in Korea had hitherto been limited to complex Chinese characters and was the exclusive property of the yangban.
Many yangban resented these simple and relatively easy-to-learn new characters, which for a long time were used mainly by women.
The introduction of han'gul The new Korean alphabet, today called han'gul, is thought to have been largely the work of King Sejong himself and is based on a careful analysis of the Korean language.
It was first revealed in 1443 and then formally introduced by the king in 1446 in a ceremony depicted here in a modern Korean painting.
But han'gul was more than just a project to bring literacy to the lower levels of society.
Like much that Sejong did, it was also an attempt to reflect the order of Neo-Confucianism.
His attention also extended into the reform of court music, the encouragement of refined painting that depicted the natural world, and the spread of new agricultural techniques to the country's farmers.
A society of unequals The foundations of the Choson dynasty rested upon more than just the will of a determined, farsighted king.
The Neo-Confucianism that dominated the thinking of Sejong and his officials reflected the reality of Choson's unequal society and actually helped to reinforce its rigid class structures.
The great majority of the population were peasants engaged in agriculture, paying taxes to the state and rent to landlords, and often finding themselves at the mercy of the floods and droughts that beset the Korean peninsula's fragile ecology, bringing with them famine and disease.
Beneath the farmers on the social scale were various lowborn groups, including those involved in so-called “dirty occupations"" such as butchery and leatherworking.
There was also a large hereditary Chongmyo ritual At Chongmyo Shrine in Seoul, the Choson kings frequently held elaborate Confucian rites as a way of honoring their royal ancestors.
INVASION FROM THE EAST The 16th century saw the rise of a vicious rivalry among the scholar-officials who vied for position in the state bureaucracy and at court.
After two invasions in six years brought devastation for the country and its people, the invaders were finally slave class that is thought to have comprised in the region of 30 percent of the total population and remained a notable feature of Choson society until the 19th century.
In accordance with his ideology, Sejong sought to encourage appropriate relationships between the different classes and cultivate decorum in personal relations.
In 1432, he ordered the publication of a didactic text on Neo-Confucian ethics called the Ilustrated Guide to the Three Bonds, which was reprinted later that century with a han’gul text so that a general readership could benefit from its instructions.
The three bonds of the title were those that occur between parents and children, between ruler and official, and between husband and wife.
Each example of bond was illustrated with a series of short biographies and woodcuts depicting the stories of devoted sons and daughters, loyal officials, and faithful wives.
But the less lofty lives of the common people found an expression in the arts of this period, in particular through punch’ong ceramics.
These developed from the refined celadon ceramics— crackle-glazed porcelain in a range of jadelike colors—favored by the Koryo court in previous centuries.
RECOVERY AND RENOVATION Choson recovered during the 17th century, but the fall of China’s Ming dynasty to Manchu “barbarians” in 1644 was a profound shock.
The rulers of Choson then saw themselves as the true defenders of civilization and Neo-Confucian orthodoxy.
Two kings, Yongjo and Chongjo, ruled for much of the 18th century and the country prospered.
A move away from Neo-Confucianism toward solving practical problems and an interest in new ideas from China and Europe followed.
The book was first printed in 1446 at the time of the introduction of the new phonetic script for the Korean language.
KOREAN KING KING SEJONG The fourth king of a relatively young dynasty, Sejong came to the throne of Choson in 1418 at the age of 22.
He was the grandson of the dynastic founder Yi Songgye and became the first king to be extensively schooled from an early age in Neo-Confucian philosophy and ethics.
Today, Sejong the Great is a national icon symbolizing Korea's first ""golden age"" and is seen by many millions of Koreans every day on the back of the 10,000-won note.
THE DONG SON Remains of the Dong Son culture that created this drum were discovered near Hanoi in Vietnam in the 1950s.
Dong Son culture was centered on northern Vietnam, but remnants have been found across Southeast Asia as far away as Java and Sumatra.
Dongsonians had an organized society that later cultures in the region would draw upon.
DONG SON DRUM HOW WE KNOW The Buddhist monument of Borobudur in Central Java remained largely hidden by jungle until its rediscovery in 1814.
Careful study of carvings and inscriptions around the site suggests that it was constructed under the influence of the Srivjaya Empire in the 8th—9th centuries.
Almost 21,500 sq ft of narrative sculptures provide information about Buddhist worship and daily life in Java in the period.
Lost Empires Long seen as a way station for merchants and missionaries, Southeast Asia has also been home to peoples and empires whose commercial, spiritual, and artistic wealth were rivaled by none.
This wealth depended on the movement of people, goods, and ideas across the vast waterways and fertile plains of the region. mong the great numbers of people who migrated along the waterways of Southeast Asia, many moved from the islands of Java and Sumatra to the coasts of today's Vietnam and Cambodia.
These people set up maritime trading centers that traded spices, woods, metals, and animal products from inland for merchandise from elsewhere in Southeast Asia, India, Persia, and Arabia.
Many areas grew wealthy as a result of this trade, and the Champa kingdom in southern Vietnam became a great empire, its power and influence lasting from the 7th century CE until its defeat by the Vietnamese emperor 1471.
Rivers and floodplains The fertile rivers of the Southeast Asian interior were another source of wealth.
Communities around the river basins of the Mekong, Red, Chao Phraya, and Irrawaddy rivers grew prosperous from rice and livestock.
But the rivers were also a source of conflict as the region's empires fought each other for control the most productive arable areas.
ZHOU DAGUAN, CHINESE DIPLOMAT, DESCRIBING KHMER CAMBODIA, 1290 had fought the declining Funan empire and the Champa city-states for control of the fertile Mekong River delta.
While the power of Funan passed, the Champa and Khmer continued to quarrel over the floodplain.
After 939, the Champa also had to contend with the northern Vietnamese state of Dai Viet, which was desperate to find territories south of the crowded Red River valley.
The Champa preoccupation with the Dai Viet let the Khmer Empire strengthen its grip on the rice lands of the Mekong.
At the same time, to the west of the Khmer Empire in Burma , the Irrawaddy River sustained the growth of a powerful kingdom around the city of Pagan.
By the mid-12th century, the Pagan and Khmer empires controlled much of mainland Southeast Asia.
As the Khmer began to decline in the 13th century, Thai-speaking peoples migrated down the Irrawaddy and Chao Phraya rivers from farther north and took control of many former 4 ee 1 —Borobudur relief The Buddhist monument at Borobudur features 2,672 carved reliefs showing both the Buddhist afterlife and the daily existence of the Javanese people.
In 1238, they established the first Thai nation, the kingdom of Sukhothai, in central Thailand.
Island kingdoms The peoples that remained on Sumatra and Java set up prosperous trading communities rivaling the coastal states of the mainland.
By the 8th century, the Srivijaya Empire controlled most of Sumatra o D Al VI Shang Long E AG aS, EC y | Hainan i i Ec.
In Vietnam, Confucianism (see 127) from China was also integrated into the daily workings of government and society.
The wealth from trade and agriculture financed the building of huge temples and monuments to the gods.
Buddhist monuments such as Malacca and imposing tolls on the highly profitable spice trade.
Other maritime kingdoms, such as the Hindu Kadiri empire, grew in influence as the Srivijaya empire weakened in the 11th century.
The spread of religion Merchants from India, China, and Sri Lanka brought religion as well as trade to Southeast Asia.
Jayavarman Il The great Khmer ruler Jayavarman VII built vast temples and defeated the Champa, but his excessive spending also impoverished the empire.
AFTER | Both Christianity and Islam were exported to Southeast Asia by merchants and traders.
THE SPREAD OF ISLAM Islam arrived in Southeast Asia with Arab and Indian traders from the east coast of India.
By the 15th century, Islam was the most popular religion in Java and Sumatra, transforming Statecraft among the sultans and religious custom among the peoples of the islands.
They sought to channel trade through ports that they could control and convert to Christianity.
Initially limited to the coastal cities, European influence spread across mainland Southeast Asia as missionaries traveled inland to convert people to Christianity and engage in Y commerce.
PORTUGUESE GALLEON Angkor Wat Constructed in the 12th century during the reign of the Khmer ruler Suryavarman Il and dedicated to the Hindu god of Vishnu, Angkor is the largest religious complex in the world.
BEFORE ISLAM The Arabian Peninsula has always been dominated by sparsely populated, arid desert.
Its early inhabitants were mainly nomads such as the Bedouin, although there were some farmers around the oases.
Frankincense, a fragrant tree resin, was one of the most important products.
FRANKINCENSE PRE-ISLAMIC RELIGION Pre-Islamic Arabs spoke a number of languages and followed a variety of religions, most of which were polytheistic, worshipping several different gods «€144—45.
Mecca, later the most important religious site of Islam, was already a center of worship.
MUHAMMAD THE PROPHET Muhammad was a merchant based at Mecca when he had his first revelation from God.
Although some people accepted his teachings, the hostility of others forced him into exile in Medina.
There, he gathered more followers, uniting the local tribes and raiding caravans until he managed to conquer Mecca itself.
The new rulers were tolerant toward the religions they found in their conquered territories, and did not force conversion.
The constantly expanding area of the Islamic Empire was controlled by governors based in armed camps, each taking their instructions from Medina.
Despite their military successes, the Muslims were soon split by factional differences.
By the mid-8th century, they had reached as far as Spain, stretching the extent of the caliphate to breaking point.
By 750, these beliefs had become the basis of a religion whose adherents governed an area stretching continuously from the borders of China to Spain.
By 1450 Muslims were ruling in areas as far east as Indonesia. governors were constantly trying to become independent, and there was tension between the ""true"" followers of Muhammad and those they believed were simply hungry for power.
When ‘Ali was Kaaba This 16th-century Turkish tile depicts the Kaaba at Mecca.
Originally a site of pre-Islamic polytheistic worship, this square building is the holiest site in Islam, and all Muslims pray toward it. assassinated in 661, Mu'awiya took power, becoming the first caliph of the Umayyad dynasty.
Although this turbulent period saw a great deal of conflict, it also witnessed the collation and standardization of the Qur'an, the Muslim holy book.
The second caliph even introduced a new Islamic “Hijri” calendar, which kept time by following the cycles of the moon, and dated its years from the time of Muhammad’s flight to Medina.
The Umayyad dynasty The Umayyads took their name from the clan to which the first Umayyad caliph, Mu'awiya ibn Abi Sufyan, belonged.
Syr Day, ÉERG HAN A ^T ASIA century, it has been restored and redecorated Tang protectorate ^^^ — several times since.
The Umayyads continued the conquests of previous caliphs, consolidating power over the former P Suhar „Muscat one of the biggest splits in Islam and bil Ls and closer to fertile farming areas.
WU persian os M id N Persian Empire and extending the rule — 'Ali's followers ultimately became the The new rulers ruthlessly wiped out Masa a of Islam across North Africa.
They built Shia branch of Islam. anyone they perceived as a threat, and R A IN monumental shrines and places of In 750, several anti-Umayyad factions replaced the old Umayyad officials with ;Yamama worship to emphasize Islamic power, joined together to overthrow their those loyal to them.
The Abbasids used Peninsula including the Dome of the Rock, on the site in Jerusalem where Muhammad is E believed to have ascended to heaven, rulers.
The leader of the revolt was descended from another relative of Muhammad, named 'Abbas. a system of intelligence to spy on officials in far-off countries, to make sure they did not get too powerful.
Although conversion was The Abbasid dynasty Islamic law to justify their claims to E no still by choice, special taxes on nonThe family of ‘Abbas was largely based power and to further secure their Shibafn i Muslims and religious restrictions on in the old Persian Empire— position.
They also introduced a Najran * senior government positions encouraged modern-day Iran, Iraq, and more formal system of taxation to o YEMEN | the population to become increasingly Afghanistan.
Athr Sams 5 Muslim and to adopt Arab customs, the capital east to the The Abbasid period is generally particularly in the east of the empire, new city of Baghdad, considered a golden age of ad “aden in what are now Iraq and Iran. which was closer Islamic art, science, and Despite all this, factionalism remained rife, with several groups trying to seize power from the Umayyads.
One major group still believed that only the descendants of ‘Ali, who had lost in the civil war that brought the Umayyads to power, should rule.
The resulting dispute triggered CALIPH Muhammad's successors as leaders of Islam were known as caliphs (from the Arabic Khalifat ar-Rasul Allah, ""the successor, representative of the Prophet of God""), and the area over which they ruled was known as the caliphate. to their center or power, located on major trade routes, Arab astrolabe The astrolabe was an astronomical device developed in the Islamic world that used the position of the sun and stars for navigation, and as a tool to locate Mecca.
Arabic became increasingly important as both a religious and a political language.
Without these Arabic copies, the modern world would probably know very little about Greek and Persian literature, and the pari MT J fS TVs Lal; DEAE RET T "" ule am n"" Aes PUOBILL Lael \ IERTAT ON paren D Ls Fax SA teal i E fanno TNT nA The Battle of Badr was crucial to the foundation of Islam.
Taking place on March 17, 624, it is one of the few battles mentioned in the Qur'an.
The Quraishi rulers of Mecca, frustrated by early Muslim ambushes on caravans in the area, launched a concerted attempt to stop them, but despite overwhelming odds in their favor they were soundly defeated.
This illustration of the pursuit of the defeated army comes from a later account of the battle.
Victory consolidated the political position of Muhammad and forced the surrounding areas to take him seriously. technological advances of the scientific revolution and after might have been much delayed.
Despite their best efforts, the Abbasids were unable to prevent further revolts and uprisings among their subjects.
In the mid-10th century, the Buyids, a group of professional soldiers employed by the Abbasids, staged a coup and took over the caliphate.
Content to operate out of sight, they allowed the Abbasids to retain their title, and the Abbasid caliphate survived in name until the arrival of the Mongols in the 13th century. ""o wv lt 2.
Having been spread mainly by missionaries and trade contacts, by the 15th century it had traveled as far east as Indonesia and the Philippines.
WOA A preacher pilgrims traveled in large groups for protection Although the Islamic world was 4 united by culture and trade throughout the whole medieval period, it did not always have one government.
As the Abbasid dynasty concentrated its power in the east, the areas farthest from the new caliphate began to break away.
Shortly after this, independent governors also arose in Morocco, western and eastern Algeria, Tunisia, and Egypt.
By the 10th century, Islam had developed into three separate caliphates—the title “caliph” was by KEY Islamic world in 1200 Spread of Islam 1200-1450 Preacher of Islam People who lived under Islamic rule were not forced to convert.
Many were converted by traveling preachers such as the one depicted in this 13th-century manuscript.
E now taken by the self-appointed head of any major Islamic community who felt the right to take it.
In addition to the Abbasids in Baghdad, there was a Fatimid caliphate in Bgypt, and an Umayyad caliphate in Spain.
The Isma'ili Fatimids The Fatimid dynasty was founded in the early 10th century by an Isma'ili Shia Muslim named 'Ubaydallah.
The Isma'ili Shia branch of Islam probably started as a secret movement in Iraq, though its missionary activity soon took its members all across the Islamic world.
From there they went on to conquer Syria and Palestine, reaching as far as Aleppo and Damascus.
Cairo, meanwhile, became the center for a trade network that extended throughout the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean.
Goods such as porcelain from China and spices from Southeast Asia were brought in by ship to the Egyptian Red Sea ports.
Gold and slaves, meanwhile, were brought down the Nile from Ethiopia and the Sudan, to be traded in Cairo.
ABBASID CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID Harun al-Rashid was the fifth Abbasid caliph, ruling in Baghdad from 786—809.
Harun was the first caliph to appoint a vizier (from the Arabic wazir, meaning ""helper^) with many administrative powers— although his own vizier was removed from power in 803.
He was also an important patron of the arts, presiding over part of the ""Golden Age"" that saw the emergence of classical Islamic culture.
Alhambra palace The Alhambra was built in the 14th century at Granada in southern Spain.
The palace buildings are covered in tiles and plasterwork bearing Islamic geometric designs and inscriptions.
ALThe Arabic word for ""the"" forms the prefix of many scientific words that were adopted by medieval Europe along with the scientific knowledge of the Islamic world—for example, alkali, algebra, alchemy, algorithm, and almanac.
Most of the merchants were Muslim, although some Europeans from Venice and Genoa were also involved.
As well as being an important trading center, Cairo was also a site of religious learning.
It attracted scholars from Great Mosque of Djenné Although the current mosque at Djenné in Mali is just over a century old, it stands on the site of a mosque first built in 1240.
Following its construction, Djenné became West Africa's most important seat of Islamic learning.
Syria, Ethiopia, and the Maghreb, and is still considered the most prestigious site of Islamic learning in the world.
The Fatimid dynasty continued to rule Egypt until their conquest by the Kurdish warrior Saladin in 1171.
Saladin used his Egyptian base to retake the Holy Land from the crusader settlers, but his Ayyubid dynasty fell within a century, overthrown by the Mamluks, originally Turkish slave soldiers, who had risen to become commanders of the Egyptian army.
The title of AAA UR caliph was taken by 'Abd al-Rahman III al-Nasir in 929, possibly as a reaction to the claims of the Fatimids.
The blending of Islamic ideas with Christian and Spanish influences produced a unique cultural fusion across the areas ruled by the Umayyad and the Almoravids, their Moroccan successors.
The visual arts of Islamic Spain are expressed most fully at the Alhambra , a palace built for the rulers of the kingdom of Granada.
The availability of Islamic scholars and Arabic-speaking Christians made cities such as Toledo on the Moorish-Christian frontier a center for the translation of Arabic texts into Latin.
Other Muslim lands As traders carried their religion across the ocean with their goods, Islamic belief moved east.
From here Islam spread into Southeast Asia and the Indonesian archipelago.
Hajj certificate The hajj, or pilgrimage to Mecca, is one of the key duties of all Muslims.
This certificate, dating from 1207 and depicting the Kaaba shrine, was proof that its owner had completed the pilgrimage.
While Islamic empires never extended their influence to China, strong trade links between the two cultures ensured that Islam gained a foothold in East Asia.
Hassan tower The huge 12th-century tower at Rabat in Morocco was designed as a minaret for an enormous mosque that was never completed.
Qutb Minar minaret The Qutb Minar in Delhi, India, is the world's tallest brick minaret.
The tower and mosque complex were built in the early 13th century by the founder of the Delhi sultanate.
AFTER IBS Islam has continued to play an influential role in world history until the present.
After 1031, the Spanish caliphate dissolved into smaller states that were slowly conquered by Spanish Christians, the last falling in 1492.
Many different materials were used, including wood, metal, and ceramics.
HELMET GOLD COIN Stone figure, dating from the late 12th-early 13th prosperity, power, joy, happiness, permanent stability."" century.
Persian military helmet, dating from the late the Fatimid caliphate, which ruled over North Africa, Egypt, 15th century and fashioned from tron and silver.
It is a mixture of gold and enamel and dates from — dinar coin from Sicily.
Enamel bowl from Persia , dating caliph al-Mustansir in the 11th century; the radiating lines from the late 12th-early 13th century, with the words ""good ^ on the piece are characteristic of the period.
Qur'an stand, mosques to indicate the direction of Mecca, Islam's holiest dating to 1360, and made from carved and inlaid wood. city.
Glass bottle, dating from the late 13th century, and Brazier in cast bronze, dating from the second half of probably made in Syria.
The enameled and gilded glass the 13th century, and dedicated to the Sultan al-Muzaffar features images of warriors wielding maces, swords, lances, ibn Umar.
Gold armlet, dating from 1030 ce silver and bitumen, and inscribed with the words “Glory, and made in Persia.
The empire was a crucial staging post for Chinese and Arabic merchant ships.
CHOLA BRONZE ISLAM BEFORE THE DELHI SULTANATE Arab traders had introduced Islam to the region by the 8th century, and there were incursions by Muslim armies from Persia and Ghazni (modern Iran and Afghanistan) in the 8th11th centuries.
Islam's impact at this stage was still very limited. pr. a [he Delhi Sultanate Although Islam was present in parts of South Asia from the 8th century, the establishment of the Delhi Sultanate marked a new era.
Immigrants from Central Asia and Persia brought concepts of kingship, built cities, and founded empires.
India was incorporated into the cultural scope of Islam. n 1175, the nomadic Muslim chieftain Muhammad of Ghur advanced into India.
Although the Indian armies were bigger and richer, the nomads had the advantages of horses and a centralized army.
Sweeping eastward over modern-day Turkestan, Pakistan, and northern India, Muhammad's armies sacked Delhi in 1193.
To celebrate this and to symbolize the assimilation of new territory into the wider Muslim world , he began to build what would become the tallest minaret in the world—the Qutb Minar.
As the empire expanded, successive sultans sought to demonstrate their power by building grand monuments around it.
This map highlights the areas where the major States of the period first originated.
The sultan's army defeated the rebels, but some managed to escape and regroup.
When the sultan left to quash a rebellion in Gujarat, the Deccan rebels seized their chance and defeated the imperial army.
Their leader was declared Sultan Alauddin Bahman Shah at Daulatabad Fort in 1347, establishing the Bahmani kingdom.
This was the end of the Delhi Sultanate's expansion, and the start of its long decline.
Sultans and slaves The early sultans ruled over a fragile kingdom, and their authority was concentrated in a series of fortified towns.
The nomadic tribes who made up the nobility did not have a strong tradition of hereditary kingship.
Military slaves frequently became sultans, such as Iltutmish in 1211 or Balban in 1266.
Women, too, could become sultans if they could muster the support of the nobility, as Razia Sultana did in 1236.
Succession to the throne at Delhi was often secured through violence; during the Slave Dynasty —the first dynasty of the Sultanate—at least five Sufi poetry Amir Khusrau was court poet for several of the Delhi sultans and a follower of the Sufi (Islamic mystic) saint Nizammudin.
His poetry, an example of which is shown here, is sung today in the devotional music called Qawwali. of the 11 sultans were assassinated.
Imperial authority grew stronger as a result, although tribal loyalties and intrigues remained divisive.
Throughout the period of the Delhi Sultanate, the sultans based their policies on pragmatism, rather than the Sharia law.
Some Hindu temples in zones of military conflict were destroyed, but this had been a military tactic in India before the arrival of the Muslims and there does il ] 6 0) 0 The number of years that I the inscribed iron pillar in the courtyard of the Qutb Minar complex has survived in the open air without any | sign of rust.
The great pillar dates back to * the pre-Islamic empire of the Guptas. not seem to have been a policy of temple destruction.
In settled areas, temple building and renovation was sanctioned by the state.
Subjects were permitted to practice their own faiths, and the Jizya tax, which non-Muslims are supposed to pay in an Islamic state, was only enforced sporadically.
Expansion to the south Between 1299-1305, sultan Alauddin Khilji launched a series of successful military expeditions against the various rich kingdoms south of Delhi, including the Yadava capital of Devagiri, the Somnath temple in Gujarat, Chittorgarh in Rajasthan, and Mandu in central India.
In 1311, Alauddin sent his favorite slave, Malik Kafur, on a series of raids into the Deccan (the vast plateau region that covers much of southern India) in search of plunder.
The Yadavas of Devagiri, the Kakatiyas of Lodi Tomb The Lodi Dynasty, the last dynasty of the Sultanate, ruled from 1451 to 1526.
Their kings were reinstated, but had to acknowledge the sultan's overlordship and send him an annual tribute.
After Alauddin's death in 1305, the southern kingdoms stopped paying tribute, and so in 1321 Sultan Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq sent his son Muhammad to annex them.
In 1327-28 he forced the elite to relocate to Daulatabad, but within two years the inadequate water supply compelled him to reinstate Delhi as the capital.
New kingdoms and political elites, both Hindu and Muslim, came to power in the Deccan region of south India.
THE DECCANI SULTANATES By the end of the 15th century, the Bahmani kingdom had fragmented into five rival sultanates, constantly at war with each other.
In 1565 the Vijayanagar Empire was defeated by a rare combination of these five provinces.
It continued until 1526 when the last of the sultans, Ibrahim Lodi, was defeated at Panipat, but was by then just one of many states contending for power in northern India.
Qutb Minar Complex The Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque in Delhi was constructed by Qutb-ud-din Aibek, founder of the Delhi Sultanate, as a symbol of his power.
The sandstone base of the Qutb Minar is visible in the background. e South of the Sahara formation of more centralized states south of the Sahara desert, such as the Ghana Empire.
The introduction of camels to Africa by Muslim Arabs made travel possible through the desert, enabling Arabs and North African Berbers to open the first regular trade routes between North Africa and regions south of the Sahara desert.
Muslim traders created trading networks throughout the sub-Saharan regions of East and West Africa.
TRADERS WITH CAMELS CROSS THE DESERT THE EMPIRE OF GHANA In the 8th to 11th centuries, the Ghana Empire of West Africa grew powerful on the transSaharan gold trade.
VICENTE PEGADO, CAPTAIN OF THE PORTUGUESE GARRISON AT SOFALA, 1531 Freestanding masonry The wall of the Great Enclosure has a marble core, and is bounded on each side by horizontal, free-standing masonry.
The wall contains 900,000 large granite blocks, and is decorated with a chevron pattern along the top.
By the 13th century, Muslim trading cities such as Kilwa, in presentday Tanzania, were at the center of a highly profitable mercantile network, importing textiles, spices, and ceramics from Asia and exchanging these for African gold, iron, ivory, and slaves.
Great Zimbabwe The Swahili ports did not produce these goods themselves, but traded in turn with states from within the African interior.
At one end of the supply chain lay the settlement of Great Zimbabwe, an important source of gold, and the hub of a prosperous trading empire that thrived in southern Africa during the 11th—15th centuries.
In the language of the Shona people of the region, the word Zimbabwe meant “houses of stone,” a term applied to the hundreds of stone-walled enclosures found throughout the Zimbabwe plateau.
Great Zimbabwe is the largest of these, located on the southern edge of the plateau.
The spectacular stone ruins today cover nearly 1,800 acres and are divided into hilltop and valley complexes.
Built at the head of the Sabi River valley, Great Zimbabwe was well placed to control the passage between the gold fields in the west and the trading cities along the Swahili coast.
An inner wall runs along the outer wall, and forms a narrow passage that leads to the conical tower.
In the 12th-13th centuries, Great Zimbabwe also profited from taxes on the trading caravans that passed through the area.
City of stone In the 13th-14th centuries, the people living in and around Great Zimbabwe probably numbered between 11,000 and 18,000, and most would have lived in huts, situated closely together.
The ruling elite led a more privileged and comfortable existence, supported by the wealth provided by their control over the export of gold and ivory to the coast.
Local granite was used to enclose the hilltop at Great Zimbabwe with stone walls, perhaps as a fortification.
The Hill Complex The buildings above the Great Enclosure may have been built as fortifications, although the walls offer no access to the top from which to repel attackers.
Conical tower The mysterious conical tower at Great Zimbabwe is 33 ft high and 16 ft in diameter.
Its purpose is unknown, although it has been suggested that it was a symbolic grain bin.
Set in the valley below the hill, the drystone walls of the Great Enclosure probably served as a palace.
As well as local pottery and ornaments made from copper, bronze, and gold, archaeologists have found many objects of Asian origin, indicating the settlement’s prosperity and extensive trade links.
These include 13thcentury glazed Persian earthenware, 14th-century Chinese dishes, and fragments of painted glass from the Middle East.
The end of Great Zimbabwe coincides with the vast conquest by the king of the Karanga, Mutota, who sought to extend his rule over the whole plateau between the Zambezi and Limpopo rivers, including the main gold-bearing areas.
But Great Zimbabwe’s decline was probably not a result of Mutota’s expansion policy.
More likely the land could no longer support the concentration of population, forcing many inhabitants to find new areas of woodland where plots could be cleared.
The Mali Empire In West Africa, the first great empire to be established after the decline of Ghana in the 12th century was the Mali.
The Mali Empire, like that of Ghana, was based in the Sahel, the savanna region running along the southern border of the Sahara.
From the Sahel, it was possible for Mali, like Ghana before it, to exploit the trade across the Sahara to North Africa and control the exchange of gold for salt mined in the desert.
The first capital of the Mali KING OF MALI MANSA MUSA Mansa Musa was the best known of the Islamic emperors of Mali, largely because of his hajj to Cairo and Mecca in 1324-25.
He was said to have taken 60,000 porters and hundreds of servants decked in gold.
During the trip, Mansa gave away or spent so much gold that it apparently took the economy of North Africa a decade to recover.
Musa established sound economic and cultural relations with the countries he traveled through.
He brought back with him an Arabic library, religious scholars, and the Muslim architect al-Sahili, who built the great mosques at Gao and Timbuktu.
Other trade goods included slaves and kola nuts, as well as glass beads and cowrie shells for currency.
Mansa Musa and Timbuktu The Mali state was founded in 1235 by Sundiata Keita when he united the 12 Mandinke clans of Mali.
A devout Muslim, Musa is renowned for his spectacular “Pilgrimage of Gold” to the holy city of Mecca.
Musa also extended the boundaries of the Mali Empire, uniting much of the Western Sudan (the huge West African savanna region to the south of the Sahel) under his rule.
The Moroccan traveler Ibn Battuta, journeying through Mali in the 1350s, could write that he had enjoyed “complete and general safety” in the area.
Musa had the great Jingereber mosque built in Timbuktu; it still stands in the city today.
North African and Egyptian scholars visited Musa’s court, and he exchanged ambassadors with Egypt, Morocco, and Arabia.
During the 1460s, the Songhay king Sunni Ali took control of much of the Mali Empire, including the city of Timbuktu and the crucial trade routes.
Like the Mali, the Songhay Empire depended for its great wealth on the goldfields on the Niger River and the trans-Saharan trade in salt and slaves.
At its height in the 16th century, the Songhay Empire would exceed even that of the Mali in size and wealth. slaves dressed in gold 5 and carrying golden staffs as well as 80 camel-loads of gold accompanied Mansa Musa on his great pilgrimage to Mecca, according to the contemporary Arab historian al-Umari.
SOUTH OF THE SAHARA The Sankore Mosque in Timbuktu was one of the most important centers of learning in Africa.
AFTER | From the 15th century, Portuguese and other European traders and colonists became ever more involved in African trade and politics.
BENIN The empire of Benin rose to prominence in West Africa during the 15th century.
Benin was well known for hand-cast bronzes, which could only be made with royal consent.
The first Portuguese traders arrived in about 1485, and a strong political and mercantile alliance was formed.
BENIN BRONZE PLATE THE MUTAPA KINGDOM Many of the people of Great Zimbabwe settled on the northeastern edge of the Zimbabwean plateau close to the Zambezi River, where they formed the Mutapa kingdom.
In 1628, the Portuguese replaced the king with a puppet ruler, who later signed a treaty giving the Portuguese free rein to mine minerals.
The knowledge he brought back of kingdoms to the west led to the opening of new trade routes.
TRADING IN IDEAS Flourishing in India from the 3rd century BCE, Buddhism traveled north to Central Asia and then east along the Silk Road to China, where it was firmly established by the 4th century ct.
It must have been on the ships of Arab traders that Chinese goods from this era were transported to the east coast of Africa.
CHINESE VASE FOUND IN AFRICA New world view Narratives of 13thand 14th-century travelers transformed European maps of Asia.
KEY E Major routes s Subsidiary routes -— mm ææ Sea routes anditry and political instability were a constant threat to the routes that made up the Silk Road.
It was in periods of relative peace, during the rule of the Tang dynasty and later under the protection of the Mongols , that trade along the Silk Road truly thrived.
Under Mongol protection the Silk Road flourished as a 4,000-mile trade route, along which travelers and traders were able to move in unprecedented safety.
Kublai Khan , who became Great Khan of the Mongols in 1260, later declared himself emperor of China.
He founded the Yuan dynasty . | point to Europe for silk and spices, Baghdad > onstantinople was a major entry which were shipped to the west by Genoese or Venetian traders.
A subsidiary trade route ran north of the Caspian to Astrakhan in the Mongol Khanate of the Golden Horde, then on to ports on the Black Sea.
The city of Ahmadabad later became a major producer of silk. [he Silk Road A web of caravan trails, mountain passes, beacon towers, oases, and garrison forts fringing somete the most inhospitable parts of the planet, the Silk Road was the world’s greatest thoroughfare in the 13th-14th centuries.
Before the 13th century, the idea of a journey from Europe to China was unheard-of, but taking advantage of the Silk Road, a few merchants and missionaries traveled all the way to Kublai Khan’s capital.
They included the Venetian merchants Niccolo and Maffeo Polo, who reached Dadu in 1266.
There were apparently well received by the Great Khan, who wanted to learn about Christianity and Western science.
Five years on, Niccolo and Maffeo’s nephew, Marco Polo (see right), reached Kublai’s court.
Also in the 13th century, Rabban Sauma, a Chinese Christian, made a pilgrimage in the opposite direction, from Dadu to Jerusalem, and then on into Western Europe.
The accounts of both journeys provide a fascinating glimpse into life along the Silk Road in medieval Asia.
Delhi, Delhi was a major center To the west of the desert and the Himalayas lies the important oasis town of Bukhara.
CUBO Bukhara Capital of the Islamic Sultanate of for the exchange of goods and ideas.
From China, caravans carried silk, paper, weapons, lacquer, and even rhubarb.
Goods were sold or exchanged for other commodities en route in staging-post bazaars.
The products were carried on camels, horses, bullocks, and yaks, depending on the location.
The two-humped Bactrian camel was Central Asia's hardiest beast of burden.
It could withstand the searing heat and biting cold and survive without water between oasis towns.
The Id Kah Mosque, in Kashgar, was built in 1422, but includes older structures dating back to the 8th century, and began as a mosque in 996.
Kashgar is situated at the meeting point of the northern and southern Silk Roads, and was the gateway to the West.
Set up as a garrison town at the foot of the Pamirs by 76 CE, it gave access to the mountain passes into Central Asia, India, and Persia.
The Taklimakan desert was a major obstacle between China e E and lands to the west.
A hoard of fascinating llected over the centuries by Dunhuang's ' overed in a cave in 1900.
VENETIAN MERCHANT AND ADVENTURER MARCO POLO As a teenager, Venetian Marco Polo accompanied his father and uncle on their second expedition to China, where they reached the fabled court of Kublai Khan.
Marco learned the Mongol language and the Great Khan employed him as roving envoy and governor for three years in eastern China.
He returned to Venice in 1295, but the following year was captured in a naval battle against the Genoese.
In captivity, he dictated an account of his travels to a fellow inmate.
Marco Polo's Travels was the most detailed account of East Asia available to European readers.
It was printed in 1483 and influenced the thinking of many later would-be explorers. *| have not told half of what I saw” MARCO POLO, 1524 The Silk Road under the Mongols Although the Mongols under Kublai Khan did not complete their conquest of China until 1279, they had already won control of the north by the death of Genghis Khan in 1227.
Hn T The geometrical center — — of China, the city of Lanzhou on the Yellow River was a major trading hub for the Silk Road under the Han dynasty.
A number of factors contributed to the decline of the Silk Road, which did not survive into the 15th century.
TRADE UNDER THE MING In the early 15th century, the Chinese joined Arab, Persian, and Indian merchants trading in the Indian Ocean.
ARCHAEOLOGY The Silk Road was rediscovered by European explorers in the 19th century.
It was given its name by a German geographer, Ferdinand Von Richthofen.
His head appears to show skin lesions similar to those caused by smallpox.
EARLY VACCINATION In ancient China it has been claimed that a lucky day was chosen on which to blow crusts from the skin of a smallpox sufferer into a patient's nose through a tube or quill.
If the Chinese did inhale a powdered material from the sores of smallpox victims, this would be the first recorded form 1 of vaccination.
Despite catching the disease himself, Thucydides survived to leave a harrowing account of the death and despair that the disease caused, accounting as it did for some 60,000 lost lives—a quarter of the population of Athens at that time.
Thus the Black Death was not the first such plague in Europe. population died from the plague in the 14th century, | 6 ( according to some of the PERCENT of Europe's higher estimates, with densely populated urban areas being the worst affected.
Historians studying medieval parish registers have also uncovered abnormally high mortality rates, which along with maritime records and contemporary accounts detailing symptoms, locations, and dates, have brought together random pieces of the plague's timetable and destinations. he bubonic plague that came a to be known as the Black Death spread to Europe from central Asia, where it had already left a trail of devastation.
It may have first reached Europe in the fall of 1346, when an army of Muslim Tartars laid siege to the flourishing Christian enclave of Caffa (the modern-day Ukrainian port of Feodosiya) on the Silk Road and plague struck the besieging troops.
Stories of infected corpses being catapulted over the walls into Caffa to spread the plague are probably unreliable.
What is not disputed is that infected fleas on rats accompanied the besieged Christian merchants when they fled by boat back to the Mediterranean via Constantinople in 1347, and so they ATLAN TT OCEAN r3 * "" Barcelona i i + * j [| i ""Granada Vi The Black Death Towns and villages of medieval Europe became littered with corpses, and death carts carried so many bodies that they could only be buried in deep pits.
The medieval world had very little protection against a plague that was to wipe out one in three, and maybe more, of the population. took the bubonic plague with them.
Thus the most virulent epidemic then known, and still ever recorded, spread rapidly—and fatally—through much of the Western world.
Diverse strains Plague is caused by a bacterium called Yersinia pestis , which is carried by fleas on wild rodents.
Transfer of bacterial infection occurs when the fleas feed on human blood.
It took 3-5 days to incubate, and then within a further three days caused death in 80 percent of victims.
The pneumonic strain, with or without the boils, was 90—95 percent lethal within just a few days (today, with treatment, that percentage would probably survive) and could be transmitted directly from person to person—by sneezing, for example.
The septicemic variant, though the least common, led to virtually instantaneous death.
This most virulent form also caused a victim’s skin to turn dark purple, almost black, and may account for the plague’s epithet “black”—though this term was not used at the time.
Trail of death How many perished under its macabre shadow is not known, but it is estimated that in Europe more than 25 million died from this plague pandemic.
Other estimates rise to 50 million out of a population of 80 million in the 1300s.
The plague returned repeatedly over subsequent generations, but never again with such devastating loss of life. x rmn < 1347 Mid-1348 Early 1349 Late 1349 1350 135] After 1351 Minor outbreak Plague migration Seaborne transportation carried the plague over vast distances.
This map Shows the spread of the plague through Europe, year on year from 1347.
Only Iceland and Finland remained unscathed. ® 0 1000 km Eb harest 1stantinople 0 1000 miles AFTER The Black Death had a huge impact on medieval society.
But it was not the last plague to strike Europe, and there may be others in the future.
AFTEREFFECTS The traumatic decline in population led to a shortage of labor and a sudden rise in prices, as well as irreversible social changes.
Over the next four centuries, another nine major plague pandemics hit Europe.
MODERN PLAGUES Precautionary measures now help to control the spread of disease.
In Hong Kong in 2003, for example, tissue-paper masks were used to avoid contact with SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) -—a variety of pneumonic plague.
Scientists predict that drug-resistant infections may cause devastating pandemics in the future.
MODERN PLAGUE Dance of death The Black Death touched every level of medieval society, lords and ladies, clergy, and the poor alike.
This Danse Macabre—a reminder of the universality of death—was a recurrent moral and artistic theme in post-plague Europe.
The Frankish ruler Charlemagne and the Saxon Otto I both held territory that approached the size and power of the Western Roman Empire. he most successful of the new states to emerge in the period after the end of the Western Roman Empire was the kingdom of the Franks.
The Franks were a confederacy of Germanic tribes from the area around modernday Belgium and Holland.
Under their leader Clovis , the Franks conquered most of the old Roman province of Gaul and laid the foundations of an empire that would dominate Western Europe for centuries.
Significantly for the future of Europe, Clovis also Charlemagne reliquary This silver container, made in the shape of a bust of the emperor, was reputed to have contained parts of his skull.
Kå BEFORE As the power of the Roman Empire came to an end, other leaders took control of the areas that had been controlled by Rome.
Instead, power was delegated to a series of commanders from beyond the frontiers who established themselves with their followers.
Rome lost control of Britain in around 410, Southern and Western Spain in 413, Southwest France in 418, North France and the rest of Spain after 451, and most of the rest of France in 473.
In doing so, Clovis ensured that Catholicism, rather than the Arian form of Christianity, would eventually prevail through Western Europe.
On his death, Clovis’s kingdom was divided among his sons, and it continued to expand in the 6th century under his descendants, known as the Merovingians.
The Carolingians The power of the Frankish kings # declined in the late 7th century.
Charles Martel defeated Arab raids from Spain and reimposed Frankish rule east of the Rhine.
Boniface were encouraged to set up monasteries and promote conversion in the conquered territories.
In 751, Charles Martel’s son Pippin III obtained the pope’s approval to depose the last Merovingian king, and became the first ruler of the new Carolingian dynasty.
Charlemagne Pippin’s son, Charles the Great or Charlemagne, reigned for almost half a century from 768.
The king met with the leading lay and ecclesiastical nobles in an annual assembly each spring, in which new laws were agreed and plans made for campaigning later in the year.
Frankish society was organized for almost continuous warfare, and the nobles depended on conquest for a continuing supply of treasure and new territories with which to support and expand their own followings.
Under Charlemagne, the Franks undertook 30 years of warfare against the pagan Saxon tribes to the east of the Frankish lands, forcefully converting them to Christianity.
In 773, invited by Pope Hadrian I to save Rome from conquest by the Lombard (north Italian) king Desiderius, Charlemagne invaded northern Italy.
Following the capture of the capital, Pavia, he proclaimed himself King of the Lombards.
He acquired the enormous treasure they had built up over the preceding three centuries, which he used to pay for new churches and monasteries, as well as building a new capital at Aachen in western Germany.
The Carolingian renaissance Contacts with Italy and the AngloSaxon kingdoms enabled Charlemagne to attract scholars to his court, such as Alcuin of York, the Visigothic poet Theodulf, and the Lombard historian Paul the Deacon.
Not only did the Frankish court become a center of learning to which the leading aristocratic families sent their sons, these and other advisors also helped Charlemagne to carry out a program of reform of the Frankish church.
Higher levels of literacy were imposed on the clergy, and new laws were issued throughout the reign to counter errors and abuses in the Frankish church.
A reformed and more legible script known as Caroline replaced that used in the Merovingian period, and continued in use throughout Western Europe until the 12th century.
This use of oaths to create a direct relationship between ruler and subjects reflects the lack of more complex administrative structures, such as had existed in the Roman Empire.
Charlemagne made many administrative reforms and created a more efficient bureaucracy than had existed under his predecessors, but he continued to depend on a handful of officials drawn from the local aristocracy.
Military action, in particular, required a large degree of consensus among the nobility.
Imperial authority Charlemagne also sought to develop the imperial dimension of his rule, borrowing from the authority of the Roman emperors.
Charlemagne said he did not want to be crowned by Leo, perhaps because by ""giving"" the emperor the crown, Leo appeared the more powerful of the two. adoption of the title was justified by the fact that the throne of the Eastern Roman Empire in Constantinople was held by a woman, the Empress Irene and so theoretically vacant.
Charlemagne's seal included the Latin tag renovatio Romani imperii (^renovation of the Roman Empire"") and he is portrayed on coins, in deliberate imitation of the Roman emperors, wearing a military cloak and laurel crown.
After Charlemagne Louis the Pious was an intelligent and well-educated man, but he lacked his father's leadership abilities.
When he died in 840, the empire was divided between his three sons, who quarreled and in turn had multiple heirs, so the great Carolingian empire was further split.
In addition, the security of Europe was threatened by invasions from several directions—Scandinavian Vikings from the north , Arabs from the south, and Magyars who had moved into what is now Hungary from farther east.
Over the course of the late 9th and early 10th centuries, Western Europe fragmented into many small states, governed by local rulers and Carolingian heirs. m 911, the Vastor the easier Carolingian rulers, Louis the Child, died, and a group of German dukes banded together to choose a king for their lands.
Basing his style of rule on that of Charlemagne, he strengthened his kingdom against further attacks, building fortified towns and establishing a naw.
He left his kingdom much stronger than he found it, and he laid the foundations for his successors to unite England under a single ruler.
The battle ended the threat from the Magyars, who had taken advantage of divisions in Western Europe to mount their invasion. most of whom were from Saxony in eastern Germany, grew steadily more powerful.
Otto benefited from a discovery of silver in the Harz Mountains in Saxony in 938, which gave him the wealth to pay for a huge army and build a string of fortified towns.
Like Charlemagne before him, Otto cultivated the church, encouraging the conversion of non-Christians in his realm and founding new bishoprics.
He appointed his own nominees as abbots and bishops and sought to strengthen the authority of the church at the expense of the secular nobility.
Feudalism in Europe The term “feudalism” is used to describe the system of relationships between kings and nobles in northern Europe during much of the medieval period.
In many ways it was the same system used by the Carolingian emperors, who appointed noblemen to administer areas of their empire in return for a certain amount of power and land, sealing the relationship with an oath of loyalty.
The feudal system that evolved in England and France worked much the same way as the Carolingian example.
Dover castle England's first Norman king, William I, built a castle at Dover following his conquest in 1066, but the massive stone tower and inner walls were the work of Henry Il, who upgraded the building in the 1180s.
The stronghold was designed to guard the country against invaders arriving by ship across the English Channel, and its thick walls made it one of the strongest castles of its time.
The king's gateway gives access to small walled area called the North Barbican, where attackers could be trapped.
First and foremost, he had to devote a set number of days each year to military service for the king.
He was obliged to attend the king’s court, where he would give his advice on matters of policy and justice.
He would also be asked to contribute payments for certain royal expenses—for example, when the king was building a new castle or a royal wedding was taking place.
A nobleman who entered into this kind of feudal relationship with the king was termed the king’s vassal, and he referred to the king as his lord.
Many noblemen T a al” aat Ll Nera Knight's helmet Battlements protect defending archers and provide a safe refuge.
The wearer looks out through a narrow slit and there are tiny holes for ventilation.
The main floors of the great tower contain a ceremonial hall for the king and smaller private rooms. apportioned part of their land to subtenants, who performed duties and swore allegiance in turn.
This meant that the feudal system developed into a hierarchy of lords and vassals.
The social networks that were involved could become very complicated, because it was possible for a vassal to accept lands from several lords.
This kind of arrangement could lead to conflicting loyalties, especially if two lords were on different sides in a war.
So vassals identified one of their superiors as their liege lord, the lord who took precedence over others.
France and England The feudal system was most highly developed in France and England.
Feudalism was already well established in France by the 10th century, when a The walls of the great tower are up to 21 ft thick to protect the royal apartments from attack.
The forebuilding and entrance were guarded, acting as a barrier between the lord of the castle and intruders.
In the field In return for protection and the right to work their lands, peasants worked for the lord of the manor for an agreed number of days per year, as well as giving him a share of their produce.
Rollo became the vassal of the Carolingian ruler, Charles the Simple, and his people became known as the Normans.
In 1066, Duke William of Normandy invaded England , became its king, and granted lands to many of his Norman followers in return for their fulfillment of feudal obligations.
Much of the rest of northern Europe was made up of a patchwork of smaller states, particularly those that formed part of the mainly Germanic Holy Roman Empire.
Here the overlapping rights and responsibilities of emperor, dukes, and other secular and ecclesiastical princes made the political system more complex.
Knighthood and chivalry The medieval knight fitted broadly into this system of feudal obligation.
Having evolved initially from the heavy cavalry who had accompanied The inner bailey walls or courtyard housed the hall and other buildings to provide accommodation for the king's household, guests, and armed garrison. rulers such as Charlemagne, by the 11th century the knights had come to represent a distinct caste of professional fighting men.
Their status was confirmed and enhanced through symbols and public ceremonies such as the “accolade”—a girding with a sword or hand on the shoulder.
In return for this special status, the knight was expected to fight for his lord and to defend those groups, such as the clergy and the poor, who relied on his protection.
Toward the atter part of this period, in particular, feudal obligations were superseded “l y"" onetary arrangements.
By the 74th century, knights would expect o be paid for their service and could themselves often pay a shield tax dn lieu of service.
FULBERT OF CHARTRES, LETTER TO DUKE WILLIAM OF AQUITAINE, 1020 ce family, and his servants.
It was where business was done, the lord met his vassals, and courts of justice met.
It was also a military base and a fortified building from which a whole region could be defended.
In a period when communications were poor, the best way for a monarch to exercise power in the kingdom was to travel continuously, so rulers usually had castles around the kingdom.
Other strongholds were held by vassals on the king’s behalf, who ruled as a part of their feudal duties.
A castle usually had a courtyard , surrounded by a strong, fortified wall.
Inside the bailey was the main accommodation, a grand hall and private rooms for the lord or king, heated by open fires and decorated with tapestries.
In the towers or outer buildings were less luxurious rooms for the stables, garrison, and service buildings.
He introduced feudal government to England and appointed many French noblemen as his vassals, meaning that the ruling class of England was mainly Norman for many years.
Halberd The halberd was carried by footsoldiers, who inflicted serious injuries with its sharp point.
They also used the weapon to trip or maim a horse or to pull a knight off his mount. w The feudal system gradually died out as traders and merchants grew more powerful, and printing led to greater exchange of ideas.
Horseman’s hammer The hammer pick or spike was used to penetrate gaps between armored areas or to smash straight through armored plate.
CHANGES IN FEUDAL SERVICE During the 14th and 15th centuries social changes made feudal relations decline in importance.
Increasingly, vassals paid feudal dues in money rather than by military service.
At the same time, the middle classes, who made their living by buying and selling goods, became more powerful.
RENAISSANCE Writers and artists began to look back to ancient Greece and Rome for inspiration.
Mace With its pointed blades, or flanges, a mace like this was a powerful weapon, even piercing plate armor if swung with enough force.
SPREAD OF PRINTING Around 1438, German metalworker Johannes Gutenberg invented a method of making metal printing type.
This allowed printing of books and the rapid circulation of ideas in Furope.
AFTER PS DECISIVE MOMENT October 14, 1066 Battle of Hastings The Battle of Hastings was fought in southern England between an Anglo-Saxon army under Harold of Wessex and a force of invading Normans led by William of Normandy.
The Normans were victorious and their leader became William | of England, known ever since as William the Conqueror.
In 1051, Edward told William of Normandy that he would be king after Edward's death, but when a Viking invasion looked likely in the early 1060s, Edward made a pledge to the Danish Svein Estrithsson too.
Harald Hardraada of Norway had also been promised the throne by an earlier English king.
However, English nobles wanted a native ruler, and Edward made yet another oath, this time to Harold of Wessex.
But he soon faced a challenge— Harald Hardraada invaded northern England.
Harold marched north to face his rival in battle and emerged the victor.
At the same time, William of Normandy set sail across the English Channel with an invasion force, and landed on the south coast.
As soon as he heard the news, Harold marched south, hoping to take the invaders by surprise.
William's scouts were watching for Harold's army, and soon after his arrival the Normans attacked.
The two armies were well matched in numbers, with around 8,000 men each.
Their footsoldiers fought in close, efficient formations and their axmen dealt fearsome blows.
When a rumor spread that William had been killed, the Norman soldiers started to break up in disarray.
From then on, the Norman archers and mounted knights dominated the English, who were exhausted after their long march south.
Finally Harold was wounded and then, after being set upon by Norman knights, he was killed.
He quickly strengthened his position by granting lands to his nobles, thereby ensuring the spread of Norman power across the country.
For many generations to come, England was ruled by kings from Normandy or other parts of France.
The ruling class of England was Norman, the language of government and the court was French, and many senior churchmen were from Norman families.
Although it is thought to have been created in England, it tells the story from a Norman perspective.
SURVIVAL OF THE LATIN CHURCH The dedine of the Western Roman Empire and the influx of barbarian peoples in the 4th-6th centuries cE did not spell the end for Christianity in Western Europe.
Many of the Germanic tribes were Arian Christians, a variant of Christianity at odds with Roman doctrine.
Others, such as the Franks, entered as pagans but were converted to Christianity.
Throughout the lands ofthe Roman Empire in Western Europe, Latin Christianity survived and, by the 6th-7th centuries, had triumphed over Arianism.
From the late 6th century under Pope Gregory the Great, and throughout the 7th-10th centuries, Christian missionaries began to spread Latin Christianity into the remaining pagan areas of Europe, such as Anglo-Saxon England, Denmark, and the Slavic territories of Central Europe.
The Eastern Church under the Patriarch of Constantinople became gradually more estranged from the Latin Church, culminating in the Great Schism of 1054.
Charlemagne made the church central to his government, using clerics as teachers and administrators, and used the spiritual authority of the church to enhance his own authority as emperor and defender of Christianity.
The Power and the Glory Medieval Western Europe was dominated by a common religious culture.
Under a series of strongwilled, reform-minded popes, the Church became more centralized, powerful, and assertive.
But over time, the Church also grew increasingly intolerant and politically divided. t the start of the 11th century, Western Europe was emerging from a long period of raids by tribes outside its borders, including Vikings from the north , Muslims from the south , and pagan Magyars from the Eurasian steppes.
An unidentified bishop shaped band of white wool, embroidered with crosses.
Freed from the threat of pagan and Muslim aggressors, the Church grew more prosperous, selfconfident, and assertive.
The church reform movement With this increasing confidence came a desire for reform.
This impulse was felt first in the monasteries, which had wears a pallium, a yokePriests and monks from the Augustinian, Benedictine, Carmelite, Dominican, and Franciscan orders are shown engaged in prayers and debate A senior cardinal (Niccolo Albertini di Prato) stands at the right hand of the pope in his broad-brimmed cardinal's hat. served as an important repository for Christian learning and observance during the previous centuries.
Prior to the 1 1th century, individual monasteries spread across Europe tended to follow their own interpretations of the monastic rule, often under the control of secular lords and benefactors.
The reform movement centered on the Burgundian Pope Benedict XI dominates the piece—as pope he is God's representative on earth and the supreme spiritual authority.
The sheep symbolize the pope's human flock and are guarded by black and white dogs that represent the Dominican order—a play on the phrase Domini canes, Latin for ""Lord's hounds."" monastery of Cluny and on Gorze in the Rhineland sought to impose a more consistent interpretation of the original monastic “Rule” of St.
Under the influence of Cluny, Europe's monasteries merged into more uniform “orders” with a renewed commitment to discipline, prayer, and study.
Other new monastic orders emerged in the period following the Clunaic reforms.
In 1098 an abbey was founded at Citeaux in France that gave its name to one of the most significant of these movements, the Cistercians.
Under the influence of the charismatic preacher Bernard of Clairvaux, the Cistercians rejected Cluny's wealth to focus on manual labor, strict discipline, and austerity.
Cistercian monks played a vital The Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV holds the orb, symbolizing the emperor's special responsibility for the security of the Church.
The laity fills the right-hand side of the picture, with representative of various secular occupations.
The man in white wears a golden garter showing he is a knight and a member of the English Order of the Garter.
King Charles V of France stands to the left of the emperor, representing the other secular rulers of Latin Christendom. role in the settlement and cultivation of inhospitable and dangerous lands along the borders of medieval Europe.
Papal reform This reforming impulse also drove the agendas of several influential popes of the late 11th century, who wished to see a Church in which the sacred was more clearly differentiated from the worldly.
He also attempted to extend papal authority by making ceremonial journeys and summoning bishops to synods held at major towns.
ITALIAN PHILOSOPHER AND THEOLOGIAN THOMAS AQUINAS The Italian Dominican friar Thomas Aquinas was the medieval Church's greatest thinker.
His key contribution to theology was to reconcile the newly rediscovered work of the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle with Christianity.
His most important work, Summa Theologica, provided a systematic synthesis of Aristotle's theory and Christian tradition; the result provided the intellectual foundation of the medieval Church and still forms the basis of Catholic doctrine today.
A fat and amiable man, the “angelic doctor” was well liked even by his intellectual adversaries.
Thomas Aquinas was canonized in 1323. reformers, one of whom, a Clunaic monk named Hildebrand, later became Pope Gregory VII—a key figure in the increasingly powerful papacy.
The investiture controversy Gregory VII was determined to promote the authority of the papacy in both spiritual and temporal spheres— even if this meant clashing with the authority of the secular kings and princes.
In 1075, shortly after he was elected, he composed a detailed statement outlining his status as the spiritual head of Christendom.
In it Gregory claimed that, since the pope owed his position to God, he was superior in authority to all earthly rulers.
A major area of dispute between the resurgent papacy and secular rulers was over the appointment of bishops and other senior church officials.
Since the time of Charlemagne, secular rulers had used their right to be involved in this process to ensure a compliant and sympathetic church.
Gregory was determined that control over investiture should lie with the Church and, ultimately, with himself.
Demons and devils A gargoyle looks out from Notre Dame cathedral, Paris.
In the drama of medieval Christendom, demons and devils battled angels and saints.
The Church in society This 14th-century fresco, The Church Militant and Triumphant by Andrea da Firenze, presents an idealized view of the medieval social order.
Enthroned in the center, the pope presides over the representatives of the Church to his right, and State to his left.
Gothic stone angel Serene figures such as this one from Reims Cathedral, France, were symbolic of the joys of heaven as well as a consolation for the sufferings of the faithful on earth.
A clash between the uncompromising pope and the formidable emperor seemed inevitable.
Henry persuaded the bishops of the German empire to declare the pope deposed; Gregory retaliated by excommunicating (excluding from the Church) Henry.
When the German princes rebelled and elected an alternative emperor, Henry decided that he had no option but to do public penance and appeal to the pope to lift his excommunication.
After four days of penance, Henry was granted absolution, but conflict between papacy and empire rumbled on.
In 1122 a compromise was reached at the Concordat of Worms—but by then the controversy had divided Europe and caused almost half a century of civil war inside Germany.
Popes and antipopes All over Christendom, the stage was set for a series of clashes between Church and State.
The shrine containing his relics at Canterbury became a center of pilgrimage for people all over Europe.
By the late 14th century, the Church and the papacy itself were divided.
Pope Urban VIL elected in 1378, alienated his supporters in the papal court, and the cardinals responded by electing a rival pope.
This “antipope,” Clement VII, established his papal court at Avignon in France.
A European crisis developed as the German emperor recognized the Roman claimant, the French king supported his rival, and other states and kingdoms took one side or the other.
The resulting split, or “Great Schism,” between a succession of popes and antipopes undermined the prestige and authority of the papacy; for several years there were three rival claimants.
The schism was eventually resolved in 1414 at the Council of Constance, with the pope in Rome recognized as legitimate.
New devotions For all its power, the established Church was increasingly cut off from the spiritual life of the growing urban classes.
Merchants, craftsmen, and their families could now read and write, ending the clergy’s monopoly on the transmission of ideas.
These people were often better educated than the clergy, and more open to new forms of religious devotion.
The growing impulse for a more personal, informal relationship with God is expressed in spiritual works such as Thomas a Kempis’ The Imitation of Christ, published around 1418.
These ideals also permeated poetry and art, which began to focus more on “Our Lady,” the Virgin Mary.
Such holy relics were considered miraculous, capable of inducing cures for all manner of physical and spiritual ills.
For the wellto-do, a pilgrimage to a shrine was also a relatively pleasant way of doing penance and, hopefully, earning remission from time in purgatory.
FRANCIS OF ASSISI The son of a wealthy merchant in the Italian town of Assisi, Francis led a carefree youth.
He began to live like a beggar, traveling barefoot, preaching repentance, and aiding the poor.
In time he was joined by two companions, and they determined to live by the rule of poverty and simplicity that Christ had given to his apostles.
In 1210, Francis gained the blessing of Pope Innocent III for his new order, the Franciscans.
Staffed by Dominicans, the medieval Inquisition operated mainly in France and Italy.
The systematic persecution of heretics—and, increasingly, the persecution of any views that diverged from strict Roman Catholic orthodoxy— was the dark side of the highly organized and efficient medieval Church.
Burning of heretics Watched by the French King Philip II Augustus, a group of Amauricien heretics are burned outside Paris in 1210.
Philip II's reign also saw the launch of the Albigensian Crusade against Cathar heretics in southern France. personal property and were not attached to richly endowed abbeys.
The friars were a part of the new urban culture, building churches and schools in the middle of towns and preaching in public squares.
To support themselves, they depended on charity, putting them more closely in touch with ordinary people.
The Franciscan friars, in particular, sought a return to the simplicity and poverty of the early Church, living among the people, caring for the poor or needy and preaching repentance.
Heretics and the Inquisition The Dominican order had its roots in the campaign against the Albigensians, or Cathars, a heretical (holding beliefs contrary to the established teachings of the Church) movement in southern France who believed that the existence of evil contradicted the notion of one benign God.
Wearing black and white habits, the Dominicans were dedicated to teaching and preaching, and emphasized religious orthodoxy and obedience to the papacy.
By ù the Synod of Toulouse in 1229, the ecclesiastical tribunals ES known as inquisitions had developed into a more formal institution charged with the suppression of heresy.
Large stained glass windows let light and color flood in to the building, a feature typical of Gothic churches and cathedrals.
Medieval pilgrimage A group of pilgrims leave Canterbury, site of the shrine of Thomas Becket and a major place of pilgrimage, in a version of the prologue to Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales.
The main Gothic buttresses, making Gothic os portion of Chartres was built in 1194-1220. buildings such as Chartres taller and lighter than any previous structures.
Typically for a Gothic building, the buttresses at Chartres cathedral are turned into a decorative feature. e -——— Ribbed vaulting helps to support the weight of the high, wide nave ceiling, the highest in France at the time it was built.
The royal portal features intricate carvings of religious scenes including Christ sitting in judgment.
Statues of authority of the French monarchs. | ay TT eM Py | t ds p The spacious nave is the widest | France and permits an unbroken view along the entire length of the cathedral. kings and queens symbolize the religious AFTER | Allegations of corruption and excess in the Church, as well as new ideas and forms of religious belief spread by new technology, undermined the unity of the Church.
The catalyst for the Reformation came in 1517, when a priest named Martin Luther nailed a list of propositions to the door of the Castle church in Wittenberg, Germany.
He intended to start a debate and, thanks to the new technology of the printing press, his ideas for reform of the Christian church were being read and discussed throughout Germany within two weeks and throughout Europe within a month.
By 1600, Lutheran churches were established in Germany and Scandinavia, Calvinist churches in Scotland, Switzerland, and the Netherlands, and Anglican churches in England and Wales.
VERNACULAR BIBLES For Luther, as for other Protestant reformers such as Calvin and Zwingli, the authority to oppose the Church came from Holy Scripture, the direct word of God.
To make holy writ readily available to ordinary men and women it had to be translated from Latin—the language of the clerical elite—into the vernacular, the spoken languages of everyday life.
This Bible facilitated the spread of Lutheranism from Germany to Scandinavia, Poland, and Hungary.
The first authorized edition of the scriptures in English, the Great Bible, was produced by Miles Coverdale and published in 1538.
The Byzantines, however, called themselves Romans and their realm Romania.
Constantinople had been the capital of the Roman Empire since the reign of Constantine , and the center of gravity of Mediterranean civilization had shifted to its eastern Hagia Sophia Built by Justinian | in five years , the Hagia Sophia church (meaning “holy wisdom"") was converted into a mosque in 1453 by the Ottomans.
The Byzantine Empire A great metropolis when the capitals of Western Europe were little more than villages, Constantinople stood for more than a millennium at the heart of its empire, a center of religion and culture, and a military power forming a protective barrier that allowed Europe to emerge from the ruins of the Roman Empire.
The Mosaic of the Donors Located above the imperial bodyguard's Vestibule of the Warriors, which today serves as the exit, the Mosaic of the Donors illustrates the consecration of the Hagia Sophia, its dedication to Christ, and Constantinople's status as capital of a Christian empire. with Justinian and entered imperial territory in 540, seizing the city of Antioch.
There followed an exhausting series of military clashes until the emperor Heraclius won a decisive victory over the Persians in 628.
The city stood at a strategic position that controlled the trade routes between Asia and Europe, as well as the passage from ihe Black Sea to the Mediterranean.
FINAL DIVISION In 395ce the Roman Empire was definitively split Into eastern and western divisions by Emperor Theodosius, the eastern empire being ruled from Constantinople.
The emperor Justinian offers the Church of Holy Wisdom (the Hagia Sophia) to the Virgin Mary and the baby Jesus.
When he became emperor of Byzantium in 527, Theodora proved herself a talented ruler in her own right.
She is regarded as an advocate for women's rights who used her position to help her society's oppressed, and she is venerated as a saint in the Orthodox church.
One of his most significant acts was to persuade the Ostrogothic leader Theodoric, who was threatening to do in the east what other barbarian tribes had done in the west, to conquer Italy rather than take part of the eastern empire.
His armies won back North Africa from the Vandals and also reconquered much of Italy.
In addition to these conquests, Justinian left a substantial cultural legacy in the form of magnificent churches and a thorough codification of Roman law.
The Persian Sassanids broke a treaty made BYZANTINE The word was not used regularly to indicate the eastern Roman Empire until after its fall in 1453.
It is also applied to the empire's style of architecture, notable for its domes and mosaics, and is a derogatory term for complex, obscure political processes. in 1204, this gilt enamel reliquary is said to contain a fragment of the cross on which Jesus Christ was crucified. weapon Greek fire, a flammable liquid used as a flamethrower, whose composition remains a mystery to this day.
The empire faced many enemies besides the Arabs, including the Lombards in Italy and the Bulgars in the Balkan peninsula, but somehow Byzantium survived.
Heraclius introduced a system of government, in which the empire was divided into military provinces, called ""themes,"" each governed by an independent strategos or general.
Orthodoxy Despite the chronic instability of its empire and periodic outbreaks of plague, the city of Constantinople fi Es pe aru Deam 3 tg dem was the largest in the world.
The Byzantine church was the “Orthodox” church—in contrast A shrinking empire The gradual loss of Byzantine territory is evident through centuries of invasion from both the east and the west.
EE wu e S ts to the various other forms of eastern ME orent aie Ge, E Los za E | KEY | orentia ^ OE deca PERSIA Christianity that it considered heretical. gue hs.
This became known — > x ""ferr g EDS i a g'a as the Iconoclast controversy.
The empire AFRICA — | Ptolemais, gApollonia Alexandria; Ne erupted in protest, and the icons were dia „Tripolis A — oMemphis restored, to be “venerated” but not ee — m EGYPT worshipped.
Revival and collapse The empire's fortunes revived under the ""Macedonian"" emperors of the late 9th-early 11th centuries.
It regained control of the Adriatic Sea, southern Italy, and all of Bulgaria.
Cities grew and prospered, trade increased, and artistic and intellectual life flourished.
A string of weak rulers after Basil II allowed the once-formidable armed forces to fall apart.
At the same time, the empire was faced with new, ambitious enemies, such as the Normans, who had taken southern Italy by 1071.
By 1080, most of Asia Minor had been lost and Byzantium's fatal decline had begun.
Desperate, Emperor Alexius sent embassies to Western Europe asking for help.
However, instead of helping their eastern brothers, the crusaders mostly pursued their own interests.
Intended The Virgin Mary and Jesus are depicted in the highly stylized form of Byzantine icons.
In 1204 a crusader army that was supposedly on its way to defend the Holy Land brutally sacked the city of Constantinople and dismantled the empire.
Bronze horses stolen from Constantinople These horses once adorned the Hippodrome erected by Constantine in Constantinople.
AFTER | In 1204 much of the Byzantine Empire was divided up between its crusader conquerors, but it survived and limped on until the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453.
CONSEQUENCES OF THE SACKING After the Fourth Crusade Constantinople was left underpopulated and in ruins.
Chief beneficiary was the Venetian Republic, which took over much of the Byzantines' trade as well as shipping fabulous quantities of loot back to Venice.
STOPPING THE OTTOMANS Once Byzantium had fallen, the Ottomans completed their conquest of the Balkans with ease.
He called for a military expedition to liberate the holy city of Jerusalem and free Christians from the yoke of Muslim rule.
In exchange, Urban stated that any soldiers who died fighting the enemy would earn remission from all sins.
Over the next two years alone, thousands of crusaders, as these soldiers became known, took the cross and joined this pilgrimage to the Holy Land.
THE EUROPEAN SITUATION By the 11th century, as opportunities for territorial expansion within Western Europe declined, an aggressive warrior society began to turn its attention to the lands outside Europe's borders.
This type of broad-bladed sword, with simple crossguard and pommel, became popular back.
Urban saw the proposed expedition east as a chance to flex papal muscles and check the expansion of Islam, as well as an opportunity to conquer what he perceived as pagan areas.
The huge popular response to his appeal, although unexpected, was the product of a number of factors, including the growth of a fervent lay piety over the preceding centuries and the need of a land-hungry warrior class to find an outlet for their martial energies.
The crusades united these impulses by legitimizing the concept of religious warfare.
Mounted and heavily armored knights formed the heavy shock troops of the crusader armies.
The First Crusade The first of the armies to enter Anatolia, in modern-day Turkey, met with disaster.
Lacking military discipline and blinded by religious fervor, the band was massacred soon after entering Seljuk Turk territory.
By the end of 1187, Saladin recaptures Acre and Jerusalem. the Christian Byzantine empire at Constantinople.
The Patriarch of Jerusalem was the spiritual leader of the kingdom and representative of the pope in Rome.
As the traditional site of Jesus's crucifixion and burial, this was the physical destination for pilgrims and crusaders alike.
He dies before with the Ayyubid Sultan of Egypt. the Ayyubids. he can set sail for the Holy Land. — f MM i 4 1 A 7 "" | al ans 2 nah.
German emperors led armies to the east in 1145, 1189, and 1228. in 1098.
After a lengthy siege, the city fell, The -— crusaders slaughtered all «gx Muslims and Jews in the i city—a bloody climax Aa that set the tone for al much that was to follow.
In time, the crusaders built huge fortresses to defend ^"" ji Outremer The crusaders now held a thin strip of coast in Palestine along which they established various crusader States, including the Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Counties of Edessa and Tripoli, and the these outposts, such as m Crac de Chevalier.
The period also saw the formation of the military orders, the Templars and the Templar seal United in the service of Christ, two knights are shown sharing one horse.
SULTAN OF EGYPT AND SYRIA SALADIN Founder of the Ayyubid dynasty and unifier of Muslim states in the Middle East against the crusaders, Saladin was also renowned throughout Christendom as an honorable and chivalrous leader.
When Jerusalem fell three months later, he allowed neither massacre nor looting.
Although he failed to expel the crusaders from the Holy Land, and was defeated at Arsuf in 1191 by Richard | of England, Saladin paved the way for the later elimination of the Crusader states.
During the 12th Hospitallers, whose members took vows of poverty and chastity to dedicate their lives to the defense of the Holy Land.
These warrior monks were the closest thing the crusaders had to a standing, professional army.
They often pursued their own interests at the expense of their fellow Christians, but they built a fearsome reputation—after the battle of Hattin in 1187, the Sultan Saladin allowed the ransom of all prisoners except for the Templars and Hospitallers, whom he had executed.
The later crusades Never again would the Muslim states of the Holy Land be so unprepared as they had been at the time of the First Crusade.
A second crusade was organized in 1145, following the fall of Edessa, but failed to retake the city from Nureddin, a Muslim ruler who had united much of Syria against the crusaders.
By the 1180s, most of the Muslim inhabitants of Syria and Palestine were united under Nureddin's successor, the sultan Saladin.
In 1187 Saladin destroyed the armies of the crusader kingdoms at Hattin and seized Jerusalem, gallantly sparing the lives of the Christians in the city.
Subsequent crusades to Egypt and the Holy Land enjoyed some success but many setbacks.
Major expeditions from Europe were sporadic, and the fortunes of the crusader states altered with the balance of power in the east.
After the fall of the port of Acre in 1291 defense of the mainland territories became impossible.
The remaining Christian cities were abandoned and the crusaders expelled from the Holy Land.
Siege machine Long sieges, such as Antioch and Jerusalem in 1097-99, were common during the crusades.
Siege machines such as this trebuchet were used by both sides to bombard opposing soldiers, fortifications, and siege towers. heavy end to beam provides sling pouch with counterweight missile thrown over and forward flexible wooden beam pivoted near heavy end ropes pull end down Greed and political expediency gradually came to undermine the ideals of the early crusades.
CRUSADES IN EUROPE The crusading ideal of war against the enemies of Christianity in the Holy Land soon lost focus.
As early as 1195 Pope Celestine III proclaimed a crusade against pagans in northern Europe.
In 1209, Innocent III announced a crusade against heretics within France—the Albigensian Crusade.
By the 1230s popes were using crusades as a political weapon against rivals.
END OF THE KNIGHTS TEMPLAR Military orders such as the Templars grew immensely rich and powerful, attracting much criticism.
In 1507, intending to seize their assets, Philip IV of France charged the Templars with heresy.
Without Rome's protection, many small kingdoms, principalities, and lordships were now more vulnerable to raiders.
ROMULUS AUGUSTUS Viking war helmet Viking helmets were similar to those used by other cultures at this time.
The myth that their helmets had horns attached to them probably came about because Vikings were often compared to demons and devils.
HOW WE KNOW The Vikings raided and traded across an enormous geographical area.
We know this through the types of coins found at Viking sites, in graves, and connected to towns.
Most historians believe there was rapid population growth in Scandinavia during the 7th and 8th centuries, and, because of the harsh cimate and rough terrain, there was limited land suitable for farming.
This competition for land meant that not only was food in short supply, but local rulers began to fight among each other in order to expand their control over resources.
One alternative, especially to a warrior society such as that of Scandinavia, was raiding.
The situation was so bad that monks prayed for stormy weather so the ""Northmen"" would be unable to set sail.
The Vikings' focus on monasteries meant that contemporary writers, all of whom were monks themselves, often portrayed them as enemies of God.
They recorded the calamities that befell their brothers with genuine anguish and horror.
But while the Viking attacks were vicious and ruthless, they and their sailors highly skilled.
The ships were light, with shallow bottoms, and could be sailed far inland on rivers and lakes, taken out of the water, and dragged across land to another river.
Planning to stay The nature of Viking involvement outside Scandinavia began to change during the 9th century.
At first, they began to overwinter on islands in the Seine and at the mouth of the Loire River in France, Then, 1n S50 CE, Charles II of France gave a group of Vikings land to settle on in exchange for aid in a conflict against his brother, Emperor Lothar.
Events like this gave the Vikings influence over local power Raiders and Traders From the 8th to 10th centuries, Scandinavians were both the terror of Europe and its most active traders and explorers.
These people swept through the treasure houses of monasteries, founded towns and cities, and even became rulers in England and France.
Lightning attacks The first Viking raids were carried out against soft targets, such as villages and monasteries, on the coast of Frisia and eastern England.
Monasteries were particularly attractive to the Vikings because they were rarely fortified, and were filled with spectacular treasures donated by local Christians.
The monks were unable to defend themselves, and the Vikings, who were not Christian, had no qualms about sacking the monasteries and making off with gold and silver chalices, crosses, and book covers.
The monastery at Lindisfarne, on the were not deliberately antiChristian, as some of the records suggest.
Vikings also threatened the relatively powerful Carolingian empire in the last years of Charlemagne's reign.
His death marked a decline in central power and a rise in political instability.
By the 830s CE, they were able to raid the important town of Dorestad on the Rhine River three times.
Element of surprise Early Viking raids were so effective because they struck unexpectedly.
By the time locals could organize their defense, the Vikings were gone.
They fought using the same basic weapons as their opponents, such as swords, spears, and axes.
However, Viking longships were superior in design Viking war spear This spearhead was attached to a long pole, and thrown at the enemy, much the same way a modern javelin is thrown.
Viking sword Viking swords were often buried with their owners to accompany them on their journey to the hall of the dead warriors, Valhalla. struggles, and encouraged them to settle outside Scandinavia.
From this point on, even though they were often involved in raids, the Vikings became much more interested in acquiring land and establishing trade.
Many kingdoms paid them off with huge amounts of silver and land in order to stop attacks.
A band of Vikings established the Duchy of Normandy in France when a chieftain named Rollo was given Rouen and the surrounding area Viking war ax The ax is the weapon that Vikings are most identified with.
ALCUIN OF YORK, /95 Crystal necklace This crystal necklace of Viking origin with Eastern elements demonstrates how Scandinavian craftsmen adopted the styles and techniques of the various cultures they came in contact with.
Iron trading weights | | | A B ES EF These brass-covered * Pd l weights were found in N f > f Hemingby, Sweden.
Each has been stamped with a different number of circles corresponding to its weight.
AFTER Viking brooch -i Brooches are frequently a square sail found in Vik was attached ae pu The Viking Age came to an end during the to this mast 11th century.
The kingdoms of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark evolved into more centralized states, as was happening elsewhere in Europe. fasten cloaks.
END OF THE VIKING AGE Launching a lightning raid on a centralized state did not have the same effect as it did in the 9th and 10th centuries because, by 1500, these states had developed organized armies and navies.
This meant that communities were able to defend themselves against attacks of the kind that the Vikings carried out.
Gold bridle Viking metalwork was complex and often consisted of intertwining animal shapes.
The prow was where E ceremonial in nature, as it is carved with interlaced decorations, and DOE heavy and highly decorated. a square sail was rigged to the mast. acta A brunt of such attacks. 15 oar ports were located on each side of the longship CARIBBEAN RAIDERS Raid tactics similar to those of the Vikings were used during the same period in the Caribbean, where Furopean navies, privateers, and pirates sacked trading posts and preyed on shipping routes. — THE HANSEATIC LEAGUE Trading in the later medieval period could be dangerous.
They traded between the Baltic, the Netherlands, and England, and carried goods from Arabia and beyond across the Russian steppes.
Between 1016 and 1055; the English Dane Cnut the Great ruled Denmark city of York. and England.
Vikings are even Novgorod, founded by Vikings, became The Vikings also became great traders, credited with being gateways to the East.
At its height, merchants sailing from Iceland to Russia and the the founders of the Grand from over 60 cities had joined, but by the end Islamic empire.
By 1260, they had conquered an area stretching from the Pacific Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea, and were considered invincible.
On September 3, 1260, the Mongols reached ‘Ayn Jalut in Palestine, where they were met by the Mamluk Sultans.
The children and grandchildren of the Mongol leader Genghis Khan took control of the Mongol tribes on his death in 1227.
One of these grandchildren, Hülegü Khan, was given power over part of the Mongol army.
He took this army into northwest Persia in 1255, raiding and looting as he went.
They overran Palestine and Syria, capturing the main city, Damascus, in 1259.
With Palestine and Syria conquered, Hülegü turned his attention to Egypt, the next major power to the west.
He sent a message to its rulers, the Mamluks, asking them to surrender without a fight.
Originally slaves taken from Turkish tribes and formed into an army by the previous rulers of Egypt, the Mamluks had overthrown the old government and taken power for themselves.
Their new government was based on military principles, making it ideally suited for Mongol soldiers waging war and unlikely to give in to threats.
The Mamluk response was to kill Hülegü's envoys and march toward the Mongol army in Palestine.
At the same time, Hülegü was informed that his brother, the Mongol Emperor , was dying.
With ambitions to gain control of the Mongol Empire for himself, Hülegü took most of the army with him and headed back to his brother.
Meanwhile, the Mamluks entered Palestine with an army equal in size to the Mongol force Hülegü had left behind.
At 'Ayn Jalut—also known as Goliath’s Spring—they defeated the Mongols, using their heavy cavalry to great effect.
The Mamluks took control of Syria and Palestine, expelling the remaining Crusaders in 1291.
The Mongols had never been so emphatically defeated before, and this halted their conquests to the west.
The internal fighting that followed split the Mongol tribes into different sections.
In Iraq and Persia, they became the Illkhanid dynasty and gradually took on the customs, religion, and language of the people they had conquered.
At its height, it included territories from East Asia to central Europe.
ORE The Rise of Ottoman Power made early contact with the Islamic whose power and influence spanned the globe. areas, which brought opportunities for expansion. n the lOth century, the branch of the Seljuk dynasty.
Seljuk soldiers This 13th-century stone relief depicts the armored fragment into separate political entities, to an influx of semi-nomadic tribes. until it controlled only the provinces immediately around it.
At the end of the 10th century, the remains or the caliphate were conquered by Turkish tribes from Central Asia.
The Seljuk family who led the tribes took power as sultans (from the Turkish word for “authority”), restoring political authority to the caliphate, while exercising real power themselves through the figurehead caliphs.
Although the Seljuks took over the existing system of government, their power Disintegration Another group of nomadic peoples from Central Asia were the Mongols , who Lh invaded most of Asia and parts of Europe.
The Turks in Anatolia were forced to move westward into areas previously ruled «<< Ottoman war helmet was inherently unstable as I EET by the Byzantines. it relied heavily on their from 1500.
Technological The Ilkhanid hold over nomadic warriors, who advances in warfare gave the Anatolia was never strong, frequently clashed with Ottomans an edge in battle. — and the peninsula soon settled peoples. began to disintegrate into In 1071, the Seljuks defeated the multiple tribes and principalities.
The Seljuks were Byzantine emperor in eastern Anatolia, of these small groups was led by a Sunni Muslim dynasty that ruled parts of Central Asia and Byzantine rule was replaced by Osman, son of Ertughrul, after whom and the Middle East in the 11th14th centuries. that of the Rum Seljuks, who were a the Ottoman Empire was named.
From here, the Ottomans managed to take over many Byzantine cities in Anatolia, which brought them more wealth and resources.
The Ottomans then annexed land along the Dardanelles, which allowed them to control the crossing to Europe.
The creation of an empire In the mid-14th century, the Ottomans aided the Byzantine emperor John VI Kantakouzenos in a civil war, and were rewarded with their first lands in Europe, on the Gallipoli peninsula.
At the same time, the Ottomans expanded their lands in central and western Anatolia.
After this, they spread into Europe, moving through eastern Thrace and across the Balkans.
It was then that they probably encountered artillery for the first time.
Nucleus of Ottoman Empire 1300 Conquests of Osman I, 1300-26 Conquests of Orkhan |, 1526-62 Conquests of Murad |, 1362-89 Conquests of Bayezid |, 1389-1402 Further Ottoman conquest by 1481 Vassal of Ottoman Empire by 1481 Under Venetian control 1450 Siege ""Banas Ottoman Empire The Ottoman Empire was very extensive until the end of the 15th century.
At the center was Constantinople, whose fall to the Ottomans in 1453 is shown opposite.
The Ottomans used Siege towers to try to get the attackers to the same height, but these were also repelled.
Constantine XI Palaeologus, the last reigning Byzantine emperor, personally led the final defense of the city and died in the final attack.
The Ottomans tried to mine under the walls, but were thwarted each time.
The Siege of Constantinople This 16th-century fresco shows the 1453 siege of Constantinople.
The Ottomans had besieged Constantinople twice before but failed each time.
Three days of looting followed its fall on May 29, 1453, and Sultan Mehmed II, who led the attack, spent much of the rest of his reign restoring and repopulating the city.
Huge cannons eventually breached the city walls, allowing them to enter.
Hagia Sophia Church in Constantinople was converted into a mosque immediately after the capture of the city.
Mehmet II fortified castles on either side of the Bosporus to prevent reinforcements.
OTTOMAN SULTAN Mehmed II was sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1451 to 1481.
One of Mehmed's first acts as sultan was to have his infant brother strangled to prevent further civil wars.
His reign was one of ceaseless campaigning, which extended the empire to include most of the Balkans and Greece, Anatolia, the upper Euphrates valley, and sections of the Black Sea coast.
Later wars with Hungary, which was threatened by Ottoman expansion, led to the adoption of artillery-based military tactics.
It was this development that made the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople possible.
Attacks by a neighboring principality in Anatolia in 1397 forced the Ottomans to take action, resulting in the conquest of most of eastern Anatolia.
This bordered on the territory of the Mongol warlord Timur, whose empire stretched across Central Asia, southern Russia, Iran, and Azerbaijan.
In 1402, Timur invaded Anatolia, capturing Bayezid, the Ottoman leader, and plundered Anatolia for a year.
The remaining small portion of Anatolian territory, and Ottoman lands in Europe, were split between the sons of Bayezid.
Civil war ensued for two Fritware pottery Produced in the Middle East in the 13th century, Fritware combined ground glass with clay to produce white ceramics. generations.
The eventual winner, Murad II, spent most of his life fighting to restore the lands the Ottomans had lost to Timur and securing his borders.
He abdicated in 1444 in favor of his 12-year old son, but was recalled by his viziers when the king of Hungary attacked the empire.
At Murad’s death in 1451, the Ottoman Empire dominated western and northern Anatolia and a large part of the Balkans.
After securing his borders, he laid siege to the city of Constantinople in 1453.
EN il F | eee | The Ottoman Empire continued to be a preeminent cultural and military power into the 17th century and beyond.
Large towns were built even near the frontiers of the empire, such as at Trier in Germany.
Political insecurity meant people hoarded their money rather than using it for trade, and the economy became reliant on bartering.
ROMAN GATE AT TRIER hroughout the early part of this period, urban populations remained low.
Some old Roman towns developed into religious centers, with bishops becoming the most powerful of the local lords.
Trading continued, but widespread unrest disrupted travel across Europe.
With fewer coins being minted—a result of shortages of silver and political instability—people had to rely on exchanging one thing for another, or bartering.
The supply of silver increased when deposits were found in the German province of Saxony.
This meant that more coins could be produced and trade could be carried out more easily.
However, it was the towns of the Italian peninsula that were first to benefit from these developments.
In Northern Europe, the towns of Flanders became centers of manufacturing.
REMIGIO DE GIROLAMI, DOMINICAN FRIAR, 14TH-CENTURY FLORENCE Bridging Britain and the Continent This map from 1572 shows all the principal towns in Flanders, including Bruges and Antwerp.
These towns were major manufacturing centers and, in the medieval period, specialized in processing English wool.
Mediterranean and was the natural crossroads for goods coming from east and west.
Most importantly, many of its towns were effectively independent of overlords and emperors.
This left the Italian cities free to run their own affairs and concentrate on trade.
Italian city-states Textile production, banking, and shipping made enormous fortunes for the Italian cities and the families involved in these occupations.
Tuscany, especially the cities of Florence and Siena, produced fine woolen cloth that was exported across Europe.
The Italians were also accomplished Milanese gold ducat This 15th-century gold coin could be transported more easily than the equivalent value in silver. bankers, lending money to rulers across Europe.
The Riccardi family of Lucca effectively financed the reign and costly wars of Edward I of England , for example, although they would later go bankrupt when subsequent English kings refused to pay back the loans.
Venice Wealthy Flemish couple This oil painting by Matsys depicts a Flemish moneychanger and his wife.
The clothes, books, and glassware indicate the prosperity of the new merchant class. also managed to build an empire in the Balkans and Greece, making the city the principal maritime power in Europe.
The great success of Italy, however, was Florence, whose fortune was built on textile production and banking, and on its central position on the Italian peninsula.
Florence was an oligarchy, a society ruled by the wealthiest merchants.
During frequent struggles between the Germanic Holy Roman Empire and the Papacy in the 11th12th centuries, it always backed the popes and gained privileged access to the lucrative Roman market as a result.
The city aggressively guarded its position within Tuscany and eventually came to dominate the other banking cities of Siena and Lucca, and the port of Pisa.
They issued gold coins, which made it easier to deal in goods of a high value than DECISIVE MOMENT BATTLE OF LEGNANO The Battle of Legnano, on May 29, 1176, marked the point at which the city-states of northern Italy gained autonomy from the Holy Roman Emperor, Frederick Barbarossa.
A group of these towns, called the Lombard League, objected to the emperor's interference in their internal affairs and, supported by Pope Alexander Ill, rebelled.
The emperor looked sure to triumph when he laid waste the city of Milan.
However, the Lombard League defeated his armies at Legnano, northwest of Milan, and he was forced to make peace. when using silver coins.
They also invented the modern financial practices of accounting and insurance to keep track of complicated transactions and prepare for losses due to shipwrecks.
Great trading networks In northern Europe, the Flanders region grew rich and powerful during the 13th century.
It straddled an area of modern Belgium and the Netherlands that meant it was ideally positioned to benefit from trade with France, England, and the Holy Roman Empire.
Flanders was ruled by the counts of Flanders and Hainault, who encouraged trade by giving generous privileges to manufacturers.
Huge annual fairs took place in the Flemish towns of Lille and Antwerp and farther south in the Champagne region of France.
Here, Flemish merchants could sell the cloth that Flanders was famous for producing.
Known simply as the Three Cities,” they housed the workshops where wool was processed into cloth and the homes of the great merchants and guilds.
The woolworker and merchant guilds became very powerful and came to dominate politics in the trading cities.
The number of workers 50,000 invotved in rorences cloth industry in the 1330s, according to the Florentine chronicler Villani, out of an estimated population of just 100,000.
Bruges’ North Sea port and canals formed vital arteries for trade, linking the town to England, Genoa, and other trading centers.
CITIES AND TRADE Flanders imported most of its raw materials, including wool to make cloth, from England.
Flanders itself grew corn and rye, which it exported, and plants to make dye for the cloth manufacturers.
However, trade was often damaged by regulations brought in by English kings, who sought to encourage home-grown cloth production.
From 1277, Flanders began to look elsewhere and started to trade more extensively with Genoa and other Italian cities.
Towers of San Gimignano These towers in Tuscany were not built to protect the town from outsiders, but to defend rival family factions within the town from each other.
AFTER The great centers of trade shifted away from Flanders and Italy during the 16th century.
ITALIAN CITY-STATES A dispute between the French and Spanish over the Duchy of Milan turned Italy into a battlefield, damaging Italian trade.
By 1527, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V captured Rome and the city was sacked by his mercenaries, the Landsknechts.
After the discovery of America, the focus of trade shifted from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic.
Countries such as England, Portugal, and Spain benefited, while Italian trade declined.
NORTHERN EUROPE Flemish trade suffered as English manufacturers began to process their own wool, helped by Flemish immigrants.
The Hanseatic League, a trading alliance of northern European towns, began to operate through the Baltic as far as England, providing a great stimulus for the northern economies.
THE AZTECS The Aztecs are thought to have arrived in central Mexico in the 13th century, either from northern Mexico or from the southwest United States, but their exact origins are unclear.
THE INCAS Beginning as a tribe in Cuzco in the 12th century, the Incas spread throughout the Andes regions of modern-day Peru, Ecuador, and Chile.
Carving on stone lintel at Yaxchilan This carving shows the accession rituals of the ruler Bird Jaguar.
His wife Balam-lx, sitting opposite, performs a blood sacrifice by drawing a rope through her tongue.
HOW WE KNOW The pyramid of Kukulcan at Chichén Itzá is a solar calendar, built on top of an earlier lunar calendar.
The facing of each terrace contains 52 panels, representing the 52-year cycle during which the solar and religious calendars become realigned.
Pre-Columbian Americas Characterized by their advances in astronomy and the arts, the Maya, Aztecs, and Incas had the richest and most complex societies in pre-Columbian America.
Although distinct cultures, they shared similar traditions, including ritualized religious worship and a belief in the value of education and spirituality. hereas the Aztecs and Incas subjugated neighboring peoples to create powerful empires, the Maya never formed an empire, nor did they have a single ruler or dominant capital city.
They were a loose federation of city-states bound together by a common language, culture, and religion.
The priest-rulers, who maintained power through their superior education and contacts with the gods, led the Maya to extraordinary achievements in mathematics, astronomy, architecture, fine arts, engineering, and writing.
Religious practices Along with the Aztecs and Incas, the Maya had a pantheon of gods, and their religious practices were based on their interpretation of the cycles of nature.
These gods were rarely discrete entities but instead combined a wide variety of forms and ideas.
They could be both young and old, take both human and animal forms, and often had a counterpart of the opposite sex.
The supreme deity of the Maya was Itzam Na, who was represented iconically as an old man; he was the inventor of writing and patron of learning and sciences.
His wife, IxChel, was goddess of the old moon, as well as of weaving, medicine, and childbirth.
Religious rituals were performed to satisfy the gods and ensure order in the world.
Ceremonies usually began with fasting and abstinence, followed by offerings of food, Quetzalcoatl mask This mask is thought to represent the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl, who is often depicted as a feathered serpent.
During the ceremonies the priests might impersonate the gods, or use hallucinogens to enhance their powers of divination.
Many explanations have been proposed for this, ranging from natural causes, such as disease or climate change, to soil exhaustion, war, or loss of control by the priest-aristocracy, but no theory can be proven absolutely.
One Chichen Itza, was founded in the second half of the 8th century by a confederation of groups drawn from the Maya lowlands and the Itza people, whose origins are unknown.
The city, which appears to have experimented with new rituals and forms of shared government, was a thriving community in the 9th and 10th centuries, but collapsed after 1050.
BERNAL DIAZ DE CASTILLO, ON ENTERING THE AZTEC CAPITAL TENOCHTITLAN, 1519 extensive cultural and trade links across central and southern parts of Mexico at this time.
The Aztec Empire The Aztecs—or Mexica, as they called themselves—were the most powerful people in the Valley of Mexico during the 15th and 16th centuries.
Their capital, Tenochtitlan (now Mexico City), was founded in the 14th century on an island in Lake Texcoco.
The marshes that surrounded the city might seem an unpromising environment, but the Aztecs were expert managers of water.
They not only built dams to trap the fresh water from the rivers that flowed into the lake, but also grew a wide variety of crops on chinampas, fertile artificial islands created in the shallow lake.
Aztec society was class-based, with nobility at the top and slaves at the bottom.
Education seems to have it was Stone sacrificial altar The cuauhxicalli, which translates as “eagle gourd vessel,” was used by Aztecs to make their most sacred offerings—human hearts. been universal, with schooling provided for both boys and girls.
A boy’s education included training to fight in wars because the Aztecs were a culture with a proud warrior tradition.
By 1520 they had an empire that stretched across Mexico from the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific.
Like the Maya, the Aztecs had a large number of gods, related to the creation of the cosmos, to the sun, and to fertility, death, and war.
The two main temples on the pyramid in Tenochtitlan were dedicated to Huitzilopochtli, the god of war and Tlaloc, the god of rain and water.
Another important god was The beating heart was lifted into the air by the priest, who pronounced it “precious eagle cactus fruit” as an offering to the sun god.
The fire in which the heart was burned was contained in a special vessel carved to represent an eagle.
Aztec sacrifice In this depiction of an Aztec sacrifice, the pyramid temple represents the Sacred Snake Mountain, where, according to Aztec mythology, Huitzilopochtli, god of war and the sun, dismembered his sister, the moon goddess Coyolxauqui.
Quetzalcoatl, the feathered serpent god of wind, creativity, and fertility.
Although the Aztecs had a rich culture that showed particular respect for poetry and song, they are remembered more for their human sacrifices.
They believed that if they did not satisfy the gods with sacrifices, the sun would not continue its journey across the sky.
One performed for the fire god, Huehueteotl, involved captives being anesthetized and thrown into a fire.
Before they died, priests retrieved them using hooks and removed their hearts.
Civilizations of America, 1520 Gulf of tae E The Incas occupied l Mexico Chichén Itza the Andes mountains A of South America.
Caribbean Sea Salinas La Blanca Mexico City, while the El Trapiche Maya inhabited the Yucatán Peninsula.
P di m Aztec dips p Inca Empire 7 Maya cultural region © Machu Picchu Lake Titicaca 0 2000 km mcm M A) C 0 2000 miles en The sacrificial victim was stretched out on his back over a stone by a number of assistants, usually four.
After a year of being pampered, the prisoner's last month was spent in the company of four “goddesses” who met his every desire.
The Incas In South America, the Incas used both conquest and peaceful assimilation to expand their empire, until it was the largest in pre-Columbian America.
Expansion was remarkably rapid, only Starting in earnest in the reign of Pachacuti, which began around 1438.
He and his son, Tupac Inca, created a huge federal system consisting of four provinces, each overseen by an Inca governor.
Following each new conquest, magnificent roads, many of them paved, were built to link it to the capital Cuzco Lost city of the Incas Machu Picchu is the best preserved of the known Inca settlements.
Abandoned in the 16th century, it Is a fine example of Inca architecture and planning.
High-quality building work and numerous shrines suggest that the site had religious importance. and the rest of the empire.
The Incas had no horses, nor had they discovered the wheel; messages were carried by relays of runners, while llamas served as pack animals.
Their superior organization enabled them to absorb many existing states, the largest being Chimor on the coast of northern Peru, home to the influential Chimú culture.
By Tupac Inca's death in 1493, Inca rule reached north to Quito in Ecuador.
Like other American cultures, the Incas built temples devoted to their gods, of whom there were many—the sun god, Inti, being most important.
Although fairly rare, human sacrifice normally involved children taken from villages around the empire.
INVENTION QUIPU The Incas used collections of knotted colored threads, called quipu, to record information.
Spun from llama and alpaca hair, there might be just a few threads in a quipu, or hundreds or even thousands.
Quipucamayocs—accountants in Inca society—would use the quipu to perform simple mathematics, calculate taxes, and keep records of labor or livestock, for example.
They were also used for censuses and for tax accounting, and to track events and time.
Inca historians used them to tell the Spanish conquistadors their history, although it is unknown whether the strings simply recorded important numbers or contained the history itself.
Culture and architecture Elaborate architecture is one of the most important legacies of Inca civilization.
Final adjustments were made by lowering the rock onto the one below, raising it again, and chipping away any sections on the lower rock where marks in the dust indicated that the fit was not perfect.
This attention to detail meant that buildings constructed by this method were extremely stable.
At the spring and fall equinoxes, the sun creates undulating patterns of triangles of light on the temple stairway.
These link with the massive carvings of snakes' heads at the foot of the stairs, suggesting a giant serpent zigzagging down the face of the pyramid. thought that Machu Picchu is a relatively recent construction, dating perhaps from the mid-15th century.
The quality of the stonework, the high altitude of its position, and the many shrines that have been identified among its ruins seem to indicate that this settlement was much more important than a mere rural village.
It has been suggested that Machu Picchu was one of a number of royal estates built by Pachacuti.
According | to Spanish chroniclers, these settlements were used as country estates when the Inca ruler traveled out of Cuzco.
Machu Picchu | Apart from Cuzco itself, much of | which was damaged by the Spanish conquistadors , the most complete remaining example of the Inca's careful planning and building techniques is Machu Picchu.
Their civilization owed much to the earlier Moche . of the Mississippi River and spread to much of central, eastern, and southeastern North America.
Key settlements were created at Spiro Mounds in eastern Oklahoma, Moundville in Alabama, and Etowah Mounds in northern Georgia; the most elaborate center was based at Cahokia Mounds in Collinsville, Illinois.
Cahokia was inhabited from the 7th to the 14th centuries and at its peak had around 30,000 inhabitants.
The inhabitants made flat-topped mounds on which they built houses, burial buildings, and temples.
It is thought that Cahokia went into a gradual decline beginning around 1200, and was completely abandoned by 1400.
Excavations carried out at the Spiro Mound have produced shell gorgets (decorative disks worn around the neck) with representations of warriors and snakes.
Monks Mound, Cahokia Large Mississippian settlements were dominated by massive pyramidal mounds of earth that served as bases for temples—where the people could observe celestial events such as the summer and winter solstices—or the residences of the more powerful individuals.
The arrival of the Spanish conquistadors had far-reaching effects on the peoples of Mesoamerica and much of South America, devastating traditions and ways of life that had existed for hundreds of years.
With a group of Spanish soldiers and some local enemies of the Aztecs, he took control of the city in 1521.
Most of the city was destroyed, but it was rebuilt by the Spanish as Mexico City, capital of the Viceroyalty of New Spain.
Although individual independent centers did fall to the conquistadors, the Maya often put up a fierce fight.
These ornaments were inserted through a hole pierced through the skin below the bottom lip.
Toltec mask inlaid with mother of pearl from the Toltec city of Tula, 40 miles northwest of modern-day Mexico City.
Zapotec vampire bat mosaic mask carved of 25 pieces of Jade, with yellow eyes made of shell.
Carved round stone found at Templo Mayor, Mexico City, showing the separated limbs, head, and torso of the Aztec goddess Coyolxauhqui.
Peruvian fan made from macaw feathers, with a handle of braided brown wool.
Maya ball marker, consisting of a disk with a whorled emblem on top of a pillar.
It was used for ball-court games, which were played by all Mesoamericans.
Aztec feather shield, stretched with spotted jaguar skin and decorated with strings of feathers.
This may have been a portrait of a real person and used for ceremonial purposes.
Ornamental Maya incense burner in the form of Chaac wearing an elaborate headdress.
Aztec funerary urn made of clay, found at Templo Mayor, Mexico City, depicting a bearded god.
BALL MARKER TOLTEC WARRIOR MASK MAYAN GOD OF RAIN md BEFORE Today's ""Polynesians"" are linked by language and DNA evidence to two prehistoric peoples.
In the early centuries ct, these people split into many tribes and explored the South Pacific.
MOA BIRD The enormous moa was one of many victims of the Polynesian expansion.
These giant, wingless birds, up to 12 ft tall, were hunted to extinction by Maori settlers © of New Zealand.
Later European expeditions collected remains for study by scientists such as Richard Owen , below.
The islands, however, never formed a single empire of the type found elsewhere in the world—each group of settlers lived mostly in isolation, occupying territories that ranged in size from a small portion of an island, to a whole group of small islands.
For this reason an incredible range of diverse cultures developed across Polynesia, each with its own way of life, customs, and tools.
Some built huge stone cities, while others lived in villages on the beach.
Contact with other groups among the isolated islanders was rare, while among groups sharing an island, war was frequent.
Across the ocean The Polynesians were great shipbuilders, navigators, and sailors, and probably reached America more than a hundred years before the Vikings.
They sailed on long voyages, Bü 8 87 The number of Moai statues | found across Easter Island.
Polynesian pendant they were able to create intricate tools and jewelry, such as this greenstone pendant. into the unknown and often TEL against the prevailing winds, to reach and populate farflung islands.
Often they brought their whole world with them—an entire family traveling together, their boats laden with all the possessions, tools, animals, and plants they would need in order to make a distant island their new home.
Some have argued that the colonization was largely accidental; without even a compass to aid their navigation, the Polynesians surely did not achieve this intentionally—they must have been blown off course.
However, recent studies have shown Double-hulled canoe — 4 The Polynesians explored the ocean more extensively than anyone before in vessels like this.
ET gw E ET Although the Polynesians did not use metal, ur E | Tae. a ENG -—À a fi X9 A platform for passengers that ancient Polynesian methods of navigation using the stars, birds, winds, currents, and tides would have been surprisingly reliable when crossing even the widest gulf of ocean.
Some recent explorers have even repeated these epic journeys in replica boats.
Although Polynesian islanders are often depicted as living at one i with nature, in reality they altered simple Square Sail a e & LT | A ^d are) NONU E ^ jai ay.
Made of sticks and shells, and bearing little resemblance to a normal map, it is a representation of local tides and currents.
Rather than taking the chart on voyages, Polynesian navigators memorized them prior to departure, often with the aid of chants. their environment just as much as any other group of settlers.
Polynesians arriving on new islands brought with them domesticated animals, such as dogs, chickens, and pigs, and they (along with the rats which stowed away) were highly destructive.
The Polynesians also brought new plants for farming, and chopped down trees to make boats, tools, and fire.
In fact, one reliable method for dating the Polynesian expansion across the Pacific is to look for archaeological evidence of large flora and fauna extinctions.
Because of this, each of the Pacific islands today has its own unique ecosystem, consisting of the different plants and animals that happened to survive the arrival of the Polynesians, mingled with whatever invading species were introduced to the island with the colonists.
Mysteries of Rapa Nui Rapa Nui is one of the most isolated islands in Polynesia.
It lies 1,290 miles from the nearest island and is believed to have been named Easter Island because the first European visitor arrived on Easter Sunday in 1722.
Archaeologists do know that around 1000-1200 cE, the trees of Rapa Nui began to disappear.
These were carved in one piece from compressed volcanic ash and required wooden frameworks during the carving process, and wooden rollers for transport from the quarries to ceremonial sites along the coast.
No one knows for certain why the Moai were built, or what they represent; and as they were built over a long period of time, the tradition may have been influenced by a variety of changing With the arrival of western ships, Polynesian isolation came to an end.
Colonists soon followed, crushing indigenous cultures with weapons, gods, and diseases.
Some went down fighting—this spear is from the New Zealand Wars , fought between the Maori and the British.
However, as the heads replaced the trees, environmental disaster struck, and Rapa Nui's ecosystem collapsed.
The inhabitants could not even build boats for fishing—they resorted to cannibalism to stay alive, and began to tear down and deface the heads that had affected their environment so much.
Moai heads Those Moai that made it to their final destination were erected along the coast of Rapa Nui, facing inland.
According to one theory, they represent great chiefs from the island's history.
RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION 1450-1750 Within 30 years of Columbus's first Atlantic crossing in 1492, a Spanish expedition had circumnavigated the globe.
As European explorers set sail in search of new lands to conquer and colonize, commerce and trade expanded internationally.
It was also an age in which established beliefs were questioned, leading to conflict and change.
Inca army j Ni m Marriage of Ivan III of Russia to Zoe, niece of Byzantine emperor; Ivan takes title of czar.
Charles the Bold killed; Habsburgs acquire most of the Burgundian territories.
Henry VII of England defeats Richard Ill and establishes Tudor dynasty.
Christian reconquest | of Spain completed as Muslim Granada falls | to Spain.
Christopher 4 Columbus makes first Atlantic crossing and T lands in Caribbean | Islands off the coast ""| of the Americas. the New World divided between Spain and Portugal.
Italian wars begin with Charles VIII's invasion of Italy to lay claim to Naples.
Seville port > ji 1497 John Cabot reaches Newfoundland. 1498 to India around Cape of Good Hope, Vasco da Gama.
W Columbus's landing 1502 First shipment of African slaves sent to Cuba to work in Spanish settlements, beginning triangular slave trade between Europe, West Africa, and Americas.
Peace of Cambrai relinquishes France's rights in Italy, Flanders, and Artois.
E Martin Luther Europe after 1450 benefited from a scientific as much as a philosophical colonization, that underpinned the voyages of exploration that established revolution.
The Renaissance was more than a matter of the rediscovery of ^ mid-18th century Europe as the world's first global power.
This expansion the continent's ancient learning—it sparked a spirit of scientific inquiry that was made in the face of formidable opposition.
At least until 1700, Ming, provided key technological advantages over the rest of the world.
It was later Qing, China; Mughal India; and Safavid Persia were Europe's equals, as much a desire for knowledge for its own sake, as for commerce and while Ottoman Turkey presented a persistent threat.
Sultan Suleyman pe 1555 Charles V concedes “Accord of Augsburg,” giving German princes freedom to select protestant or Catholic religion.
A Gold Inca armlets 1556 Wales and England formally united under Act of Union.
Henry VIII begins dissolution of monasteries in England; crushes Catholic rebellion.
Protestant League of Schmalkalden defeated by Emperor Charles V 1532 Francisco Pizarro lands in Peru and encounters, captures, and kills Inca emperor Atahuallpa.
Fi voe v Silver censer 1558 Elizabeth | becomes Queen of England. of Gwalior in central India.
Mariner's Mirrour b Battle of Lepanto e 1590 m rH og 1595 Beginning of ""Long Turkish War"" between Habsburgs and Ottomans.
Spain establishes first permanent European colony in Philippines, Cebu.
Treaty of Nonsuch provides English military assistance for Dutch rebels in their strugele against Spain.
Protestant and catholic intervention sparks off the 30 | Years War across Europe.
BARTOLOMJ-"" MN Italian cookbook, 1622 1620 Mayflower sets sail | from England with the Pilgrim fathers; arrives in Plymouth, North America later that year; one year later they celebrate the first | Thanksgiving with American Indians.
A First Thanksgiving 1624 Shah Abbas retakes Baghdad and extends Safavid empire deep into Anatolia.
Gustavus Adolphus consolidates position of the Swedes in Germany and restores Protestant fortunes after a decade I of defeats.
Gustavus Adolphus > 1635 French intervention in 50 Years War prevents pro-Habsburg settlement at Peace of Prague.
Treaty of Aix-laChapelle concedes French gains in the Spanish Netherlands.
Heliocentric universe v from Dutch. eumd um * 1682 La Salle navigates Mississippi; claims Louisiana for France.
North American colonies map P | Opticks, written by Isaac Newton, exploring theories of light.
Sultan of Bornu becomes ruler of neighboring Kanem; forms major subÍ Saharan trading state.
FERDINAND MAGELLAN, LEADER OF THE FIRST EXPEDITION TO CIRCUMNAVIGATE THE GLOBE, 1519 a IN ; > A Harrison's chronometer 1736 Nadir Shah becomes ruler of Persia, and begins Persian expansion.
Lancashire cotton mills supplant South Asian textile trade in Western Furope.
HENRY THE NAVIGATOR Prince Henry of Portugal captured Muslim Ceuta on the north coast of Africa in 1415 and was eager to extend his knowledge of the continent.
The next year he set up a navigation school at Sagres to provide Portuguese sailors with a center for exploration.
Here they learned the necessary skills of navigation, seamanship, and cartography to enable them to venture overseas.
Each year he sponsored a voyage south to explore the African coast, each voyage sailing farther south than its predecessor. acao PHILIPPINE ISLANDS THE FIRST SUCCESSES One of Henry's navigators discovered the Madeira Islands in 1418-20 and the Azores in 1427-31.
As the navigators returned home with gold and slaves, African exploration became very popular.
By the time of his death in 1460, the Portuguese had discovered the Senegal River, rounded Cape Verde, and sailed east toward the Gulf of Guinea.
HENRY THE NAVIGATOR Expedition routes This map shows the major European ocean voyages of the 15th and 16th centuries.
Arrows indicate the direction of travel, and major ports NOVEMBER 27, 1520 Voyages of Discovery In little over a century, European navigators left their continent and sailed the world, opening up new sea routes to India and the east.
They discovered a continent previously unknown to them, and began a process that eventually resulted in the total European colonial and economic domination of the world.
FERDINAND MAGELLAN Magellan was a Portuguese soldier and adventurer who had taken part in four expeditions to India and Malaya.
He quarreled with the Portuguese king, Manuel | and left the country in 1514 to enter the service of Spain.
In 1519 he proposed a voyage west to the Spice Islands, which promised great wealth to Spain if successful.
He sailed south across the Atlantic, and in November 1520 through the straits that now bear his name and into the Pacific.
He then crossed the ocean, the first European to do so, reaching the Philippines in April 1521, where he was killed in a local war.
Europe, the Mediterranean, and western Asia were reasonably well mapped, but Africa was vague in shape, as no one knew how far south it stretched, and the Americas were missing altogether.
Poor ship design that restricted oceangoing voyages and primitive navigation instruments kept ships close to the coast.
At best, navigators used dead reckoning—intelligent guesswork based on speed through the water, winds, and currents—to assess their location. as calm and benevolent as it is today.
FERDINAND MAGELLAN ON FIRST ENTERING THE PACIFIC OCEAN, The development of the oceangoing caravel by the Portuguese and new navigation instruments transformed this situation.
The magnetic compass, the astrolabe, which measured the height of the Sun at noon, and the cross-staff and quadrant, which measured the height of a star, all helped navigators determine their latitude, or how far north or south they were.
Lack of accurate marine chronometers meant that longitude—distance east or west—was not accurately calculated until the mid18th century.
New technology, new worlds Armed with this new maritime technology, the Portuguese tentatively explored the coast of Africa.
Diogo Cao sailed around the Gulf of Guinea and then headed south, exploring the Congo River before making his final landfall at Cape Cross in what is now Namibia in 1486.
Two years later, Bartolomeu Dias rounded the Cape of Good Hope and sailed into the Indian Ocean, while in 1498 Vasco da Gama crossed the Indian Ocean to Calicut in southern India.
These expeditions Acapulco CU BA GREENLAND 7. i X O hs SNR ALIIS CCS a ih , BAHAMAS Columbus 1492 fo San Julian cm m T Strait of Magellan N Cape Horn opened up a new trade route to Asia by sailing east around Africa.
Portugal's neighbor and rival Spain was anxious to share in this potential source of wealth.
In 1491, Christopher Columbus, Genoese by birth, persuaded Queen Isabella to support a voyage across the Atlantic in order to find a westerly route to Asia.
He set sail in 1492 with three ships, using dead reckoning to calculate his position.
Like other navigators of his day, he knew that the world was round—it is a myth that the common belief of the time was that the world was flat—but accepted Ptolemy's incorrect calculation of its size.
Thus when he stumbled upon the islands of the Caribbean he assumed these were outlying islands of Asia.
Three further voyages, in 1493—96, 1498-1500, and 1502-04, failed to convince him that he had found not Asia but a previously unknown continent—the Americas.
While the Europeans viewed Columbus's journey as a success, since he had ""discovered"" a new world, it was in fact the beginning of an extended period of hardship for the sophisticated empires of Central and South America and the other peoples of the continent.
However, had Columbus not made this first landing, another navigator would have done so within a few years.
But he was first, and asa pioneer, hé opened up the prospect ol European expansion overseas.
Around the world The desire to seek new trade routes to Asia continued to preoccupy European sailors and merchants.
The caravel was lighter than its predecessors and more seaworthy, enabling it to venture far from land.
English and Dutch navigators also sought a northeast passage around the top of Siberia— again, a feat not achieved until 1879 by Finn Nils Nordenskjöld.
The treaty was useful when the Portuguese began to colonize Brazil, but problems arose in the Spice Islands of Southeast Asia.
Isabella’s father, John II of Castile , died when she was three, at which point her depressed mother shut herself away.
Her young brother died of a plaguelike illness in 1468, and her older half-brother, the mentally unstable Henry IV, perceived her as a threat.
However, Isabella emerged from this Cinderella-like childhood an extremely strong-willed and intelligent young woman.
In marrying the young prince of Aragon—whom she had yet to meet— 17-year-old Isabella L 4 n Catholic New World This 17th-century altarpiece from Guatemala reveals the impact of Spanish culture in the Americas.
Isabella regarded it as her sacred duty to bring Christianity to her subjects in the New World. risked the wrath of Henry, who had not given his consent.
But Isabella knew that this was the marriage most likely to bring her power.
In 1469 they were married in the Spanish city of Valladolid, and for much of the next 10 years they fought for recognition of their right to become joint rulers of the unruly kingdom of Castile.
However, within a few years it was clear that Isabella and Ferdinand were winning on every front.
By 1476 they had set up the hermandad , a network of local Isabella the Catholic Isabella's strong will helped bring about fundamental changes in Spain.
Her reign led to the permanent unification of Spain (which had previously been a collection of kingdoms) and her decision to sponsor Christopher Columbus's journey to find a new route to Asia laid the groundwork for an era of global commerce and trade.
Fall of Granada Isabella's greatest achievement was the conquest of Granada, the last Moorish kingdom in Spain.
She and.51 Birth of Isabella, daughter of John II her husband are pictured accepting the submission of their new Muslim subjects, but in practice, promises of religious toleration were not kept.52 Birth of Ferdinand II of Aragon.
Having achieved so much for ""God's cause,"" Isabella had time for other 1468 Isabella's younger brother Alfonso dies. activities.
She and Ferdinand agreed to 1469 Isabella of Castile marries Ferdinand sponsor the ""enterprise of the Indies,"" of Aragon. the first transatlantic voyage of 1470 Birth of Isabella's eldest daughter, Isabella.
Isabella's final years In her final years, Isabella was distressed by a succession of family tragedies.
In keeping with 1480 Parliament confirms Isabella's succession as Queen of Castile; the monarchs announce their intention to go to war against Granada.
Isabel como Fernando"" (“It’s the same Europe, and awarded Catherine was Arthur, As a result, treachery and heresy become thing, Isabella is the same as the title of the Prince of Wales; the Ieee airiai a a Ferdinand”), they issued joint decrees “Catholic Monarchs” second, Henry VIII Jews ana dissidents are rigorous perc mea and approved coins and stamps. by the pope.
In of England. es pus to have ere d i of Although Ferdinand's name preceded addition to forming But Isabella's son m M MAC or taoa ovna Isabella’s on state documents, her coat the final episode in the and heir, John, died i of arms came first.
They were a united centuries-long battle soon after his 1482 Birth of Isabella and front, fully supporting each by the Christian church to reclaim wedding, and this loss was followed by Ferdinand E other's decisions. the Iberian peninsula, Granada's the death in childbirth of Isabella's only one of whom conquest was widely seen as eldest daughter, Isabella.
Then, before de d The Catholic Monarchs compensation for the loss of he was two, her grandson Michael died 1485 Birth of Isabella and Isabella may have viewed Constantinople to Muslim in her arms.
Since it was clear that the Ferdinand's youngest the turmoil of her Ottoman Turks in 1453 unhappy Joanna /a loca daughter Catherine. childhood as a sign of . had lost her reason, all hope for the 1 1492 Fall of Granada, last God's displeasure with future of the dynasty rested with Moorish kingdom in the weak rule of her Isabella and Ferdinand's Habsburg Spain; Ferdinand and half-brother Henry.
Her I De ue T grandson, the future Holy Roman Isabella agree to support sense of duty and passion Emperor Charles V It is thought that | the expedition of ) minted in Seville with the images of m for order and unity led to both monarchs.
Spain had access to vast these events contributed to a decline in the establishment of the amounts of silver and gold in the Americas.
This was a court run by the Catholic Church with the aim of ensuring royal subjects Christopher Columbus.
UI FERDINAND OF ARAGON 1493 In the Papal Bull /nter Caetera, a a Pope Alexander VI refers to the couple as Reyes whose first victims were Jews and Ferdinand's political skill was matched by his flair Coote ss( The Teo eM eae conversos (Christians of Jewish as a military commander.
Although not particularly 1497 John marries Margaret of Austria; Joanna ethnicity)—became a byword for handsome, he had great charm, and in his enthusiasm marries Philip of Flanders. cruelty and terror.
By 1492, the year of for hunting, jousting, gambling, and women, he was 1498 John dies suddenly; young Isabella, the fall of Granada, those who died the epitome of the dashing Renaissance prince.
Queen of Portugal, dies in childbirth. because of its denunciations may have After Isabella's death, he Nds in an awkward 1499 Isabella and Ferdinand's daughter Maria exceeded ten thousand in number. position as a former king, until 1506, marries Manoel of Portugal.
In 1492, after being and flexible, Ferdinand gained much territory in Italy for Spain as a result 1504 Isabella dies. of the Italian Wars of 1511—13. besieged for a year and a half, Granada surrendered.
Columbus lands in the Caribbean The arrival of a small, Spanish-sponsored fleet on the Caribbean island of San Salvador was to have dramatic effects on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean.
European explorers would be galvanized by the discovery of what eventually proved to be two whole new continents, while the native populations were about to enter a period of prolonged suffering and repression.
Christopher Columbus was born in Genoa around 1451, going to sea at an early age.
By finding a direct sea route to Asia, he hoped to open the wealth of the region for European trade.
His fleet consisted of a three-masted cargo ship, the Santa Maria, carrying 40 men, the smaller Pinta, with 26 men, and the four-masted Nina, with 24 aboard.
The fleet dropped anchor in the Canary Islands, southwest of Spain, for repairs, but on September 6 it finally resumed its journey across the Atlantic.
On the evening of October 11, 1492, Columbus, aboard the Santa Maria, thought he saw “a light to the west.
Two hours after midnight, Rodrigo de Triana, lookout on the Pinta, sighted land.
On January 16, 1493, he set off back to Spain, convinced that he had sailed to Asia and back.
COLUMBUS'S WORDS AFTER CLAIMING SAN SALVADOR FOR SPAIN, OCTOBER 12, 1492 1450-1750 BEFORE Contact Americas Forty years after Columbus first set foot in the Americas, the Spanish had built a vast empire in North, Central, and South America.
With remarkable ingenuity and treachery, and considerable bravery, two small bands of soldiers felled two mighty empires and initiated three centuries of Spanish rule.
On the eve of European conquest, three highly advanced civilizations occupied much of Central and South America.
All 16 states were independent, and in 1480 there was a major war for regional supremacy.
The lack of a single ruler made these states more difficult to conquer.
Under Itzcóatl (reigned 1428-40) and his successors, the empire expanded rapidly, so that by the reign of Moctezuma II , over 10 million people were subject to Aztec rule, which stretched from the Caribbean across the valley of Mexico.
Central to their belief system was the need to provide human sacrifices for their sun god Huitzilopochtli.
By 1525, the empire was at its greatest extent, stretching from modern-day Ecuador in the ; north to Chile in the south.
OM The empire was rich in gold and had a 12,500mile network dud; of roads.
FRANCISCO PIZARRO, ON GORGONA ISLAND OFF THE PACIFIC COAST OF COLOMBIA, 1526 Americas for a variety of reasons.
They came to claim land for their king, and saw the locals as inferiors to be subdued and exploited.
And they came for adventure—Vasco de Balboa was an unsuccessful pig breeder, Hernán Cortés a failed law student— but the Americas gave men such as these a chance of gold and glory.
Initial conquest and settlement was first permanent mainland settlements were founded from 1510 and included Vasco de Balboa, soon to become the first European to see the Pacific, and Francisco Pizarro.
By now, the Spanish were realizing that this new world was rich, but its wealth was not to be taken easily.
In 1518 the Spanish governor of Cuba sent 11 ships under the command of Cortés to explore the coast of the Yucatán peninsula for gold.
Using local guides and interpreters, he arrived at Tlaxacala, an independent city and enemy of the Aztec empire.
With the Tlaxacalan army as willing allies, he approached the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlán, in November 1519.
The Aztec emperor Moctezuma was fearful of the Spanish, aware of their military reputation and ruthlessness.
He placated them with gifts and housed them in a palace in his island capital.
Cortés launched the desperate scheme of taking Moctezuma prisoner, though | royal messengers and other travelers. this simply encouraged the Aztecs who were hostile to the Spanish presence to chose another leader.
Tenochtitlan began its descent into chaos when Cortés’s soldiers massacred a large number of young Aztec nobles taking part in a festival of feasting and dancing.
As the city rebelled, Moctezuma proved powerless to calm the Aztecs; he was stoned by his own people and later died of his wounds.
However, the Aztecs failed to deliver the death blow to Cortés’s bedraggled survivors.
Boosted by large numbers of new soldiers attracted by rumors of huge wealth, and by a vast auxiliary army of native peoples anxious to throw off the yoke of Aztec dominance, Cortés undertook a second, and this time definitive, siege of Tenochtitlan, forcing the Aztecs into a final surrender after a desperate struggle in August 1521.
While Cortés set about organizing his new territory, others Inca Gold Armlets «1 The capture of Tenochtitlan The destruction of the Aztec capital by Cortés in 1521 is shown in this somewhat fanciful late 18th-century painting by an unknown Spanish artist.
The splendor of the city on its island in Lake Texcoco is clear, though not, perhaps, the brutality of the conquest.
V Inca storehouses The Incas were great stonemasons, building depots to store their harvested crops, and roadside hostels for Gold jewelry in the Inca empire was a sign of wealth and power.
Birü excited the Spanish, who sent an expedition along the Pacific coast in 1522 that found no gold but confirmed reports of a rich empire inland.
Further expeditions continued to map the coast, and two of these were led by Francisco Pizarro, an illiterate but brave 51-year-old soldier.
With this treasure, he returned via Panama to Spain and sought permission to mount an armed expedition.
Reaching Tumbes, he found it ruined by a civil war between Atahuallpa and his brother Huáscar for control of the Inca empire.
They were received by an imperial envoy bearing gifts from the emperor, who was camped with his army outside the city.
Pizarro lured Atahuallpa into Cajamarca, took him hostage, and was offered an enormous ransom.
With the treasure amassed by July 1533, and panicked at rumors of an Inca counterattack to liberate Atahuallpa, Pizarro and his officers executed the emperor.
The Spanish then marched on the capital, Cuzco, and seized control of the entire Inca empire.
An uneven struggle Both Aztec and Inca empires fell to remarkably small Spanish armies.
From a strategic point of view, they The arrival of Europeans in force on the American mainland had lasting consequences on all sides.
CONTINUED RESISTANCE Spanish conquest of Central and South America The last Inca stronghold fell to the Spanish in 1572, and the Inca hinterland was largely untouched until the early 1800s.
Conquest of the Aztecs and Central America was more complete, did not end with the fall of the two main empires.
CONTACT AMERICAS LAST INCA EMPEROR ATAHUALLPA Atahuallpa came to power after a bloody civil war that broke out on the deaths of both his father, Huayna Capac, and the probable heir to the throne by 1527.
Atahuallpa took charge of the imperial army in Quito while his half-brother Huáscar ruled the city of Cuzco.
The civil war that broke out between these two for the throne tore the empire apart.
By the time Atahuallpa triumphed in 1532, the Spanish had already invaded Inca territory. recognized that both empires were highly centralized states ruled over by all-powerful emperors.
Following the conquest, the Spanish exploited the religion of the Aztecs, using their desire for captured enemies to sacrifice to turn them into allies on the battlefield.
Pizarro was also helped by the superb Inca road network that enabled his troops to cross otherwise inaccessible terrain.
Perhaps most importantly, though, the Spanish brought with them diseases to which the Americans had no resistance.
Diseases decimated local populations as the Spanish took control of their lands.
AFTER » but the Maya were a greater challenge, as their states had to be conquered one by one.
DOMESTICATED CROPS New World domesticated crops—those whose growth was controlled by farmers—included corn, tobacco, cocoa, and cotton.
The Old World was equally productive, but apart from cotton it shared few crop types with the Americas.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS Europe and Asia had an abundance of domesticated animals—such as horses, cattle, goats, sheep, chickens, and pigs—but in the pre-Columbian Americas the only equivalents were turkeys, guinea pigs, dogs, alpacas, and llamas.
The LLAMAS IN PERU Americas, however, had an incredible range of wild animals, hence much meat in the diet was obtained through hunting and fishing.
DISEASE Before Columbus, the Americas had enjoyed a long period of population growth.
Nevertheless, mortality rates remained high from diseases such as tuberculosis, and waterborne parasites caused illness.
The Europeans suffered similarly, but they went on to export some of their deadly diseases. olumbus’s very first voyage C in 1492 introduced new species to the Americas—he brought 28 horses, three mules, and an assortment of sheep, goats, cattle, chickens, dogs, and cats.
Apart from the dogs, these were all unfamiliar creatures to the indigenous Americans, but Spanish colonization in the 16th century quickly expanded stock holdings.
The numbers of domesticated animals imported by Europeans grew at different rates depending on the species, and brought different social effects.
Sheep, goats, pigs, and chickens bred rapidly (the Europeans found excellent grazing land), and became useful not only as sustenance for the colonists, but also as foods to trade with native Americans for fruits and vegetables.
Geographically, grazing animals also spread quickly—by 1519 The Great Exchange Columbus's arrival in the Americas in 1492 began one of the greatest revolutions in global food habits ever seen.
Plants and animals previously separated by some 3,000-4,000 miles of ocean would now be exchanged. sheep flocks could be found from northern South America up to the southwestern corner of what is today the United States.
Horses and cattle Horse and cattle numbers grew more slowly because of the animals’ longer breeding cycles and smaller numbers of offspring.
Nevertheless, during the 16th century they spread through Peru and Chile and reached northward through New Spain, which covered Central America and much of southern North America.
Horses were central to the early Spanish military conquests— many native Americans were at first terrified of horses, believing them to be divine creatures—but they also introduced effective transportation, providing the future means for a wider Deadly trade An early colonial artwork shows the lethal effect of smallpox on the native Americans.
The first major smallpox outbreak in the Americas occurred Detween 1520-24, but epidemics returned regularly until the late 1800s.
American Indians later fueled the growth of cattle herds with a newly acquired love of beef and leather.
Transatlantic foods The “exchange” of animal foods between the Old and New Worlds was mainly one-sided, with Europe importing its domesticated animals into the Americas.
The European colonists attempted to grow all the traditional Old World Crops in the Americas, with sugar cane, bananas, and lemons, for example, all doing well in the tropical climate.
Grain crops such as wheat grew better in mountainous regions and later found perfect growing conditions in the temperate plains of North America.
By the end of the 16th century, sugar cane was growing in huge amounts in the Caribbean, Peru, Brazil, and Mexico, with entire forests being cleared for its growth.
Exported in the opposite direction were crops that changed the diets of much of Europe and Asia, including corn, beans, potatoes, and tobacco.
Potatoes were introduced across Europe between 1570 and 1600, and two centuries later they would be one of the most important crops of the Old World, alongside corn.
Cacao (a base ingredient of chocolate) transformed European confectionery, while tobacco introduced a whole new pastime.
Tomatoes became staples of Mediterranean cooking, while chili peppers introduced Potatoes and wheat Wheat, an Old World crop, grows alongside potatoes in a hilly region of South America.
Wheat needs cooler temperatures to grow, and the first attempts to grow the plants in the American tropics largely failed. typhoid fever, scarlet fever, cholera, whooping cough, diphtheria, mumps, and malaria and yellow fever.
The only major disease that possibly traveled in the opposite direction was syphilis, although many experts dispute its origins.
Compounding the horrors of disease were the social effects of Old World agriculture in a New World setting.
Local communities were displaced to make room for grazing cattle, or were forced to labor on farms and plantations.
O stripped of vegetation MASTRE DELE ÍRTA HEL | VEIN ARI and suffering from soil Destruction and disease DIVISA IN SEI LIBRI. erosion.
For better or This great exchange worse, the New World steadily transformed the had imported much ts F world’s diets, but also had dramatic human consequences.
Along with food, the Europeans also brought diseases that devastated indigenous populations, principally smallpox, ; N VENI measles, bubonic plague, T ila Per Abel Gedo de V culi.
New cuisine | This Italian cookbook from 1622 was an effort to teach Italians how to cook the exotic foods arriving | | from the Americas, such as tomatoes.
THE GREAT EXCHANGE AFTER The Great Exchange had far-reaching implications across the world, irrevocably changing the global ecosystem.
EXPORT OF TEA Tea was first imported to the Dutch settlement of New Amsterdam in North America in 1650, and during the second half of the 17th century its popularity spread along the eastern seaboard.
Horses had existed on these continents previously, but were hunted to extinction by 7000 ce.
Once American Indian nations of the plains (stretching from the Rocky Mountains to the Mississippi River) mastered the use of the horse, it transformed their way of life.
They were now able to travel faster and farther than ever before, and their hunting efficiency increased exponentially.
EARLY SILVER Silver is documented as being used as far back as the 3rd millennium Bce in the Middle East.
It became the most common coinage metal in Europe from the 5th century BcE onward.
PLUNDERING THE NEW WORLD Imports from America included pearls, sugar, dyestuffs, and cowhide, but gold and silver were most highly prized.
At first soldiers seized or bartered objects belonging to the native Americans.
When these supplies were exhausted, gold was prospected by natives washing out surface gold from stream beds.
Spanish Silver From the 1540s onward, the Spanish New World was shaped by the discovery, exploitation, and trading of silver around the world.
The steady stream of silver into the Empire's coffers allowed Spain to become the superpower of its day, producing such imperial adventures as the Great Armada of 1588. he discovery of silver at Potosí T in April 1545 was not the first time the Spanish colonialists had encountered this precious metal.
It was already being mined in the arid hills of New Spain , and in Peruvian mountain sites previously exploited by the Incas.
In 1540, Spaniards began mining silver at Porco, located like Potosí to the southeast of Lake Titicaca.
But five years later, the discovery of an entire mountain of silver ore (the biggest single concentration of this precious metal ever found) changed everything.
Potosí quickly sprawled into a shanty village, growing in the next century to become the largest city in the New World with a population between 100,000 and 160,000.
A royal mint, established there in 1585, still stands today and, at some 13,600 ft above sea level, Potosí remains the highest human habitation in the Americas.
Real exploitation of the Potosí mines took off around 1560 when a new and more productive method of refining silver came into use.
The new process required mercury, for which the main source was the Almadén mines in Spain, but it yielded more silver than traditional smelting, and made it worthwhile to extract lowergrade, less concentrated seams of ore.
Silver mining also boosted the demand for supplies of beef, leather, and tallow candles.
Mules were used to carry supplies to the mines and bring back silver, so ranching and mining grew together.
As both Mexico and Peru became wealthy from their mineral resources, the numbers of Silver mining The conical mountain of Cerro Potosi became the chief source of the Spanish Empire's dazzling wealth after the discovery of silver there in 1545.
The huge outcrop of silver ore was soon honeycombed with mine workings, as shown in this engraving from the 18th century. slaves increased—imported for the mining industry, and to work as servants.
Many native Americans were used as forced labor, but others were paid as skilled craftsmen to produce fabulous silverwork.
The first transatlantic convoys From 1503 to 1660 some 16,000 tons of silver were shipped to Seville , tripling the existing silver resources of Europe.
Seville was the “mistress” port, enjoying a monopoly on all these precious cargoes until 1680.
Each flota sailed from Vera Cruz, Cartagena, and Nombre de Dios to Seville over two months.
The accountants take over It was not just the sailors who ensured the silver took a secure route, but also the civil servants.
They ran an extensive and accountable system of bureaucratic government that was set up to replace the violent, quarrelsome, and independent-minded Conquistadors.
The Council of the holes release scented smoke Censer An elaborate silver church censer from about 1650, suspended by chains and used for burning incense in Catholic ceremonies, shows the direct link between the prosperity of Spanish-American society and silver production.
LETTER FROM FRANCISCO DE ERASO, FINANCIAL ADVISOR OF EMPEROR CHARLES V, 1558 Incense rests on hot coals The mistress port Seville was already a thriving trading port when, in 1503, it was given a monopoly on silver brought back by the fleets from Mexico and Peru.
Indies, established in Spain from 1522, was charged with the business of the new Imperial territories, presenting reports and policy documents to the King, and acting as the link between Spain and the administrators in the Americas.
In order to maintain crown control of the new colonies, all the major posts in the colonial administration, from the Viceroys of New Spain and Peru, from judges to senior churchmen, were either fixed-term appointments or always chosen from the Spanish elites—never from those already in the New World.
It could be slow and cumbersome, and the imposition of a Spanishborn ruling class was deeply resented by the “Creole” population of Spaniards born and bred in the New World.
But it achieved the aims of the Spanish Crown, preventing the colonies from slipping toward independence, and maintaining a high level of control over the resources of the New World, including, of course, silver production.
Bullion and coins passed from silver merchants on the Seville waterfront to European royal mints, bankers m Agen such as the wp Fuggersand chain to swing censer back and forth The influx of Europeans had a lasting effect on the American continents.
Even Elizabeth I and the merchants of England sought to ensure their share of the treasure through loans.
The silver trail stretched east via Italy to the Eastern Mediterranean, and across Persia and India into East Asia, where it was the one commodity in steady and undiminishing demand from Europe in exchange for spices, silks, and Chinese porcelain.
These men, women, and children are lauded as the Pilgrim Fathers, the founders of what became the United States.
Yet they were by no means the first Europeans to settle in the country.
Permanent French settlers arrived later— after the foundation of Québec in 1608.
The first Europeans to visit America were adventurers Frenchman Jacques Cartier T io.
The Spanish, obsessed with gold and conquest, concentrated on exploiting the wealthy empires of Central and South America.
To the north, the French explored the rich fishing and fur-trapping regions of the St.
Those European navigators who did visit America were more concerned with finding a route around it to Asia than exploring the continent itself.
While the Spanish established bases to protect their bullion fleets, such as St.
Augustine in Florida, and the French traded in Canada to the north, it was the English who first attempted colonization of the eastern seaboard.
In 1584 the English adventurer Sir Walter Raleigh established a settlement on Roanoke Island, but lacked the resources to sustain it.
The settlement is believed to have been destroyed by the local Croatoan Indians in 1590.
By then the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 gave the English the incentive to attempt to intervene in the relatively undefended and undercolonized continent of North America.
In 1607 the Virginia Company of London took advantage of this, and set up a colony in Jamestown, Virginia.
The Pilgrims The men and women who settled Jamestown came to acquire land and hopefully wealth.
Those that landed at New Plymouth in 1620 came to escape religious persecution in Europe.
Often described as Puritans, they were more accurately religious dissenters who had left England for the Netherlands in 1608, but then decided to build their own society in a new land.
Armed with a Virginia Company land grant, they set sail in the Mayflower.
After a two-month voyage, they arrived in the New a M FATHERS 1630, Catholics in Maryland in 1634, religious freethinkers in Rhode Island in 1636, and Quakers in Pennsylvania in 1682.
Other colonies, notably the Carolinas, were given by the English king to supportive noblemen.
The Dutch West India Company, started in 1621, established Fort Orange (presentday Albany) on the Hudson River in 1623.
It then purchased Manhattan from the native Canarsees for 40 guilders in 1626.
Farther south, the Swedish West Indian Company set up New Sweden on the Delaware in 1638.
The Dutch ended Swedish rule in 1655, but were then conquered by the British in 1664.
The English colonists preferred to create closed, selfsufficient communities.
When their efforts failed, as they often did, the settlers seldom conciliated the natives, but instead tried to defeat, destroy, or drive them away.
To the English, the native American was an obstacle to be overcome, not a valuable resource to be exploited.
The Mayflower This proved a problem as the colonies This painting shows the 12-year-old Mayflower in Delft grew in strength.
Spain ruled what is now Florida, while France controlled much of Canada.
The blue area in the north of Canada had both French and British settlements.
Native trapping Colonists traded blades, often imported from Sheffield, England, with American Indian nations in return for furs from animals trapped and killed by the Indians. d AFTER Settlers started to object to being ruled from overseas without . communities, where farming was for having any rights. used to transport wine. food, not export, and so had little need for local labor.
The By 1750 most of the 13 celebrated their first successful harvest growing of tobacco and other export colonies were governed with a dinner, an event still celebrated crops led to the development of large in much the same way.
These were worked Each had a local MEETING HOUSE The settlers, who called themselves first by white indentured servants from steel assembly—Rhode Island's “Saints” or “Strangers” depending on England, but then increasingly by blade met in the Meeting House in Newport (above their religious beliefs—the name African slaves , the first right)—and a governor appointed or approved by “Pilgrims” was applied later—received 20 of whom arrived on a Dutch ship animal skin sheath decorated the monarch.
Each colony made its own laws and help initially from two American in Jamestown in 1619. with porcupine quillwork was internally self-governing.
They were therefore relatively independent, with political and social institutions that differed quite markedly from those in Britain.
Indians, Samoset and Tisquantum , who spoke English as well as their native language, Algonquin.
Indeed, Squanto had been taken to England in 1605 by an English seafarer and stayed for nine years.
The Pilgrims were not the first Europeans to settle live in the area, as the seaboard was well known to English fishermen from the early 1500s, many of them wintering on its sheltered coast and gathering stocks of food for the journey home.
IMPERIAL RULE Colonies were subject to the British parliament and government, which regulated their trade and currency to prevent them from competing with British industries.
When in 1765 the British government began to levy direct taxes on the colonies to pay for its recent colonial wars, the colonists strongly objected to paying without having proper representation in the British Parliament.
Spain's trade LL ' Ü V9"" was a notorious pirate, operating along population and natural resources, buta bureaucracy ensured that the monarch ae tune the coast of Virginia, the Carolinas, and wealth of nautical received 20 percent of throughout the Caribbean in his 40-gun warship Queen Anne's Revenge.
He seized tolls from ships with the backing of the governor of North Carolina, until a British force was dispatched at the request of cotton planters.
He was attacked and decapitated in November 1718. and navigational cC . all precious metals expertise.
By forging Let It be known mined in the New an empire, it could World, in exchange tap into the lucrative that if YOU dre for protective convoys.
F: ""atate "" ""ul ee F s E: Ormuz, and Goa in : while Portugal helped colonial ambitions under Louis XIV safeguard a position in Europe.
France's empire wasa countries, the interests of merchants established by M East Asian trade, state creation, and at first excited little themselves came a poor second.
Portuguese navy IS you rs."" carrying gold and enthusiasm among the French l general Afonso silver to China and merchant classes.
One notable exception Empires of merchants da Albuquerque, FRANCISCO DE ALMEIDA, FIRST bringing back silk was the fur trade created in New Traders and adventurers were at the PORTUGUESE VICEROY OF INDIA, 1507 . . . , ensured control of via the Pacific and France , along the trading forefront of England and Holland’s the Persian Gulf and Atlantic oceans. network around the Great Lakes. “private-enterprise” empires.
E > E Belts of small seashells, called wampums, were made by stretching to Africa, Asia, and the Americas.
Imperial growth tended to follow one of two patternsIroquois natives along the New England coast.
Dutch centralized, bureaucratic, and monarchical, or mercantile and occasionally chaotic.
EXIT THE DRAGON In 1405-33, seven major Chinese naval expeditions explored and traded across the oceans as far west as Africa.
Mariner's Mirrour was the first book to show standardized symbols for buoys, channels, safe anchorages, and submerged rocks.
Where conflicts arose, the great empires were ruthless apis — -— in Japan.
Ima sf uva | Merchants used it to check on the Spanish convoys, but * D ER Ceu] Fo 99 TAM TAa G i very regions that supplied the raw materials. p ner ` beney Ticken |ie ordd) nl n dd tl progress of shipments arriving Pa PP somewhat overshadowed y Tansan NE RNC 71 from around the world, including As trade in commodities became more complex, by the Dutch.
New Navigation Acts set out a framework for colonial trade and monopolies, the Hudson’s Bay Company traded out of Canada, and the 1715 Treaty of Utrecht gave England a monopoly on supplying slaves to the Spanish American empire.
A NUTMEG Building Batavia |o Located on the northwest coast of Java, Batavia | T was N seized by Jan Pieterzoon Coen in May 1619 and became the trading hub of the Dutch East Indies.
DU ——RNNRMá— —— — — DS Sea TT T T ir — ES [1 | GaII E u1 T OPE E AN Rb o wA a uma 1450-1750 BEFORE While the last few emperors of the Ming dynasty were distracted by internal rebellion, a new power was gathering in the north.
THE JURCHEN BANNERS The Jurchen people were descended from the founders of the Jin dynasty «€ 163.
By the 16th century the Jurchen were living near Jilin in modern-day northeast China, where they hunted, farmed, and traded extensively with the Chinese.
In 1616, the Jurchen leader Nurhaci founded the Later Jin dynasty and began to organize his people, as well as the Mongols and Chinese who had submitted to Jurchen rule.
The entire population were enrolled into four military units called banners, each being identified by the color of their standards. 50 2 5 niru, or 7,500 families, were organized under one banner.
FROM JURCHEN TO MANCHU Nurhaci's successor, Huang Taiji, introduced Chinese-style institutions among the Jurchen.
The banner system was expanded by the conquests of Huang Taiji to include eight Manchu, eight Mongol, and eight Chinese banners by 1644.
Xinjiang 0 2000 km 0 2000 miles y the early 17th century, the E Ming dynasty was beset by internal popular rebellions and the threat of a Manchu invasion.
In April 1644, the rebel leader Li Zicheng took Beijing, and the Ming emperor committed suicide.
Li tried to persuade Wu Sangui, the most powerful commander on the frontier, to join him.
Instead Wu negotiated with the Manchus, allowing them to pass freely through the Great Wall.
Imperial Poetry The Three Emperors The reigns of the Three Emperors, Kangxi , Yongzheng , and Qianlong , are known collectively as the “Prosperous Age,” a period when the Chinese empire expanded to its greatest extent and its population doubled.
Outer Mongolia uangzhou peal’ ^ HAINAN cout Emperor Kangxi was an accomplished —‘ poet as well as a sponsor of the arts.
Yellow © o | Y ~ Nanjing «i N o The Manchus continued their advance south, crushing any resistance from Ming loyalists.
They also ordered all . male Chinese to show that they submitted to Qing rule by shaving their foreheads and adopting the queue, a long braided ponytail, which was compulsory in China throughout the Qing period.
Having gained control over China, the Qing instituted a bureaucracy that relied on features retained from the Ming administration, which of government examinations.
In 1757 a Zunghar rebellion was mercilessly crushed, and their territory was incorporated into the empire.
Manchu and a Chinese official, a policy that helped somewhat in easing the resentment felt by the Chinese at being ruled by alien invaders.
The Prosperous Age Shunzhi showed great promise as a ruler, but he died of smallpox at an early age.
It was his three successors who were responsible for consolidating Qing power in China.
Shunzhi’s son, the Kangxi emperor, was the longest-reigning emperor in Chinese history.
He read and commented on more than 50 memorials every day, and traveled extensively.
During his reign he crushed a major internal rebellion and led successful campaigns against the Zunghar people of Mongolia.
Yongzheng insisted on the use of the Manchu language at court and raised the salaries of officials to discourage corruption.
To ensure ideological conformity he ordered that the Sacred Edict, which exhorted subjects to revere the emperor, be read out twice a month at Confucian temples.
The addition of territory led to an expansion of the economy, as well as a significant population increase.
Missionaries The first Christian Jesuit mission in Beijing had been established in 1598.
When the Manchus came to power, they continued the Ming practice of The sails of a junk could be moved inward, allowing it to sail into the wind much like today's windsurfers and catamarans.
Bamboo battens stiffened the sail and made tt easier to roll up in high winds.
They also prevented the sail from tearing too easily. stern were used on ju centuries before their adoption by the West. employing Jesuits for various official tasks.
Kangxi gave Father Adam Schall responsibility for preparing the imperial calendar, for example.
When a mistake was detected, Schall was accused of treason and narrowly escaped death.
Other Jesuit priests were engaged as diplomats, architects, artists, and mathematicians.
In 1692, after Jesuit missionaries had cured the emperor of malaria, Kangxi issued an “edict of toleration,” which permitted the teaching of Christianity.
However, when the pope forbade all Chinese The tea trade links by land with Central Asia and Rudders affixed to the nks Introduced in the Han dynasty , these ocean-going vessels were in use throughout Chinese history.
Qing dynasty trading junks carried a variety of Christians from performing the rites of ancestor worship, the preaching of Christianity in China was forbidden.
China had long-standing commercial GREEN TEA GINGER ROOT The rowboat was hung from the very high poop deck at the stern of Chinese junks, rather than from the sides of the ship as on Western models.
Model of a traditional Chinese junk products, from tea and spices to silk and jade. century, Britain had become China’s major Western trading partner.
Interest in Chinese ceramics and silk was still strong, but tea quickly became China’s leading export.
Under the Qing, foreign trade was regulated closely and from 1760 it was confined by to the city of Guangzhou.
From the late Ming period, China also had dealings with the European powers.
MANCHU EMPEROR QIANLONG Qianlong projected an image of himself as a model Chinese ruler, attending to affairs of state in the morning and painting and writing poems in the afternoon.
Though not particularly gifted, he was a prolific poet; more than 40,000 poems have been ascribed to him.
The last few decades of Qianlong's rule saw the ""Prosperous Age"" come to an end.
QING CORRUPTION In 1775, the imperial bodyguard Heshen became a favorite of Qianlong, and he began to build a network of corrupt patronage.
Qianlong gave him control of the imperial revenues, and allowed him to appoint his henchmen to senior official posts.
Heshen is considered to have begun a trend of corruption that continued through the 19th century, gradually undermining the status of the Qing dynasty.
THE OPIUM TRADE Opium, grown in India, was smuggled into China by British firms.
Then the price was lowered, and by 1830 the trade had soared to 18,956 chests.
Opium smuggling surged again to more than 40,000 chests a year in 1834, costing 34 million silver dollars and causing a significant drain on imperial revenues.
For of sakoku, or national seclusion, magine a 17th-century city of towering stone walls, long wooden parapets, huge gatehouses, and massive moats, all sprawling out from the largest castle in the world.
This bustling town-port with artisans, traders, and laborers is Edo , a city twice the size of the largest cities in Europe at the time, such as London and Paris.
Its busy thoroughfares were filled with people from different classes, all of whom were beneficiaries of a new period known as BEFORE Before the Edo period, Japan was a politically divided and unstable country.
THE COMING OF PEACE The battle of Sekigahara was the last great field battle between two Japanese armies.
The shogun, while exercising control from Edo, had to work with these local magnates, in order to maintain power in distant provinces that were difficult to reach.
They were allowed to demand physical labor and duties from local villagers, including taxes and rent. the “Great Peace” or Edo Period.
The emperor and his court— though revered— were consigned to ceremonial stature at Kyoto, which was Japan’s capital at that time.
The Imperial court, powerless but prestigious, conferred the title shogun and Ieyasu manipulated this “support” to his advantage.
DUTCH TRADER ENGELBERT KASMPFERER, 1621 Edo, largest town This print by the Japanese artist Ando Hiroshige reveals an 18th-century view of Edo, which was the one of the largest cities in the world throughout the 18th century.
The population was labeled as to whether they were samurai, farmers, craftsmen, or merchants.
At the apex of the system were the warrior class, the samurai, who were the only individuals allowed to carry weapons.
As a class, samurai were controlled by the military leaders and worked as government officials, guards, policemen, or for local authorities, serving either the shogun or one of the local daimyo.
The great change in Japanese society was the elevation of farmers—who made up 80 percent of the population, and whose labor was critical to the economy—to the second rank of society.
Although at the mercy of the daimyo and samurai, the peasant farmers enjoyed a high degree of village autonomy.
They elected leaders and formed collective assemblies that decided on local issues.
They paid taxes asa village unit and were granted individual rights to cultivate the land registered to them.
In Construction of a Noh mask Noh masks must be light, as they are worn throughout an entire performance.
Traditionally, each mask is carved out of a single piece of cypress wood.
Below the farmers in terms of rights and restrictions were the artisans and craftsmen; merchants and shopkeepers were considered the lowest rank in this strict class structure.
Commerce, however, developed in the expanding urban centers of Edo, Osaka, and Kyoto, and the merchant class made money trading and brokering, coming to enjoy a certain amount of financial power, which offset their “low class” status in this society.
Edo culture The Edo Period produced much of what we recognize today as traditional Japanese culture.
Haiku, the 17-syllable poem still in use today, was born; zen gardens, flower arranging, and the tea ceremony all came into their own; and Noh theater was transformed.
Noh plays deal with a universal truth, displayed on stage in a kind of visual metaphor.
Pictured to the right are a 14th-century warrior mask and two Edo-period masks.
While Noh theater's restraint and elegance appealed to upper-class Japanese society, Kabuki theater, which was garish and bawdy, was embraced by the merchant class.
Cha-no-yu, as it is called, was— and still is—considered a traditional art in Japan. provinces.
It originally consisted of acrobatic and juggling displays, but the addition of operatic dance and recital transformed it into a highly stylized and symbolic drama.
As with all other forms of cultural life in the Edo period, Noh theater was strictly governed and the lower classes were forbidden to learn the techniques of the art form.
Kabuki, ukiyo-e, porcelain, and lacquerware all developed and thrived during this period.
Ukiyo-e, or ""pictures of the floating world,"" was an art form that proved highly popular for its depictions of sensual courtesans, erotic prostitutes, and flashy kabuki actors.
The genre also later proved influential to Western artists such as Vincent van Gogh, Claude Monet, Edgar Degas, and Gustav Klimt.
AFTER The 18th and early 19th century in Japan were marked by severe famines, increasing social tensions, and repeated but unsuccessful attempts at political reform.
A long, slow decline ended with the as undisputed ruler of northern India. confederacy of Rajput kings at Kanua. empire's dissolution in 1857.
Mughal treasury. from Fatehpur Sikri to Lahore. ad atl 1648 Shah Jahan takes up residence in his new capital, Delhi.
Akbar accedes to the throne Mughal Empire and rule over India by the British crown. with Bairam Khan as regent.
The splendor and sophistication of its court was world-famous. he decisive battles in Babur’s conquest of north al India were his defeat of the Afghan Sultan of Delhi, Ibrahim Lodi, at Panipat in 1526 and his success over a confederacy of Rajput kings at Kanua the following year.
Using firearms and an experienced and efficient cavalry, he had consolidated Mughal (Persian for Mongol) rule over the rich cities and The first Mughal emperor Babur, founder of the Mughal Empire, is shown here capturing sheep from the Hazara tribe.
Babur is remembered as much for his literary prowess as for his military achievements.
By 1540, he had lost his father's kingdom to the Afghan ruler, Sher Shah Sur, and had been forced into exile at the Safavid court in Persia.
In mid-1555, with Persian support, he restored Mughal rule by defeating Sher Shah’s weaker descendants, thus duplicating his father’s conquests.
However, he died just seven months later, leaving the empire to his 12-year-old son, Akbar, with —— an influential noble, Bairam Khan, as his regent.
Together, they extended Mughal control over northern India, in the region bounded by the Indus and Ganges rivers, to form an imperial heartland that, in time, was framed by palace fortresses at Agra, Allahabad, Ajmer, and Lahore.
The center consisted mainly of Muslim o T P, Q «ig t OMasulipatam sultanates, while the Hindu Rajputs and Lodi 25 o Afghans quarreled over the north.
O CEA Structure and tolerance To consolidate his position, Akbar established a centralized system of government.
This was administered by warrior-aristocrats of various ranks who could be appointed to bureaucratic or military positions and were accompanied by their own households or troops.
They had the right to collect taxes from this land, but could not own, govern, or occupy it.
Akbar had a policy of religious tolerance, which was evident in his own marriages to women of different faiths, whom he did not force to convert to Islam.
He also allowed the Hindu Rajputs to negotiate entry into his nobility if they offered their daughters in marriage.
Eventually, he relied more on Rajputs and Persians than on his own Central Asian nobles.
Reform and the arts During his reign, Akbar also reduced the influence of Muslim scholars , abolished taxes on Hindu pilgrims and non-Muslim residents , and introduced the Bengali calendar, a solar calendar to replace the Muslim lunar cycle.
At his new palace at Fatehpur Sikri near Agra, he held among garden tombs streams are thought to represent the four rivers in the Islamic depiction of paradise religious debates in a custom-built ibadat-khana, or “house of worship,” that gave representation to different faith groups.
He induced the famed singer and musician, Tansen, to join his court, and began patronizing what became known as north Indian classical music.
At Fatehpur Sikri, he established a school of Mughal painting, combining Persian the tomb is placed at one end, not at the center.
This is unique geometric bricklined flowerbeds the white marble interior "" of the dome is decorated a with a sun motif t23 Taj Mahal The Taj Mahal at Agra is the ultimate example of a Mughal garden tomb.
Representing paradise on earth, it was built in 1632-54 under the patronage of Shah Jahan for his beloved wife, Mumtaz Mahal, after she died giving birth to their fifteenth child in 1631.
Peak and decline Jahangir’s son, Shah Jahan , contributed more artistic treasures, such as the Taj Mahal at Agra and a majestic new capital at Delhi, which included the Red Fort and the Jama Masjid.
These huge projects were also symbols of Mughal wealth, dependent on flourishing agriculture and trade.
From his accession in 1658, the last “great” Mughal, Aurangzeb oversaw the expansion of the empire to its largest extent.
Yet his reign also 2 THE GREAT MUGHALS Red Fort Repeating scalloped arches of red sandstone in the Red Fort at Delhi.
From 1648 it functioned as his imperial palace and the Mughal administrative center.
In the 18th century, Mughal sovereignty became limited to Delhi and its hinterland.
A final attempt to restore Mughal rule was connected to the Indian Mutiny of 1857.
The last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah Il, died in exile in Burma in 1862.
Mughal formal gardens, charbaghs , were based on those of the Persians, who saw great significance in the number four.
The plan of the Taj Mahal garden shows the use of units of four. signified the beginning of the end.
He was often away from his capital on military campaigns, and he depleted the treasury attempting to defeat the Marathas in the south who were trying to establish their own empire.
Some scholars also believe his strict interpretation of Islam offended his Rajput collaborators and Hindu subjects.
The empire was further weakened by a rapid succession of rulers following Aurangzeb's death in 1707.
In 1739, Nadir Shah, the Safavids' successor, sacked Delhi and seized the Mughal treasury.
The harem of the Topkapi Palace This 18th-century miniature by Fazil Enderuni shows concubines bathing in the Topkapi Palace harem.
All concubines were non-Muslim captives taken in war or bought from slavers.
BEFORE The Ottoman Empire was forged in a bloody furnace of continual intrigue and conflict.
With this formidable army, Orhan and his son Murad I seized most of the Balkans, and achieved the Ottoman goal of conquering Anatolia.
The Sipahis were mounted warriors in the army recruited from land-owning Turks.
T he emergence of the T Ottomans as a world power began with the rule of Mehmed II in 1451.
Using the world's largest cannon to pound the allegedly “impregnable” walls, and with more than 160,000 men against the defenders’ 7,000, he swiftly crushed all resistance.
Mehmed pushed on into Europe, seizing territory, until his failure to take Belgrade in 1456 brought the conquest to a halt and left the Ottoman Empire’s border with Western Europe Static for the next 60 years.
Meanwhile, the Ottoman eastern borders were threatened by the rise of the Persian Safavids.
It was not until the Battle of Chaldiran in 1514 that Selim I humbled the rival dynasty.
Selim led his troops east and south, taking Jerusalem’s holy sites and conquering Cairo in 1517.
Selim’s son, Suleyman, known as “The Magnificent” in Europe for his wealth and power, proved no less a conqueror than his father.
Suleyman’s two favorite sons, Mustafa and Bayazid, were accused of conspiring against him.
He never RULER OF OTTOMAN EMPIRE SULEYMAN This king is known as “Suleyman the Magnificent” in the Western world and in the Islamic world as Kanuni, “the Lawgiver""—a tribute to the prosperity his reign brought to the Ottoman Empire.
Suleyman believed himself to be the spiritual heir to both Alexander and Caesar , and claimed title to all the lands they had ruled over.
Within a year of his accession, his armies had taken Belgrade, and by the time of his death the Ottomans controlled large parts of southeast Europe, the North African coast, and the Middle East.
His support of the arts and the rule of law that he implemented remain his legacy.
Dagger and scabbard Ottoman weaponry was renowned for its beauty and functionality.
This dagger and scabbard, richly encrusted with semiprecious stones, was probably the possession of an Ottoman noble. recovered from this loss and, a sad and broken figure, became a Palace, leaving his Grand the empire.
With no political or military training, Selim's formative experiences were food, drink, and women.
On his accession Selim handed over control of the empire to his vizier.
This set the pattern for the next century of Ottoman rule, with catastrophic results.
Without a strong ruler, government corruption flourished, and the indifference of the bureaucracy to predatory local officials eroded public support for the regime.
Monemvasia. rzurumdS ONakhichevan "" 5 A ; “Rhodes b AT Dabiq Lo 5 DLP Cyprus.
Aden of pace Socotra A EX oU Map r c The Ottoman Empire was a considerable force in world politics from the 14th century until the early 20th century.
This map shows the borders of the Ottoman Empire at the height of its power. various elements of t government—the Diwan , grand vizier, and janissaries (elite army units)—all vied for power.
The Sublime Porte presented a united face to its enemies, but a century of nepotism and greed slowly ate it from within.
Although there had been a few attempts to stem the tide of misgovernment, it was only in the 1650s with Mehmet Kopprulu, grand vizier to Mehmet IV, that a systematic and enduring effort to root out corruption began.
He also planned a resumption of Ottoman conquest, but died before his plans came to fruition.
His brother-in-law, Kara Mustafa, continued Mehmet’s expansionist policies, marching on Vienna, the capital of the mighty Habsburg Empire, in 1683.
However, a combination of innovative cavalry tactics and superior artillery resulted in Mustafa’s defeat.
With this defeat a steady European encroachment on Ottoman lands began, and for most of the 18th century they were at war with one or more European powers.
Mahmud I brought respite to the weary empire, capturing Belgrade, and holding it under the Treaty of Belgrade of 1739.
But given the ongoing corruption within government, further losses seemed inevitable.
The Blue Mosque Built for Sultan Ahmed | between 1609-16 by master architect Sedefhar Mehmet Aga, the Sultan Ahmed mosque in Istanbul is lined with more than 20,000 handmade ceramic tiles. 1000 km — 0 1000 miles A Calligraphy This is the exquisite tugra—a form of calligraphic monogram or seal— of Sultan Murat IIl and dates from 1575.
Initially tugras were used only on official documents such as fermans , but later they began to appear as a symbol of sovereignty on stamps, coins, and flags.
AFTER After 1750, the Ottoman Empire's story is one of slow, continuous decline.
LOSING GROUND In the early 18005, reforms were introduced to stabilize the Ottoman Empire, but its slow dismemberment continued.
Bosnia-Herzogovina rebelled in 1875, and in another war with Russia in 1877-78, the Empire ceded Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro.
END OF EMPIRE Two more Balkan Wars saw the empire lose most of its remaining European territory.
The aim of the Europeans was to save the island of Cyprus from the westward advance of the Ottomans, who already occupied most of Hungary and threatened Vienna and the Austrian lands.
In 1453 they conquered the empire's capital Constantinople , and in the next few years they took over most of its lands, from Serbia and Bosnia in the west to Anatolia in the east.
By the early 16th century they were expanding again, destroying the power of Hungary at the Battle of Mohacs in 1526, and laying siege to Vienna in 1529— although they had to pull back from the city when they ran out of supplies and winter came.
The Habsburg rulers of the Holy Roman Empire were concerned they would be attacked again, and the Catholic Church also felt threatened by the Muslim Ottomans.
As a result, Venice, Genoa, Spain , and the Papacy formed an alliance, called the Holy League, in order to defend the Mediterranean against the Ottomans.
Both fleets were made up mainly of galleys, large warships powered by oarsmen.
Don John also had six galleasses, powerful hybrid vessels with sails as well as oars, and with heavy cannons mounted along their flanks.
The Turks preferred to fight by ramming their enemy's ships, but Don John deployed the formidable firepower he carried.
The Ottoman commander, Ali Pasha, was killed, as were thousands of his men.
The Holy League destroyed the Turkish navy, but they did not destroy the Turks.
But they did not expand farther westward, as they might have done if they had won.
Don John of Austria goes to war This painting by 16th-century Italian artist Andrea Micheli depicts the Battle of Lepanto, which was the last battle fought by galleys.
CHESTERTON, BRITISH AUTHOR, FROM THE POEM LEPANTO, 1915 1450-1750 The Renaissance During the 15th and 16th centuries, art and learning flourished in cities and at royal courts in many parts of Europe, but especially in Italy.
The works of the exceptional individuals who made this “renaissance” are among the marvels of the world. he Renaissance was part of an ongoing process that changed the shape of European culture over many centuries.
The paintings of artists such as Giotto, and the writings of Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio in the 14th century are among many works that prefigured the Renaissance.
The period of the Renaissance is, however, Early book BEFORE In medieval times, some artists and thinkers were already breaking with tradition.
THE FIRST RENAISSANCE Historians have identified an early ""renaissance"" in 12th century Europe.
GIOTTO Florentine artist Giotto di Bondone initiated a revolution in European painting a century before the Renaissance proper.
Wealth and culture Economic prosperity was the basis for the Renaissance.
Art and learning were luxuries that could be afforded through the increasing wealth of a social elite.
Grown S rich on the proceeds of banking, trade, and manufacture, cities spent freely on cultural luxuries out of civic pride or to enhance the prestige of local rulers such as the Medici family in Florence or the Sforzas in Milan.
Wealthy kings such as Matthias Corvinus in Hungary and Francis I in France also patronized artists and intellectuals as a way of advertising their own power and status.
Renaissance popes such as Alexander VI and Julius II made Rome another focus of excellence, lavishing money raised from their Christian flock on extravagant artistic and architectural projects such as St.
Dante standing before Florence Domenico di Michelino painted this image of the poet Dante alongside his native city, Florence.
UE. a Humanist group Painted by Domenico Ghirlandaio around 1490, this detail from a fresco in the church of Santa Maria Novella in Florence shows a group of humanist scholars including Marsilio Ficino, head of the Platonic Academy.
Michelangelo's David This massive marble statue was made by Michelangelo for the city of Florence in 1504.
Humanism The loose international network of scholars who spearheaded the Renaissance are known as ""humanists,"" reflecting the degree to which they placed humankind, rather than God, at the center of their world-view.
These scholars studied ancient texts more critically than had been done before, reading in Greek as well as in Latin, which had long been the THE RENAISSANCE language of the educated in Europe.
They also strove to establish an accurate text for the Bible—the famous humanist Erasmus regarded his Greek version of the New Testament as his major achievement.
Humanists were often employed as tutors for the children of the rich and powerful, and they devised influential systems of education, focusing on subjects such as Latin, history, grammar, and rhetoric.
Feats in architecture Architecture was an area in which the emulation of antiquity was most fruitful.
One of the first great achievements of the Renaissance was the dome built for the cathedral in Florence by Filippo Brunelleschi.
Brunelleschi had studied the ancient ruins in Rome, including the domed Pantheon , before embarking on the work.
Completed in 1436, it was the largest dome ever built, a nearly miraculous feat of engineering as well as an aesthetic masterpiece.
Domes were established as a crowning feature of the most ambitious Renaissance buildings, including St.
Peter’s Basilica in Rome, The Birth of Venus Sistine ceiling Painted around 1483, Sandro Botticelli’s famous painting is unusual in having an overtly pagan theme drawn from classical mythology.
This was possible because it was produced for Lorenzo de Medici's private villa, not for public display.
Commissioned by Pope Julius Il in 1508, the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican is one of the masterworks of Florentine genius Michelangelo Buonarroti.
Depicting scenes from the Old Testament, the frescoes took four years to complete. rooms on the upper floors open onto walkways around i VH the courtyard E Ww iiid , iu m Ii the palazzo consists of a pentagon around a circular colonnaded courtyard the piano nobile (main living area) contains 12 state rooms decorated with frescoes illustrating the exploits of Hercules, Alexander the Great, and the Farnese family fortresslike main entrance base reached 2A zigzag stairways while antique-style columns, arches, and statues abounded in palaces, villas, and churches.
Artists and art In painting and sculpture, the influence of ancient Greece and Rome was evident, for example, in the interest in an ideal version of the naked human body, seen especially in the painting and sculpture of Michelangelo Buonarroti.
Artists also added classical pagan mythology to their subject matter , although usually for the private enjoyment of wealthy connoisseurs.
As well as a desire to match the art of antiquity, however, there was a novel drive to represent the visual world with illusionistic precision.
Flemish artists such as Jan van Eyck led the way with oil paintings that represented human features and the surfaces of objects with astounding accuracy of detail.
MARSILIO FICINO, FLORENTINE PHILOSOPHER, 1492 T "" Wi ud Ob stairs at each corner connect the two floors T m ""il tul ij TY INL um E castle base set in a moat invisible from the entrance Villa Farnese Commissioned by the wealthy Farnese family, the Villa Farnese in Caprarola is considered a masterpiece of late Renaissance architecture.
Architect Giacomo Barozzi de Vignola worked on the building from 1559-73.
CLASSICAL SCHOLAR ERASMUS Dutch humanist Gerhard Gerhards, better known by his pen-name Erasmus, was ordained as a priest but lived as an independent scholar.
In works such as /n Praise of Folly , he criticized the corruption of the Church, advocating a life governed by firm moral and religious principles.
Associated with geometry and optics, painting was part of the mainstream of intellectual development in the Renaissance.
Overtaking the ancients The striving for an exact depiction of the world in art was related to a wider trend toward the close observation of nature, rather than reliance on received wisdom.
This produced clear advances on the knowledge inherited from the ancients.
The geographical notions of the ancient Greek Ptolemy were corrected thanks to the efforts of European explorers and mapmakers.
Craftsmanship Underpinning the achievements of the celebrated geniuses of the Renaissance was a widespread culture of practical ingenuity and skilled craftsmanship.
Fine craft objects, such as the elaborate suits of armor made by the metalworkers of Nuremberg and Augsburg, or the products of Venetian or Florentine goldsmiths, were collected as avidly as any painting or sculpture.
More practically, it was during this time that gunpowder weapons came into general use in European warfare Timepiece The first clocks marked with minutes appeared in the 1570s , but truly accurate timekeeping was not possible until pendulum clocks were introduced in the 17th century.
Mechanical clocks, which had first started to appear in the towers of Italian cities in the 14th century, became more widespread.
Navigational instruments such as magnetic compasses were essential tools of expanding seaborne trade.
The printed word By far the most influential product of European enterprise, however, was the printing press.
Fresh thinking became readily available through the relative speed with which Jean de Dinteville is depicted with his friend, French envoy Georges de Selve.
In the foreground is a distorted representation of a skull, an obvious symbol of mortality.
The skull appears correctly if viewed from a precise low point to the side of the painting. new printed books could be produced and distributed.
Literature in the vernacular—everyday languages such as English, Italian, and French, rather than scholarly Latin—received an enormous boost.
Humanist scholars were able to circulate accurate, standardized versions of major texts.
The celestial globe, showing the constellations, was the latest model, made by German astronomer Johannes Schóner.
The scientific instruments are devices for navigation and time measurement.
They are resting on a valuable Turkish rug, imported from the Ottoman Empire.
Political turmoil The cultural developments of the Renaissance took place within a context of acute political and religious conflicts.
The Italian city-states that were such dynamos of creativity were also the site of vicious power struggles.
In Florence the dominant Medici family was twice driven into exile by popular uprisings, in 1494 and 1527, and twice restored to power.
Civil conflicts were complicated by the intervention of the armies of the kings of France and the Habsburg emperors, who fought one another in Italy in a series of wars from the 1490s to the 1550s.
Observing these conflicts at close hand inspired Florentine Niccolo Machiavelli to write his cynical political handbook The Prince in 1513 (published in 1532), advising the wise ruler to use any methods, however immoral, to stay in power.
Whether or not this was good advice, it certainly described the normal practice of Renaissance political leaders.
Machiavelli’s model for The Prince was the ruthless Cesare Borgia , the illegitimate son of Pope Alexander VI, who was suspected of many murders, including that of his elder brother.
Niccolo Machiavelli Author of The Prince, Machiavelli based his pragmatic political philosophy upon his experiences as a diplomat in the service of Florence.
NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, FROM ""THE PRINCE,” 1532 INVENTION The first effective press for printing books using movable metal type and oil-based ink emerged in 15th century Europe.
Its invention is attributed to Johannes Gutenberg, a German artisan and entrepreneur.
The Bible that he published in 1455 was the first book printed in this way.
The new technique spread, with presses established in Paris in 1470 and London in 1476.
The most prestigious early printer, Aldus Manutius, set up the Aldine Press in Venice in 1494.
Much cheaper than hand-written works, printed books revolutionized the diffusion of knowledge.
Much of the thrust of Renaissance humanism, especially in the works of Erasmus, consisted of an attack on the ignorance and corruption of the clergy, including successive popes, and calls for a return to a purer form of faith.
On the other hand, Renaissance artists, as purveyors of luxury goods sometimes with pagan connotations, found their works under attack from religious reformers.
Religious revival Between 1494 and 1498, a radical monk, Girolamo Savonarola, won control of Florence and led an orgy of book-burning and destruction of works of art in his campaign against wealth and corruption.
One of the main provocations for the Reformation that challenged papal authority from 1517 was outrage at the money being spent on commissioning men such as Raphael and Michelangelo to beautify Rome.
The atmosphere heavy platen or printing plate THE RENAISSANCE of religious revival in the Reformation and the Counter-Reformation was broadly hostile to the spirit of free inquiry and invention that animated the Renaissance.
In the second half of the 16th century, both zealous Protestants and Catholics cracked down on the ""free-thinking"" that undermined their religious orthodoxies.
But in the longer term, there was to be no turning back from the development of scientific and philosophical inquiry, the dissemination of knowledge and culture in printed books, and innovation in the arts.
Renaissance clock The introduction of spring-powered timepieces at the start of the 16th century allowed smaller portable clocks such as this to be made for domestic use. bar to lower platen leather ink ball, 4 A stuffed with — 4 horsehair ^ sliding coffin sturdy wooden frame Mercator map Representing the latest knowledge of geography, this map was created by Flemish cartographer Gerardus Mercator in 1587.
Mercator's projection, his famous method for representing the globe on a flat surface, was still in widespread use four centuries later.
AFTER Renaissance thinkers came in conflict with the Church, but their achievements lived on.
RELIGIOUS REACTION In 1542 the Catholic Church established the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith in Rome as a body to suppress ideas contrary to the Church's teaching.
Giordano Bruno, a wide-ranging thinker in the Renaissance tradition, was burned at the stake in Rome after the Congregation found him guilty of heresy in 1600.
ART AND ARCHITECTURE Through the 16th century, European painting, sculpture, and architecture developed in a less naturalistic direction, valuing expression above harmony and true proportion.
This more artificial style has been labeled ""Mannerism"" by art historians.
Mannerism evolved into the exuberant Baroque style dominant in the 17th century.
LATE RENAISSANCE In some countries the Renaissance Is generally agreed to have flowered at a later date.
In both England and Spain, the height of the Renaissance did not occur until the second half of the 16th century and early 17th century, when writers, musicians and artists such as Thomas Tallis, Edmund Spenser, William Shakespeare, El Greco, and Miguel Cervantes all flourished.
LEONARDO DA VINCI ne of the great geniuses of the good use of opportunities for profit and 0 Italian Renaissance (see advancement.
At about age the countryside outside Florence, he 14, he was apprenticed to Andrea del received little formal education, Verrocchio, a leading sculptor and only learned Latin, the basic whose studio had recently accomplishment of an educated man branched out into painting. of his day, in adulthood.
Instead, he Leonardo’s outstanding studied the animals and landscapes talent, especially in the around him.
It was characteristic of relatively new medium Leonardo that, at a time when artists of oil painting, was and philosophers were fixated on unmistakable, and in his learning from the classical past, he mid-20s he was able to set concentrated on direct observation of up a studio of his own. the human and natural world.
Leonardo’s paintings are It is possible to present Leonardo’s now his most famous career as that of an ambitious artisan achievement, but in the 15th and entrepreneur, a poor boy making century, even with his own studio, an artist was only a craftsman touting for commissions.
The next step up was to be taken on by a prince as a member of his household.
Thus, in about 1482, Leonardo proposed his services to Ludovico Sforza, the ruler of Ducal commission This document from Cesare Borgia, lord of the Romagna, dates to 1502, commissioned “architect and engineer” Leonardo to survey palaces and fortresses.
Self-portrait Leonardo drew this haunting self-portrait when he was in his mid-60s, three or four years before his death.
The long hair and beard give him the air of Florence Cathedral a traditional sage or seer.
During his apprenticeship in Florence, Leonardo helped place the orb and cross on top of the city's famous cathedral dome.
Indeed, none of Leonardo's flying machines were practical; they were simply flights of imagination. | | Milan.
Judging that the warlike Milanese ruler might have more need A of a military engineer than of an artist, ^ Leonardo listed at length the ""infinite W variety of machines for attack and Y | defense"" that he could create, including armored cars, portable bridges, and cannons, before skills at painting and sculpture.
A man of talent Leonardo's all-around skills, including his ingenuity at P designing machines, were ^ exactly what Renaissance NW princes were looking for, and | he rarely lacked employment Hk i YA for the rest of his life.
Leonardo’s boundless imagination and experimentation led to many failures and disappointments.
For Ludovico Sforza he designed one of the largest equestrian statues ever conceived, but it is unlikely that it could have been cast and only a clay model was built.
His Last Supper, considered one of the ultimate masterpieces of Western art, was painted using an innovative technique that meant it started decaying almost as soon as it was finished.
In the service of the ruler of Florence from 1503, he produced a The Last Supper Leonardo painted The Last Supper in the refectory of the church of Saint Maria delle Grazie in Milan, using a mix of tempera and oll, rather than a traditional fresco technique.
He studied birds on the wing, commenting that ""a bird is a machine operating according to mathematical laws” This model is a full-size realization of his design for an ornithopter—a machine powered by flapping artificial wings.
It could never work because mentioning as an afterthought his t monarchy as firstly “engineer” AN ORNITHOPTER Anatomical drawing Leonardo's sketch of a cross section of a human skull showed impressive anatomical details, which are due to the autopsies he preformed. grandiose project for a canal linking the city to the sea, which was never built, and he also undertook to paint the Anghiari fresco for the Palazzo Vecchio, which was never completed.
The machines he dreamed of were ingenious and forward-thinking but mostly impractical.
In fact, much of Leonardo’s most remarkable work consisted of writings and sketches in his private notebooks, material that remained unpublished until long after his death.
It was in these notebooks that Leonardo’s fertile, inquiring, adventurous mind and eye found full expression.
The pages are packed with an astonishing number of ideas, observations, projects, and experiments.
They include studies of the movement of water and speculations on the nature of the cosmos, as well as reflections on fossils, and on the principles of flight.
They also include the record of one of his greatest achievements, the systematic exploration of human anatomy.
Leonardo obtained about 30 corpses for dissection, from which he produced the most refined, accurate, and annotated sketches.
A modern thinker Leonardo’s idiosyncratic personality and free-ranging mind could easily have brought him into conflict with the authorities.
His homosexuality was both a sin and a crime in the society he inhabited, even if it was not generally disapproved of in sophisticated circles.
Dissecting corpses was of dubious legality and almost got him into trouble in Rome in about 1515.
He seems to have had no fixed religious beliefs and certainly did not allow Christian doctrine to set limits to his thinking.
Unable to undertake major works, he found a sympathetic patron in the French King Francis I, who appreciated the prestige of having such a renowned figure in his employ.
It is reported that Francis said he could never believe there was another man born in this world who knew as much as Leonardo.
Few of Leonardo’s paintings have survived, but their scarcity has if anything enhanced his legendary status.
LEONARDO DA VINCI TIMELINE April 15, 1452 Born near Vinci, a small town outside Florence, the illegitimate son of a peasant woman and a local lawyer.
April 1476 Accused of homosexual activity, an offense that could carry the death penalty.
April 25, 1483 Commissioned to paint an altarpiece for the church of San Francesco in Milan, now known as the Virgin of the Rocks.
Works on a failed project for a canal to give Florence direct access to the sea.
LA GIOCONDA 1504 Starts work on a fresco, the Battle of Anghiari, for the Council Hall in the Palazzo Vecchio, Florence.
EARLY REFORMERS The Lollards from England in the 14th century and the Hussites from Bohemia in the early 15th century both proposed reforms of the Catholic Church to end corruption and purify church doctrine.
HUSSITES THE GREAT SCHISM Pope Clement V moved the papacy to Avignon in France in 1309 to avoid internal feuding in Rome.
An attempt to return the papacy to Rome in 1579 led to the election of two rival popes, causing a schism «€194-95.
A Church meeting in Germany in 1417 elected a third pope to replace the two rivals.
RENAISSANCE EXCESS The building of a vast new basilica in Rome was funded by the sale of indulgences, or pardons for sins, which typified the extravagance of the Catholic Church in the 15th century.
Pope Leo X financed construction partly through the sale of indulgences and used the leading artists of the Renaissance to design and decorate it. [he Reformation A simple but effective protest against corruption in the Catholic Church in 1517 soon turned into a major force for religious change known as the Reformation.
It transformed the political, social, and economic face of Europe over the next few centuries, and its legacy can still be seen around the world today. artin Luther's M challenge against the Catholic Church in Wittenberg, Saxony, came after the arrival in the area of German preacher Johann Tetzel, who was selling indulgences to raise money for Pope Leo X Indulgences had long been criticized by Catholic theologians but their financial success ensured the practice was too lucrative to end.
Luther’s response, on October 23, 1517, was to post a document bearing 95 theses on the door of the town church.
Luther’s theses were not radical, but they attracted a wide audience, and due to recent advances in printing methods they were widely distributed and read.
Luther’s initial criticism of the church focused on the sale of indulgences, but he went on to attack the core Catholic teachings of transubstantiation (the belief that bread and wine change into the body and blood of Christ when received during communion), clerical celibacy, and papal supremacy.
He also called for a reform of religious orders such as monasteries, and a return to the simplicity of the earlier church.
The Lutheran church Luther’s challenge to the established church won him many followers, but he initially wished only to reform the existing church rather than set up an entirely new system.
His disagreements with the Catholic Church hierarchy over its conduct led to a revolt against the institution in 1517 that soon spread across Europe.
Luther was a reluctant revolutionary, preferring at first to reform the Church from within, but once excluded from the Church in 1521, he proved to be an energetic and skilled leader, making good use of the new printing technology to write and distribute pamphlets publicizing his views.
His belief in order, and his conservative political views, put him at odds with many who wished to develop more radical religious doctrines.
The Gutenberg Bible The world's first printed Bible was produced, in Latin, by the German printer Johannes Gutenberg in 1455.
Bibles in the vernacular, or common language, first appeared during the Reformation.
Luther refused to retract his views and, having already been excommunicated (expelled from the church) by the pope, was now | outlawed by the emperor.
He also set to work translating the Bible into German; previous editions of the Bible had been transcribed in Latin— Luther's edition would allow people to read the Bible in their native language for the first time.
Germany at this point was made up of many independent states, nominally controlled by Emperor Charles V German princes wishing to exert their power against the dominance of Charles V saw Luther’s teachings as a way of breaking both imperial and church control over Germany.
In 1524 the Peasants’ War broke out in southwest Germany as a result of economic hardship in the region.
A league of German princes, supported by Luther, crushed the revolt in 1526 with great loss of life.
The revolt horrified Luther as much as it did the secular leaders it was aimed at.
One by one, the north German states of Saxony, Hesse, THE REFORMATION The Protestant Reformation began in Germany in 1517 and had a profound and disruptive effect across Europe well into the next century.
The Renaissance papacy Pope Leo X became a cardinal while still a child.
Peter's Basilica, prompting Luther's protest against this practice in 1517.
Each state took control of the church, strengthening the hold of the ruler over his people.
Worldwide appeal The appeal of Lutheranism was not restricted to Germany.
In 1527 Gustavus Vasa, the ruler of Sweden (which had only gained independence from Denmark-Norway in 1523), seized church lands to provide funds for his new state.
A similar process saw the adoption of Lutheranism in Denmark-Norway in 1536.
In England, a break with the church in Rome came about after the pope refused Henry VIII a divorce from his wife, Catherine of Aragon.
Political fallout The political response to the Lutheran reformation was led by Emperor Charles V However, his vast territorial domains in Europe brought him in conflict with, among others, France.
War between these two sides, as well as between Charles and the growing might of the Muslim Ottoman empire in the Mediterranean and Balkans , meant he could not devote all of his resources to crushing the Lutherans in Germany.
Charles defeated the Lutherans in battle at Mühlberg in 1547, but he could not crush them politically.
A religious and political compromise was finally reached by the Peace of Augsburg in 1555, by which the emperor allowed each prince within the empire to choose between Catholicism and Lutheranism and impose that belief upon his subjects.
However, he disagreed with Luther about the nature of the Eucharist (the bread and wine received during communion) and began to lead the Swiss Church in a more radical, anti-hierarchical direction.
His death in 1531 while defending Zurich against the Catholic cantons of Switzerland slowed the momentum of the reformation in Switzerland.
Calvin , who was starting to create a new religious center in the city of Geneva, subsequently emerged as the key figure associated with protestant reform in Switzerland.
Calvin had converted to the new reformed faith in 1533 and settled in Geneva in 1556.
There he developed a more austere form of Protestantism, based on his own reading of scriptures and his rigorous academic training, stressing predestination—God’s control of all human actions.
Though Calvin himself did not develop any practical theory of resistance to “ungodly authority,” such as the Catholic Church or Catholic rulers, many of his successors were prepared to justify violent resistance through his teachings.
Like Luther, he stressed both an individual’s direct relationship with God without a papal or priestly intermediary and the primacy of the Bible—now widely distributed in modern languages RELIGIOUS REFORMER JOHN CALVIN Born in France, John Calvin prepared P ff ""ey eee tr eg eee for a church career in Paris, but in 1533 experienced a “sudden conversion’ to the reformed faith.
He wrote the Institutes of the Christian Religion , rejecting papal authority in favor of justification by faith alone.
He settled in Geneva in 1536, where he sought to create a society in which the demands of ""godly behavior"" were strictly enforced by a combination of | church and civil | Pa T authorities.
Here, in the cathedral, the Church Council met in 1545-47, 1551-52, and finally in 1562-63, to reform the doctrines and practices of the church to meet the threat posed by the Protestant Reformation.
It strengthened the § spiritual institution of the papacy, reformed old and formed new $ religious orders, most notably the Jesuits, who set up schools and A missions to preach Catholic virtues, and clarified church doctrines.
Congregations were lured back into church through increased use of ornament and spectadle, best personified by the glorious new churches in the Baroque style in Austria and Italy-the spectacular {8 ceiling of St.
Ignatius Church in Rome , dating from around ur 1707, shows the missionary work of the Jesuits.
EE 2 A k ds DIE and not the Latin of the church—as the foundation of all preaching and Catholic cardinals and bishops and leading Catholic theologians attended the council; no Protestants attended. teaching.
Unlike Luther, however, who believed in the political subordination of the church to the state, Calvin preached that church and state should act together to create a “godly society” in which religious beliefs and strict codes of conduct should shape every aspect of daily life.
Calvinism took hold in Scotland, the Netherlands, and in large parts of France, where followers were known as Huguenots, and in areas across the German states, Bohemia, and Transylvania.
Calvinism also inspired the Puritan movement in England and, later, North America, whose members wished to purify the Anglican church of its remaining Catholic elements, notably the authority of bishops and the “popish” adornment of church vestments, ornaments, and music.
The Catholic response The initial Catholic response to the Reformation was to excommunicate (exclude from the sacraments of the church) those who rebelled against it.
As it became clear that it could not crush the Reformation, the Catholic St.
Bartholomew's Day Massacre The French wars of religion reached a bloody climax on St.
Bartholomew's Day 1572, when the French Church began to reform itself, drawing on a groundswell of internal calls for church reform that long predated the emergence or Luther.
The Catholic Counter-Reformation succeeded in its aims, strengthening Catholicism both theologically and politically, although a more authoritarian orthodoxy was instituted.
But while Germany remained largely at peace, the strong Calvinist presence in France prompted a lengthy religious war that was only ended with the granting of religious toleration in the Edict of Nantes in 1598.
By the end of the century, perhaps 40 percent of Europe’s population followed one or other of the reformed beliefs.
Catholic mobs then went on a SCOTLAND S S b i lli h h rampage, killing thousands more Huguenots.
P S i Berli ry POLAND“LITHUANIA the present-day Czech Republic), although in Germany and Scandinavia NF ou | GERMAN © M eu its later stages it became a political struggle for and Calvinist churches in 2 pacz Troyes STATES supremacy between France and the equally Switzerland, the Netherlands, q © Nantese o""T a Catholic nations of Spain and Austria.
Her birth was a disappointment to her father, Henry VIII, who was desperate for a male heir.
He had declared himself head of the English Church so he could divorce and marry again, in an effort to produce a son with his new wife.
Elizabeth was two-and-a-half when her mother, Henry's second wife Anne Boleyn, was executed on his orders, accused of adultery.
Declared illegitimate, Elizabeth was relegated to court life, finding safety in discretion.
Mary's accession to Maesbrorne in-1553 placed Elizabeth in a perilous situation.
The Catholic Mary The Tudor Rose Henry VIII Elizabeth l's father was a true Renaissance man.
He was highly educated, fluent in several languages, and adept at sports such as tennis.
One of Henry's lasting legacies Is the establishment of the Church of England.
The decisive defeat of the armada was Elizabeth's finest hour. had every reason to distrust a sister who could be put forward as a Protestant candidate for the throne.
Elizabeth survived by steering clear of plots against Mary and maintaining a facade of loyalty.
The worst she suffered was a brief imprisonment in the Tower of London, in 1554.
The Golden Age The early deaths of her siblings brought Elizabeth to the throne at the age of 25.
From the start of her reign, she chose her advisers well, especially her chief secretary of state, William Cecil.
The goal she set them was the survival of her person and her state—a goal dictating caution, suspicion, and ruthlessness when required.
Elizabeth refused to endorse Protestant extremism, insisting on royal control over the Church but trying to avoid complex issues of doctrine.
Plots and rebellions by English and Irish Catholics plagued her reign, and she had her cousin, Mary Queen of Scots, imprisoned and eventually executed as a dangerous Catholic claimant to the throne.
Elizabeth similarly attempted to avoid involvement in the religious wars racking Europe, but was reluctantly drawn into backing the Protestant Dutch against Catholic Spain.
The Virgin Queen Elizabeth’s role in the cultural flowering that occurred in England during her reign and the feats of English mariners is hard to assess.
She supported the arts financially, although her taste in theater was more for clowning than for refined wit.
Adventurers such as Sir Francis Drake enjoyed her fitful support, backed when their schemes served her purposes.
For the last two decades of her reign, England was at war with Drake knighted Elizabeth | knighted Francis Drake on board his ship, the Golden Hinde after his round-the-world voyage.
The knighthood was a calculated political gesture, effectively giving royal backing to his plunder of the lands of the Spanish empire.
He excelled at both comedy and tragedy, and his works explored the universal human experience.
Twelfth Night was written specifically to be performed at court for Elizabeth I Spain.
Elizabeth's advisers tried to seek national security through an advantageous marriage between the queen and a foreign prince.
Unmarried she ruled; once married, she inevitably would have had to cede part or all of her power to her consort, as were the conventions of the day.
In Elizabeth’s later years, the deaths of favorites and counselors left her an isolated figure.
May 19, 1536 Anne Boleyn is executed; Elizabeth is declared illegitimate and loses her right of succession to the throne.
June 1543 An act of parliament restores Elizabeth to the line of succession, after her brother Edward VI and sister Mary.
January 28, 1547 Henry VIII dies; Elizabeth becomes a ward of his widow, Catherine Parr.
March 20, 1549 Catherine Parr's fourth husband, Thomas Seymour, with whom Elizabeth has been closely associated, is executed for treason.
March 18, 1554 Elizabeth is imprisoned in the Tower of London for alleged complicity in a rebellion against Mary led by Sir Thomas Wyatt; she is released on May 19.
July 25, 1554 Mary marries Philip Il of Spain in Winchester Cathedral; Roman Catholicism is restored as the primary religion in England.
November 17, 1558 Elizabeth accedes to the throne on the death of Mary; she is crowned in Westminster Abbey on January 15, 1559.
May 8, 1559 The Act of Supremacy asserts the Queen as head of the Church of England, restoring the Anglican Church in place of Mary's Catholicism.
November 9, 1569 The Catholic Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland lead the ë Northern Rebellion against Elizabeth.
April 4, 1581 Elizabeth knights Francis Drake after he completes a voyage around the world.
July 1588 The Spanish Armada, an attempt by Philip Il of Spain to invade England, fails.
August 4, 1598 William Cecil (later known as Baron Burghley), Elizabeth's chief adviser since the start of her reign, dies.
Initially a civil war between rival religious factions in Germany, the 30 Years War became a battle for European supremacy.
By the end of the 16th century the empire included much of Germany, part of the Netherlands, Bohemia , and many states in Italy.
Many German states adopted Protestantism, causing tension within the Holy Roman Empire.
ENDEMIC WAR The 30 Years War was a series of conflicts spurred by religious bigotry and imperial paranoia that divided Europe from 1618-48.
For the people living in central Europe, this period was one of continuous warring.
But the words of Martin Luther, John Calvin, and the Reformation had challenged the previously unquestioned authority of the pope.
The Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, along with the Imperial Diet headed by the empire's great princes, agreed that each ruler in the empire should be able to choose between Catholicism or Lutheranism for their realm's religion.
In 1607 a riot between the two sides broke out in the south German city of Donauworth.
The emperor authorized Catholic Duke of Bavaria, Maximilian I, to restore order.
When the duke imposed a rigorous Catholic settlement 1632 Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus is killed at the battle of Lützen, Saxony, Germany.
Battle of White Mountain, 1620 This was the first major military encounter of the 30 Years War.
The Catholic League and imperial forces had a numerical advantage over the Protestant troops, routing them in just two hours.
EDWARD CALAMY, ENGLISH PREACHER, 1641 Defenestration of Prague Protestants assembled in Prague’s Hradschin Castle, where they threw two Catholic regents out of a window in protest for violating guarantees of religious freedom.
X RAE on the city, German protestants formed a defensive Protestant Union led by Calvinist Frederick V, ruler of the Rhineland Palatinate.
This was swiftly followed by the formation of the Catholic League led by Maximilian I The Imperial Diet tried to resolve the ill will, but the more radical Protestants walked out and the Diet did not meet again until 1640.
A Habsburg duke, the devoutly Catholic Ferdinand of Styria, Was named Crown Prince and Emperor Matthias's successor | as King of Bohemia, a | | primarily Protestant realm.
Regents representing Ferdinand used their muskets as clubs when too close to fire, relying on pikemen to defend them.
Later, the plug bayonet, fitted into the gun's muzzle, was a better close-quarters weapon.
Swedish signed by Bavaria, Ferdinand Il. general Torstensson ravages Cologne, France, and Habsburg lands in Austria.
With the election, on Matthias’s death in 1619, of Ferdinand as King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor, the Habsburg’s religious issues became an imperial one.
The Bohemian rebels appointed Calvinist Frederick V as king of Bohemia; he took the throne and called for support from the Protestant Union in his revolt.
Spain lent Ferdinand financial aid, as well as troops, which, together with the newly mustered Catholic League army led by Count Tilly, marched into Bohemia to crush the German Protestant rebellion.
After the battle of White Mountain on November 8, 1620 , Bohemia lost its independence, and Protestantism in the region was exterminated.
Cardinal Richelieu of Catholic France supported the rights of the German princes against the Catholic Habsburgs, led by state politics and trading interests rather than any shared cause.
Self-interest of the sovereign state was also behind the intervention of the Dutch Republic and Sweden in the war, rather than any anti-Catholic solidarity with the German protestants.
The Dutch had trading rights to protect across Europe and the rest of the world.
Sweden was a small country of peasant farmers and a preeminent gun foundries industry.
Under the decisive leadership of Gustavus Adolphus II (see 272), Sweden became a power on the Baltic coast.
Having crushed Count Tilly at the Battle of Breitenfeld in 1631, The Estates army formed two echelons of footsoldiers, about 5,000 cavalry, and reserves.
The right wing flanked an arboretum, the left backed against a hillock.
However, any accurate artillery shell or side-on cavalry charge on such a formation spelled disaster, as the target was larger.
AFTER By the end of the 30 Years War, there had been a shift in power among the states involved and a framework for a modern Europe of sovereign states was established.
EMERGENCE OF SOVEREIGN STATES The Peace of Westphalia paved the way for the concept of the sovereign state.
Fixed geographical boundaries for the many countries involved were established and states of the Holy Roman Empire were granted full sovereignty.
It was recognized that citizens were bound to the laws of their own government rather than those of neighboring powers, whether religious or secular.
THE RISE OF FRANCE The end of the war left Germany decentralized and divided into many territories.
A politically weakened Spain recognized the Dutch Republic —and later Portugal—as independent.
France continued to war with Spain until 1659, when it emerged as the dominant Western power.
RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE Calvinism, Lutheranism, and Catholicism were all recognized as legitimate faiths.
While religious conflicts still occurred, there were no further great religious wars in mainland Europe.
DECLINE OF THE MERCENARY The hiring of mercenaries had been commonplace in realms that lacked standing armies.
However, the size of these armies had grown massively, making them very costly to maintain.
They also caused great destruction as the soldiers attempted to live off the land, often taking from civilians.
These limitations gave rise to the idea of the national “professional” army.
It was the most costly war in terms of human life to be fought on European soil until the two world wars of the 20th century.
The desire for peace, and resentment against marauding armies looting their land, was now overwhelming in Germany, and the Peace of Prague was forged in 1635 between the Holy Roman Empire and most Protestant states.
Reconciliation between Catholics and Protestants in Germany was imminent, but Richelieu, displeased to see the Habsburgs retain power, entered into the war against them that year, with Swedish support.
The theater of war now spread to most of Europe, with fighting between the Dutch Republic and France against Spain.
OLIVER CROMWELL, ADDRESSING THE ARMY COUNCIL, 1654 The conflict between monarchy and Parliament had its origins in Charles l's belief in the Divine Right of Kings.
By the time it was over, around 10 percent of Britain’s population was dead.
This war was not just the product of a quarrel between Parliament and the king.
Religion also played a key role, as for many Parliamentarians, Catholicism and tyranny were inseparable.
However, instead of granting him cash, they countered with their own catalog of recriminations, fueled by 11 years of grievances.
He was forced to dismantle the institutions of absolute rule Statue of Charles | The reign of Charles | was characterized by religious conflict.
Combining charm with stubbornness, his absolutist tendencies, put him on a collision course with Parliament.
BEFORE Since the 13th century, the English monarch had needed Parliament's approval to raise taxes; its increasing interference infuriated the Stuart kings.
THE TUDOR REFORMATION When the pope refused Henry VIII a divorce from his first wife, Henry rejected the pope's authority and declared himself head of the Church of England in 1534.
Since she was childless, she was succeeded in 1603 by her Stuart cousin, James VI of Scotland. and lost his right to dissolve Parliament.
Rumors of his complicity in an Irish rebellion against Protestant English rule increased the tension.
When news reached Charles that Parliament intended to impeach (charge with improper conduct) his Catholic queen, Henrietta Maria, he took drastic action.
In January 1642, he entered the House of Commons with an armed force, intending to arrest five leading radical MPs for high treason.
Forewarned, they took refuge in the City of London, which considered Charles’s actions an outrage.
Fearing for his safety, Charles went north to raise an army, while his queen went abroad to raise funds to pay for it.
The years of conflict While the king commanded the loyalty of Wales, the west, and the north, Parliament controlled London, the east, and the south.
The initial battles were inconclusive—a draw at Edgehill was followed by victories for the royalists, or Cavaliers, at Landsdown and Adwalton Moor in 1643, and for the Parliamentarians, or Roundheads, at Turnham Green and Newbury.
Numerical supremacy and Scottish involvement led to Roundhead victories at Marston Moor in 1644, # and at Naseby and Langport in 1645.
KING JAMES I James's belief in the Divine Right of Kings (that the king was god's representative on Earth with unlimited authority) antagonized Parliament.
He enforced royal authority through the Courts instead and raised money by selling titles.
The conspirators meet and Lady d'Aubigny shows them Charles's Commission of Array (a royal commission summoning his officers to war)—to be proclaimed once Charles sends word of his advance.
The Guildhall is the planned storehouse for the conspirators' magazine . niei.
Sha he s iie nants dor ptis leet wi y y | Math ce yae + ied JerHeu re ats, "" m lá ais. d) ""e Fe e k ihe dau Bel pe 586, sa With suspicions aroused, the Commons orders the detention of the King’s emissary Alexander Hampden on May 22.
On May 31, they order the arrest of the suspected conspirators on the evidence of a spy.
Parliamentarian uniform red coat was N After the fall of Oxford in 1646, The New Model Army, formed in 1645 the only l Charles’s surrender to the Scots by Parliament, was England's first uniform item i at Nerak marked POE professional army.
The foot regiments, officially n E l . l | the first civil war. comprised of pikemen and musketeers, issued to the l were provided with the distinctive red New Model | Lis roe S supporters now tunic shown here.
Army split into those who wanted to share power with the king, and a more radical group, supported soldiers were by the army generals, that wanted a Foiled royalist plot dax republic.
His death warrant, shown here, is endorsed by It is a graphic account of the various parties, finally making a deal many signatures, including that of Oliver Cromwell. with the Scots to adopt Presbyterianism “Malignants’ plot"" against Parliament woolen that was unearthed on May 31, 1643. breeches in England in return for their support. firmly under English control.
His defeat | z | The royalists rose again in July 1648 of a Scottish army loyal to Charles I's son > for the zine whthout the Citty and the Scots invaded England.
The at Worcester in 1651 New Model Army finally brought an end to the civil war. v to be fer Vrat. | | n Ww easily suppressed these uprisings before In 1653, Cromwell dismissed the Rump crushing the Scots at Preston.
They Parliament, unhappy at its failure to then marched on Parliament and pass any reforms.
The appointed Lord Protector for 58 who remained—known as the life—a role that effectively colored bow, i which was used Rump Parliament—were ordered made him a military "" us to set up a High Court to try the dictator—he divided reeches king for treason.
Charles I was found guilty and beheaded on January 30, The plan is to 1649.
This was truly revolutionary; arrest the leading monarchs had been deposed or parliamentarians, killed before, but never legally England and Wales into 10 districts ruled by army generals.
With no P ae The Lord Protector power base, he was m The conspirators are Before the civil war, helpless against the a SUD hanged at the Tyburn Oliver Cromwell was army generals and 4 / gallows.
ZW. i issues a proclamation i URS aa es) — ES making all who support Parliament.
ETERNE AN ETEN S iir SPRL par oir Barmy. reopened, and public festivals, such as Christmas, Charles Il in 1685, alienated his subjects by placing were restored.
Nell Gwyn, a former orange-seller turned actress, became one of the king's most popular mistresses. religion above politics.
His advisers secretly invited the Dutch Protestant prince, William of Orange, In response to John Pym's report on the royal plot, the Commons accepts P y P Lena / to take over the throne in 1688. the imposition of a vow of support for Parliament known as ""the Covenant,"" which Is sent around the country as a test of loyalty.
ANATOMISTS Taboos surrounding the desecration of corpses prevented physicians of the 2nd-14th centuries from studying human anatomy in any detail.
Practitioners used methods we would recognize today in pursuit of a mythical ""philosopher's stone"" attributed with a variety of powers, such as the ability to give everlasting life or to make gold.
ALCHEMISTS AT WORK Scientific Revolution The 16th and 17th centuries saw a metamorphosis in European thinking about the natural world.
The Renaissance had transformed art, and the Reformation loosened the ties of religious dogma.
As their works began to filter back into European libraries, they helped to inspire a growing recognition that not everything the Greeks said was accurate.
During the 18th century, failings were exposed in a number of areas, and a new method of philosophy, in which observation and experiment took precedence over authority, began to establish itself.
Jupiter and its four Sun orbited by Mercury and Venus The knowledge explosion The scientific revolution could not have taken place without the printing press , and the rapid spread of information that printed books brought with them.
Suddenly, ideas could be transmitted accurately and rapidly across the entire European continent.
Collectors, such as the Dane Ole Worm, created “cabinets of curiosities"" —early Ring measures ascension, the equivalent of longitude on the celestial sphere The idea that the universe orbited Earth is an ancient one.
However, there were problems—Mercury and Venus never strayed far from the Sun, and Mars occasionally reversed its motion.
In 1543, Polish priest and astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus published the first widely read proposal for a new system with the Sun at its center , and the Earth the third of six planets orbiting around it.
It is a skeletal representation of the ""celestial sphere"" used for measuring astronomical coordinates.
From the early 17th century onward, the Sun was placed at the center of the sphere, as shown here.
Ring measures declination, the equivalent of latitude Plane of the solar system equivalents of today's natural history museums.
Exotic plant species brought back from around the world were cultivated in botanical gardens, and the collection of new specimens became an increasingly important part of exploratory and trading missions overseas.
The growing interest in novelty undermined the reliance on the ancients, as it became clear that they had not, after all, known everything.
The classical geographers had nothing to say about the new lands now being discovered, and since the authorities were also silent about the many new species of plant and animal, the scholars of the time had no choice but to investigate for themselves, and start to draw their own conclusions.
Written in the stars Improved technology was also undermining other long-held theories.
The most celebrated casualty of the entire revolution was the ancient, Barth-centered model of the universe.
Italian physicist and astronomer Galileo Galilei is often credited with discovering that Earth and the other planets orbit the Sun, using one of the first telescopes.
Galileo’s discovery in 1610 of the four moons orbiting Jupiter showed that Earth was not the center of all motion in the universe, and his observation of the Moon-like phases of Venus showed that it must be orbiting the Sun.
The most persuasive evidence for this theory came from the observations of Danish Timekeepers Improvements in time measurement aided both astronomy and navigation.
The weightdriven brass lantern clock was one step forward, although this Japanese version from the mid-T7th | century still does not have a minute hand.
The pendulum clock invented by Christiaan Huygens in 1656 marked a further advance in precision. astronomer Tycho Brahe.
However, these observations alone could not have created a new theory— they merely disproved the old one.
The crucial leap was made by Brahe's one-time student, German astronomer Johannes Kepler.
Careful study of Brahe's measurements allowed him to develop a set of laws, published in 1609, that showed how the planets follow elliptical, rather than circular, orbits around the Sun.
Advances in biology While astronomy and physics were undergoing their revolution, medicine and anatomy were also in a period of rapid change.
The discovery of a lost text by Galen in the early Life through a lens The first book of microscope observations was Robert Hooke's Micrographia of 1664, which described and illustrated Hooke's observations of insects, plants, and living cells.
This illustration of an ant shows more detailed anatomy than was previously possible.
SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION © ISAAC NEWTON Kepler's laws explained how planets and other celestial objects followed their orbits, but could not explain why.
The realization that the force of gravity found on Earth might extend out into space, and be generated by other objects of sufficient mass, came from Isaac Newton.
Newton was a brilliant but tempestuous individual, fascinated by mathematics, | astronomy, optics, and alchemy.
During the last two ų decades of his life, he was the most revered “natural philosopher” in Europe.
The universal laws of motion and gravitation, and the model of the behavior NEWTON’S TELESCOPE of light that he discovered, remained the 16th century intrigued the Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius, who discovered that Galen had clearly never dissected a human body.
Vesalius’ great atlas of anatomy, De Humani Corporis Fabrica , inspired a new generation to continue the study of anatomy without undue deference to authorities from the past.
One great battleground between traditionalism and the new approach was the nature of the circulatory system.
Imbalances in the humors supposedly caused a variety of ailments, and much of medieval medicine focused on how best to regulate them.
Only when Galen’s description of the heart was proved wrong did physicians begin to question this theory.
In 1603, Italian anatomist Hieronymus Fabricius discovered valves within certain blood vessels, but it was not until 1628 that William Harvey, personal physician to Charles I of England, announced his discovery that the valves only worked in one direction.
Blood vessels must therefore form two distinct groups—arteries taking blood away from the heart, and veins carrying blood back toward it.
Harvey’s discovery met with fierce resistance, not only because it undermined Galen, but also because, with no visible connection between Mountains on the Moon Using a telescope Galileo discovered the varying terrain of the Moon , and spots on the Sun. foundations of physics for two centuries. arteries and veins, it relied on tiny “capillaries,” too small to be seen, to complete the system.
By stating the evidence rather than attacking rival ideas, Harvey formed a template for later scientific publications.
In 1661, improvements to the recently invented microscope finally allowed direct observation of the capillaries, vindicating Harvey and confirming the supremacy of the new method of observation, experiment, and deduction.
AFTER After the scientific revolution, science became established as the best method to explain and predict natural phenomena.
SCIENCE AND SOCIETY The 17th century saw the foundation of many scientific societies across Europe.
Establishment of true scientific method inspired thinkers in many other fields, giving rise to economic, social, and political sciences among others.
The growing supremacy of Western technology ensured longevity of the nascent European empires.
Up to 100,000 people perished in the earthquake itself and in the tsunami and fire that followed.
The physical shockwaves were felt around the world; but the event also caused people to question established beliefs.
In the 18th century, Lisbon, situated on the southwest coast of Portugal, at the mouth of the Tagus River, was a grand, affluent city that formed the hub of a vast global empire.
But by 10:00 am on November 1, 1755, an earthquake measuring an estimated 9 on the Richter scale (the highest number on the scale being 10) had reduced Lisbon to a scene of utter devastation.
Cracks as wide as 16 ft appeared in the ground, swallowing buildings and people.
In panic, many inhabitants had fled toward the port at the mouth of the river, clambering aboard the ships moored there in the belief that they would be in a safer place.
But the earthquake was followed by a massive tsunami, a huge wall of water some 20 ft high, that crashed into the city and roared up the river, causing further death and destruction.
All along the coast of Portugal, towns were inundated by catastrophic floods.
Agadir in North Africa was flooded, leaving thousands dead, and the wave traveled as far as northern Europe and across the Atlantic as far as Barbados.
Once the ground had stopped shaking and the waters had receded, the third disaster, fire, struck Lisbon.
These three catastrophes resulted in the destruction of threequarters of Lisbon's buildings, including the city's vast royal library, which held priceless works of art and historical records detailing Portuguese expeditions to Southeast Asia.
The earthquake had struck on All Saints’ Day, one of the holiest days in the Christian calendar.
The earthquake caused others to question the very existence of a higher being.
The event became a key topic of discussion for thinkers of the Enlightenment , who began to look for the causes of such disasters in the natural world, rather than blaming the wrath of God.
The French writer and philosopher Voltaire used the earthquake to attack blind faith in God; while the German philosopher Immanuel Kant argued that the causes of the disaster should be examined scientifically, and that it is the responsibility of humanity to prepare itself for such events.
Disaster strikes As the earthquake struck, Lisbon's buildings rocked backward and forward.
The Encyclopédie paid particular attention to everyday professions, eager to preserve artisan skills and techniques for posterity.
The German philosopher Immanuel Kant described the Enlightenment as ""... man's release from his self-inflicted immaturity,” meaning that people should use their reason without taking direction.
Its 17 volumes of or ""Reasoned Dictionary beyond during the 18th century thanks that allowed anyone to be locked up ED PAR cM e E El AD an 72,000 articles and over 2,500 plates.
Arts and Trades. to an explosion in printing and the without evidence; and the Church (for encouraging 5 ims superstition and Phe Swiss thinker ENCYCLOPEDIE, widespread use of the French language.
Enlightenment A woman renowned for her beauty and wit, i i From 1750, a Jeanne Poisson was installed in beliefs by arguing Mis en & publié par M DI DE RO T, de l'Académie Royale des Sciences & des Belles""republic of letters"" Versailles Palace as Louis XV's mistress.
Shewas that social progress Lettres de Prule; &, quanta la Pantie Maruémarigque, par M D'ALEMBERT, emerged in Paris, an avid patron of artistic and intellectual projects. had helped to corrupt de l'Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, de celle de Prule, & de la Société Royale aided by the existence human nature.
Che; | DAVID lainé, me Saine Jacques, d la Plume d'or, F The roots of the as Voltaire.
He promoted the English legal system, Enlightenment lay in religious toleration, and its constitutional monarchy the Renaissance and as alternatives to French absolutism in his Lettres English political and Philosophiques ; it was immediately banned. intellectual culture.
Humanists such as the empiricism , French moralist Michel de Montaigne wrote | on direct experience); and d'Alembert.
Isaac Newton and disseminate all existing knowledge customs through the eyes of Persian d D RA | for his unifying scientific in clear, accessible prose and to educate visitors, poking fun at the Church, POLITICAL REFORMS ""T "" laws and discoveries. public opinion by “changing accepted Court, and French society.
Banned twice for perfected it in Candide , an and replaced by William Ill.
Subsequent } E its anti-Catholic tone, its survival relied account of a naive young man's political reforms inspired French writers, such OF LEARNING"" on the support of the state censor. adventures, by exposing the A more effective way of spreading hypocrisies of the institutions and similar ideas was through satire.
They argued that for states to be progressive, politics and religion should be kept apart.
Yet many also believed that religion was necessary for upholding the social order, creating an insoluble conflict.
Anticlerical sentiments, spread by satirical prints and novels, were fueled by anger at the Church's corruption and abuse of power.
Freemasons lodges sprang up across Europe as secular spaces for disciples of the “Cult of Reason"" to gather and exchange ideas.
The French king and his ministers were often in dispute with The tools of the trade of a pastry cook are shown here, including bowls of varying sizes, a baking tray, a mortar and pestle, and a rolling pin. the parlements—French law courts dominated by the aristocracy.
Montesquieu transformed the political debate by proposing, in his bestselling treatise Spirit of the Laws , a limited monarchy based on a three-way division of powers between the executive , the legislature , and the judiciary.
This was a time when thinkers believed that a rational, scientific approach could be applied to almost any subject.
Scotsman Adam Smith's analysis of capitalism, in his book Wealth of Nations , invented the new science of economics, while Kant's Critique of Pure Reason presented a more scientific approach to philosophy and knowledge.
A fully inflated cornemuse shows the positioning of the mouthpiece, fingering tubes, and venting tube.
The soufflet was a type of bellows to which a sound-producing object such as a chanter (see below) could be attached.
The four-reed drone fitted onto the musette de cour shown above it; a type of bellows-blown bagpipe.
With three keys and seven finger-holes, it gave a range of one octave; annotation relates each finger-hole to its note.
Other mouthpieces for the bagpipes are illustrated—the editors intended the engravings to be as comprehensive as possible.
AFTER The Enlightenment provoked both radical change and growing criticism of its ideas.
REVOLUTIONS Increasing demands for political representation helped pave the way for the American and French revolutions.
In practice, the self-interest of modern nation states often comes first.
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU, ""THE SOCIAL CONTRACT,” 1762 Enlightenment ideas on the state, attacking outdated traditions, filtered down to some of Europe's rulers, including Empress Maria Theresa of Austria, Catherine II “the Great"" of Russia, and Frederick II ""the Great"" of Prussia, who briefly employed Voltaire as his advisor.
Frederick tried to govern his subjects as the ""first servant of the state” His ""revolution from above"" created an enlightened welfare state with a modern bureaucracy and law system, transforming Prussia into a semiconstitutional state.
Prince Karl Frederick of Baden went one step farther, abolishing serfdom outright.
Innovative tactics were employed by field commanders, and training manuals, maps, and field glasses began to be more widely used.
But the idea of a permanent or ""standing"" professional army as a fixed piece of machinery of state was still in its infancy.
The copper and bronze weaponry made to fire it was slow in development and far from uniform in design or ammunition.
It was fought at close quarters between an English fleet of 56 ships under the Duke of Albemarle and a larger Dutch fleet commanded by their great admiral Michiel De Ruyter.
E ar KING OF SWEDEN GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS Il ensured that his men were regularly paid.
His military innovations in troop formations and combinations led to a permanent increase in the size of European armies.
Gustavus Adolphus II came to the throne of Sweden in 1611 and is considered the father of modern military tactics.
He promoted a more standardized and much lighter artillery, more compact supply trains, offensive tactics (a quick offensive campaign gave the enemy little time to prepare its defense), and provisioning troops by negotiation, not looting.
LH Battle with pikes As military tactics became more sophisticated, full-on cavalry charges and standardized artillery became integral to more sustained and offensive tactics than the older pike-style warfare, shown above. uring the 17th century, Europe D became an almost permanent theater of war, witnessing more battles than in any other place or time.
If there was a dispute to settle, then war was the way to do it—diplomacy came when treaties were made.
From the late 17th century, trade— not religion or dynasty—became the dominant cause of conflict between Europeans.
The nascent nation-states were increasingly concerned about their freedoms to trade, and thereby to profit and to protect monopolies both on the high seas and in overseas possessions.
Quarrels about trade around the world were now a concern of European states-in-the-making.
For example, from 1652 to 1674, two former Masters of War By the 18th century, Europe had emerged from a series of violent wars fought over religion.
Such conflicts were quickly replaced with battles over republican allies—England and the Dutch Republic—embarked on three Anglo-Dutch Wars centered around trade, colonial possessions, and shipping rights.
The initial cause was an act passed by the English parliament that forbade any foreign ship to carry, and therefore trade, English goods.
The Dutch carried massive quantities of English goods in their ships, which made them huge profits that they were prepared to fight to protect.
The Treaty of Breda , which ended the second Anglo-Dutch War, was the first multinational peace settlement, concerned as much about Europe’s overseas interests as its European boundaries.
Significantly, the wide-ranging Peace of Westphalia that had ended the 30 Years War trade rights both in Europe and in the ever-increasing number of European colonies abroad.
More portable and accurate than earlier guns, it also had a fixed ring bayonet. only 19 years earlier contained almost nothing about nonEuropean matters in its collection of treaties, which demonstrates how rapidly Europe’s overseas possessions had grown in importance.
On a war footing One effect of frequent wars was that large and properly equipped armies and navies had to be maintained, and this required centralized and bureaucratic states to run them.
Countries now developed national armed forces as they became an integral element of nation-building.
The Dutch were a typical example of how a government’s administration and finances were now geared to the ability to mobilize for war and buttress the state’s power.
FREDERICK II OF PRUSSIA, ATTRIBUTED did not “stand down” every winter slowly became the norm.
The days of the mercenary captains raising private armies for a fee were numbered.
Militarism, the central aim of which was the financing and organizing of professional armies, was increasing so that by the 1690s, France, fighting a European coalition, could mobilize upward of 340,000 troops.
Even at peace the French standing army numbered 150,000 troops, compared bronze siege mortar F2 — with 55,000 in the 1660s.
Prussian mobilization in the 18th century could raise an army of 185,000 from a population of only five million.
Warfare came of age with key developments in the study of strategy, siege tactics, topography, and ballistics.
Weapons and ammunition were also refined, and logistics became more of a science as soldiers were now part of the state’s permanent expenses.
The emphasis switched to defense from aggression. wooden mounting Early mortar gun by a Dutch military engineer, the Coehorn siege mortar gun was a cannon used to fire Shells at right angles.
Developed in the 17th century Europe's military power grew in sophistication and scope, soon to be ""exported"" to the rest of the world.
During the Napoleonic Wars , Napoleon Bonaparte introduced the method of deploying massed artillery at a specific point in a battle, thereby giving him sensational victories.
EUROPE’S FIRST PROFESSIONAL ARMY Russia had the first European army in which all the men wore uniforms and private soldiers were decorated for bravery—almost unknown in the rest of Europe.
Troops were directly recruited and financed by the state—peasant conscripts served for life until 1793.
It is considered to be the first truly global conflict in history. l M l| | f | | 1450-1750 | i i L] i | POWDER BELT E cs i > | o phe m | Pte ot l inim. * yt H E EL] TE A "" ‘hs iw.
VAAN d Lg c m uam ume RR 22 LES cülsss GAUNTLET Com ""—— GREAVE AND GREAVE AND SABATON — a Pe um zr z e e RR AMA SABATON CUIRASS Arms and Armor As armies became more formal organizations and military strategy developed, so GAUNTLET WU EIER J J^ amem e, CER 3 did weapons.
Lighter, more flexible armor was used and the use of guns increased. hi pE E However, despite their violent purpose, many weapons were exquisitely decorated.
French sword, dating from poe helmet, dating to c 1570 and elaborately decorated.20, and made from silver with elaborate gold decoration.
Italian equestrian armor, designed to protect the head JH $ b British matchlock gun, dating from the 17th century. and neck of a horse in battle.
Dutch Closed helmet with a pivoting visor from an Italian eit. flintlock pistol, 1700, made by the Flemish gunmaker suit of armor, dating to the mid-16th century.
Scottish pistol, 1750, constructed constructed from metal plates, suits such as this were actually from iron by Thomas Cadell of Doune.
Gauntlets constructed from Sh a Ne 6 gaps in the steel blade were designed to trap the sword of an small, flexible plates protected the hands and wrists. i"" Ae opponent, and wrench it from his grip or shatter the blade.
Greaves protected the lower legs and sabatons covered Barbed arrowheads dating from 1500, and probably the feet.
The cuirass protected the torso and comprised HUNTING used for hunting rather than warfare.
Steel mace with the breast and back plates, which were attached to each SWORD seven flanges, and typical of this type of weapon in the 16th other with leather straps.
The establishment of overseas empires, and the creation of trading centers to finance them, spurred this new wave of global commerce. he discovery of the Americas and the development in the 15th century of ocean-going ships capable of sailing vast distances kick-started the modern era of capitalism.
The enterprise of investing money to make money now had a global reach with potentially massive profits, simply because of the scarcity of the precious commodities—from silver to silk, porcelain to pepper—and the large distances involved.
The value of goods from the East was so huge in Europe that it paid for the costs of such voyages many times over.
Ships often succumbed to storms, reefs, and pirates, with the result that all of the goods accrued over many months would be lost in an instant.
Investment in ships, rigging, guns, and crew, as well as refurbishing and filling the ships with BEFORE In the medieval period, the attitude of the Catholic Church to usury prevented capitalism from developing.
The papal ban on levying interest was not repealed until the 15th century.
Such undertakings tied up large sums of money for long periods, sometimes years, before any profit could be realized.
So a large number of speculators needed to be persuaded to share the risk.
Merchant capitalism The need to secure the required investment saw the creation of joint stock companies.
Investors bought into the companies—even if they had no personal links to its trading activities— by buying stocks in them on the open market.
HUGO GROTIUS, FROM ""CONCERNING THE LAW OF PRIZE,"" 1604 Royal exchange Edward Lloyd's coffee shop Ship owners meet at Lloyd's coffeehouse to discuss future voyages with underwriters—men who insure things against loss for a premium.
Dutch trader's manual A Dutch trader's manual from the 1500s with pictures of coins, which was used to conduct business.
As a London doth merchant who supplied the tapestries for Henry VIII's Hampton Court, Richard Gresham had visited Antwerp's trading center.
He recognized its vital trade link, and urged the establishment of a similar center in London.
In 1565 his son Thomas established the Royal Exchange of London, shown here. but, crucially, could not withdraw their capital.
An investor's share in the company's stock could also be sold at whatever price the buyer and seller agreed on.
The Muscovy Company was the first joint-stock enterprise established in England in 1555, but the Dutch East India Company was the most famous.
It was chartered by the States General in 1602 and consisted of a grouping of six provincial chambers each with its own capital and share distribution of total profits.
They appointed 17 general directors, the Heeren XVII, who became the central management.
The Heeren XVII controlled the administration of factories and territory in the East Indies, the marketing of imported goods to Amsterdam, and how ships were to be freighted and employed.
Even the Bank of England, when it was founded by royal charter in 1694, was organized at first on joint-stock lines to raise money for what were effectively trade-based wars against France.
Other company enterprises included the United Company of Merchants of England , Companhia Geral do Comércio do Brasil , Compagnie de Chine , the French East India Company , Compagnie de Sénégal , the Royal African Company , the Dutch West India Company, the Hudson’s Bay Company , and the South Sea Company —the name of each often giving away the nature of the enterprise.
The lynchpin of capitalism A vital innovation, the joint-stock company enjoyed a much more longterm and independent existence than other companies, as it built up its capital and a buoyant market for its shares over time.
A large range of financial services offered by banks were provided by legal clerks, merchants, and goldsmiths in the 18th century. to protect their coastal factories and trade.
Specialist traders now emerged to arrange deals between buyers and sellers of stocks and shares (in an enterprise or commodity with which they had no direct connection) in return for a cut on each transaction.
In London the brokers gathered at first in coffeehouses, and a system of stockbroking — pg ""tI D e, s e n Ta LaL a íi x ux gradually became established.
At Edward Lloyd's coffeehouse, merchants, brokers, ship owners, and sea captains met to discuss investment and insurance for new voyages.
At Jonathan's coffeehouse in Change Alley, brokers negotiated with investors to buy and sell shares in jointstock companies and trading ventures.
In 1698, stock dealers were expelled from the Royal Exchange for rowdiness and began their dealings in the streets and coffeehouses nearby, in particular in Jonathan's Coffeehouse.
It was in these coffeehouses that brokers also came up with the idea of producing lists of share prices and shipping departure data.
In the same year, John Castaing began publishing a twice-weekly newsletter of share and commodity prices, called The Course of the Exchange and other things, which he sold at Jonathan's.
A ""bourse"" is born From the early 16th century in Antwerp, merchants had a base within which to trade—a Bourse.
It was custom-built and regulated as a market for the sale and purchase of trading companies' shares and stocks.
The Bourse—the continental term for a stock exchange—became the symbol of capitalism and an expanding economy, in which ships were chartered, cargo insured, and stocks and shares bought and sold.
As with marine insurance, double-entry bookkeeping, and other business techniques, the bank was copied from Italian models.
CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY Adam Smith's /nquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations supported the massive growth in the banking industry.
LLOYD'S OF LONDON Within the vast atrium of the Lloyd's of London building stands the Lutine Bell.
It was rescued from HMS Lutine, which sank in 1799 with its crew and cargo of gold and bullion.
Now mainly reserved for ceremonial purposes, it was traditionally rung once for the loss or delay of a ship and twice for its safe arrival.
During the campaigns, Louis XIV relied on his "" regency of his mother, Anne of Austria, director of finances, Jean-Baptiste ^ the effective ruler of France was her Colbert.
When tax collection system, brought Mazarin died in 1661, the 23-year-old King Louis XIV was expected to appoint a chief minister of similar caliber.
Expensive wars For the first 20 years of his personal reign , Louis was constantly waging war.
He began with an attack on the Spanish Netherlands in 1667 to gain land, but his territorial ambitions there were thwarted by an alliance between Holland, England, and Sweden.
In 1672, having detached England from that alliance, he invaded Holland, but under William of Orange the Dutch managed to stand firm against him.
Although this campaign led to the formation of another European alliance against France, Louis did make some territorial gains along France’s frontiers.
By all accounts, Louis was attractive, with a strong nose, piercing eyes, and a healthy complexion.
The War Royal family tree of the Grand Alliance Louis XIV was a member of one of the most powerful and widely distributed royal dynasties lasted until 1697.
He was also in charge of the royal household’s finances, a responsibility that included the cost of Versailles.
The court of the Sun King Versailles began as a modest hunting lodge near Paris, where the young Louis A XIV entertained his intimate friends.
In the late 1660s Louis started to devote more attention to the project of reconstructing and extending the old é hunting lodge into a royal palace.
There was method behind Louis’ extravagant plan to build a great royal palace.
By making Versailles the permanent base of the royal court and the seat of government from 1682, Louis created a hugely attractive nexus of power and influence, which the nobility found irresistible, and which persuaded them to trade provincial power for influence and rewards at Court, under the direct auspices of the king.
Above all, the Court was a center of conspicuous consumption and magnificence, principally intended to glorify the “Sun King,” as Louis was Sun motif This gilded sun emblem made of carved wood Is found on the walls of the palace of Versailles.
IDEA ABSOLUTE MONARCHY From the moment of his coronation Louis XIV demonstrated his belief that he had a “divine right""— God-given duty—to rule France as an absolute monarch, without consulting parliaments, ministers, or senior nobles.
Blessed with stamina, confidence, and a passion for order, he was an extraordinarily capable ruler.
Even when he was at war, he insisted on daily progress reports about the construction of Versailles.
Theater i Madeleine Béjart was the leading lady of the F theatrical company managed by Molière, the genius of French comedy whose plays entertained Louis and his court.
Palace of Versailles Once established at Versailles, Louis’ court become a magnet for all the talent in France, and a monument to French cultural and political prestige. styled by artists paid to glorify him.
And, like the sun god Apollo, Louis wished to appear a great patron of the arts, provided that the artists obeyed the various controls imposed by the royal academies.
At the heart of the royal palace, which at its height was the size of a small town containing upwards of 10,000 people, were the apartments of Louis, his Spanish Queen, Marie Thérèse, and the royal mistress.
It was usual for the current royal mistress to enjoy court honors, and the children resulting from the relationships were acknowledged by the king.
The Sun King died at the age of 77, in the 56th year of his personal rule.
His final years were clouded by bereavement, military defeat, and a catastrophic country-wide collapse in the French economy.
The sudden deaths of his son, the dauphin , his grandson, and his elder great-grandson— all within a matter of months—meant that his kingdom passed to his fiveyear-old great grandson, Louis XV. miti, AIR LOUIS XIV TIMELINE 1638 Birth of Louis, long awaited first-born child of Anne of Austria and Louis XIII of France.
LOUIS XIV'S MARRIAGE 1668 Treaty of Aix-La-Chapelle marks France's successful annexation of part of the Spanish Netherlands.
His bequeaths the throne in the first instance to Louis XIV's grandson, the Duc d'Anjou, who becomes Philip V of Spain.
The war ends in 1713 at the Treaty of Utrecht, with Philip V left on the Spanish throne, but the Spanish Empire partitioned.
SUGAR PLANTATIONS The first sugar plantation was established by the Portuguese in Madeira, an island off the northwest coast of Africa, in 1452.
At first, Africans were kidnapped and forced into slavery to work on plantations, but in 1458 a deal was brokered with African rulers to purchase slaves.
The triangular trade The global triangular trading system had profit on every leg.
Slave ships left European ports for West Africa laden with Iron, wine, guns, and textiles.
These were exchanged for slaves, who were transported across the Atlantic to sell to plantation owners.
The ships then returned to European ports with a cargo of sugar, coffee, and tobacco.
All together, around 10 million Africans were captured, shackled, and shipped to the Americas to work on sugar, cotton, and tobacco plantations.
Ithough African slave labor A was used in the production of other commodities, such as minerals, coffee, cocoa, indigo, cotton, and tobacco, it was Europe’s craving for sugar that brought European traders to Africa to buy and barter slaves.
The Swedes, Danes, French, British, Dutch, and Portuguese established over 30 slave forts along the West African “Gold Coast,” and a series of ports for exporting slaves stretched over 2,000 miles from the Senegal River south to Angola in Senegambia, Dahomey , and Ouidah.
Slaves in Africa Slavery was already part of Africa’s tribal economy and society—more so than land ownership—before the arrival of the European traders.
For example, women and children whose menfolk had been killed in battle were usually enslaved, becoming part of a tribal ruler’s extended family.
The East Africa slave trade was also wellestablished, with captured slaves transported north across the Saharan desert and east into Arabia, the Middle East, and India by Arab and Ottoman slave traders.
African chiefs were complicit in providing the European seafarers with slaves.
As a result, African chiefs leased out land along the coast so the Europeans could establish trading forts.
African slaves captured in raids or after battle were transported to the forts by their African captors, then sold to the European traders.
For Instruments of torture Slaves were seen as chattel, or goods, not as human beings, demonstrated by the assortment of heavy tron Shackles that they had to endure.
Male slaves were chained up in gruesome ankle and neck chains. example, in 1726 the King of Dahomey suggested that the Europeans should establish plantations in his kingdom— he would supply the slaves.
Money without morals With only a toehold on the African coast, Europeans were unable to monopolize the slave trade.
OTTOBAH CUGOANO, FREED SLAVE, 1787 were collected directly from leased forts in exchange for goods, such as guns or alcohol, or ships plied the Gold Coast hoping to pick up a cargo of slaves from private dealers.
For example, by the 1780s the plantations of the French colony Saint-Domingue accounted for 60 percent of France’s overseas wealth, supplying Slaves were shackled in rows between the hold and the deck, lying on their back or sides.
I | pi it) ith Tm UE hi Branding iron When they were bought, all male slaves were forcibly branded with a hot iron as proof of ownership. 40 per cent of all the sugar and 60 percent of all the coffee consumed in Europe.
The middle passage Slaves from the African coastal forts were packed on ships bound for N a journey called the “middle passage.
RELIES SUE SSE NUN ui Me YALE RUMI uj » Lu di USERS TS ü PAREN )1NU a [A JAS M 1 teri Wi aig ""t E Tute POE cy | LR G 1 af A | E aq iLilsgsecsscorssssoseu.. t JE M T SIDE DROTU G | aie SE — 2 oa ee M Se YON see SENIE SL VU YO PYNE Aine TNG JOUER ES 9 asJETSRIESARICOSPSIQSODOSISEA REKETE Men were chained together at the front of the boat; women were held in a separate area.
Both food and water were rationed so there was enough to last the voyage.
This peaked in the 1780s at 78,000 slaves a year, with half of them carried on British ships.
Men were chained together in a suffocatingly small space between the deck and the hold.
Women were usually left unchained and were allowed on deck to help with the cooking.
However, they risked constant sexual harassment and rape by the European crew.
Few ships were equipped to deal with bodily functions and, as they were shackled together, it was particularly hard for the men to avoid catching dysentery and smallpox—the two biggest onboard killers.
After a month at sea, a slave ship stank of sweat, urine, feces, and vomit.
It was said that a slave ship could be smelled two days before it actually arrived in a port.
Each morning, the slaves were dragged up onto deck and their shackles were inspected.
Any slave who had died during the night was unchained and thrown overboard.
Rations included boiled mash of horse beans and yams, biscuits, rice, plantain, and occasionally meat.
One food bucket was usually shared among many, resulting in quarrels— and infection.
Accounting for those dying in transit to forts and on slave ships, the figure is probably closer to 12 million.
AFTER The slave trade was finally abolished in England in 1807, after years of campaigning by antislavery groups.
ANTISLAVERY CAMPAIGN Thomas Clarkson, a leading antislavery protester in England, gathered evidence such as shackles and the oral accounts of former slave captains to publicize the horrors of the trade.
The Abolition of the Slave Trade Act was passed in England in 1807, followed by the Emancipation Act of 1833, which made owning slaves illegal.
A string of legislation followed, with slavery abolished in the United States in 1865, Cuba in 1886, Brazil Captains and crew z | m in 1888, ending with Sierra Leone in succumbed to disease and m sg s rq.27 and the Gold Coast in 1928. death as much as their xd TOP E pte aw cargo.
In 1787, of the ANTISLAVERY POSTER, BOSTON, 1851 slave-ship crews that embarked from Liverpool in England, SLAVERY TODAY less than half returned alive.
Auctioned Arriving in Brazil or the Caribbean islands, the slaves were sold at auction, then delivered to their new owners.
This was often followed by a period of ""seasoning""—about a year in which the slave either succumbed to disease or survived to live a life of human bondage and misery.
Guianas Brazil Old World Modern-day human rights campaigners point out that the fight against slavery is far from over.
It is estimated that there are over 27 million slaves in the world today, including people in forced labor, women and girls trafficked for work in the sex industry, and children kidnapped and forced to fight as soldiers.
The problem of determining longitude on an endless Harrison eventually won the prize in horizon was one of the greatest challenges for sailors 1764, though the full amount was not AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND navigating the Pacific Ocean in the 18th century.
But arid Australia clock-making but built five marine timekeepers, the remained uninviting except to the Aborigines best of which could keep time at sea to within about ere ee who landed there 40,000 years earlier. one second per day—a staggering positioning without pendulum or accuracy of about 1,600 ft —solving the any lubrication UNCHARTED TERRITORY navigational problem.
This huge clock was To Europeans, Terra Australis Incognita (Unknown his first prototype, called H1.
E i TUls "" m — — d aS ~ xS mat C an area larger than all the continents' Greenwich after a aj AE M Y-the3middle-of-tre-pstri landmass combined, and the prevailing a voyage to the other side of the world p /, y P B century, Europeans had winds also narrowed the sea routes required an extremely accurate clock. i A H^ | mapped the coastlines of North available.
Earlier Polynesian voyagers— The ability to determine longitude was fy 4 and South America, Asia, and Africa, the Maori who had sailed to New vital—it would allow sailors to chart Y fy | and vast empires were well underway Zealand and the discoverers of the their precise location and that of the i ARS in these areas.
E to colonize the islands of the Pacific sun and the stars, and patterns in the and reported in 1568 but were not i Ocean until the late 18th century. ocean's currents and waves.
Accurate chronometers were invaluable as they allowed sailors to measure exact longitude ror the first time.
Other obstacles to colonization included malaria, settlers’ reliance on imported livestock, the poor quality of land for farming, and tropical storms.
They used the Pacific primarily to ship South American silver to the Philippines to trade with China and the East Indies.
Spain’s greatest rival, the Dutch East India Company, concentrated on its possessions in the Indonesian archipelago, discouraging its captains from long, fruitless, and costly ocean voyages in the region.
Breakthrough voyages, such as Luis Vaez de Torres’ 1606 sailing between New Guinea and Australia that proved the former to be an island, received no publicity.
The race for land begins When British Captain James Cook set out for Tahiti on the Endeavour in 1768, his orders were to observe the transit of Venus, a rare astronomical event when the planet passes across the disk of the Sun.
But the British also wanted to forestall any French ambitions of gaining land in the area.
The second, secret purpose of Cook's voyage was to survey the vast Pacific Ocean to see if Tahiti was the possible gateway to the landmass of — a southern continent, Australia. — — Be. win EXPLORING T As European settlers arrived, some under duress, the Pacific region began to develop whaling and agricultural industries.
WHALING Whaling was a lure in the Pacific for Europeans and Americans from 1789 onwards.
They impacted on the islands"" native communities as well stimulating further maritime expansion.
SHEEP FARMING British settlers in Australia and New Zealand introduced sheep to temperate regions of the continent.
INDUSTRY AND REVOLUTION 1750-1914 From the middle of the 18th century, the world experienced radical change.
Political revolutions challenged established governments, aiming to throw off the shackles of oppression and privilege.
New methods of mechanization and transportation resulted in an age of industry and manufacturing that gave birth to new cities and consolidated empires.
Victory at Battle of Plassey secures Bengal for the British East India Company; Prussia defeats Austria at Battle of Leuthen; gives them control of Silesia.
James Cook begins his first Pacific voyage A Bridgewater canal 1760 Boer settlement of South African interior.
Captain Cook's <q chronometer 1776 United States Declaration of Independence; British abandon Boston.
Spanish possession of Uruguay and Portuguese possession of Amazon basin confirmed.
Articles of p Confederation 1781 Battle of Yorktown: George Washington and French allies defeat British; Articles of Confederation ratified.
British take direct control of Indian territories. <q Treaty of Paris l Vac dete Tennis Court Oath; French Revolution begins.
George Washington elected first president of the United States (to orn 1782 Britain sues for peace with American rebels.
The American and French revolutions transformed Western political expectations.
If the results were contradictory-the United States emerging as a fully functioning democracy, France destabilized for almost a century— demands for political liberation echoed through the 19th century.
These demands took place against a background of Western domination, ee ap | KR a 1B Louis XVI overthrown; French republic declared; France declares war on Austria, Prussia, and Piedmont.
PIDDE OI ^ A Execution of Marie Antoinette 1793 Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette executed; beginning of “Terror” led by Maximilien Robespierre.
Maximilien < Robespierre 1798 Napoleon Bonaparte invades Egypt; French fleet destroyed by British at Battle of the Nile.
Lewis and | Clark explore territories of Louisiana Purchase | and reach the Pacific.
Battle of Trafalgar d 1804 Napoleon assumes title of Emperor of France.
Napoleonic Code introduced. 9 allies defeat France; | British cross into 1 France.
Congress of | Vienna to set out Abolition of slavery future of Europe in Britain p | | Moscow, but forced to | retreat.
Egypt reclaims Battle of the Nations; INDUSTRY AND REVOLUTION supported by rapid industrialization, expanding trade, and population growth.
It was an era of unprecedented European global supremacy and imperial expansion on every continent.
Yet by 1914, these apparently impregnable powers were poised to tear themselves apart in the world’s 1828 Russia acquires Armenia, declares war on Ottomans, takes Varna, Bulgaria.
Agricultural innovation, &; a such as Morton seed iÑ. drill, continues.
Peru becomes independent from Spain, aided by Simón Qd ] Bolivar. oa a s | 1826-28 | Russo-Persian War.
A Battle of Maipu 1818 Chilean independence from Spain confirmed by victory in Battle of Maipu.
M Morton seed drill 1750-1914 PY Liberty Leading the People, Eugene Delacroix 1830 Revolution in Paris topples Charles X; Louis-Philippe crowned | king of France.
The Communist ES Manifesto > | 1857 Opening of Great Exhibition, London Indian Mutiny; revolt attempts to end | British rule.
V indian Mutiny Second Italian War of Independence; Giuseppe Garibaldi serves as major general.
INDUSTRY AND REVOLUTION “A people destined to achieve great things for the 9 gitare of humanity must one day or other be con ynstituted d nation.
Madagascar becomes a French protectorate, Tanganyika a German protectorate.
Young Turk Revolution v Reformist ""Young Turks"" oust Ottoman sultan, Abdul Hamid Il.
Mexican Revolution begins. v Mexican Revolution 1750-1914 BEFORE Despite advances in farming practices and knowledge, pre-18th-century food production was inefficient and reliant on manual labor.
ENCLOSURE The enclosure system was first developed in England in the 12th century, and saw the division of large, commonlyowned fields into small, privately-owned plots.
Laborers were forced from the fields by land owners thanks to a series of Enclosure Acts.
ENCLOSURE SYSTEM NEW METHODS By the mid-17th century many farmers began to treat farming as a science.
They adopted new winter feeding methods, which made fresh meat available year-round.
Improved seeds in Holland and later in England yielded new varieties of fruit and vegetables, and numerous new horse-drawn threshers, cultivators, grain, and grass cutters were used.
Although this had happened before, each time the population had ceased to grow because agriculture could not feed the extra people.
However, by 1750 the onset of agricultural technology allowed this population growth to be sustained. he mid-18th century witnessed T a dramatic increase in world population.
The British economist Thomas Malthus believed that this rise would eventually be halted by a shortage of food.
He had not accounted, however, for vast improvements in agricultural practice.
In 1701, Jethro Tull had developed the horse-drawn seed-drill, a machine for efficiently planting seeds, while a four-year system of crop rotation dispensed with the need to replenish fields by leaving them unfarmed for a season.
These changes would have been impossible under the old common-field system, but a spate of Enclosure Acts during the 19th century allowed landowners to evict peasants from the land, and experiment with new farming techniques without the consent The Food Revolution The Agricultural Revolution that began in the mid-18th century saw a massive increase in food production.
The dramatic increase in efficiency fed a rising population, allowing it to expand further.
It could do the work of three men, and was soon exported around the world.
Changing practices Rural scene like this one in Norfolk, England in 1887 had remained relatively unchanged for centuries.
Eventually, with the introduction of steam power, horse-drawn plows became obsolete.
THE FOOD REVOLUTION THOMAS MALTHUS Thomas Malthus was born into a wealthy family and enrolled at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1784.
In 1798 he published his Essay on Population, arguing that the growth in population was far outstripping that of food production.
Although derided by many, he was the first to write about the economic situation of the lower classes.
Malthus believed that if left unchecked, population would always exceed the level of food available.
He saw starvation and disease as ""positive checks"" on population growth and voluntary abstinence as a form of birth control as “preventative checks.’ of other farmers.
In the US, the mechanical reaper, invented by Cyrus Hall McCormick in 1831, further reduced the need for farm labor.
Steam power invaded the countryside with the introduction of the Fowler steam plow in the 1850s.
In the second half of the 18th century better livestock was introduced with selective breeding, by British agriculturalists Robert Bakewell and Thomas Coke.
In the mid-19th century, the British scientists Joseph Gilbert and John Lawes demonstrated that plants required nitrogen and other nutrients, improving techniques for farming crops.
Around the world As Europeans explored the globe, they carried with them their farming methods and crops . handle for steering large wheel turns a roller in the drill, which dispenses seeds Ae D O ` blade marks soil for next row of seeds — Increasing efficiency This Morton seed drill of 1828 shows how seeds were passed from a hopper by grooved rollers.
This gave more precise coverage of seed than spreading by hand, ensuring that more seeds fell on fertile soil.
In 1788, the first European settlers arrived in Australia, and influenced early practices in wool production.
But lack of wooden fences meant farmers could not keep cattle off their crops.
The invention of barbed wire (made commercially successful by Joseph Glidden in 1874) solved this problem and transformed farming in the Midwest in the process.
Prairie grassland was hard to cultivate, but the development of farm machinery, such as John Deere's sodbuster plow, changed this situation.
As food production increased, workers moved away from agriculture, into industry. introduction, significant increases in population took place.
These crops from the Americas triggered an agricultural revolution in Africa.
Corn and sweet potatoes reached the western shores of Africa with slave traders, who introduced them into that continent to provide food for their human cargoes.
Preservation and transport Equally important to this improvement was that crops could be preserved and distributed efficiently and safely.
Although drying and salting had been used for millennia, new preservation techniques were invented during the 18th and 19th centuries.
In 1795, French chef Nicolas Appert developed a process for preserving food in airtight bottles after sterilization.
The rights to this were bought by engineers Donkin, Hall & Gamble, who set up the world’s first canning factory in 1813 in London.
Modern refrigeration began in the 1850s when the French inventor Ferdinand Carré pioneered the vapor compression system.
This also enabled agriculture to pursue price and profit globally, rather than focus on a small, local economy, allowing farmers to import specialty seeds, foods, and livestock that suited their terrain.
A period of high productivity and low food prices meant people did not spend all their money on food.
Amid this wealth, however, was the Irish potato famine , which ravaged the Irish population.
AFTER The involvement of technology in food production continues in the 21st century, though not without controversy.
FAST-FREEZING Clarence Birdseye developed advanced techniques for freezing food in the 1920s.
The popularity of frozen food increased during World War Il 392405 >», as it used less packaging than canning.
ADDITIVES As more people moved to cities, food had to be transported and stay fresh for longer.
This was made possible by the introduction of additives to prevent food decay.
GM FOODS Since James Watson and Francis Crick broke the genetic code in 1953, the engineering of genes has been possible.
DECISIVE MOMENT In 1846, blight—a fungus that damages plants—ruined the potato crop in Europe, leading to starvation for many people in Ireland, where potatoes were a staple food.
There was another blight in 1847, accompanied by an outbreak of typhoid.
All attempts to deal with the problem failed and Ireland's population was decimated in this, the last peacetime famine in Western Europe.
By 1851, the population of Ireland had fallen from 8. million to 6. million.
BRITAIN FIRST Access to cheap imports, such as cotton, silk, and wool, from its colonies gave Britain an advantage in being able to m industrialize faster MATERIALS than the rest of Europe.
IRON MASTERS Two key innovations made by British ironworks owners contributed to industrialization.
First, in 1709, Abraham Darby's use of coke (processed coal that burns at much higher temperatures) instead of charcoal reduced the cost of ironmaking, due to coke's relative abundance.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK Transportation was another vital element during industrialization.
Raw materials had to be moved to the point of manufacture, and finished goods went to cities and ports for distribution.
Britain had a network of navigable rivers, which it enhanced by building canals.
The Bridgewater Canal, Manchester, cut in 1761, was followed by other canals that ERIDGEWATER were connected to CANAL major rivers.
N The Ind ustrial Revolution Deets ae TESTE The world we live in today owes much to the industrialization that took place first in Britain, in the late the industrial north of England also runs 18th century, and swept across Europe and North America during the 19th.
An empire unhindered by continental Europe's event, rather a series of technological Britain had an unusually large market The steam engine powered the internal frontiers and trade barriers gave innovations, social developments, for its manufactured goods, with an revolution.
E slavery was abolished in 1807, trade with the to be the industrial pioneer.
Steam powered Trains, like this British one from 1908, were both the product and driving force of the Industrial Revolution.
They were enabled by the growth of coal mining, and transported raw materials and goods at high speed.
INVENTION In 1712 Thomas Newcomen built an ""atmospheric engine"" in which a vacuum produced by condensing steam caused atmospheric pressure to pull down a beam.
Sixty years later James Watt improved its efficiency, and added modifications for driving machinery.
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION Child labor Child labor was cheap, and in demand, as small hands could reach into machines.
These children spinning cotton in South Carolina, in 1905, have bare feet, because nails on their shoes might produce a spark, causing a fire. made by James Watt have remained an essential element of steam engines ever since.
When, in the 1770s, Watt went into business with Matthew Boulton, an entrepreneur and factory owner, they manufactured steam engines to Watt's patented design.
These went on to power all stages of industrial production—pumping the mines; powering machinery in the factories and mills; and driving the steamships and railroad locomotives.
The ""iron horse"" The huge demand for steam resulted Improvements in both the mining of coal and its distribution via canals, and later, railroads, dramatically cut its cost.
The use of refined coal to smelt iron further fueled industrialization by enabling engineers to build better tools and machines.
Iron was also used as a building material for bridges, ships, and railroads.
By 1850, about 2 million tons of iron had been used for railroad tracks and there were 6,214 miles of train tracks around Britain.
The speed and efficiency of the railroads made the growth of the great manufacturing cities possible, and by the 1840s, it had cut the cost of moving goods by up to 50 percent.
Railroad timetables changed timekeeping, with the standardized use of Greenwich Mean Time replacing local time across Britain.
Dark satanic mills With the harnessing of steam power, factories and mills no longer needed to be sited near natural resources such as rivers, FREE ENTERPRISE CAPITALISM Free enterprise capitalism works on the basis that all of industry (property, business, factories, and transport) should be privately owned, and that the products of industry should be sold in a free market, through a system of supply and demand.
For this to happen, industry has to be unrestricted by government control, subsidies, or tariffs.
Growing populations in the 18th and 19th centuries provided a larger market for new products, and steady growth in wages increased buying power, helping to satisfy the laws of supply and demand.
Textile production rapidly mechanized; by 1835 there were more than 120,000 power looms in textile mills.
Reaction to progress The Industrial Revolution undoubtedly improved productivity, and drove technological and economic progress, but it also became synonymous with appalling living and working conditions.
Men, women, and children flocked to the cities, but with so many seeking TRADE UNION An organization devoted to protecting the interests of its members, who are drawn from a specific profession or trade. employment, the value of their labor was reduced, and they worked long hours for low pay.
Opposition to industrialization also came from skilled workers, who had been made obsolete by mechanization, and unemployed factory workers.
France’s first railroad opened as early as 1832, but subsequent development was hindered by political and financial problems.
Britain's < Eiffel Tower Finished in 1889, Gustave Eiffel's tower, made from 18,058 separate pieces of iron, was a sign of France's industrialization.
American colonies had shipbuilding and iron-production industries; and some German states began to industrialize their metalworking.
The first Continental nation to industrialize was Belgium, from 1820 onward.
German industrialization accelerated massively after unification in 1871 , and by the turn of the century, both Germany and the United States had overtaken Britain’s industrial output.
European industrialization was made possible not just by technology, but also by the availability of a workforce recently freed from serfdom—those 1900-14 Industrialization in Japan, Austrian part of Habsburg Empire and, to a lesser degree, Spain and Hungary.
Massive acceleration in industrialization, particularly in Germany and the US, which began to challenge Britain's supremacy.
Coal fueled the industrial revolution, and in Britain output increased almost sixfold in fifty years, from 11 million tons in 1800 to 65 million tons in 1854.
A Trade and transportation National and international transport networks were vital to the continued momentum of the Industrial Revolution.
London's Albert Dock was opened in 1880 as the second of the Royal Group of Docks. tied for life to work their landowner's land—which was abolished in France during the 1790s, in Germany from 1811 to 1848, and in Russia and Poland in the 1860s.
In the US, immigrants moving to North America from Europe brought new skills and labor.
In addition to transporting raw materials and finished products, they also affected the economies of industrializing nations.
Not only did they connect previously disparate economic regions, but financing railroads required new approaches to investment, such as a shift from private to joint-stock banking , which provided greater access to capital for industry in general.
Similarly, the progression from sail to steamships had an impact on global trade.
Foodstuffs and raw materials could be bought from the cheapest supplier, and the market for finished products increased.
Improved communications, such as the invention of the telegraph and telephone , enabled businesses to respond relatively quickly to changes in the marketplace.
They were also able to establish links with the farthest parts of the world which, thanks to the developments of the Industrial Revolution, had become intimately linked with their own.
INVENTION Steel-making was one of the key characteristics of the second phase of the Industrial Revolution.
On October 17, 1855, building on previous investigations in this field, English metallurgist Henry Bessemer filed a patent for a means of producing mild steel by blasting cold air into molten iron in a “Bessemer Converter"" This reduced the amount of carbon in the iron, making a stronger, more versatile product used for railroad lines, shipbuilding, and armaments. i Until the advent of the steam locomotive, the fastest form of transportation on Earth was a galloping horse.
THE THIRD WAVE After the first phase of the industrial revolution in Britain, and the second in Belgium, Germany, and the US, economic growth was slowed by a worldwide depression.
Recovery was triggered by a third wave of industrialization from the 1890s onward in countries including Russia, Sweden, France, Italy, and Japan.
Where the first wave had centered on textiles and iron production, and the second on heavy engineering and steel, the third wave saw the application of industrial processes to chemical and electrical engineering, car manufacture, and increasingly, armaments.
ARMING FOR WAR Bessemer invented his steel-making process after the French complained that a new artillery shell he had invented for use in the Crimean War was too powerful for their castiron cannons.
The advent of steel sparked an arms race that changed the face of warfare forever with the introduction of mass-produced guns, heavy artillery, and tanks.
LUGER PISTOL OMINOUS SIGNS German dominance in industrial production and weaponry toward the end of the 19th century led its increasingly nervous neighbors to accelerate industrialization.
Russia, France, and Italy all invested in arms manufacturing, and Russia improved its railroad network specifically for transporting troops to defend its borders.
Tensions over colonial was sandwiched between Prussia the number of deaths, and the size powers, although they did not consistently possessions continued between Britain and Austria.
Fighting broke out of the cell turned the incident known fight on the same sides. and France, while Austria plotted to almost immediately. as the Black Hole of Calcutta imio regain the province of Silesia, which an imperial myth. meu.
The Aix-la-Chapelle peace treaty of 1748 confirmed both Maria Theresa and her husband on their respective thrones, but left Austria weakened against the growing power of Frederick Il's Prussia, which had snatched the rich province of Silesia from Austria during the war.
Although the treaty formally brought peace to Europe, it also left many issues dangerously unresolved.
The First Global Conflict For seven years, the major nations of Europe waged war not just on the European continent itself, but also, for Britain and France, in their colonial possessions overseas in the Americas and Asia.
The Seven Years War was the first approximation to a world war, and gave birth to a new, truly global empire.
PRUSSIA EMERGES Prussia's annexing of Silesia saw it emerge as a significant figure on the European stage, leading to diplomatic overtures from Britain and France.
COLONIAL CONFLICT Alongside the war in Europe, Britain and France continued their colonial rivalry overseas.
Britain captured Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island in Canada from the French in 1745, only to lose Madras in India to France the next year, although the British Royal Navy won a number of notable victories.
The Treaty of Aix-laChapelle returned both gains to their original owners, but the conflict remained intense.
He believed in absolute power, but generally used it for the good of his subjects, establishing religious toleration, abolishing torture as an instrument of state power, and freeing the slaves on his own estates.
An able and cultured man-he corresponded with the French philosopher Voltaire, and wrote music for the flute, which he played well—he was also a ruthless figure on the European stage and a brilliant military commander, raising Prussia to the first rank of European powers.
AUSTRIAN EMPRESS MARIA THERESA, SPEAKING OF FREDERICK II, 1757 Russians at Zorndorf, Prussia, in August 1758.
In India, British general Robert Clive defeated the Nawab of Bengal at Plassey in June 1757, while the British navy routed the French off the Indian coast in 1758—59.
The first years of the war in America had seen French success, but James Wolfe turned the tide for the British, by capturing Louisbourg in 1758, and then by defeating general Montcalm in Quebec, the capital of French North America, in 1759.
In Europe, an Anglo-German army defeated the French in Hanover, while the French navy was crushed off the coast of Brittany.
The seizure of French Montreal in 1760, and Pondicherry, in India, in 1761 effectively marked the end of the war, despite the entry of Spain on the French side in 1761.
With the succession in 1762 of the pro-Prussian Peter M in Russia, all nations were ready for peace.
The 1763 Treaty of Paris saw Britain take French North America, and all French lands east of the Mississippi, as well as parts of the Caribbean, and every French fort in India.
Spain gave Florida to Britain, but received French lands west of the Mississippi in return.
With the French excluded from North America and India, Britain now controlled a massive colonial and trading empire.
The Battle of Zorndorf Frederick Il of Prussia followed up his decisive defeats of the French and Austrians in 1757 with an equally impressive victory over the Russians at Zorndorf in western Poland on August 25, 1758.
THE BIRTH OF THE BRITISH RAJ The end of French power in India left Britain without a rival in its conquest of the entire subcontinent.
IN INDIA Squashed between Prussia, Austria, and Russia, Poland was divided by the three powers after 1772.
In 1795, it was absorbed piecemeal by Russia, Prussia, and Austria, and did not reappear until 1918.
COST OF WAR Britain was ceded French territory in North America during the Anglo-French wars but the cost was high, and the British felt the colonials had failed to pay their share.
PROTEST Until the 18th century, British North America was subject to English law.
Settlers thought the new laws passed after 1763 to raise money BOSTON TEA PARTY for the British extremely irksome.
In 1773 a group of Bostonians disguised as American Indians threw a cargo of highly taxed EIC tea into Boston Harbor.
Intended to restore order, instead they united the colonies in further protest.
Fiery leaders began to emerge—they cried out that the actions of the British government were illegal and stirred the colonists to take further action.
On April 19, 1775, General Thomas Gage, commander of the British forces in North America, dispatched troops to seize an arms cache in Concord, a town just outside Boston.
When the British made it back to Boston, they were besieged by militias, and had to wait there for reinforcements.
With On June 15, 1775, George Washington became commander of the new Continental army.
He immediately began turning the militias into a more professional fighting force.
However, news of the revolts had spread, and the colonists’ cause was rapidly gaining momentum.
Independence The American colonists made their decisive break with Britain on July 4, 1776, when their leaders agreed to the Declaration of Independence.
The declaration stated that “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness” were the The Articles of Confederation Adopted by Congress—the formal assembly of government representatives—in 1777, this was the first governing document, or constitution, of the United States, and was ratified by all thirteen states in 1781.
American Declaration of Independence Until the end of the 18th century, Europe and its colonies were dominated by monarchies.
The American Declaration of Independence undermined the old order and proclaimed a new republic in which people would be free to govern themselves. their arrival on May 26, Gage decided to capture hill positions that overlooked Boston.
The signing of the Declaration of Independence was a momentous event, and made a peaceful settlement with the British much less likely.
Washington had won important battles in what is now New Jersey— in Trenton on December 26, 1776 and Thomas Jefferson was the third president of the United States.
An intellectually outstanding figure of the period, Jefferson was chosen as the principal drafter of the Declaration of Independence at the age of 33.
He served as governor of Virginia during the American Revolution and afterward became the first United States secretary of state.
On March 2, 1776, with a force of over 17,000 men and a buildup of artillery stocks, the Americans began bombarding the blockaded British troops in Boston.
It was a major turning point—the Americans were no longer fighting alone.
Lord Cornwallis was forced to surrender at Yorktown, Virginia, after an 18-day siege.
Declaration of Independence This painting by John Trumbull depicts the committee of five who drafted the Declara Independence, presenting it to the Cont Congress on July 4, 1776. a a E L 4 or T The British prime minister at the time, Lord North, broke down and sobbed when he heard the news.
Birth of a nation After the British withdrew, Loyalists were allowed to remain, but about 2 percent opted to emigrate to Canada and the Caribbean.
The British government gave the Americans their independence in return for a trade agreement that would benefit both sides.
The Treaty of Paris, signed in 1783, gave the Americans a western border on the Mississippi, and control of the Old North West—an area extending from the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to the Great Lakes.
Conflicts over the issue of slavery threatened to divide the nation, but the new republic had great political hopes, which they set out in the 1781 Articles of Confederation, and later the Constitution of June 21, 1788.
George Washington was elected as the first president in 1789, giving the federal a, A Stars and Stripes Dating from about 1850, this hand-sewn flag has 13 stars and 13 stripes, to commemorate the 13 original colonies that rebelled against the British. government exclusive power in the conduct of diplomacy, commerce, and war.
Congress was to consist of two chambers, the Senate and the House of Representatives.
In addition, a Supreme Court was set up to interpret laws and safeguard the Constitution, which stated that all men were born equal, and had an equal voice in government.
AMERICAN DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE French territories were incorporated into the United States, but the growing northsouth divide eventually led to civil war.
FURTHER EXPANSION The new nation quickly expanded to the south and west.
Ohio became a state in 1803, Indiana in 1816, Illinois in 1818, and Alabama in 1819.
WAR OF 1812 Fought under the motto ""free trade and sailor's rights,"" the War of 1812 against Britain was a result of British maritime policies during the Anglo-French wars when American sallors were seized and forced into the British navy.
President James Madison saw the war as a way to strengthen republicanism, and believed it could secure possession of Canada as a bargaining chip against Great Britain.
Although three attempts were made to invade Canada, all of them ended in failure.
The war was, however, the first step in establishing the United States as a serious, and permanent, presence in international politics.
For years, slaves were used on southern plantations, but in the north slave labor was forbidden.
The war ended in 1865 with victory for the Union, but it led to economic disruption.
Slavery was abolished, but Abraham Lincoln was assassinated in the month the war ended.
Many different factors caused this revolution, but the one event that symbolized the collapse of royal power in the face of widespread popular dissent was the storming of the Bastille prison on July 14, 1789.
Built between 1370 and 1383 as part of the walled defenses of Paris, the Bastille first became a prison for high-ranking state prisoners during the early 17th century.
It also served as an arsenal, storing large quantities of gunpowder and arms.
In 1789 the prison was defended by 18 cannons and 12 smaller artillery pieces manned by a regular garrison of 82 invalides—veteran soldiers no longer fit for active service—and reinforced by 32 grenadiers from a Swiss mercenary regiment summoned to Paris by the king some days before.
On July 14, rumors spread through Paris that troops were marching on the city to crush dissent against the king.
At around 10:30m. the first of two delegations met the governor of the Bastille, Bernard-René de Launay, asking him to distribute its weapons to the crowd.
By 1:30m., the crowd had lost patience, and surged into the undefended outer courtyard.
At around 3m., a detachment of 62 mutinous Gardes Françaises arrived at the prison armed with two cannons, which they placed in front of the gates leading to the inner courtyard.
As fighting intensified, de Launay threatened to blow up the fortress; but the soldiers within the garrison surrendered, forcing him to open the gates.
The governor was led away to the Hôtel de Ville, the town hall, where he was stabbed to death, along with at least two defenders.
One defender and 98 attackers died in the actual fighting, with another 73 attackers wounded.
The news of the fall of the Bastille spread quickly across France, prompting uprisings in many cities.
In reality, the prison was an almost empty symbol of royal tyranny—it held a mere seven prisoners—but the storming did signify that power had now passed from those who discussed political change to those who took direct action to achieve it.
First blood One of the first victims of the storming of the Bastille was its governor, Bernard-René de Launay, shown here, surrounded by soldiers.
His head was stuck on a spike and paraded through the streets of Paris.
A century of foreign wars had left the country with huge debts and threatened bankruptcy.
Its effect was to put financial reform at the top of the political agenda.
Nearly 40 percent of the land was owned by the nobles and clergy who made up less than 3 percent of the population and were exempt from taxes, placing the tax burden on the bourgeoisie and peasantry.
Bad harvests almost doubled the price of bread, worsening social tensions.
When it convened at the palace of Versailles in May 1789, the majority third estate insisted on greater voting rights, and when these were refused, broke away to form the National Assembly, inviting sympathetic nobles and clergy to join them.
Louis XVT's dismissal of Jacques Necker, the popular finance minister, on July 11, along with the concentration of troops outside Paris, provoked agitation in Paris for arms amid rumors of a royal clampdown.
Several days of rioting ended with the July 14 capture of the Bastille prison , symbolizing an important blow against the oppressive forces of the ancien régime, while placing Paris and mob violence at. the center of events.
The revolt spread to the countryside, where wild rumors resulted in the “Great Fear,” in which peasants attacked their landlords, burning their chateaux.
On October 5, Parisian women, frustrated by bread shortages and the king's indecision, marched to Versailles to force his move to Paris, where he could be more closely monitored.
Between 1789-9], the National Assembly passed a series of reforms that further undermined the ancien régime.
These included publishing the ""Declaration of the Rights of Man,"" reforming the army, dividing France into 83 départements, selling off the Church's land, and forcing the clergy to take a civic oath to the state.
This last measure split the Church, alienating the conservative peasantry and sowing the seeds of future counterrevolution.
A new constitution showed the National Assembly's distrust of the masses by dividing the population into active and passive citizens.
This period also saw the growth of political clubs—such as the Cordeliers and Jacobins—that tried to exert pressure on the Assembly.
The Jacobins were the first real political “party,” with clubs dotted throughout France.
In June 1791, the king attempted to flee abroad, but was captured at Varennes, east of Paris, by a postmaster.
This marked a key turning point, for it lost the king his people's trust.
Threatened on all sides In April 1792, a new Assembly declared war on Austria and Prussia, hoping to distract attention from THE FRENCH REVOLUTION Between 1789 and 1795, the French Revolution resulted in major social and political upheavals.
July 9, 1789 Formation of the National Constituent Assembly, which becomes the effective government of France. domestic problems.
While saluting the revolution with one hand, the king plotted with the other, hoping that French defeat would restore his fortunes.
A Prussian manifesto that threatened the French people if any harm came to Louis inflamed the Parisian radicals, who stormed the Tuileries on August 20, deposing the king.
At the same time, a revolutionary Commune took control of the city and encouraged the massacre of 1,200 “counterrevolutionary” prisoners, provoking international horror.
A third, more radical Assembly was elected and a crucial victory at the battle of Valmy on September 20 helped to restore national confidence.
Execution of Marie Antoinette When Queen Marie Antoinette was guillotined on October 16, 1793, few mourned.
Deeply unpopular, she was found guilty of treason by the Revolutionary Tribunal.
July 12, 1790 Civil Constitution of the Clergy brings the Church under state control, following confiscation of their land.
July 1790 The professional political clubs, most notably the Jacobins and the Cordeliers, increase in influence.
September 20, 1792 National Convention instituted; France is declared a Republic the following day.
In January 1793, the king was found guilty of “the crime of being a king” and through Europe. more threatened the nation, and France became more militarized.
It relied on conscription and revolutionary zeal for its citizen armies, fighting a series of revolutionary wars that were bankrolled by loot from newly “liberated” countries.
The French Revolution's most lasting legacy was its Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, published on August 26, 1789.
Inspired by the political writings of John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, this bold document stated that all ""men are born and remain free and with equal rights,"" and that the duty of government was to preserve these ""natural and inviolate rights... liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression"" through a constitution, rooted in the rule of law.
Although originally neglecting women's rights, its universal appeal made it the basis for the constitutions of many countries as well as the UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights, published in 1948.
August 10, 1792 Storming of the Tuileries and imprisonment of the royal family. guillotined, sending shockwaves Foreign invasion once deposes the Girondins.
July 27, 1794 Robespierre and 21 supporters are overthrown and guillotined, leading to an anti-Jacobin backlash. revolt.
MAXIMILIEN ROBESPIERRE, FEBRUARY 5, 1/94 Faced with mounting military and economic problems, the government founded the Revolutionary Tribunal, to provide instant justice, and the Committee for Public Safety , to centralize power.
Meanwhile, increasing conflict within the Convention culminated with the expulsion of a faction known as the Girondins on June 2, and the rise to power of the Jacobins.
The Jacobins and the ""Terror"" Under Robespierre's leadership, the Jacobins aimed to create a new “Republic of Virtue.
On September 3, 1793 terror was made “the order of the day” and “war” declared on those suspected of counterrevolutionary sympathies, creating an oppressive climate of informers and instant justice.
In 10 months, 20,000 “enemies of the revolution” were executed across France.
A decisive military victory over Austria in June 1794 eased the pressure, but there was no letup in the daily flow of victims to the guillotine.
Robespierre and his supporters were finally toppled by fearful fellow deputies, and this was followed by an antiJacobin backlash (the “White Terror”) and a return to more moderate policies.
Royalist—radical tensions pulled France in both directions and two elections were annulled.
The success of the French Revolution, and its spirit of “liberty, equality, fraternity,” helped to inspire wars of independence far beyond Europe.
LEGACY IN FRANCE While the revolution failed in some ways, the legacy of popular insurrection established a radical tradition in Paris that continues today.
In 1871, there was a shortlived and bloody Paris Commune based on the one from 1792.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE he future French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte was born Napoleone Buonaparte, a member of a poor Corsican noble family of Italian origin.
A wild island of bandits and vendettas, Corsica became a part of France in 1768, the year before Napoleon's birth.
When he was nine years old Napoleon learned French at school so he could attend the military school at Brienne-le-Cháteau in France, but he always spoke with a strong Italian accent.
That he was an able man was evident at an early stage and, after graduating in 1784, he went on to complete a two-year course at the Royal Military School in Paris in 12 months, proving Carve up Drawn in 1805, this caricature by the cartoonist James Gillray demonstrates the greed of great powers.
The British prime minister, William Pitt the younger , and Napoleon are carving up the world-the Frenchman seizing a slice of Furope while Britain takes most of the rest. notably strong in math, geography, and science.
He was commissioned as a sublieutenant of artillery at the age of just 16.
Revolutionary opportunities On the death of his father in 1785, Napoleon was elected as head of his family, despite not being the eldest son.
Corsica remained the focus of his life for some years, to the neglect of his army career.
It was only after his family left the island in 1793 because Of iii pro-French views that Napoleon shifted his ambitions to France.
Appointed a brigadier-general by the Jacobins, a prominent political club of Peacemaker On September 30, 1800, Napoleon signed the Treaty of Mortefontaine, ending a smoldering naval conflict brought about by United States reaction to the French Revolution. between France and the US, T ^ Portrait of Napoleon Napoleon carefully controlled his public image, employing only the finest portrait artists of the day to present his desired view of himself to the people.
NAPOLEONIC CODE The Civil Code, drawn up on Napoleon's orders between 1800 and 1804, is often regarded as his most enduring legacy.
Napoleon's code broadly upheld the rights and freedom of conscience established by the French Revolution.
Once Napoleon was made head of the Army of Italy in March 1796, there was no looking back.
Reviving a moribund force, he had a spectacular series of victories, including defeat of the Papal army, that made him a French hero.
Supreme power “Napoleon was not content with being recognized as a superb general.
Brought in as the litary muscle to back a political leading role in government as First ""Gonsul, and from there to absolute imperial power in 1804.
Retreat from Moscow As the French withdrew from Russia in 1812, Marshall Ney inspired the rearguard of the Grande Armée to resist the Russian cossacks.
Military genius Napoleon genuinely desired peace— on his own terms—but spent almost the entirety of his years in power at war.
He demonstrated his military genius time and again, maneuvering large-scale armies quickly to engage the enemy in decisive battle with maximum application of force.
It was a style of warfare that often required his men to sustain heavy casualties in the pursuit of victory.
Nevertheless, he was popular with the soldiers and his presence on the battlefield always heartened them.
He knew how to use titles and decorations—including the Légion d'honneur, which he instituted— to reward and inspire effort.
He was often dishonest, lying in battlefield dispatches to aggrandize his own role.
By the time he invaded Russia in 1812, his grasp of the realities of power had begun to waver.
To the last, he devoted himself to the service of his self-image, Ee writing his memoirs in E 4 captivity.
He left a EM legend, but not the imperial dynasty that he had hoped to found.
Deathbed scene Horace Vernet depicted the dead Napoleon crowned with laurel leaves, as a Roman emperor would have been, and with Christ-like features.
September 1785 Commissioned as a sublieutenant in the artillery after a year at the Royal Military School in Paris.
August 10, 1794 Briefly arrested because of his links with the Jacobins, a radical political group.
March 1796-April 1797 As commander of the Army of Italy, claims a series of victories over Austria, and Piedmont in Italy.
May 1798-August 1799 leads Army of the Orient to invade Egypt and Palestine.
December 2, 1804 Crowns himself Emperor of France in Notre Dame Cathedral, Paris.
December 2, 1805 Defeats the Austrian and Russian armies at Austerlitz.
October 14, 1806 Defeats Prussia at the twin battles of FRENCH CURRENCY BEARING Jena and NAPOLEON'S IMAGE Auerstadt.
July 15, 1809 Marriage to Josephine annulled; marries the Austrian Archduchess Marie Louise in March the following year.
March 20, 1811 His son is born, styled by Napoleon as the King of Rome.
April 6, 1814 Abdicates after Paris is occupied by the Allies ; he is exiled to the Mediterranean island of Elba.
June 18, 1815 Defeated at Waterloo in Belgium by the British and Prussian armies.
The change in government occurred during a series of wars in Europe and beyond.
REVOLUTIONARY WARS The French Revolutionary Wars were initially fought to protect French borders » from other European powers.
NAPOLEON'S SABER RISE OF NAPOLEON Having been tainted by association with the Jacobins after Robespierre's fall, Napoleon redeemed himself in October 1795 by crushing the last popular revolt in Paris, and then by conducting a brilliant military campaign in Italy-he was welcomed as a hero on his return to Paris in 1797.
He banned democracy, and set up a network of police spies responsible for censorship and for arresting his political opponents.
Following an assassination attempt in 1800, Napoleon was able to harness widespread support for his own dynastic ambitions, to fend off any attempt to restore the Bourbons—the royal family that had ruled France between 1589 and 1792—and to establish himself as the French leader.
In 1804 Napoleon crowned himself “first Emperor of the French,” in a ceremony overseen by the Pope, thereby sanctifying his position.
The building of an empire Between 1805 and 1815, Napoleon’s armies took on seven different coalition armies made up of various European The Napoleonic Wars powers.
He won his most notable victories in 1805 at Austerlitz in the modern Czech Republic against the Austrians and Russians; in 1806 at Jena in Germany against the Prussians; and in 1807 at Friedland against the Russians, in their own country, forcing them to sue for peace.
In the French West Indies, sugar plantations were disrupted by slave revolts and foreign invasion, although SaintDomingue was the only one to gain its independence in 1804.
In 1806, the Confederation of the Rhine unified the small German states, such as Bavaria and Saxony, into kingdoms allied to France.
Between 1805 and 1815, Napoleon's armies conquered most of western Europe in a series of notable victories, creating an empire with 44 million French subjects.
However, his plans to invade England were thwarted by naval defeat at Trafalgar, and his obsession with conquest led to a disastrous campaign in Russia.
Napoleon was finally brought down at Waterloo in 1815. rejected France’s influence.
Napoleon, however, was obsessed with restoring the Roman Empire by mastering Italy and conquering Britain.
Defeat and downfall The destruction of two French fleets by English admiral Horatio Nelson at Aboukir Bay, Egypt, in 1798, and Trafalgar off the coast of Spain in 1805 scuppered Napoleon's plans for invading Britain.
It caused unnecessary wars against Portugal and Russia , creating two simultaneous fronts and provoking his most disastrous defeats.
These were epitomized by the humiliating retreat from Moscow in 1812, when he lost more than half a million men.
These campaigns left him vulnerable to a legacy of European resentments and military exhaustion following his defeat at Leipzig in 1813.
In 1805 and 1812 he raised two vast armies, known as ""grandes armées,"" from across his empire to fight in his Austrian and Russian campaigns.
It is estimated that around a million soldiers died in creating Napoleon's empire.
Wellington's Allied army Wt { 3 of British, Dutch, Belgians, ih E bz 1 and Germans.
NAPOLEON, FROM HIS MEMOIRS, 1825 Venic . | lonian Islands Following Napoleon's resignation in 1814, Europe's rulers met at the Congress of Vienna to carve out a new balance of power.
POST-NAPOLEONIC EUROPE Most of the hereditary monarchies overthrown by Napoleon were restored, allowing 50 more years of reactionary rule.
Napoleon's fall also paved the way for Britain to become the world's leading imperial power.
WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, SPEECH TO THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, 1/89 he third of four children born into a well-to-do Yorkshire family, Wilberforce grew up in an age when the institution of slavery was considered socially acceptable.
He attended Hull Grammar School, in northern England, and from 1768 was brought up by an uncle who introduced him to Methodism, an offshoot of the Church of England.
Before graduating he decided on a career in politics and fell in with William Pitt the Younger, later British prime minister.
An evangelical parliamentarian Between 1784-85, Wilberforce began a period of intense religious reflection.
Mary Woolnoth, London, a former sailor who became an antislavery campaigner thanks to his early experiences as a slave ship master.
Wilberforce became a fervent supporter of evangelical Christianity, joining the “Clapham Saints"" under John Venn.
John's College, Cambridge, where Wilberforce enrolled as an undergraduate in 1776.
Here William Pitt the Younger , who himself later became British prime minister, inspired Wilberforce to enter politics.
House of Commons (the elected house of the British Parliament) committed to God, and eager to target immorality and vice.
In 1787 he moved to Bath, in western England, where his interest first arose in championing the cause of black African slaves, but, contrary to popular accounts, he was not a founder member of the London Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, and he attended no meetings until June 1791.
His ideal of Christian charity did not always extend to his rivals, and he snubbed the real workhorse of the abolition movement, Thomas Clarkson, almost until the end of his life.
Spurning advice In the spring of 1791, ignoring prudent advice, Wilberforce urged the parliament to completely abolish the slave trade; the confrontation immediately failed.
Wilberforce doggedly pursued the dream of a total abolition bill each year from 1795-1799, but it was regularly thrown out by the powerful West Indies lobby, representing those with financial interests in the region.
Pitt’s government fell early in 1801, replaced by that of Henry Addington.
By January 1802, however, Wilberforce had become seriously disillusioned, House of Commons William Pitt the Younger, the British prime minister, addressing the House of Commons in 1793, about a year after the failure of a pivotal antislavery debate.
Pitt was returned to power in 1804 and Wilberforce’s biographers claim that the “abolition business” had again become his chief care, yet he only attended three meetings of the Abolition Society that year, and a further three in 1805.
A Whig government under Addington was returned, and in 1807 the antislavery trade bill was trundled out again.
Lord Howick, a leading advocate of abolition, delivered the main motion, dispensing with rhetorical flourishes and presenting hard economic facts.
The House of Lords was won over and passed the Trade Abolition Bill on March 23, 1807.
Withdrawing from public life Wilberforce increasingly claimed bouts of malaise that prevented him from attending debates that he guessed were likely to prove unpopular.
He began to question if he should resign his seat in Parliament, and on September 8, 1812 declared his intention to step down.
Symbol of suffering A sculpture of a kneeling and chained enslaved African man, whose image was identified with the antislavery movement.
When debate was launched in earnest in 1823, he became a virtual bystander in the House of Commons and also in the recently formed Anti-Slavery Society.
O07 OLAUDAH EQUIANO Born in what is now Nigeria, Equiano wrote an influential autobiography, which was published in 1789 and detailed his life as a slave.
Captured in West Africa at age 11, he was shipped to Barbados, and then to Virginia, where a Royal Navy officer bought him, taught him to read and write, and named him Gustavus Vassa after the Swedish king.
Sold again, he was taken to Montserrat, in the Caribbean, where he bought his freedom.
He moved to London in 1786 and became involved with the abolition movement.
In July 1828 he wrote scathingly to the new emancipation champion, Fowell Buxton, about the Duke of Wellington's pro-slavery position, yet he still took no more active involvement other than the symbolic chairing of an Anti-Slavery Society meeting in 1830.
TIMELINE August 24, 1759 Born in Hull, the third of the four children of Robert and Elizabeth Wilberforce.
He joins the ""Clapham Saints"" and becomes a fervent evangelical Christian.
May 22, 1787 The London Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade is founded by Thomas Clarkson and others.
October 30, 1787 Wilberforce makes his first contact with the London Committee.
April 19, 1791 Opts for confrontation and brings a full abolition motion before the House of Commons against advice.
May 30, 1797 Marries Barbara Ann Spooner, a landowner's daughter, after a two-week courtship.
March 23, 1807 Bill against the slave trade carries in the House of Lords after a successful motion, presented by Lord Howick and Sir Samuel Romilly.
March 18, 1823 Presents radical petition in the Commons on behalf of the dissident Society of Friends for abolition in all British Dominions.
June 11, 1823 Wilberforce gives his last speech in the House of Commons.
August 3, 1833 State funeral held for Wilberforce in Westminster Abbey.
In 1783 Britain returned Florida to Spain, which also controlled the Louisiana Territory.
NEW STATES The 1787 Northwest Ordinance allowed the formation of up to five new states to the northwest of the United States on land ceded by various states to the United States government.
In 1795, 12 American Indian nations were persuaded to sign the Treaty of Greenville, giving land to the United States.
DECISIVE MOMENT FIRST TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILROAD On May 10, 1869 at Promontory Point, Utah, a grand ceremony marked the opening of the first railroad to cross America.
Leland Stanford, president of the Central Pacific Railroad, swung a silver hammer at a golden spike—a bolt made of gold—to symbolically join the tracks.
Envoys from the Union Pacific Railroad also took a turn at hammering it home.
Ceremonial skull This buffalo skull was painted by the Blackfoot k cau A Tah P nation for their ceremonial -""T ; i LA mercem 2 Sun Dance.
The rights of ""o m i —— . such American Indian nations a i Ta were usually swept aside by settlers and the United States government.
Pioneer spirit Settlers, such as this family, traveled west across the Great Plains, often in large convoys for safety.
The wagons carried all their worldly goods, plus tools for farming and building. rom its beginnings, squashed a between the Atlantic Ocean in the east and the Appalachian Mountains in the west, the United States quickly expanded westward to the Mississippi River and beyond.
The land between the Appalachians and the Mississippi was ceded by the British at independence.
In May 1804, United States president Jefferson sent Meriwether Lewis, his secretary, and William Clark to explore this practically unknown area.
Expanding the Frontier The independent United States of America that emerged in 1783 was, in reality, the United East Coast.
In the century that followed independence, the frontier was pushed west across the continent until American dominion stretched from ocean to ocean.
The route was hard, but having been displaced by the discovery COLDREGIOND DIR they met friendly Indians and returned of gold in their home in Georgia.
Another agreement in -The discovery of gold in the | Te Waprcen, Fast Saint and ceri packet 1842 confirmed the northeast border Lower Sacramento Valley in Maine.
To the south, Florida was in December 1848 lured acquired from Spain between 1813 and X prospectors west to 1819.
JOHN L O'SULLIVAN, NEW YORK MORNING NEWS, DECEMBER 27, 1845 In 1846, Oregon Country was split with the British, again along the 49th parallel, providing a Pacific frontier.
Its annexation by the United States in 1845 led to war with Mexico, bringing California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, and New Mexico into the nation in 1848.
The Gadsden Purchase from Mexico in 1853 provided the land for the South Pacific Railroad to California and so confirmed the southern border.
With the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867, the United States completed its continental growth.
Land of opportunity As politics and war settled the frontiers, countless intrepid migrants settled the land.
Three years after the opening of the Oregon Trail through the Rockies in 1841, 5,000 settlers a year were making the challenging journey.
Nebraska had been described by an army expedition in 1820, as ^wholly unfit for farming,"" yet 72,000 people flocked there in four years to build houses of earth, and live off the soil.
The completion of a transcontinental railroad in 1869 , and three more by 1883, further opened up the west.
The railroads brought z ""E. new settlers west and also helped farmers already there, as cattle and grain could be transported easily to cities back in the east.
The massacre of the Sioux ghost dancers at Wounded Knee on December 29, 1390 ended the wars with the American Indians.
Like these children, all were given a health check before being allowed to enter.
There were many opportunities to purchase or otherwise take control of land beyond its shores.
FIRST CATCHES Alaska was bought from Russia in 1867 and Hawaii, Midway Island, and Wake Island were annexed in 1898.
FARTHER AFIELD A war with Spain, precipitated, among other disagreements, by the sinking of the battleship USS Maine off the coast of Cuba in 1898, brought Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines under American control.
The following year, the United States acquired Samoa as a naval base and refueling station for ships trading with Asia.
In 1917, the Virgin Islands were purchased from Denmark to protect Caribbean sea routes.
BATTLESHIP MAINE RELINQUISHING CONTROL The United States has given up some of its empire.
The Philippines gained independence in 1946, while three former Japanese island groups in the western Pacific held since 1945 became independent in 1994-96.
The Panama Canal Zone, American since 1903, was returned to Panama in 1999.
This is reflected in the rich and varied artifacts that represent these cultures.
SENECA PESTLE AND MOHAWK MORTAR Haida totem pole or grave post, which was probably hoop was made from hide and slipped over the mother's erected in the honor of a deceased chief.
Delaware doll carved from wood; this female soulcatcher carved from ivory or bone and used by a effigy was a spirit guardian of health.
In the fall, the Delaware shaman to capture the soul of a sick people honored her with a feast and offerings.
Arapaho ghost club — warrior doll sold by Mohave people as a souvenir at train used in the ceremonial “Ghost Dance” performed by the Stations in the 19th century.
Tlingit fighting to teach children about Kachina . knife with an iron blade and abalone-inlaid ivory handle.
Fox nation bear claw necklace, which was probably Kwakiutl transformation mask, which was fixed to the property of a chief or renowned warrior.
By separate each claw; the collar is made from otter skin. manipulating draw cords attached to the beak, this mask Seneca pestle and Mohawk mortar used by Iroquois changed from a fierce eagle into a human face.
Inuit ulu war club made from tinned iron, topped with a carved with an ivory handle and steel blade; it was used stone, and trimmed with a feather and hair.
Pomo shell nation war club carved from birchwood and used for hunting currency, which was taken south by traders and used as beavers.
Inuit finger mask worn by women at ritual money by many of the California Indians.
Malecite ceremonies to emphasize their flowing hand movements. canoe made from white cedar, covered with bark of white Paiute cradleboard, which was used to carry a baby; the birch, and waterproofed with resin from the black spruce.
SLAVERY The Constitutional Convention of 1787 allowed individual states to permit slavery; northern states abolished it, while southern states kept it.
THE NORTH-SOUTH DIVIDE The issue of slavery itself revolved around state versus federal rights, and whether a slave was a person's property, the right to which was guaranteed by the United States Constitution.
Admitting new free states to the Union would be problematic, as it would upset the balance between slave and free states and possibly provoke a federal move to abolish slavery.
THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE This 1820 amendment to the Missouri statehood bill balanced admission of slave and free states, but in 1857 the Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional, in favor of slave-owning states.
With increasing numbers of free territories wishing to gain Union status, and an armed raid in 1859 by antislavery militant John Brown to free slaves at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, the southern states began to feel threatened.
JOHN BROWN [he American Civil War In 1861 the United States split apart over the issue of slavery.
Lincoln opposed slavery in territories wishing to achieve Union membership, and won the votes of every free state but one.
The southern states voted for a proslavery Democrat, John Breckenridge.
AMERICAN GENERAL ULYSSES S GRANT Ulysses S Grant trained at West Point military academy but failed to make a success of army life, and then saw his Missouri farm fail during the 1857 depression.
His military training won him the rank of colonel when war broke out, and early successes and aggressive tactics—notably at Shiloh in 1862— earned him promotion.
In March 1864 Grant was appointed by Lincoln as overall commander of the Union troops.
In & July 1866 he took control of the United States army, until becoming Republican president in 1869.
Kentucky remained neutral, while Delaware, Maryland, and Missouri were loyal to the Union.
Virginia joined the Confederacy, causing West Virginia to separate and become a Union state.
The first shots were fired by Confederate cannons on April 12, 1861; their target was the Union-held Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor, South Carolina.
Battle of Get tysburg H PME casualties s for both sides at Gettysburg are 0 eth ave exceeded 46,000, with the dead aS he | Í st-co t M LL notogra raphers.
Its simple strategy was to defend itself from attack and win recognition as an independent state.
The Union government had no option but to attack the Confederacy by blockading its coastline and seizing its capital of Richmond, Virginia.
When numbers were insufficient, conscription was introduced, by the Confederacy in 1862, and the Union the next year.
By the war’s end, 50 percent of the eligible population in the Union had been mobilized, as were 75 percent of the Confederacy.
Both armies were mainly white; Congress initially would not allow free African-Americans or escaped slaves—totaling about 500,000—to join the Union army, but changed the law after emancipation in 1863.
Almost 200,000 joined up, although they were paid less than white troops and could not become officers.
In the Union, many women joined the Sanitary Commission, which ran kitchens and hospitals, and raised funds.
Standard issue Both armies used versions of this .58-caliber rifle-musket.
In the north it was known as the Springfield, after the Massachusetts armory in which it was made.
Victories and defeats Superior Confederate leadership led to early success, notably with Stonewall Jackson’s victory at Bull Run, Virginia in July 1861, reprised in August 1862, when Union forces failed to push the Confederates away from Washington.
In the west, Union general Ulysses S Grant held Shiloh, Tennessee in April 1862, and then took Vicksburg on the Mississippi in July 1863, cutting Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas off from the rest of the Confederacy.
In the fall of 1864, Union general William Sherman began to advance through Georgia to the sea, before moving north through the Carolinas.
In Virginia, Grant’s victories against Lee reduced the a v » c pM ^ Se > _ P y i w Confederate flag, Snodgrass Hill The 2nd Battalion Hilliard’s Alabama Legion attacked Snodgrass Hill during the Battle of Chickamauga, Georgia, September 1863.
The fall of the Confederate capital on April 3, 1865 led to Lee’s surrender to Grant at Appomattox Court House on April 9.
Railroads transported men and supplies to the front, messages were telegraphed, iron-clad warships fought for the first time, and photographers and journalists brought the war to people every day via newspapers.
Lincoln had B initially fought to preserve the Union, not free the slaves, but abolitionists in the north, and the effect of escaped slaves fighting in the Union army, changed his mind.
On January 1, 1863 Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation had freed the slaves in the Confederacy, though he did not have the constitutional authority to abolish slavery, nor the power in the south to do so.
J f THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR AFTER MEE Although the end of the war led to the reunification of the country, it took years for the new laws to be accepted.
EMANCIPATION The Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 became the 13th amendment to the Constitution in 1865.
The 14th amendment, passed in 1868, gave the former slaves United States citizenship (American Indians had to wait until 1924), and the 15th amendment of 1870 guaranteed their right to vote.
In many cases, however, these were paper rights, as racial discrimination lasted for the next century.
EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION RECONSTRUCTION After the war, the south was occupied by federal troops.
Former Confederate officials were prohibited from holding public office, veterans were required to pledge allegiance to the Union, and newly freed slaves ran in state elections.
Confederate states were readmitted to the Union only after they had accepted the 14th amendment.
His father, Thomas Lincoln, was a farmer and carpenter who set his son to hard manual labor from an early age.
A united front In the presidential election of 1864, Lincoln ran with Democrat Andrew Johnson as his vice-presidential running mate.
With war-weariness widespread, Lincoln's reelection was far from a foregone conclusion.
On the campaign trail In 1858, Lincoln's public debates during the um Illinois contest for the Senate attracted nationwide attention.
Lincoln was at this time clean-shaven, adopting a beard in 1860 to improve his electoral chances. farming.
He became a lifelong believer in technological progress and financial economy as escape routes from the backwardness into which he had been born.
Lincoln had little schooling, but was encouraged in self-education by his stepmother Sarah.
In higher social circles his backwoods manners were seen as rough and gauche, yet he was successful enough to persuade a plantation-owner's daughter, Mary Todd, Wartime president This photo-portrait of Lincoln was taken by Alexander Gardner in November 1863.
It shows the president's stubborn resolve, but also reveals the sadness and strain that afflicted him as a wartime leader.
Mary actively promoted her husband's political career, but was violently jealous and given to bouts of wild extravagance.
As a couple, they did not find happiness; the death of two sons in childhood preyed on Mary's mind, while Lincoln himself was prone to fits of depression.
Elected to the United States Congress in 1846, Lincoln's first foray into Washington, D.C., was not a success, so he returned to Illinois to dedicate himself to the law and making money.
It was the eruption of the slavery issue through the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 that propelled him back into politics.
His attitude to slavery had been formed as a child, since his family attended antislavery Baptist churches.
But it was above all his personal experience of selfadvancement that determined his views.
The reluctant abolitionist Although he denounced slavery as morally wrong, Lincoln did not adopt an abolitionist stance, accepting that slavery would persist in the southern states.
Even so, his antislavery position during public debates with Ilinois Democrat Stephen A Douglas in 1858 made him a His statement that the United States government “could not endure permanently halfslave and half-free” was seen as an invitation to civil war.
As an inelegant, awkward westerner with limited political experience, Lincoln was not the obvious choice for Republican presidential candidate in 1860, but he slipped through as a compromise between conflicting factions.
With the Democrats divided, he won the presidency with less than 40 percent of the popular vote.
Diehard Southerners had made it clear his election would provoke secession from the Union.
So bitter was the atmosphere that Lincoln had to sneak into Washington in disguise to take up his office because of the threat of assassination. figure of hate for Southerners.
Lincoln at first fatally underestimated the strength of secessionist sentiment and the force that would be required to overcome it.
However, with the outbreak of civil war in 1861 between the northern states and southern states , Lincoln showed an unflinching will for victory.
He was despised by the political elite, opposed by factions on both wings of his own party, and threatened by discontented generals.
Yet with almost no | Man of letters _ Lincoln wrote this letter | to his Secretary of War, Simon Cameron, in May 1861, recommending that his friend, Alexander Sympson, be given a contract to supply the army with horses.
In other letters, Lincoln constantly urged his generals to prosecute the war with greater energy and resolution.
A Presidential visit Lincoln visits the Union army camp at Antietam in October 1862.
He is flanked by intelligence chief Allan Pinkerton and General John A McClernand, one of the Union army's many lamentably unsuccessful military commanders. military experience, he showed a better grasp of the principles of warfare than most of his generals.
It was not until 1864 that he found in Ulysses S Grant a commander-in-chief whose implacable will matched his own.
Lincoln's legacy Even in the thick of the war, Lincoln found a chance to advance the material progress in which he so firmly believed.
He oversaw the creation of a National Bank, laid the foundations for the building of the Pacific Railroad, and prepared the way for the carving up of the prairies into small farms with the Homestead Act.
On slavery, it was only after his reelection in 1864 that he was able to press for a constitutional amendment to abolish the practice and to advocate full citizenship and voting rights for black Americans.
Lincoln's unequaled rhetoric, both in his Gettysburg Address of 1863 and his second inaugural speech of 1865, gave the war a dignity it would otherwise have lacked.
His assassination by fanatic John Wilkes Booth at the moment of victory for the Union army was a national tragedy.
THE GUN THAT SHOT LINCOLN Assassination at Ford's Theatre Watching the play Our American Cousin, alongside his wife Mary, Lincoln was shot in the head by John Wilkes Booth.
He was carried to a boarding house opposite the theater, where he died early the following morning.
December 9, 1818 Lincoln's mother, Nancy Hanks Lincoln, dies at age 34; the following year his father, Thomas Lincoln, marries Sarah Bush Johnston.
November 4, 1842 Marries Mary Todd, member of a slave-owning Kentucky family.
His unpopular opposition to the United States’ war with Mexico halts his political career.
February 1, 1850 Lincoln's second son, Edward Baker Lincoln, dies at age 3.
May 16, 1860 Wins the Republican nomination for the presidency of the United States as a compromise candidate.
November 6, 1860 Lincoln is elected 16th President of the United States with 39. percent of the popular vote; seven Southern states respond by seceding from the Union.
March 4, 1861 In his inaugural address, Lincoln promises to uphold the Union, but also to protect slavery in states where it already exists.
April 1861 After Confederates fire on Union troops at Fort Sumter, Lincoln calls for military action to ""preserve the Union""; four more states join the Confederacy and the Civil War begins.
September 22, 1862 Lincoln announces the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring slaves in Confederate states free; it comes into force on January 1, 1863.
November 8, 1864 Supported by a coalition of Republicans and War Democrats, Lincoln is reelected president with 55 percent of the popular vote.
February 1, 1865 Signs a resolution proposing the 15th Amendment, abolishing slavery in the United States.
Thousands of laborers and landless peasants fought to reclaim lost lands.
CONQUISTADORS The Spanish conquistadors , bold and brutal adventurers, established Spain's claim to the New World.
In 1515, Vasco Núñez de Balboa was the first European to see the Pacific.
Mexico and Peru MOCTEZUMA HEADDRESS had rich silver and gold mines, and Mexico City became the capital of New Spain.
SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE SETTLEMENT In the 16th century, Spanish colonists advanced north into what is now Florida and California, and south to today's Venezuela and Argentina.
In the 18th century, precious metals and stones were discovered, and coffee cultivation began in Brazil.
The Portuguese explored Amazonia, and formalized their claim to it in 1750.
In 1817 a larger northern armies attacked in a pincer and his son Ferdinand taken hostage and revitalized movement for movement to crush the remaining by Napoleon, leaders jostled for power independence emerged, and won the loyalist strength, and in 1824 Peru across Spanish America and juntas struggle in the north.
Not many lasted long, named president of Gran Colombia in In Mexico, a unique movement but by 1810, progress toward 1819, a union of Venezuela, Colombia, | emerged in 1810, led by a radical independence was underway.
The independence movements in South America rose from opposite ends of the continent.
In 1817, San Martín, a former Spanish military officer, directed 5,000 troops across the Andes from Argentina and struck at a point in Chile where loyalist forces had not been expecting an invasion.
Battle of Maipü José de San Martín led his rebel troops over the heights of the Andes to fight Spanish royalists.
The Battle of Maipu, in 1818, gained Chile liberty from Spanish domination.
The Spanish army was so demoralized—2,000 died and 3,000 were captured—that San Martin was also able to liberate Peru.
NOS Am already been contemplating ECISTENCIA ; ; ; ATA DIJO the idea of independence in * ANDO. the late 18th century.
Plundered resources Coffee was a nonnative crop introduced by the Europeans.
Before 1800 it was mainly produced by slaves on plantations controlled by colonists.
Hidalgo appealed to the indigenous Mexicans to eject from the village of Dolores the wealthy classes of Spanish descent.
Hidalgo’s untrained army grew to number 80,000 as it conquered towns and larger cities, and threatened Mexico City itself.
But by then Mexican independence was on its way to being realized, and was achieved in 1822.
Brazilian independence In Brazil, the discovery of a conspiracy against Portuguese rule in 1789-98 showed that some groups there had 1816 Argentina declares independence.
José de San Martin assembles an army for his long-term campaign for Peru.
In November the congress declares Mexican independence. of the Portuguese court from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro in 1808, to escape Napoleon's invading troops.
After 13 years, King John returned to Portugal, leaving his son Pedro as regent.
Dom Pedro I proclaimed Brazil independent in 1822, with himself as emperor.
In 1831, however, he abdicated, leaving his fiveyear-old son, Dom Pedro II, as regent, until 1840, when he was made emperor.
He reigned until 1889, when he was deposed, and a republic was proclaimed.
Building new nations The former Spanish America split into more than a dozen separate countries.
Adapting models from northern Europe and the US, republics were set up across the region.
Factional fighting caused the first constitutional governments to fail, however, and the unrest led to more centralized regimes by the mid-19th century.
Governments changed rapidly in most regions, and the use of force became common.
Military men, ^caudillos,"" rose to positions of dominance and consolidated their power through strategic alliances.
In many countries, difficult financial circumstances contributed to political instability.
But by the 1860s and 1870s, manufacturers from England, the US, and other nations were welcomed, and there was a surge in demand for sugar, coffee, wheat, and beef.
Traditional exports such as silver recovered, and exceeded previous production levels.
SIMON BOLIVAR Simón Bolívar was a South American patriot, and hero of the struggle for independence from Spain.
Born an aristocrat, Bolívar began his revolutionary career in Venezuela in 1813, after visits to Europe and the US, where he had absorbed anticolonial ideas.
Bolivar spent his remaining years unsuccessfully trying to forge a union of the newly independent states.
SIMON BOLIVAR, ATTRIBUTED When domestic funding was scarce, European investment helped to provide money for improved infrastructure.
Foreign firms, from countries such as JUNTA A Spanish word for a governing group, often used to refer to military officers who seize power and establish an authoritarian government.
Britain, constructed railways, streetcar systems, and electricity networks.
The Mexican Revolution In 1876 General Porfirio Díaz forcibly seized power in Mexico and set up a dictatorship.
He opened up the country to foreign investment and allowed the owners of foreign estates to take more of the Indian peasants' lands.
Díaz was overthrown in 1911, but fighting broke out between rival factions.
Díaz's successor, Francisco Madero, failed to carry out promised agrarian reforms and was overthrown in 1913.
LATIN AMERICA LIBERATED . l Pa Pii After centuries of colonial rule, industrialization and democracy came to Latin America only slowly.
NEW CONSTITUTION FOR MEXICO In 1917, President Venustiano Carranza began to create the modern Mexican state with land reforms and more limits on the Church's power.
NEW INDUSTRY Shortages of goods caused by the two World Wars were an incentive to industrialization.
Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina became Latin America's leading producers of iron, steel, and machinery.
CARRANZA THE DAWN OF MASS POLITICS Latin America has often been politically unstable.
TRANSFORMING LATIN AMERICA The 19th century saw major upheaval throughout Latin America, beginning with nationalist revolts, and culminating in the Brazilian republic and the Mexican Revolution.
EARLY MAPPING At the beginning of the 15th century, European sailors used maps based on the writings of ancient Greek geographer Ptolemy, showing Europe, the Mediterranean, and western Asia.
However, European knowledge of the Southern Hemisphere was still sketchy.
With instructions to chart coastlines and annex trading posts in the name of the British Crown, Cook's first Pacific voyage took him around New Zealand and along the coast of eastern Australia.
He led three voyages to the Pacific, and was greatly respected by his crew, believing in good diet and hygiene.
Despite mainly successful efforts to forge friendly relations with the Polynesians he visited, Cook was killed in Hawaii in 1779. but few ventured deep into the interior until 1860, when Robert Burke and John Wills left Melbourne and headed north.
Into Africa Africa posed a great challenge to explorers, as there were still many blank spaces in European maps of the continent.
The British, Portuguese, F French, and Germans were all eager to lay claim to its lands, with various religious, commercial, political, and colonial agendas.
Later in the 19th century several explorers, including Richard Burton, Cook's chronometer, K1, 1769 Invented by John Harrison, the chronometer (see 282) allowed the measurement of longitude.
Cook was one of the first to know his exact position while sailing uncharted waters. circumnavigated Australia , proving it was one large island.
The west coast Swan River colony, founded in 1829, confirmed British claims to the whole continent, ` p ear L Le Se eee oY Mapping continents In 1866, Dr.
His maps, such as the one above of central Africa, changed mapping of Africa.
John Hanning Speke, and Verney Cameron, endured great hardships to continue their explorations.
The Scottish missionary David Livingstone attempted to open up trade routes favorable to Britain.
He navigated lakes and rivers, including the Zambezi River and Victoria Falls, crossing Africa from east to west.
Livingstone and Henry Morton Stanley (the man who was sent to find Livingstone when he went missing in 1866-71) were important in mapping this enormous continent.
On finding him, in 1871, he doffed his hat, and uttered the now famous words, ""Dr.
Livingstone, | presume."" was the Scottish-Canadian explorer Alexander Mackenzie in 1793, as he Searched Tor the Northwest Passage—a water route to the Pacific Ocean.
In 1804, with settlements becoming overcrowded and people migrating west, United States president Thomas Jefferson sent Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to explore Louisiana and the mountains and plains beyond it.
They crossed the United States from east to west by canoe, horse, and foot, reaching the Pacific Ocean in 1805.
A test of endurance The North and South poles were so inhospitable they offered little chance for exploitation, but there was prestige in being the first nation to conquer them.
A pair of Americans, Frederick Cook in 1908 and Robert Peary in 1909, both made claims to have reached the North Pole—claims that remain in dispute to this day.
While navigators of many nations had charted the coastline of Antarctica in the extreme south, it took an American expedition led by Lieutenant Charles Wilkes to confirm that it was a continent.
Both the Norwegian Roald Amundsen and the Englishman Robert Falcon Scott sought to demonstrate their technological prowess and endurance.
With husky-drawn sleds, Amundsen reached the pole on December 14, 1911.
Halfway there, Scott sent his ponies back and dragged the sleds by hand.
He reached the South Pole a month after Roald Amundsen, but died of starvation on the return journey.
Through such feats of human endeavor, geographers were able to draw the first accurate outline of the world.
By the turn of the 20th century, all seven continents—Europe, Asia, Africa, North and South America, Australia, and Antarctica—were on the map.
However, human endurance and scientific curiosity have kept polar and space exploration alive.
POLAR EXPLORATION The first crossing of Antarctica was accomplished by the British Vivian Fuchs and the New Zealander Edmund Hillary in 195758.
American Ralph Plaisted became the first to reach the North Pole using surface transport in 1968.
SPACE HIGHLIGHTS In April 1961, the Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person in space.
Journay This 1909 French J E cartoon depicts Peary \ and Cook, who both claimed to be the first to reach the North Pole.
Ay Cook in New South Wales On August 22, 1770, Captain James Cook (center, raising hat) declared the southeastern coast of Australia British and named it New South Wales.
The city has evolved 19th century onward is walking distance of the as a center of commerce and power. fairly straightforward—the factories.
In many ascendancy of industry over heavily industrialized ANCIENT CITIES agriculture—but the effects DUI MMMT cities, a ""factory culture"" Towns and cities emerged of this change in lifestyle arose, in which the in Asia and Egypt in were far more complex.
The cable car's popularity local mill or factory. ili with streets running at force flooded into the cities when the resulted from its replacing horse-drawn transport.
Industrial In 1850, London, Paris, Constantinople of intellectual, religious, and commercial life. in cities that had existed for centuries. buildings and railroad yards tended to , and St.
However, despite this Massive increase in city living, at the turn of the 20th century, the majority of people—even in industrialized nations—still lived in the country.
Squalor, space, and sanitation For those who were forced to move to the cities, life was often squalid and miserable.
In the first half of the 19th century, the influx of people to the cities outstripped the facilities available, which meant that in some poor urban areas, food supply and sanitation were so bad that the high mortality rate (both from malnutrition and from diseases caused by overcrowding, such as cholera and typhoid) kept urban growth relatively slow.
The population more than tripled in the 50-year period from 1850 to 1900. some even declined.
Water was polluted with human filth, the air with industrial pollution, and rats and insects quickly spread disease.
Not surprisingly, the situation was worst in the world’s most populous cities, such as London, Paris, Constantinople, and particularly Peking , which in 1800 was the only city with more than a million inhabitants.
The appalling conditions in the working-class slums close to his father’s cotton mill in Manchester, in northern England, inspired German philosopher Friederich Engels to write The Condition of the English Working Class in 1844.
It also added to the demands for improved health and sanitation in city slums.
Such developments meant that urban populations began to expand naturally, rather than as a result of rural immigration, prompting the expansion that took place between 1850 and World War I Urban planners also came to realize that space was as important to health as sanitation.
Putting the railroad underground by cutting or boring a tunnel was a means of providing rapid, frequent, and cheap transportation around a crowded city.
The first subway in the United States opened in Boston in 1897. aimed at improving people's health and comfort—and another was the emergence of model towns.
While industrialists are often characterized as exploiting the masses, many were philanthropists.
In 1786, Scottish cotton magnate David Dale built the model town of New Lanark for his workers, and his example was followed by several other industrialists during the 19th century, including his son-in-law, Robert Owen.
AMERICAN ARCHITECT WILLIAM LE BARON JENNEY The idea of building up instead of out to maximize living space began in the medieval period, when city walls restricted outward expansion.
This picture, from 1860, shows the cramped conditions resulting from a population boom. on jal 4 ' The first such town was Letchworth, in Hertfordshire, England, in 1903.
Harvey’s idea was adopted by the American architect Walter Burley Griffin in his work on Canberra, the capital of Australia.
The spread of urbanization As cities expanded, so did their infrastructures.
The improvements in transport led more middle-class workers to move away from downtown areas, giving rise to the concept of suburban living and the commuter belt—residential areas on the periphery of a city.
This in turn led to expansion of the suburbs, which in some cases meant cities absorbing entire towns and villages into their urban sprawl and filling the spaces that once Chicago was 10 stories when completed in 1885 and 12 by the time it was demolished in 1931.
It is generally acknowledged to be the first skyscraper, not simply because of its height but also because of its method of construction.
Jenney's use of steel girders, a skeleton frame, and a ""curtain wall"" (hung from the frame rather than supporting the building) paved the way for modern skyscrapers. separated them with new housing and facilities.
In some countries this resulted in legislation limiting the extent of expansion and the creation of ""green belts"" around cities.
City living was not simply about the buildings in which people lived and worked; it also affected their habits and ways of thinking.
City-dwellers had greater anonymity than rural villagers, which gave them greater license in many aspects of their lives.
I med «1 Piccadilly Circus, London Despite being built in the early 19th century, by the time of this photograph, taken in 1910, the roads of London's Piccadilly Circus were having to accommodate early motor cars , as well as more traditional horse and carts.
A Paris, France Paris expanded rapidly from the 1840s due to the arrival of the railroads.
During the 1850s, Napoleon III ordered a massive remodeling by Georges Haussmann, who replaced entire medieval districts of narrow, cramped streets with the wide boulevards, such as this one, for which the city is now famous.
World's biggest cities These graphs show the extraordinary population growth in the world's top five cities.
The list of top cities changes between 1800 and 1900 from mainly Asian cities to European and American ones. ^ dal M ‘ A Chicago By 1900, thanks to industry and railways, Chicago was the second-largest American city.
Not only were people earning more money, but the focus of their lives was undergoing a gradual shift away from the workplace—average working hours were shorter, leading to a division between work and leisure time.
By the early 20th century, a wide range of diversions were available, including popular theater, music hall, motion pictures, and professional sports.
PERCENT The proportion of the global population living in towns of over 200,000 people in 1800. ] n PERCENT by 1900.
CONTINUED GROWTH The number of people worldwide living in cities has continued to rise since the medieval period.
SLUMS AND SHANTIES As urbanization continued to accelerate during the 20th century, the new phenomenon of the shanty town appeared on the fringes of cities in Africa, Asia, and South America, where there is a wide gap between rich and poor.
Shanty towns are haphazard collections of unlicensed makeshift houses that are built from any available waste materials.
The rural poor are drawn to shanty towns in the hopes that living close to the city might bring them employment, housing, health services, education, and utilities, but for the vast majority it is a false hope.
Conditions are far worse than those they have left behind in the country, with hunger and poverty made worse by crime and disease.
According to the United Nations, more than half the world's population now lives in cities, almost one-third of that number in slum areas or shanty towns.
SHANTY TOWN LIFE LIGHT POLLUTION In urban areas, problems are caused by an excess of artificial light.
These include adverse effects on human health and disruption of ecosystems governed by sunlight.
INNER CITY CONGESTION During the 20th century, the problems of overcrowding in cities changed from those encountered during the 19th century.
Problems of food supply and sanitation were replaced by those of pollution and traffic congestion, together with the perennial problem of overcrowding.
A CITY CYCLIST of traffic in London in the ] MPH The average speed year 1900 and in the year 2000.
GREEK MEDICAL THEORY In ancient Greece , it was believed that health depended on the body maintaining a balance of four fluids, or ""humors""—blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm.
Each humor had its own characteristic qualities, combinations of hot, cold, wet, and dry.
A sanguine temperament was believed to produce an excess of blood, which made the person cheerful, even-tempered, and optimistic, though feverish.
They traveled across Europe during the Roman Empire, then spread to the Middle East, and to European colonies.
While the core theories remained constant, doctors added to the Greek understanding of anatomy.
In the 16th century, the Belgian physician Andreas Vesalius's groundbreaking On the Workings of the Human Body contained detailed anatomical sketches.
My n the 18th century, doctors a researching human anatomy realized that some diseases, such as cancer, produced swellings in the solid parts of the body or changes to the appearance of organs such as the lungs and liver.
The idea that disease was located in the solid parts of the body, not the fluids , was firmly established by Parisian research into pathology in the early 19th century.
In the city's huge hospitals, doctors carefully recorded the progress of many of the diseases suffered by hundreds of patients they treated.
Those who died were dissected, to discover how their illness had affected the organs in their body.
Using this approach, doctors were able to monitor the progress of many diseases, and to make precise distinctions between diseases of the heart and of the lungs, for example.
During the rest of the century, doctors explored the structure of the human body in finer detail.
They described the various tissues that made up the organs and, using improved microscopes, began to explore the cells that formed the tissues.
By experimenting on animals, their patients, and sometimes themselves, doctors began to understand erm Warfare In the 19th century, a number of significant developments in medical science greatly increased doctors' knowledge of anatomy and disease.
Coupled with the transformation of hospitals into specialized treatment centers came a crucial understanding of the spread of infection and how to halt it. 19th-century surgeon's kit Although antisepsis is often associated with the British surgeon Joseph Lister and the use of carbolic acid, safe surgery owed much to simple ideas—like making surgical instruments from steel, and sterilizing them after every operation.
FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE, BRITISH NURSE AND PHILANTHROPIST, 1859 the role of the liver and pancreas in the digestive system and the function of the kidneys.
This in turn gave them new ways of diagnosing illnesses, such as identifying kidney disease by analyzing the chemicals found in a patient’s urine.
Surgery Once doctors began to think of disease affecting the solid organs of the body, they realized they might be able to cure patients by cutting out the diseased part.
However, in the 18th century, surgical operations were used only as a last resort, because of the pain involved in cutting into the patient's body, and the high probability of wound infection.
From the beginning of the 19th century, surgery began to change with the introduction of anesthetics—the British surgeon Robert Liston's use of ether during an amputation had an impact throughout Europe.
Now surgeons could work more slowly, reducing blood loss by tying up blood vessels, and carefully cutting out damaged or diseased tissue.
This allowed surgeons to operate safely, and to devise a range of operations to cure diseases.
Therapy Although the practice of bloodletting—draining a patient of blood in the hope it would cure their illness—was still used in the 19th century, by 1900 Early operating theatre This 1898 photograph of an operating room reveals that the idea of asepsis (the reduction of contamination) spread very slowly.
The surgeon wears an apron, but no mask, and the room is filled with observers wearing ordinary clothes.
The idea that disease was located in the body's organs led to a string of inventions helping doctors to ""see"" inside of living patients.
In 1816 René Laennec created the first crude stethoscope when he rolled up some papers into a tube, and discovered he could hear sounds made by the lungs and heart.
The 19th century saw the invention of a number of ""scopes"" for seeing into the ear, eye, and the throat.
The ability to see inside the living body became a reality in 1895 when Wilhelm Róntgen discovered that X-rays passed through flesh but not bone.
Opium was used to relieve pain, but as an addictive substance it was not without risk.
Doctors could treat serious injuries and broken limbs with the aid of anesthetics and improved surgical methods.
Quinine (made from the bark of the 4 cinchona tree) was used to treat malaria, and digitalis (made from foxgloves) was an effective treatment for heart conditions.
In 1897, aspirin (based on a chemical found in willow bark) was launched.
Salvarsan, the first synthetic drug, was introduced in 1910, and was prescribed in cases of syphilis.
However, many remedies did not cure disease, but only soothed the symptoms—for example, cough syrup eased coughing, and poultices reduced objective lens stage for specimen Slide primary lens to focus light source SECONDS was said to be all it took for the 19th-century surgeon Robert Liston to amputate a human legwithout administering an anesthetic. swellings.
Bed rest, nutritious food, and careful nursing were still the basis of medical care for most forms of illness.
Caring for the sick Hospitals were crucial to the development of new medical ideas and practices, and in turn these medical innovations completely transformed the nature of the hospital.
In the 18th century, hospitals were still charities caring for the sick and poor.
In the 19th century, they became centers for treatment, open to all who could afford to pay.
Operating rooms were built to allow students to view surgery, with specialized lights and equipment, and lined with glass and tiles that could be easily cleaned.
They also began to offer specialty treatments for complaints of the ear and eye, or conditions affecting children.
As a result, hospitals treated a greater number of seriously ill patients, and the amount of staff, especially nurses, grew enormously to provide roundMicroscope From 1830, the microscope played a crucial role in understanding the structure of the body.
Doctors diagnosed cancer by examining tissues under the microscope, and confirmed infection by identifying disease-causing bacteria.
GERM WARFARE In the late 19th and 20th centuries, the greatest medical developments came in the form of new treatments.
VACCINES Smallpox vaccination had been developed in the 1790s, based on the chance observation that milkmaids who caught cowpox did not catch smallpox.
Other forms of immunization were developed as doctors began to understand how the body resisted disease.
In the 1880s, French scientist Louis Pasteur developed a vaccine against rabies based on a weakened form of the virus.
This was followed by vaccines against tetanus and diphtheria in the 18905.
Mass immunization against common childhood diseases came in the 20th century—with a vaccine against polio in 1957 and against measles and mumps in the 1960s.
Before then, most drugs were derived from plants, but since the 1950s, synthetic drugs have predominated. the-clock care.
Nurses, who were almost always women, played a crucial role in the new hospitals.
They kept the wards scrupulously clean and neat to limit the possibility of infection, monitored patients’ symptoms, and administered medicines.
However, even experienced and skilled nurses were expected to follow the doctors’ directions at all times.
While the relatively well-equipped hospitals were able to treat a wider range of conditions, many people, particularly the poor, continued to die of infectious diseases transmitted by bacteria and viruses.
Children were particularly vulnerable, and many died from measles, mumps, diphtheria, and scarlet fever.
Doctors could do little to cure these diseases, but they could control their spread.
Increased supplies of clean water and improved sanitation helped to clean up cities and stop the spread of waterborne infections.
Patients suffering from infectious diseases were isolated in special hospitals, or in their homes.
LI r O LI nN r These are not always the same thing— for example, the Kurdish people are a nation with no defined state, while South Africa under apartheid (see In the late 18th century, nationalism emerged in Europe and the American colonies as a force for DEC ET o liberty, equality, and fraternity.
ER bow None OLET nace he term nationalism describes a loyalty to one’s nation, pride in its history and culture, a belief that the nation’s interests are EOM BEFORE i C Until the 18th century the idea of the nationof primary importance, and a patriotic state was linked to the monarchy and, in desire to achieve or maintain its smaller states, people were unified by independence. shared language and culture.
Nationalism emerged as a political force in the late 18th century, and t KING AND COUNTRY since then, the idea that nations have E^ Europe comprised a small number the right to form their own political of powerful kingdomsBritain states has shaped the map of the world and France were the as we know it today.
This ideal, known oldest, with the as national self-determination, inspired Netherlands, Portugal, major upheavals, such as the American Spain, and Sweden Revolution , provided emerging between the the impetus for smaller nations to seek 15th and 17th centuries. independence from large empires, Only in politically and encouraged nations divided FRENCH independent kingdoms into a collection of small states, or MONARCHS CROWN ME SUITS any sense of principalities, such as Germany and nationhood.
This was reinforced by loyalty to Italy, to seek unification. the crown, the flag, and, later, by patron saints.
CULTURAL NATIONALISM Although the word “nation” is In smaller states and principalities—territories commonly used to describe a state or ruled by a prince—political loyalties were country, it is technically a group of localized, but a sense of unity was provided by people united by ethnicity, culture, common language and culture.
Liberty Leading the People This painting of the July Revolution of 1830 that made Louis-Philippe the French king is both a depiction of and an act of nationalism.
Napoleon decorated Chauvin with the Saber of Honor, but when his brand of unquestioning nationalism fell out of fashion, he found himself satirized in several French plays.
A country whose state boundaries correspond to those of a particular nation is described as a nation-state.
One idea, called primordialism, is that nations are simply the outward territorial expression of the divisions between people of different ethnicity or culture.
This idea of “cultural nationalism” was first expressed by the 18th-century German philosopher Johann Gottfried von Herder.
Opposition to this idea States that the concept of nationalism came first, followed by the artificial creation of nations, for political or economic reasons.
More recently, it has been proposed that national identities evolve by merging with new ethnic and cultural influences.
Today the idea of the nation-state is well established, but that was not always the case.
As people developed a sense of nationhood they began to demand the right to selfgovernment.
In America and France the liberal ideals of freedom, equality, and brotherhood led to nation-states that granted their citizens unchallengeable rights and were governed in the name of the people.
Consequences of nationalism Once nation-statehood had been achieved, some less savory aspects of nationalism emerged.
Napoleon tried to impose the French identity on much of Europe , and the belief that the United States had a “manifest destiny"" to take over North America came at the expense of the native population.
The idea that the nation-state should cherish itself above all others could lead to racism, religious intolerance, and imperialism.
Britain's imperialism went on to encourage nationalist movements Throughout the 20th century, nationalism showed its two faces, freeing some while subjugating others.
The resulting settlement was essentially conservative—an attempt to contain the seeds of nationalism that had shattered the old order of Europe.
Most of the monarchies that had been overthrown by Napoleon's armies were restored.
In Spain, King Ferdinand VII was given back his father's throne; Italy was divided once again into scores of principalities; the 39-state German BEFORE In the 18th century a number of national revivals made the concept of national identity a significant force in European politics.
MAGYAR RENAISSANCE When Joseph II, the energetic ruler of the Habsburg Empire from 1780-90, decreed that German replace Latin as the empire's official language, the Hungarians in his empire reacted by insisting on the right to use their own tongue.
TREATY OF VIENNA NATIONAL REVIVALS The Magyar national reawakening subsequently triggered national revivals among the Slovak, Romanian, Serbian, and Croatian minorities within Hungary.
In 1789, a revolt broke out in the Austrian Netherlands in reaction to the emperor's centralized policies, and in Ireland a swell of nationalism and a mass rebellion for democratic rights erupted against British rule in 1798.
These revivals later blossomed into the nationalist movements of the 19th-20th centuries.
The 1815 Treaty of Vienna was an attempt to redraw the borders of Europe and secure peace and stability.
Confederation was formed; Austria was given back most of the territories it had lost in Italy; Norway and Sweden were joined under a single ruler; and Russia was handed Finland and given effective control over the new kingdom of Poland.
But the forces to which the age of revolution gave birth were not so easily contained.
Traditional loyalties to the old dynasties of Europe had declined; in their place came new loyalties to national groups and demands for nation-states.
Over the following century, the old order of Europe would be fundamentally transformed.
In 1830, revolution also broke out in Belgium (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands), and an independent Belgian state was formed in 1831.
In Paris the Bourbon monarchy, restored to the French throne in 1814, was overthrown and replaced by a republic.
On hearing of events in France, the people of Vienna, Budapest, and Prague rose up against the Habsburg rulers of the Austrian Empire.
For a time, this empire (which covered much of central and southeastern Europe) showed signs of collapse, but the revolutions of 1848 failed within the Habsburg territories.
National unification The national impulse that led to the division of the Ottoman Empire into independent nation-states could also act as a force for unification.
Large, ethnically diverse states such as the Ottoman Empire were particularly vulnerable to the first type of nationalist movement.
During the first part of the 19th century, there was a series of uprisings by Greeks, Serbs, Romanians, and other ethnic groups within the Ottoman Empire.
Serbia was semi-independent by 1817, and Greece declared its independence from the Ottomans in 1829.
The Greek War of Independence, in particular, caught the imagination of writers and artists such as the poet Byron and the painter Delacroix, helping stimulate a romantic ideal of national struggle the Congress of Vienna had divided the Italian peninsula into a patchwork of independent states.
In spite of this, the idea of a single Italian nation had potent popular appeal.
Cavour, the Prime Minister of Piedmont in northern Italy, provoked a war against Austria in AP 1859.
With the help of » France, Piedmont repelled a Austria, leaving the way — open for Cavour to take control of most of northern and central Italy.
The following year the charismatic Italian patriot Giuseppe Garibaldi invaded southern Italy with an army of a thousand volunteer “Red Shirts"" and conquered Sicily and Naples.
ATLANTIC OCEAN GIBRALTAR to Britain The sick man of Europe This cartoon depicts Abdul Hamid II, the last Ottoman emperor , having his empire whipped out from underneath him by Bulgaria and Austria.
Such displays showed off military strength, and helped build nationalistic pride.
At the time of the 1848 revolutions, Germany was a loose confederation of states, of which the most powerful was Prussia.
Bismarck’s primary objective was to secure the supremacy of Prussia in Central Europe, but by encouraging the other German states to unify under Prussia, he was also the architect of the German nation.
The process began in 1864, when Prussia joined forces with Austria to annex the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein from Denmark.
Two years later Bismarck was ready to deal with Austria, Prussia’s chief rival for dominance in Germany.
Allied with Italy and several smaller German states, Prussia defeated Austria—who counted the German states of Saxony and Bavaria among their allies—at the Battle of Koniggratz.
Final unity came when the southern principalities of Germany joined Prussia in its war against France in 1870.
A German victory led to the proclamation of a unified German Empire in 1871.
National identities The principle that nations share a unique, common identity based on a common culture and history was well established by the late 19th century.
OTTO VON BISMARCK Otto von Bismarck became prime minister of Prussia in 1862.
His ambition was to unite Germany under Prussian leadership— a result he believed could only be achieved by force.
Victory in the Franco-Prussian War persuaded the other German States to join together to form an empire.
Although conservative, Bismarck introduced some social reforms in an attempt to reduce the appeal of socialism.
P ia P J Y^ National languages became paramount, often at the expense of regional dialects.
During the struggle to unify Italy, for example, the Italian dialect spoken in Tuscany was chosen, and energetically promoted by writers such as Alessandro Manzoni, who revised and republished his great patriotic novel, The Betrothed, in this new national language.
Symbols of national identity, such as music and literature, flourished.
Military campaigns cemented a growing patriotic fervor with symbolic state emblems and flags.
National Days were created, education systems enforced a standard curriculum, and fanfares, marches, and national anthems became prolific across Europe.
In some areas, a particular national identity was enforced by the state in an attempt to suppress or maintain control over other ethnic groups.
OTTO VON BISMARCK, SEPTEMBER 30, 1862 LM AEST National identity National symbols and rituals such as the flag and Pledge of Allegiance, shown in this United States school , could help to forge the identity of a young nation such as the US, which was largely made of immigrants.
Militarism As liberal nationalism, which had focused on civil rights and a constitution, gave way to imperialist nationalism, based on national pride and expansion, a strong army became essential.
Until Napoleon, armies were essentially professional forces whose manpower was drawn from the less socially and economically useful elements of the population.
The old idea of loyalty to the king was replaced in the Napoleonic armies with loyalty based upon national patriotism fired by the idea of social revolution.
This made it possible for Napoleon to raise the type of mass armies that came to characterize the national armies of the 19th and 20th centuries.
The entire population was expected to contribute to the war, and conscription was gradually introduced across Europe.
The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78 was the first war in which modern repeating rifles were uniformly used, increasing the accuracy of fire, and breech-loading cannon, which loaded from the rear for safety and efficiency, replaced front-loading cannon.
By the outbreak of the RussoJapanese War , the use of indirect heavy artillery fire was standard practice.
The result was that the armies of the early 20th century had an unprecedented killing capacity.
Colonial acquisitions were greeted with enthusiasm and there was a growing sense that nations were in competition with each other.
Italians, Serbs, Romanians, Greeks, and Bulgarians dreamed of extending their national borders to include their people who were living outside of their nationstate.
This expansionist nationalism pitted the nation-states against each other.
In 1912, a coalition of Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece invaded, occupied, and partitioned the Ottoman Empire's European provinces.
Disagreement over the spoils led to the Second Balkan War in which Greece and Serbia gained large territories.
A war of independence and civil war was fought in 1918, and Finland officially became a republic in 1919.
Poland had disappeared from the map in 1785, partitioned between Russia, Prussia, and Austria.
In 1915, the Germans expelled the Russians from Poland and promised Poland independence.
In 1921, however, the British signed a treaty with the Irish majority party Sinn Féin to bring about Irish Independence, except for the six northern counties, and in 1922 the Irish Free State came into being.
WORLD WAR I By the early 20th century, nation-states replaced small principalities in Europe.
These were also joined by a new generation of powers, whose interests were largely economic.
Rivalries between the powers intensified and their ambitions came into conflict.
KARL MARX, FROM “THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO,” 1848 evolutionary socialist and R philosopher Karl Marx was born into a well-to-do German Jewish family in Trier.
His father had converted to Christianity to avoid persecution by the Prussian authorities.
Karl was sent to university to become a lawyer like his father, but instead immersed himself in the study of philosophy and radical politics.
Rebelling against his social origins, he became an atheist and a savage critic of the prosperous middle classes.
When Marx was a young man in the 1840s, Europe seemed to many people to be ripe for revolution.
Marx became a political journalist, plunging energetically into arguments against the authorities and fellow radicals with whom he disagreed.
Forging friendships Marx formed his lifelong friendship with Friedrich Engels in Paris in August 1844.
The son of a German industrialist, with a business in Lancashire, England, Engels provided Marx with financial support as well as intellectual collaboration. alienated state of humans in the modern world and to justify a future transformation of society.
Marx and Engels In 1844 Marx formed a close | friendship with Friedrich Engels, 4 r the son of a wealthy cottonpe” 1 mill owner.
Marx and Engels shared the belief that Victorian patriarch Despite his enthusiasm for violent revolution, Karl Marx, pictured here in 1875, was a gentle father and husband.
He reserved an intellectual hatred for people with whose political views he disagreed.
Marx had no influence on the uprising, but hailed it as “the glorious harbinger of a new society.” industrial workers, inspired to rise up against the capitalists who exploited their labor, could be the vehicle for revolutionary change.
In 1847, Marx and Engels both joined a small subversive organization known as the League of the Just, soon renamed the Communist League.
For this they wrote The Communist Manifesto, a powerful appeal for the overthrow of society by a worldwide workers' revolution.
It was a timely document, for in 1848 there were revolts in many cities across Europe, including Paris, Berlin, and — Vienna.
Marx contributed Bu the agitation with his writings, though neither he nor the Communist League had any significant impact on events.
After the suppression of the uprisings in 1849, life for radicals such as Marx became impossible in continental Europe.
He moved to Britain, a relatively liberal country that was tolerant of the activities of political refugees.
Theorizing revolution In the 1850s the prospect of a triumph for the workers' revolution seemed remote, and the Communist League withered away.
Marx instead devoted himself to an immense theoretical effort, intended to place the revolutionary critique of capitalist society on a secure scientific and philosophical basis.
Although he earned some money from journalism, Marx did not work to support himself and his growing family, depending mostly on handouts from Engels.
Thus he was free to write full-time, becoming a familiar presence in the British Museum Reading Room in London.
The major result of his labors was the first volume of his analysis of capitalism, Das Kapital, in 1867.
In 1864 he joined the International Working Men's The Communist Manifesto The Manifesto of 1848 is the most succinct statement of Marx's and Engels' ideas.
Association, an attempt to coordinate the efforts of assorted left-wing groups.
Marx immediately established himself as a dominant force in the group, but his inability to tolerate the views of those who did not share his own ideas led to conflicts.
When a revolutionary Commune briefly took control of Paris in 1871 (an uprising provoked by France's defeat in war with Prussia) the International played only the most marginal role in events.
Yet after Marx wrote a pamphlet in praise of the uprising, the International received much of the blame for it, giving Marx unprecedented notoriety.
In 19th-century Europe, the bourgeoisie, or middle class, owned the means of production— factories and machinery.
By paying the working class less than their labor was worth, the bourgeoisie accumulated capital.
According to communist ideals, it was the historic role of the working class to carry out a revolution, establishing a ""dictatorship of the proletariat"" and creating a classless society free of exploitation or want. —————— — Radical journalism Marx and Engels collaborate on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, a radical newspaper that they edited in 1848-49, a time of revolutionary upheaval in Europe.
Marx was an excellent journalist, writing with humor and style as well as insightful political analysis.
KARL MARX, FROM THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO, 1848 influential figures in history.
His writings, combining German philosophy and economic analysis, were often dauntingly intellectual.
Yet a conviction spread that Marx had proved the inevitability of the fall of capitalism and of a workers’ revolution.
After his death, Marxism was adopted as a belief system by revolutionary groups, and became the official ideology of states such as the Soviet Union and Communist China.
June 19, 1843 Marries Prussian aristocrats daughter Jenny von Westphalen.
August 28, 1844 Friedrich Engels meets Marx in Paris and shows him his work on The Condition of the Working Class in England; their lifelong collaboration begins.
JENNY MARX, C 1840 January 1845 Expelled from Paris, Marx and Engels move to Brussels, Belgium.
March 1848 Arrested and expelled from Brussels, Marx moves to Paris, where a revolution has overthrown the monarchy.
June 1848-May 1849 Marx returns to Cologne and edits a radical newspaper, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung; when the paper is suppressed he returns to Paris.
August 1849 Again expelled from Paris, Marx moves to London, where he settles for the rest of his life.
April 6, 1855 Marx's best-loved son, eight-yearold Edgar, dies; in all, four of Marx's seven children die between 1850 and 1857.
Land was held by a vassal on behalf of a lord or a king, in return for loyalty and military service.
Serfs, mostly unfree peasants, labored for the vassals in a state of virtual slavery in return for the right to farm some of the land for themselves.
MERCANTILISM During the 17th and 18th centuries a trading system called mercantilism, operated in Europe, particularly England, France, and the Netherlands.
It aimed to amass national wealth, especially in the form of gold bullion.
Under this system the means of production are privately owned and goods are produced for a profit.
Capitalism promotes a free market that is regulated by supply and demand.
Humanist values run counter to the harsh treatment of working people during the Industrial Revolution «€ 29293, and they made an important contribution to the development of socialist thinking.
Consequences of industrialization The drive by 19th-century industrialists to maximize profits resulted in dirty and dangerous conditions for most working people—both in factories like these Pittsburgh steel mills and in overcrowded, inadequate housing.
These appalling conditions were the subject of numerous campaigns by social reformers.
While factory owners enjoyed huge profits during the Industrial Revolution, the new working class was impoverished.
This inequality gave rise to political ideas that aimed to organize and inspire the workers, so that they could share the wealth they had created. he hope of making the world a fairer place had existed for centuries.
However, it was largely in response to the Industrial Revolution that this idea developed into a political philosophy called socialism.
Socialism seeks to share wealth by putting it in the hands of its creators—the working class.
However, a central issue of socialist debate was whether this could be achieved gradually or through a revolution in which the working class seized power.
Socialism in practice Early 19th-century socialists included Robert Owen, a Welsh industrialist, who came to believe, along with other “Utopian Socialists,” in the construction of societies in which property was owned collectively.
After establishing an experimental model community around his cotton mill at New Lanark in Scotland , he continued to attempt to found cooperative communities, most significantly in New Harmony, Idaho, though this was not a success.
One of the more radical beliefs for the age held by Utopian socialists was that men and women should have equal rights.
In France, Henri Saint-Simon, often called the ""father of French socialism,” looked for a society in which there would be equal opportunities for all, while his followers proposed an end to private property.
Among the many other radical ideas to emerge in the early 19th century, particularly in continental Europe, was anarchism, which held that the state itself could be replaced by a system of voluntary cooperation between workers.
Marx viewed history as a series of class struggles that would ultimately lead to the end of capitalism and the arrival of an ideal, classless society without private property, and free from exploitation and want—a theory he called communism.
He published his beliefs in the Communist Manifesto , which he wrote with Friedrich Engels.
Marx believed that such change could only be reached through a process of violent revolution.
The rise of Marxism It is highly unlikely that many working class people read the work of Marx or other socialist figures, but their discontent was evident.
In 1848 Europe was shaken by a series of revolutions, which erupted as a result of various factors, including high unemployment.
Although all the revolutions were quashed, labor movements emerged strong.
Marx played a more direct role in one of these movements in 1864, when a group of workers and intellectuals formed the International Working Men's Association, or First International.
However, an alternative version of socialism, known as ""social democracy,"" was beginning to gain momentum in Germany and spreading to other European nations.
Inspired by the work of the German philosopher Ferdinand Lasalle, social democrats asserted that it was possible UH LUSTRATION LILA STRATH French newspaper report Karl Marx featured on the front page of the newspaper L'Illustration in November 1871.
Nine months earlier Parisian workers had set up the Commune, a short-lived government that was hailed as the first example of ""the dictatorship of the proletariat""—or communism. for a fair government to free workers from want and exploitation.
In his eyes, capitalism and the growth of socialism were steps toward revolution and communism.
The revolution Marx sought eventually took place in Russia, though he had envisaged it happening in more industrialized societies, like Britain.
New Lanark In 1800 Robert Owen set up a model community at this mill in Scotland.
TRADE UNIONS IN BRITAIN From the early 19th century, British workers organized themselves into associations called trade unions to protect their common interests.
JAMES KEIR HARDIE SOCIAL DEMOCRACY Political parties espousing social democracy have held power for long periods during the 20th century—particularly in the Scandinavian countries, Germany, and France.
They created societies in which wealth was—at least partially— redistributed among all their citizens.
Elevating the importance of self-expression, intuition, emotion, and the imagination over reason, Romanticism saw the beginning of the distinction between art and science.
E4 BEFORE Before Romanticism, Enlightenment thinkers sought answers to profound questions in science and reason.
Classicists followed the formal rules of art set down by ancient cultures.
CHALLENGING IDEAS French philosopher René Descartes advocated doubting everything until rational grounds had been established for believing it, which led enlightened thinkers to challenge previously accepted truths.
Its celebration of emotion and imagination is typical of Romantic poetry. d | qe 1 sad j i poo "" an Va ""T. unii Y n | Romanticism gave Germans a sense ; of national unity at a time when ""Germany"" was little more than a fragmented group of states.
Led by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (see below) with his novel The Sorrows of Young Werther, German writers and poets advocated sturm und drang , flouting convention by rebelling against their rational educations and emphasizing emotion in their work.
The German pioneers also established other motifs that rm would become characteristic of the ves lum EU i (ons ae movement.
Romanticism found its first expression not in France but among German writers, as a form of “cultural nationalism” ; the ideals of JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE Goethe was a major inspiration for the Romantic movement, of which he eventually came to disapprove.
CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, FRENCH POET, “THE SALON OF 1846,” 1846 GERMAN WRITER AND THINKER superior to reason.
This led to the cult of the artist as hero, capable of expressing thoughts and feelings beyond the realms of ordinary people.
Art for art's sake The Romantic ideal was that art should be a form of self-expression rather than a commodity, and that artists should not be treated as hired hands.
Painters began to distance themselves from their craftbased heritage and increasingly art became an imaginative product rather than merely a possession of the artist's patron.
This reinforced the Romantic idea of the artist as a gifted individual, intrinsically different from “ordinary” people—a status indulged to its fullest by the English poet Lord Byron, and the German composers Ludwig van Beethoven and Richard Wagner.
Many painters abandoned the strict rules of classicism and instead brought personal significance to their work.
Turner in England, Théodore Géricault and Eugene Delacroix in France, and Caspar David Friedrich in Germany, Romantic painters explored the subjects of nature, individual consciousness, and the cultural history of their nations.
Similarly, poets explored themes of childhood, subjective experience, and the mysteries of the natural world, often using traditional poetic forms.
He presented himself as a restless hero, in perpetual search of a deeper understanding through his work.
Perhaps the best expression of Romanticism is found in classical music.
From the powerful symphonies of Ludwig van Beethoven, the Romantic songs of the Austrian Franz Schubert, and the epic operas of Richard Wagner, 19thcentury composers produced many masterpieces that are still popular today.
On hearing Beethoven’s Ninth symphony, the French composer Claude Debussy declared that it was a Art song Gretchen am Spinnrade, a selection of text from “art song""—a musical rendering of a literary text.
It is a typical example of a lied, or THE ROMANTIC MOVEMENT Gothic revival Romanticism celebrated the medieval Gothic style in art, literature, and architecture.
Above is Keble College, Oxford, England, controversial for tts use of Gothic-style red brick rather than traditional stone. “universal nightmare” for all other composers, because no one would ever be capable of bettering it.
The cult of the individual Romanticism fundamentally changed the way society views art and the artist, reintroducing the classical idea that the creative act sets the artist apart.
This contributed to a separation of arts and sciences and to the notion of the avant garde—of artists ahead of their time, pioneering new ways of thinking.
The Death of Byron Lord Byron is depicted lying on his deathbed by the Flemish Romantic painter Joseph-Denis Odevaere.
Byron, who tried to help liberate Greece from Ottoman rule, is presented as a classical Greek hero.
AFTER 5x Artistic movements continued to spring from reactions to what was going on in society, as well as influencing social change themselves.
PRE-RAPHAELITES In 1848 a growing reaction against materialism and industrialization in Britain contributed to the foundation of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood by British artists John Everett Millais, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and William Holman Hunt.
They had strong links to the literary world, and Rossetti and his sister Christina were both notable poets.
REALISM As art became more of a commodity for the middle classes to acquire, its subject matter became tied to their values.
Realism was a reaction against idealization in art and a rejection of literary or exotic subjects.
French painter Gustave Courbet embodied its ideals, believing that an artist should only paint scenes of everyday life.
Other | and Christian creationists challenges came from ADAM AND EVE believe that the world was Darwin's grandfather, created exactly as stated in Erasmus Darwin, who in the Bible.
Based on a literal reading of this, the 1794 noted a progressional Church believed that the world was created change in animals.
French between 6000 and 40008cE, and that Earth naturalist Jean-Baptiste de and its species of plants and animals, including Lamarck also proposed a humans, are unchanging.
The young Charles theory of progressive Darwin was influenced by theologians such as development in his 3 William Paley, who argued that the natural world Philosophie Zoologique, | was too complex not to have had a creator. published in 1809.
CHARLES DARWIN, FROM THE DESCENT OF MAN, 1871 Origin of Species The theory of evolution is often called “Darwinism,” after the British naturalist Charles Darwin.
In 1859 Darwin published the results of his research in the first evolutionary theory based on scientific evidence.
His controversial work known as On the Origin of Species changed our view of the world.
Omana, lthough the uproar caused by On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection might suggest otherwise, the idea that humankind and animals had evolved from more primitive creatures was nothing new, even in Darwin’s day.
Some 2,500 years later, in 1844, Scottish encyclopedist Robert Chambers scandalized Victorian society by anonymously publishing Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation.
The realization that the separate species were all derived from common ancestors influenced Darwin's theory of natural selection.
This frontispiece to his Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature, 1865, reveals the similarities in the skeletons of (from left to right) gibbon, orangutan, chimpanzee, gorilla, and human.
Mar. time, contradicting the Biblical notion that they had been unchanged since their creation by God.
Chambers’ ideas were unscientific and unsubstantiated, but the very idea of evolution was enough to ensure that the book sold in huge numbers.
Natural selection From 1831 to 1836, Darwin traveled as a naturalist aboard HMS Beagle, on a scientific survey of South American waters.
During the voyage he found evidence to support the geologist Charles Lyell’s idea that the world had evolved through gradual processes (see BEFORE), but it was not until several years later that Darwin began to forge his own theory.
In the meantime he read Thomas Malthus’s 1798 “Essay on the Principle of Population” (see 291), which argued that the size of an animal population is limited by its food supply.
When Darwin’s friend, the ornithologist John Gould, realized that the species of finches that Darwin had brought back from his voyage shared common ancestors, Darwin wondered why.
Darwin began to work on what he called his theory of “transmutation” in 1842.
Darwin finally published when it emerged that zoogeographer Alfred Wallace was working on a similar theory.
Charles Lyell persuaded Darwin to submit a paper to London’s Linnean Society (a biological society), which was read on July 1, 1858, the same night as Wallace’s essay.
The number of biological 2, 9 UU and anatomical specimens Charles Darwin collected during the voyage of the Beagle, the details of which were put in 12 catalogs.
The Descent of Man The novel element in Darwin’s theory was natural selection.
His version, that individuals compete with each other for resources, differed from Wallace’s idea that they competed against the environment.
Humanity’s descent from the apes was a minor part of On the Origin of Species, but his 1871 book, The Descent of Man, argued that it was Although Darwin's theory has been highly influential, and is widely taught, debate over the origin of life on Earth continues.
EVOLUTIONARY SYNTHESIS As Darwin completed his book, Austrian botanist Gregor Mendel was researching heredity in plants.
In the 20th century, after years of neglect, Mendel's work led to the new science of genetics, which explains how the mutations necessary for natural selection occur and are passed on.
After the voyage, he gained wide respect for the papers he published describing his findings, and then, plagued by illness, he painstakingly prepared the publication that was to change the course of scientific history.
Upon his death, Darwin was buried in London's Westminster Abbey alongside the physicist Isaac Newton. walking on two legs that led humankind to evolve differently.
This was controversial, gaining both support and criticism from scientific and religious figures.
AFTER INTELLIGENT DESIGN Many people still doubt that complex living things such as human beings could have been created by entirely natural processes.
Popular in the 19th century, the idea was revived in the late 20th century.
GALILEO AND THE INQUISITION In 1622, Italian scientist Galileo Galilei asserted his belief that Earth revolved around the Sun-a theory first put forward a century earlier— in his book Dialogues on the Two Chief World Systems.
GALILEO FACES THE INQUISITION SOCIETIES AND ACADEMIES During the 17th century the emergence of scientific societies such as the Royal Society in Britain and the Académie des Sciences in France provided forums for debate and encouraged the formalization of the scientific method.
The societies also gave science respectability, though it continued to face opposition from the Church.
Newton believed that God was the force behind the natural systems his science had sought to explain, with the universe as a clockwork machine created by God.
Darwin's book, which advanced the theory that all creatures had evolved through natural selection, critically undermined the literal interpretation of the Bible, which held that God created the world, including humans, during a period of six days around 6,000 years ago.
God In 1859 Charles Darwin published On The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, in which the naturalist put forward his theory of evolution.
This sparked a public debate over the roles of religion and science in providing the means by which humans understood the world around them.
Their debate became known as ""the moment that science clashed with religion."" its position.
Bishop Wilberforce attacked Huxley over a perceived lack of evidence, while Huxley quipped that he would rather be descended from a monkey than a bishop.
Hard evidence This challenge to previously accepted ideas was not a deliberate attack on religion by science, but came simply from the fact that discoveries were being made that were at odds with Christian doctrine.
Philosophers had been challenging the literal interpretation of the Bible since the Enlightenment , but in the late 18th and early 19th The Creation of Adam Michelangelo's depiction of God creating Man adorns the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Rome.
It is part of a series of panels depicting stories from the book of Genesis, the first book of the Bible. centuries, scientific evidence added a new dimension to the debate.
Many Christians were willing to consider Biblical chronology as Science has continued its attempts to explain the universe, while the issue of Creationism still causes debate today.
ALBERT EINSTEIN, PAPER FOR CONFERENCE ON SCIENCE, 1940 metaphorical, with the six days of creation being interpreted as epochs, or geological time periods.
The idea that humans themselves were descended from apes—derided as the “monkey theory""—was much harder to accept.
Some found a way to reconcile the information with their religious beliefs.
GOD In 1869 Dmitri Mendeleev, a Russian chemist, wrote the name of each chemical element on a card with its chemical properties and atomic weight.
Having noticed repeating patterns in them, he arranged the cards in a grid according to property and weight ; the modern periodic table has reversed this system.
Science gained credibility alongside religion, rather than instead of it, and Christianity proved resilient to change.
The reduction of the Church's influence by the state following the French Revolution in 1789 resulted in greater religious freedom throughout Europe, with a move away from state religions toward more numerous denominations.
Competition between them resulted in the strengthening of religious loyalties, while a rise in atheism in urban areas BIG BANG In 1927 Georges Lemaitre, a Belgian scientist and Catholic priest, proposed that the universe was created by the explosion of a ""quantum singularity,” or “big bang""—a state of nothingness, existing outside space and time, containing the potential for everything there Is, has been, or will be.
ALBERT EINSTEIN led to increased church building in many European cities.
Scientific progress continued, with people experiencing its effects through technology and medical advances.
As scientific knowledge filtered through society, it became more accessible.
Despite the fears of the Church, society was not faced with a stark choice between science or God.
Instead, these advances led in many cases to the acceptance of both science and belief.
Geological evidence The discovery of fossilized ancient creatures such as these ammonites seriously undermined the teachings of the Bible regarding the age of Earth and the way it was created.
AFTER CREATIONISM The belief that the universe was created by a god, rather than being formed by a process of evolution.
CREATIONISM In mainstream Western thinking, scientific theories have largely replaced Creationism.
However, there is still a vociferous creationist minority, and in modern usage Creationism usually refers to Christian fundamentalists who oppose the teaching of scientific theories such as evolution and the Big Bang.
By the late 17th century, dramatic advances had been made in mathematics, astronomy, and biology.
Coal was used to power steam engines that drained mines and eventually drove machinery.
MECHANICAL CALCULATION In the 1840s Charles Babbage, an English mathematician, worked on the development of an Analytical Engine which, had it been completed, would have been capable of performing calculations similar to the early computers of the 19405.
Ada Lovelace, a woman fascinated by mathematics, saw the possibilities of the machine.
ADA LOVELACE Gatling gun Richard Gatling's mechanical gun of the 1860s consisted of six barrels mounted in a revolving frame.
Ingenious Inventions The four essentials of technological advances are the right idea, the method to execute it, the perfect moment in time, and the availability of the right materials.
Factories were filled with a labor force as agricultural manual work gave way to mechanization.
Manufacturing produced cheaper goods for a mass market, encouraged by the rise in wages and standards of living.
The traditional workplace, and the home, were being rapidly transformed.
Few men had a greater impact on life in the 19th century than Michael Faraday.
Faraday discovered that an electric current was produced in a coil of wire when a magnet was moved through the coil.
His experiments with electricity in the 1830s led to dramatic developments in the sphere of communications.
In 1837, British scientists William Cook and Charles Wheatstone patented the electric telegraph, a method of sending messages through wires to a remote receiver.
By 1876 the inventor Alexander Graham Bell, a Briton living Can opener Tin can A discovery in 1810 that food could be preserved by heating it and sealing it in Jars led two British men, Bryan Donkin and John Hall, to develop tin cans.
While early tin cans were opened with a hammer and chisel, lighter steel cans made the can opener possible.
Another electrical discovery in 1887 further revolutionized communications, when a German scientist named Heinrich Hertz proved the existence of radio waves.
In 1906 Marconi achieved his final goal by transmitting speech over the airwaves using radio transmissions.
By the turn of the 20th century wars were being fought with more advanced weapons, food was preserved in new tin cans , and domestic refrigeration was evolving.
Cars emerged on the roads, shipbuilding was prolific, railroads stretched across continents, and the first plane was about to take off.
In the US, Wilbur and Orville Wright progressed by way of gliders to a fabriccovered wooden biplane.
Domestic life was being slowly transformed by sewing machines, washing machines, electric stoves, electric heaters, and vacuum cleaners.
They listened to gramophones, which played flat discs, and, in March 1895, people thrilled to the sight of flickering pictures when a film of workers leaving the Lumière factory during their lunch hour was shown.
Berliner gramophone Emile Berliner created the forerunner of modern records and record players.
This 1890s model plays grooved flat discs, which were cheaply produced.
Bell “Box” telephone Alexander Graham Bell had transmitted speech along a wire by 1876.
This early Bell telephone has a combined trumpetlike mouthpiece and earpiece. a Low INGENIOUS INVENTIONS Debrie Parvo camera In 1908, 60 years after the earliest models, Frenchman Joseph Debrie developed the ""Le Parvo"" camera.
Powered by a am ins» P single-cylinder engine, there were two forward speeds and no reverse gear.
NM HN E E NM LÁ LO M AMERICAN INVENTOR THOMAS EDISON Edison was a self-taught inventor.
Attending school for only three months, from the age of 12 he began devoting all of his spare time to scientific experimentation.
Eastman Kodak Brownie In the early 1900s the American George Eastman developed cheap cameras such as this example, and amateur photography was born.
With Orville F^ | k 3 DE | telephone, a Wright as pilot, the plane rose to 10 ft fa E l successful and landed heavily after 12 seconds.
Of the 9j | | electric lamp, three flights that day, the longest lasted ""^ d | andhe ret 59 seconds. ps movie projector.
Science continued to progress in the 20th century, making technology accessible, and breaking down barriers to communication.
Leclanché cell This late 19th-century Leclanché cell is an early example of a battery.
Cash register The American James Ritty invented the cash register in 1879 to stop theft by cashiers.
CONQUISTADORS The Americas were the greatest attraction for European settlers.
EXPLORERS OF AFRICA In 1652 the Dutch founded a settlement at Cape Town, southern Africa, to provision their ships.
Imperialism—empire-building—expanded so rapidly that by 1900, extensive The world in 1900 European influence stretched across the world.
Britain, Russia, and France were the preeminent Portugal, Germany, and Denmark all controlled parts of Africa, Southeast Asia, and South America.
The newly discovered continents of the world offered huge wealth, for example, but once this was realized, traders preferred to do business under their own administration.
When Britain seized South Africa, it was because they wanted to deal with the British, rather than native Africans or the Dutch Afrikaner settlers, called Boers.
It also became apparent that they were an abundant source of cheap labor.
Another factor in imperial growth was the political rivalries of the major European powers.
In cases, colonization was simpl matter of claiming a nation b another power could get there.
Many felt it their duty to spread Christianity, believing it was, in the poet Rudyard Kipling's words, the ^white man's burden"" to “civilize” the native population.
Communities of merchants were established, with garrisons to protect them, and only rarely did the colonists take formal control.
The colonial nations found Australasia and North America sparsely inhabited.
But elsewhere, such as India, they Empire and migration New lands beckoned European settlers.
In the 19th century, Britain's maritime prowess established it as the leading colonial power. led to large-scale migration.
In the 19th century, as the frontier of the United States moved west , millions arrived from across the Atlantic Ocean.
In Victoria, Australia, the discovery of gold in the 1850s triggered a rise in the population from 76,000 to 540,000 in just ten years.
Colonists exported their dress, language, and religions around the globe.
By 1900, much of the inhabited world was governed, directly or indirectly, by Europeans, or those of European descent. granted, or won their independence.
In North and South America and Australia, European rule left a permanent stamp.
This often led to dictatorships—by 1976, 21 African countries had military governments.
AFRICAN IMMIGRATION TO EUROPE Economic and political development failures in Africa, and new immigration and refugee policies in Europe, saw mass migration by African 100,000 highly skilled African workers went to Europe, but they often faced discrimination.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES Indigenous peoples such as the forest people of the Amazon, the tribal people of India, and the Inuit of the Arctic lost their land during colonization.
There is still a threat of territorial invasion, and the plundering of resources, in these places.
QUEEN VICTORIA, TO ARTHUR BALFOUR, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, 1899 ueen Victoria, the longestQ reigning monarch in British history, was the only child of the Duke of Kent, fourth son of George III, and his German wife, Princess Victoria of Saxe-CoburgSaalfield.
On the death of William IV in 1837, the 18-year-old Princess Victoria acceded to the throne.
Until then, she had slept in her mother’s room, and one of her first decisions, on moving into Buckingham Palace, was to insist on a bedroom of her own.
In political matters, Prince Albert The Victorian family As a loving couple with a happy home life, the queen and her consort, seen here with some of their nine children, exemplified respectable “Victorian” family values.
After his death, Victoria reputedly made decisions based on what she thought he would have done.
Victoria’s first prime minister, the fatherly Lord Melbourne, was her early mentor, but within a couple of years he was replaced by the love of her life, Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.
A royal courtship As one of Victoria’s German cousins, Albert was considered an appropriate husband.
He was just three months younger than Victoria—in fact, the same midwife had assisted at both of their births—but he was mature for his age.
Photography, an Invention of her reign, made Victoria an international icon, spreading her image around the world.
F intelligent, deeply serious young man, fluent in several languages and acutely conscious of his duties as the unofficial king of England.
Love and marriage Victoria and Albert presented the public with the novel spectacle of a young and serenely happy royal family.
For the birth of her eighth baby, Prince Leopold, Victoria had pain relief in the shape of newly available chloroform.
She found it “soothing, quieting and delightful beyond measure,"" and this royal endorsement made it easier for other women to opt for pain relief in childbirth.
To reach their new homes at Balmoral in Scotland and Osborne on the Isle of Wight, the royal family took advantage of the railroads, another recent invention.
For Victoria, Balmoral Castle, with its specially designed turrets and tartans, was a In 1856.
She was laid to rest in the Frogmore mausoleum at Windsor Castle, alongside Albert.
Victoria Cross This military decoration for conspicuous bravery was created by Queen Victoria Exhibiting the world Victoria arrives for the opening of the Great Exhibition ""of the works of industry of all nations"" at the Crystal Palace in P | Í E er ai D London's Hyde Park.
Her beloved husband's interest in art and design culminated in the Great Exhibition OR 1851, for which 112,000 items from across the world were displayed in the Crystal Palace, a glass and iron exhibition hall in Hyde Park, London, of roughly 21 acres . personalities of the day.
She had a much better relationship with his rival, Benjamin Disraeli, who coaxed and flattered the widowed queen into renewing her interest and participation in public life.
It was Disraeli who had Victoria proclaimed Empress of India, a title and a role in which she took great interest and pride.
Ten years later, on the occasion of the Diamond Jubilee of 1897, the queen-empress commanded global esteem and affection.
Soon afterward, her health began to fail, and she was 81 when she died in January 1901.
The widow of Windsor Albert’s sudden death from typhoid in 1861 was a shock from which Victoria never fully recovered.
As the “widow of Windsor,” she withdrew from public life and lost some of her early popularity.
QUEEN VICTORIA, ATTRIBUTED, 1900 QUEEN VICTORIA TIMELINE May 24, 1819 Alexandrina Victoria is born at Kensington Palace, London.
June 26, 1830 William IV becomes King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and with no legitimate children to succeed him, his niece Victoria becomes heiress presumptive.
May 24, 1837 Turns 18 and becomes eligible to assume the throne should her uncle die.
June 20, 1837 Becomes Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland when William IV dies of heart failure.
February 10, 1840 Marries her cousin Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha in the Chapel Royal at St.
May 6, 1840 England issues its first postage stamp, costing one penny, which bears the image of Queen Victoria.
June 10, 1840 The first of a total of seven attempts on her life is made when Edward Oxford fires two bullets into her coach—she is pregnant at the time.
November 21, 1840 Her first child, the Princess Royal Victoria Adelaide Mary, is born.
May 1851 Victoria opens the Great Exhibition in Hyde Park, London, which showcases international culture and industry.
June 26, 1857 Victoria Cross awarded for the first time; 62 soldiers and sailors receive it.
December 14, 1861 Devastated by the death of Albert, Victoria sinks into depression and starts a period of isolation, withdrawing from public life.
May 1, 1876 Proclaimed the ""Empress of India"" by the British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli.
SHILLING SHOWING QUEEN VICTORIA September 22, 1896 Victoria's reign surpasses that of George III as the longest in English, Scottish, and British history.
January 22, 1901 Dies of a cerebral hemorrhage at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, bringing to an end a reign of nearly 64 years.
EUROPEAN PROFITS The Portuguese captured the Malaysian peninsula in 1511, moved on to the Spice Islands in 1513, and then China, Japan, and Indonesia.
The Spanish arrived next, setting up plantations in the Philippines in 1565.
Two private trading companies followed— the English East India Company , based in India, and the Dutch East India Company , which set up colonies in Asia.
COOK IN BOTANY BAY Dene-Harding revolver The explosive power of European firearms such as this Dene-Harding revolver ensured that the colonizing powers swiftly overcame indigenous populations.
Until then, Britain had transported convicts to North America, but the American Revolution made this impossible.
The use of Britain's new Australian colony for this purpose had been proposed in 1779, by English botanist Sir Joseph Banks.
The natives seemed more peaceful than the Maoris of New Zealand—and this was to prove and armed resistance proved ineffectual.
Foreign diseases, to which the Aboriginal population had little resistance, also caused widespread mortality.
A smallpox epidemic broke out in 1789, followed by influenza, typhus, chicken pox, whooping cough, tuberculosis, and syphilis.
The chiefs ceded sovereignty in return for protection and guarantees against further encroachment on their lands.
However, the treaty was not upheld, and the settlers’ continuing demands for land led to the New Zealand (or Maori) Wars, fought between 1843-47 and 1860-72.
The Maoris were equipped with firearms acquired through decades of trading, and fought back staunchly.
The first outbreak of war was contained relatively quickly, but the second became a protracted Colonial Resistance Resistance to the European colonization of Australia, New Zealand, and Southeast Asia brought very different outcomes for the indigenous populations.
In Australia and New Zealand, it led to the subjugation of the Aboriginals and Maoris; in Southeast Asia, to eventual independence. their downfall.
When James Cook landed in 1770 (see BEFORE), there were 300,000350,000 Aboriginals in Australia.
Initially, relations between native inhabitants and settlers were amicable, but as the colony expanded, the Aboriginals resisted.
Their arrows and spears were no match for British guns, however, po"" 1788 the Aboriginal population was concentrated in the same fertile areas as the most populous parts of modern Australia.
British governors were instructed to protect the Aboriginals, but they often imposed British values and, im the late 19th century, even removed native children (the “Stolen Generation”) from their families, and moved them into state institutions.
Maori wars Maori resistance to European settlers in New Zealand was more fierce.
Both Dutch explorer Abel Tasman and Cook received violent receptions, but Cook noted that tribal differences made united resistance unlikely.
By the early 19th century, European and United States seal and whale hunters were trading with the Maoris.
As disputes among tribes and between Maoris and settlers were common (and to preempt French c and American interests), Britain negotiated the Treaty of guerrilla campaign that cost the lives of around 1,000 Europeans and some 2,000 Maoris.
MILLION acres of Maori land was confiscated in the 19th century, and most Maoris were confined to New Zealand's less fertile North Island ] PERCENT of the Maori population still lived there at the end of the 20th century The Dutch East Indies During the 17th and 18th centuries, the Dutch monopolized trade with the Spice Islands (so named because prized spices, such as nutmeg, originated there), and took control of most of what is now Indonesia.
In the 1790s, the Dutch East India Company (see BEFORE) collapsed and the Dutch government took over.
From 1830 it forced Indonesian peasants to grow export crops, such as indigo and coffee, at set prices and, from 1870, allowed Dutch investors to lease land and establish plantations.
This led to an outbreak of nationalist resistance, and the Dutch fought a series of wars between 1821 and 1901.
The murder or French Christians there provided the pretext for Emperor Napoleon III to invade in 1858, but resistance was strong, both from the Chinese, who claimed sovereignty over Vietnam, and from the indigenous population.
In 1863, France took control of southern Vietnam and established a protectorate in Cambodia.
Between 1874 and 1884, the French set up more protectorates in northern and central Vietnam.
In 1887, these were incorporated, along with Cambodia, in the Union of French Indochina.
JOHN FREETH, ENGLISH POET, 1731-1808 which included Malacca and Singapore.
During the 19th and early 20th century Britain set up protectorates over a number of Malay states including part of Brunei and North Borneo.
The British established highly profitable tin mines and rubber plantations in Malaya.
However, rather than exploiting the indigenous population, they imported Chinese labor for the mines, and Indian workers for the plantations, while encouraging the Malays to farm for a living.
The result was a more peaceful coexistence than in many other European colonies in Southeast Asia.
Maori wahaika Weapons such as this wahaika—a short dub made from wood, whalebone, or stone—were used for close fighting.
ASIA AFTER IMPERIALISM Britain granted commonwealth status to Australia in 1901, and New Zealand in 1907, recognizing their self-government within the empire.
British Southeast Asian colonies were made independent between 1957 and 1984.
The Aboriginal population declined to 60,000 in 1921 and the interwar period saw renewed confiscation of land.
In 1938, on the 150th anniversary * of European colonization, ay Aboriginals declared Australia | Day, the national holiday, to be a day of mourning.
As the Mughal Empire's controlling grip on the area weakened, British influence increased.
The lucrative spice trade had tempted the Portuguese to India since the mid-15th century.
By the 16th century, India was visited by Italians, English, French, and Dutch, all eager to trade, seek adventure, or spread Christianity in the area.
These ""3g companies acted as + trade organizations, and later provided a military presence @ inthe region.
However, as the British fortunes rose, the fragile Mughal Empire went into decline.
ENGLISH EAST INDIA COMPANY COAT OF ARMS BRITISH INVOLVEMENT Short reigns, protracted war, and peasant revolts undermined the Mughals.
Indian provinces became more independent of central rule, paving the way for British interference.
The British Raj The desire for power and wealth has led nations to expand their influence far beyond their frontiers.
India became the jewel in the British Empire's crown, and the British Raj -which ran from 1858 to 1947—was the culmination of decades of British involvement and domination in the Indian subcontinent. tthe turn or the 18th century, A the long-established English East India Company (see BEFORE) enabled Britain to enjoy unprecedented privileges in India, with footholds in economic, political, and military life.
To protect this situation, the EIC had increased the number of troops deemed necessary to defend its establishments.
Rivalry with other trading companies, especially the French, was fierce and led to the Seven Years War , a slow, stuttering campaign for British expansion and control.
In 1756, under Robert Clive, a soldier and statesman described as “the conqueror of India,” the British claimed the richest Mughal province, Bengal, in the northeast of the country.
The recapture of Calcutta by Clive in late 1756, the storming of nearby French Chandernagore in early 1757, and Clive’s success at Plassey in June of that year were milestones in the British domination of India.
Finally, in 1763, the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II formally inducted the EIC, and Clive, into the Mughal hierarchy.
As Diwan for Bengal, the EIC received a title that amounted to Viceroy Curzon at the Maharajah's Palace Nathaniel George Curzon was Viceroy of India from 1898 to 1905, and ruled in place of the monarch.
Devastating famines, and a dispute with Lord Kitchener, chief of the Indian army, led to his resignation. sovereignty over the province.
The British gained administrative powers throughout India and became more of a government than a trading concern.
British influence knew no bounds, from the building of roads, an extensive railroad network, and schools, to an administrative system of officials that emerged as a model for the British civil service.
Hinduism was seen as something from which the people were to be emancipated.
This evangelical zeal led to the eventual erosion of British tolerance and support of Indian faiths. £z. ai By the late 1770s the East India Company was burdened with massive military expenditure and was in dire financial straits.
The Regulating Act of 1773 resulted in the EIC's becoming The Siege of Lucknow The British Garrison in Lucknow, in northern India, was besieged by Indian rebels on July 1, 1857.
Despite the large numbers of mutineers, the siege was finally ended by Sir Colin Campbell's relief force in November 1857.
Indian locomotive The Fairy Queen, built in Britain in 1855 for the East Indian Railways, still survives and is the world's oldest working engine. subject to increased supervision from the British government.
When its royal charter— sovereign permission to operate as a corporation—was renewed in 1813, the EIC had to surrender its monopoly of trade in India, allowing other corporations to operate in the region.
The Indian mutiny Under the EIC, there was some rebellious behavior among Indian soldiers serving in the British army, who were aggrieved at their treatment.
The flash point was reached in 1857, im Meerut, northern India, when rumor spread that the British had introduced a new rifle and cartridge into the Indian Army.
The cartridges, which soldiers had to bite open, were lubricated with a grease containing pig and cow fat, offending both Hindu and Muslim soldiers.
The revolt spread across the country, and was finally quelled in 1859 after much bloodshed.
In 1858 a royal decree stated that all EIC rights were to be handed over to the British Crown.
The reign of the EIC was over, and the British Raj had begun. a E a "" ^ —À (a dnd Christian miniature Indian artists often painted Christian subjects in order to appeal to the increasing Christian population of the country and patrons of the British Raj.
Rule Britannia Initially, after the Indian Mutiny and the decline of the EIC, many policies remained unchanged, yet British attitudes toward Indians shifted from openness to insularity.
As more British families arrived with their servants, private clubs were set up that became symbols of wealth and snobbery.
Facilitated by new railroads, exports such as cotton, wheat, and tea enriched the British, vet profits rarely reached native pockets.
Despite the fledgling nature of industries such as textiles, and their potential for collapse, the British insisted on an economic policy of laissez-faire, or free trade, refusing to In the 20th century, demands for Indian independence grew.
THE FREEDOM STRUGGLE At the end of the 19th century, calls for Indian independence were growing.
FLAG OF PAKISTAN RELIGIOUS DIVIDE Bengal's population was mainly Hindu in the west and Muslim in the east.
BENJAMIN DISRAELI, ADDRESSING THE HOUSE OF LORDS, MARCH 1881 impose tariffs or subsidies on imports and exports.
Instead, they invested in the country’s infrastructure, especially trains, which assisted economic development, and irrigation works.
On the tea estates that proliferated from the 1850s, indentured labor was widely employed.
Most Indians lived in abject poverty, a state not helped by severe famines in the second half of the 19th century.
Their plight, and the continued deployment of Indian troops on imperial service in other countries, stirred nationalist feelings, resulting in an awakening Indian political consciousness.
As the main nationalist political party, it was initially moderate and widely representative.
By the beginning of the 20th century, however, a younger, more politically militant generation of Indians emerged, calling for independence from British rule . of foreign rule, his charismatic personality helped to unite the country in the struggle.
After arduous constitutional negotiations, the British agreed to transfer power on August 15, 1947.
A nationalist movement arose in the early 20th century and independence was granted in 1948. ee M —————————————— 5535 1750-1914 The Opium Wars of the mid-19th century were the culmination of more than 50 years of strained Anglo-Chinese relations.
THE LADY HUGHES In 1784 a British merchant ship, the Lady Hughes, fired a cannon salute and accidentally killed two Chinese officials.
Chinese law required that whoever was responsible should be surrendered to the authorities.
The gunner was reluctantly handed over, and he was immediately strangled.
THE MACARTNEY EMBASSY In 1792, Lord Macartney led a large British delegation to the summer palace of Emperor Qianlong at Rehe to request the accreditation of a British minister at court, the opening of more ports, and the provision of an island base.
He was granted an audience but refused to perform the kotow, the respectful ceremonial three prostrations and nine head knockings.
Qianlong accepted Macartney's gifts but rejected all the envoy's requests.
The Opium Wars By 1838, use of opium, a highly addictive drug, was spiraling out of control in China.
In 1906, opium cultivation was finally banned and opium dens were forced to close.
The apparatus for opium smoking was confiscated and burned in public bonfires. n an attempt to curb the opium problem, the Chinese government appointed a leading official, Lin Zexu, to suppress trade in Guangzhou, a port city in the south of the country.
On his arrival, Lin confiscated all opium stocks, and forced foreign residents to sign a bond agreeing to stop trading in the drug.
The British government, having learned that its citizens had been imprisoned, sent an expeditionary force to China.
This force blockaded Guangzhou and, moving north, threatened the capital Beijing.
In 1842, a larger expeditionary force brought about a Chinese surrender, ending the First Opium War.
China was compelled to negotiate the Treaty of Nanjing , which ceded Hong Kong to Britain, admitted missionaries, controlled external tariffs, opened five treaty ports, and removed Westerners from Chinese jurisdiction.
However, the relationship between Britain and Sword used in Opium Wars The outcome of the conflict between Britain and China was largely determined by weaponry.
Chinese swords—like this example, captured by a British naval officer in 1842— were no match for British firearms.
By 1860 China had been defeated, and was forced to grant further privileges to Britain, which were later extended to other Western powers.
The Taiping Rebellion China in the mid-19th century was not only under attack from foreign powers, it was also under threat from a series of internal rebellions, the largest of which was the Taiping Rebellion.
In 1836, a Christian teacher, Hong Xiuquan, had a series of dreams that led him to believe he had a mission to restore China to Christianity.
He made converts among peasants and miners in Guangxi, south China, and in January 1851 declared the establishment of the Taiping Tianguo, the Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace.
In 1853, Taiping rebels The Chinese Army 1880 China's first modern army, the Anhui Army, which was raised by statesman Li Hongzhang to campaign against a series of mid-19th-century rebellions, adopted Western-style drills and Western-style weapons.
In 1864, the Hunan army—organized on a network of personal loyalty and financed by a new tax on internal trade—recaptured Nanjing.
Hong Xiuquan committed suicide and the rebellion came to an end, though pockets of Taiping resistance continued until 1868.
After 1860, the number of Protestant and Catholic missionaries operating in China rose sharply.
Missionaries initially concentrated on converting the population, but later ran schools and hospitals.
Their presence DECISIVE MOMENT l _ SINO-JAPANESE WAR The origins of this conflict lay in a struggle between China and Japan over influence in Korea.
First the Huai army was defeated at Pyongyang in present-day North Korea.
Then, in September 1894, the Chinese Beiyang fleet engaged the Japanese fleet off the mouth of the Yalu River, at the border of North Korea and China.
China was forced to sign the Treaty of Shimonoseki, recognizing Korean independence, and ceding Taiwan to Japan. yy y hare af # tons ony THE OPIUM ay un Wh tbe threatened the position of the Chinese scholar-officials, and anti-missionary incidents occurred, the most notorious being the massacre of French Sisters of Charity at Tianjin in 1870.
In 1866 Wojen, a Mongol Grand Secretary, complained that self-strengthening ideas were not compatible with traditional Confucian government.
Nevertheless, in 1872 the statesman Li Hongzhang started a steamship company to compete with foreign shipping on the Yangzi, and later established coal mines that led to the building of China's first railroad.
Russia obtained an agreement to extend the TransSiberian railroad across Manchuria in northeast China; Germany seized Qingdao in the north; France obtained commercial concessions in the southwest; and Britain gained a 99-year lease on the ""New Territories,"" opposite Hong Kong Island.
THE EMPRESS DOWAGER In 1856, a concubine named Yehonola gave birth to the future Tongzhi emperor.
Britain sent 2,000 troops to stop them, but the Empress Dowager ordered the Imperial army to turn them away.
Westerners were executed and thousands of Chinese Christians were killed.
In the aftermath of the siege, Chinese officials were executed and compensation was paid to the West.
For centuries, the Imperial court and the warrior classes wrestled for control.
HG La GER DET Oda Nobunaga, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and Tokugawa leyasu displayed superior military tactics and shocking acts of brutality to unify Japan. leyasu was made a shogun in 1603, and was recognized as the greatest power in the land.
TOKUGAWA RULE With Japan reunified, leyasu's aim was to maintain control.
All foreign influences were discouraged, and from 1635 Japanese subjects were unable to leave Japan—those Japanese who were overseas at the time were refused reentry on pain of death.
Christianity was banned, and foreign merchants and missionaries expelled.
A CLOSED COUNTRY For two centuries, descendants of the Tokugawa shoguns kept the peace, and the population prospered.
But from the early 19th century, environmental and political troubles caused the shoguns' grip on power to slip.
Famine and earthquakes caused thousands of deaths, trade within Japan widened the gap between rich and poor, and foreigners sailed into Japanese waters.
The ""Land of the Rising Sun,"" as it is known to most Japanese, has had a turbulent history.
Ambitious and industrious Japan quickly caught up with the West, but success came at a heavy price.
E -n 'ee n apan's development from E a land of feudal lords into a world power began in the 19th century.
During the reunification of Japan , the country was closed to foreign visitors and trade, but in 1853 the American government sent Commodore Matthew Perry to Edo in command of four warships.
Perry demanded the opening of Japanese ports for trade, making it clear he would return.
In 1854, Perry returned with an even larger fleet, and the shogunate signed the Treaty of Kanagawa.
Westernizing society Similar treaties with Britain, France, Russia, and the Netherlands followed.
They too were successful in demanding rights to trade, and Japan gradually lost control over its own customs duties.
Following the Meiji Restoration , the new regime thought that Western ideas might make Japan stronger and more able to compete.
In 1873, conscription was introduced so that all men, not just those from the noble class, as previously, could join the military.
The image was issued only seven years after the Meiji Restoration opened Japan to foreign ideas. teachers.
A modern mint was set up, and in 1882 the Bank of Japan opened with a standardized decimal currency based on the yen.
Population shift Perhaps the greatest symbol of Japan's modernization was the railway.
The first was opened in October 1872, and within 15 years 1,000 miles of track had been laid.
Suburbs grew as people now lived away from their place of work, and the age of commuting had begun.
They were hereditary leaders who commanded armies that included a warrior class known as the samurai.
Japan at war After years of turmoil, there was a revived sense of national identity and pride in Japan.
In the spring of 1894, Korea called for military aid from China to put down a rebellion.
The rebellion was swiftly dealt with, but both sides had interests in Korea and stayed on.
The Japanese were determined to fight, and officially declared war on August 1.
In the battles that followed, Japan proved superior, especially at sea.
The naval base of Port Arthur in Manchuria, on the northeast coast of China, was seized in November, and the Chinese fleet destroyed at Weihai in the eastern province of Shandong in February 1895.
The Treaty of Shimonoseki in April 1895 saw China abandon its interests in Korea and cede territory to Japan, including Taiwan.
Japan also gained rights in Manchuria, which had rich natural resources of lumber, iron, oil, gold, and uranium.
Russia reacted by persuading the French and German governments that Japan should give up its stronghold in Manchuria because it caused instability.
When Russia refused to withdraw its troops from China, following an uprising against foreign influences known as the Boxer Rebellion , the increasing tension with Russia eventually erupted into war in 1904.
The ensuing Portsmouth Treaty, signed in September 1905, recognized Japan’s interests in Korea and granted them occupation of the Liaodong Peninsula in Manchuria.
It disbanded the army and annexed the nation in 1910 with no international opposition.
Japan had succeeded in its aims—it was now taken seriously by Western powers.
The unequal treaties, which had caused so much bitterness, were revised and full tariff control restored in 1911.
Ina mere half-century, Japan had gone from being virtually dismissed as a backward country to a major world power.
Economic depression and dissatisfaction with Japan's role in world affairs eventually led to war.
Rural incomes fell sharply and the gap between rich and poor, city and countryside widened.
Both the military and public became increasingly angry, and many blamed the influence of Western ideas.
AN UNEASY ALLIANCE Japan maintained an uneasy relationship with foreign powers.
To compound matters, the Washington Arms Limitation Treaty of 1922 limited Japan to three warships, compared with five American and five British.
EMPEROR HIROHITO OF JAPAN After United States naval officer Matthew Perry demanded the opening of Japanese ports in 1854, the shoguns seemed incapable of dealing with the foreign threat.
A group of leading samurai formed an alliance, believing that only the restoration of the emperor could save Japan.
The period of modernization that followed was called the Meiji (1868— 1912), but not all were content.
Traditional forces, including samurai infuriated at being barred from carrying swords, were defeated by the new conscript army.
The emperor promised a national assembly, and in 1889 the first-ever formal constitution adopted outside North America and Europe was proclaimed.
In this woodcut, Meiji officers in Western-style uniforms are shown accepting the surrender of the samurai rebels.
Modern power A Japanese naval Squadron is shown here steaming in to bombard Port Arthur, Manchuria, and attack Russian ships.
During the RussoJapanese war, Japan proved militarily superior, especially at sea.
MUSLIM EXPANSION The Prophet Muhammad was both a political and a spiritual leader.
His first successor, Abu-Bekr, proclaimed a Holy War against Byzantium and Persia.
Tughril Beg, conquered Iran. f His successor, Alp Arslan, led the Seljuks to conquer Georgia, Armenia, and much of Asia Minor.
They overran Syria and in 1071 defeated the Byzantine emperor Romanus IV in eastern Turkey «€ 199.
SELJUK BOWL OTTOMAN EMPIRE A number of Islamic states emerged during the 16th century.
Islamic teachings were carried around the world by missionaries and merchants.
ENVER PASHA Enver Pasha was born in the Black Sea town of Apana in 1881.
Enrolling with the military, he was posted to Greece, where he joined a secret group hoping for modernization of the Ottoman Empire.
In 1908 Pasha was one of the leaders of the Young Turks that rebelled against the rule of the Sultan Abdul Hamid.
During World War I, as minister of war, he Je aligned Turkey with Germany and Austria— Hungary.
On defeat in 1918, Pasha fled to Turkistan, where he was killed in 1922.
A series of Jiliad revivalist movements led to the emergence of Islamist states in Nigeria, Libya, and the Sudan.
During the 19th century, European expansion became an increasingly important force in Muslim societies, and the major states that remained independent responded by undertaking a wide range of reforms.
In the Ottoman Empire reforms began with attempts by Selim III, who reigned between 1789-1807, to institute a Nizam-i cedid, or “New System” of military and bureaucratic organization.
His successor, Mahmud II, went on to restore the power and The Young Turks Revolt Five times a day millions of Muslims face Mecca to pray.
Peace is the avowed aim, but the spread of Islam has not been without its conflicts.
During its history, Muslim societies, such as the Young Turks and the Ottoman Empire, have struggled to define themselves in the modern world. rom the 11th century onward, a Islam, under the leadership of the Turks , had consolidated its hold on the Middle East and made further gains in India, East Asia, and Europe.
However, by the 18th century, Europeans came to dominate much of the Muslim world from north Africa to southeast Asia, and this Western imperialism prompted a religious and political crisis.
Some believed that Islam could be restricted to private life and that public life might embrace modern, European ideas about technology, education, and law.
He traveled all over the Muslim world strengthening communities in the hope of driving out the Western powers, but he was convinced that science and technology could be successfully adopted by Islamic countries without compromise to their religion or culture.
In the late 19th century, other modernists, such as the Indian Syed Ahmad Khan , recommended the reformation of Islamic society along similar lines.
He was responsible for founding the Muhammedan AngloOriental College at Aligarh, northern India, in 1875, where Muslims could study Western ideas without alienating themselves from their religion.
Rejecting the West Conservative Muslim leaders were convinced that Muslim impotence in the face of Christian imperialism was a result of divergence from Islam and deviation from their traditions.
YOUNG TURKS , 1910 authority to the central government that had been usurped by powerful local lords.
As the empire sought to modernize, it gained the support of the British, and the Crimean War found Britain and the Ottomans allied against Russia.
In 1876 Abd al-Hamid II came to the throne, and Russia declared war ISLAMISM An ideology that considers Islam to be both a religion and a system of government.
Islamist states are guided by sharia—Islamic religious law. on the Ottoman Empire im 1877, in an attempt to liberate the Balkan Peninsula from Ottoman rule.
In a swift campaign, the Russians drove the Ottomans back and forced them to sign the disastrous Treaty of San Stefano in 1878.
This treaty deprived them of most of their European territories, including Bulgaria.
Further territorial losses included the loss of Tunisia to the French in 1881 and Egypt to the British in 1882.
In order to maintain greater control over the remaining empire, Abd al-Hamid continued the reform process.
In 1902 a meeting in Paris brought together the leadership of the ""Young Turks”—a coalition group composed of fervent nationalists wishing to save Turkey from decay and ruin.
In the early 1900s, Bulgarian and Macedonian terrorists started bombing Ottoman government buildings, demanding total independence.
The two rebellions eventually joined in 1908 when an army regiment stationed in Macedonia rebelled and fled into the hills.
It was LA RÉVOLUTION EN TURQUIE The 20th century witnessed continued polarization between the Islamic world and the West.
This WIE A led to parts of Turkey T Vietoire des Jeunes-Tures being distributed to Greece.
ISLAMIST RESURGENCE The late 1960s signaled a turning point and the dawn of a new phase in Islam.
The Arab-Israeli War in MUSTAFA KEMAL DURING THE TURKISH WAR OF INDEPENDENCE THE YOUNG TURKS REVOLT The victorious Young Turks This illustration from Le Petit Journal shows the Young Turks’ successful revolution of 1908.
After they marched on Constantinople, the sultan surrendered himself as a prisoner in his palace, the Yildiz Kiosk. joined by Macedonian rebels as well as large numbers of Young Turks.
A constitution was adopted and a parliament created and the Young Turks of the CUP, led by a triumvirate— a group of three people who share power—of whom Enver Pasha (see left) would become the best known, were in command of the empire.
The Young Turks continued the Ottoman reform process, opening schools to women and overseeing legislative progress in women’s rights.
Revolutionizing the army Enver Pasha holds a chibouk, a traditional smoking pipe.
Pasha had trained in Germany and wanted to improve the efficiency of the Ottoman Armed Forces along German lines.
AFTER 2 1967 and the loss of Jerusalem to Israel 41415 »» was a blow to Muslim pride, provoking a call for a return to Islam.
PORTUGUESE EXPLORATION Portuguese explorers began charting the coast of Africa in 1419.
SLAVE SHACKLES lthough several European trading nations had secured coastal settlements around Africa by 1600, by the early 19th century the interior of the continent remained largely uncharted by Europeans, partly because many explorers feared contracting malaria in the vast tropical expanses.
In 1820, the development of quinine, an effective treatment for the disease, allowed the exploration of the tropics.
From the 1840s the Scottish missionary David Livingstone journeyed extensively in central and southern Africa.
Expeditions in the 1850s and 1860s by Richard Burton, John Speke, and James Grant located the great central lakes and the source of the Nile.
By the end of the Privileged few Like this British official, government staff based in Africa in the early 20th century enjoyed many privileges, including servants who tended to their every need.
The most profound example of these was Sufism, a mystical tradition within Islam.
SHAKA ZULU In 1816, Shaka became king of the Zulus of southeastern Africa.
Shaka led the Zulus in raids on neighboring Nguni villages, which they razed.
In this way he systematically expanded his territory and created a powerful kingdom that covered vast areas of the southern coastal and interior regions of Africa, which are known today as KwaZulu-Natal.
The Scramble for Africa Motivated by accounts by explorers and missionaries of vast untapped resources in the heart of the African continent, rival European countries raced to gain possession of African territory during the late 19th century.
The race became known as the “Scramble for Africa.” century, Europeans had charted the courses of the Nile, Niger, Congo, and Zambezi rivers, and the world now knew about the vast resources of Africa.
In 1869, the opening of the Suez Canal, a direct trade route from Europe to Asia, focused European attention on the continent’s economic and strategic importance.
There was the former Ottoman territory of Algeria, whose conquest by France had begun in the 1830s; a few Spanish settlements; Angola, which was held by Portugal, along with trading posts on the west coast; and British and French trading stations in west Africa.
The Cape Colony was administered by the United Kingdom, and just north of Cape Colony there was the Orange Free State and the Transvaal.
These two states were established by Boers , after the Great Trek of 1835-36.
This was a mass migration of 12,000 Boers, known as the “pioneers,” who left Cape Colony in a search for new pastureland and to escape unwelcome British rule.
Cultural groups were being torn apart by the continuing slave trade, and new states were emerging in East, Central, and West Africa.
The Europeans capitalized on these disruptions, conquering territory with reasonable ease.
In some cases, such as the Anglo-Zulu wars in 1879, they used military force; in others, African and European leaders agreed joint control over territory.
Divided continent The competition between the Europeans often resulted in violent conflict.
In southern Africa the first of two wars between the Boers and the British took place from late 1880 to early 1881 , while North Africa became a theater for AngloFrench rivalry.
Between November 15, 1884 and February 26, 1885, the Berlin Conference was convened by German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck (see 333) in an attempt to settle rival claims.
At the conference it was agreed that imperial powers could only claim colonies if they had agreed treaties with chiefs, and had administrative powers in the region.
By the close of the century, virtually all the continent was under European control.
Portugal expanded its empire to include Mozambique; Belgium took over the enormous Congo region; “If | could, | would annex other 39 pla nets.
They exploited the continent's resources to benefit industry and commerce in their own countries. and Germany gained new colonies in southern Africa.
France and Britain acquired new territory in West Africa, and Britain also built a network of colonies in East Africa running from South Africa to Egypt.
By 1914, the French had occupied Morocco and the Italians had conquered Tripoli.
Only Ethiopia remained fully free, having beaten an Italian force at the Battle of Adowa in 1896.
Africa under foreign rule Although the styles of rule adopted by the colonial powers varied, in general the Europeans made no attempt to develop their colonies, exploiting them as sources of raw materials and markets for their manufactured goods.
Africans were excluded from decisions that affected their lives, and European settlers established themselves in relatively temperate areas of Africa FRA DE Sit nit British in Egypt These Scottish soldiers are pictured in front of the Sphinx at Giza in the summer of 1882, just after their victory at the Battle of Tel-el-Kebir, a dispute between the British and the Egyptians over the control of the Suez Canal. where the land was fertile, often banishing Africans from the best land.
They imposed property taxes, and to pay these taxes Africans were forced to undertake waged labor, working on railroads, plantations, and mining operations.
This grew into violent anticolonial resistance, which spread across the continent m the early 20th century.
Ch Lacoste rey | In 1904—05, the Herero of central Namibia rose up against their German rulers.
In 1912, Zulus united to form the South African National Congress, which became the African National Congress, or ANC , to further the rights of native peoples.
This marked the beginning of an organized movement for self-rule in Africa.
THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA B DECISIVE MOMENT | In retaliation for the British annexation of the Transvaal in 1877, Transvaal Boers launched the first Anglo-Boer war in December 1880.
In March 1881 the British admitted defeat and granted the Transvaal self-rule.
After a long, hardfought struggle, the British, aided by Canadian troops, won and absorbed the Boer republics of the Orange Free State and Transvaal into the British Empire.
After World War II, Africa's colonial rulers faced demands for self-rule.
AFRICAN NATIONALISM Almost two million Africans served in the armies of their colonizers during World War Il.
When the soldiers returned home, they yet again faced the exploitation and indignities of colonial rule.
Discontent grew, and many men joined the independence movements, which had been increasing in strength since before the war.
MAJORITY RULE There were long and protracted struggles for black majority rule in Zimbabwe and South Africa.
Majority rule was achieved in Zimbabwe in 1980 when Robert Mugabe, leader of Zanu PF, was voted into power.
It has been a period of opposing political beliefs and ruthless dictators, of rapidly expanding populations and diminishing resources.
But it has also been one of startling technological innovation and unprecedented prosperity.
Red Army badge > | 1915 Italy enters World War | on Allied side; United States invades Haiti and | Dominican Republic.
Edwin Hubble discovers galaxies beyond our own and the expansion of the universe.
Bolshevik banner > A Assassination at Sarajevo 1914 Great Powers vie for | influence in the Balkans; assassination of Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo sets the ""powder keg of Europe” alight.
Germany invades di M pont T League of Nations France and the — ""solet founded.
Military e coup in Spain. vy Spanish flu A Collectivization Wall Street Crash leads to global economic depression.
Exchange of 1 Turkish and Greek populations ends Turkish-Greek conflict.
POPULATION AND POWER World War |, far from being the “war to end all wars,"" not only led to part a consequence of the Great Depression, was also directly spawned.
This was the beginning of an Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia.
In some regions an era of ideological confrontation that lasted until 1991.
World War Il, though in sustained economic growth followed the conflict.
V Hiroshima 1933 A Nuremberg rally A Spitfire Mk V Hitler appointed chancellor in Germany.
Germany annexes Austria and, with British and French agreement, Sudetenland.
United States repulses Japanese carrier fleet; German invasion of USSR stalls | at Stalingrad; Axis forces defeated at El Alamein; United States invades North Africa; killings begin at Auschwitz. b Spanish Civil War Pt Y "" 1930 Mahatma Gandhi Communists establish | | Pu'an Soviet in China.
A Gold ""Jew"" star 1940 German forces conquer Denmark, Norway, Holland, Luxembourg, Belgium, and France; Italy declares war on Britain and France; | Battle of Britain; Japan | allied with Germany | and Italy.
United States in France; Paris and of the Long Knives""; remilitarizes Rhineland. enters war on Allied Brussels liberated; rearmament begins.
USSR joins League of | between Germany Malaya, Burma, German offensive J Nations.
East and West Germany established, the former as part of the Communist Bloc.
Morocco P and Tunisia gain SE independence from France and Sudan from Britain.
Uganda, Jamaica, i| Trinidad and Tobago 4 gain independence from Britain.
Over —4 five million women | in the United States are using the contraceptive pill.
Israel takes Sinai, Gaza Strip, West Bank, Golan Heights, and Jerusalem.
POPULATION AND POWER ^| think that people want peace so much that one of these days governments had better get out of the way and let them have TU DWIGHT D EISENHOWER, United States PRESIDENT, 1955 A Bloody Sunday n Pinochet protest 1970 Military rule in Somalia.
First black homelands in South Africa; race riots in Soweto. recession.
Egyptian-Israeli rapprochement. b wain Afghanistan 1974 Coup in Ethiopia: Haile Selassie ousted.
ES Steve Biko Death of Mao in China; 1980 Saddam Hussein launches Iran-Iraq | War.
Eastern Bloc governments toppled; Solidarity elected in Poland; Berlin Wall breached.
Clinton, y Arafat, and Rabin 1991 UN coalition expels Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
DVDs launched in A Boris Yeltsin 1998 India and Pakistan test nuclear weapons.
NATO troops in ""B kosovo A Petronas Towers Russia restarts Chechen war.
PAUL Sudan rejects UN peacekeeping force, launches genocide in Darfur; around 400,000 die.
Iran develops nuclear program despite international pressure and UN sanctions.
Hamid Karzai re-elected president of Afghanistan but Taliban attacks worsen.
Ads promote y global companies | Earthquake in Haiti leaves 230,000 dead.
Deepwater Horizon oil platform explodes in Gulf of Mexico, starting oil leak that takes six months to plug.
GEORGE SANTAYANA, ""THE LIFE OF REASON,"" 1905-06 Boomtown In 2006, China's economy grew by 10. percent.
It was once one of the world's weakest economies but is now among the strongest.
The Assassination at Sarajevo The spark that caused the European tinderbox to ignite into World War I was lit in the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo.
The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the AustroHungarian throne, triggered a series of reactions that would lead to a full-scale European war within five weeks, a war that soon spread around the world.
The archduke and his wife Sofia were making an official visit to Sarajevo to inspect military maneuvers.
Austria— Hungary had occupied the Turkish province of Bosnia-Herzegovina since 1878 and fully annexed it in 1908.
Neighboring Serbia resented this, as the province was mainly populated by Serbs, so relations between the two states were tense.
As the royal couple drove to an official reception at the town hall, a bomb was thrown into their car.
It bounced off the rear canopy and exploded under the car behind, injuring two royal aides and 18 others.
After the reception, the archduke changed his route out of the town but on the way, his driver took a wrong turning and halted.
By chance, a group of conspirators involved in the earlier incident but not detained by the police were loitering there.
One of them, Gavrilo Princip, a 19-year-old student, leaped onto the car's running board and shot the royal couple at point-blank range, hitting the archduke in the neck and his wife in the abdomen.
He and his five fellow assassins were members of the Black Hand, a secret nationalist society led by Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevic, head of Serbia’s military intelligence.
Austria-Hungary then accused the Serbian government of complicity in the assassination.
When this was confirmed, Austria— Hungary issued an ultimatum on July 23 that would have effectively ended Serbian independence.
Serbia's reply was received in the Austrian capital just two minutes short of the 48-hour deadline.
It had agreed to almost all of Austria's demands, but also appealed to Russia for help and offered to refer the dispute to the International Court.
The next day, July 26, Austria-Hungary mobilized its forces, declaring war on Serbia on July 28.
Arrest Soldiers arrest 19-year-old Gavrilo Princip after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sofia, in Sarajevo.
SIR EDWARD GREY, BRITISH FOREIGN SECRETARY, AUGUST 5, 1914 BEFORE The origins of the world war lie in European rivalries stretching back more than 40 years.
The German defeat of France in 1871 had made the two countries bitter enemies.
Germany constructed defensive alliances with first Austria-Hungary and then Italy, while France looked to Russia and Britain.
A naval arms race between Britain and Germany added to the growing military tension.
SCHLIEFFEN PLAN Fearing war on two fronts, against France and Russia, in 1905, the German chief of the general staff, General von Schlieffen, drew up a plan for Germany to deliver a knockout blow against France, before turning to face the huge, but slow-to-mobilize, Russian army.
RUSSIAN THREAT he beginning of the twentieth century saw Europe divided into two armed camps.
Germany had formed an alliance with Austria-Hungary in 1879 as it felt threatened by the hostile nations at its borders and needed to protect its interests in Central Europe and the Balkans.
France, Russia, and later Britain formed their own alliance, in part to protect themselves against possible German aggression.
Austria accused Serbia of complicity in the murder, and gained German support.
Austria refused a compromise with Serbia and, on July 28, declared war.
Continental war was unavoidable as both sides honored commitments to their allies.
Russia mobilized its troops in support of Serbia, and when German demands for it to stop were refused, Germany declared war on Russia on August 1.
Knowing that France would support Russia, Germany then declared war on France on August 3 and implemented the Schlieffen Plan sending its army through Belgium in an attempt to knock France out of the war, before turning its attention on Russia.
Britain initially held back, but honored its [he Great War In July 1914 a war broke out in the Balkans that within days spread to the rest of Europe.
That war was expected to be over by Christmas but it dragged on for more than four years.
We know it now as World War I guarantee of Belgian independence, agreed by treaty in 1839, and declared war against Germany on August 4.
Deadlock The initial German advance was halted in early September, 50 miles east of Paris, by a combined French and British army.
Both sides then raced north toward the English Channel to try to break through around the side of their enemy's lines.
When this failed, the two sides dug in along the length of the Western Front.
Stalemate lasted there until almost the end of the war, as the defensive capabilities of the machine gun prevented any significant advance by either side.
Allied attempts to break the deadlock at Neuve Going over the top The order to climb out of the relative safety of the trench and advance—assaulted by gunfire and weighed down by weapons and heavy equipment-across the mud of no-man's-land toward the enemy was often met with terror.
German attacks on the French city of Verdun throughout 1916 were intended to make France “bleed to eem By the time the battle ended in stalemate, there were more than 750,000 French and German casualties.
A Russian advance into German East Prussia was halted at Tannenberg in August and the Masurian Lakes in September.
In the Balkans, Serbia repelled an Austrian invasion, but the entry into the war on Germany’s side by the Ottoman Empire in November 1914 and Bulgaria in September 1915 tipped the scales.
By January, Serbia and its ally Montenegro were overrun, while Romania was defeated the following year.
An Allied attempt to force the Ottomans out of the war by invading the Gallipoli peninsula in Turkey failed miserably in 1915.
British and French imperial troops occupied German colonies in Africa and the Pacific, the Japanese seizing German colonies in the western Pacific and China.
British and Indian troops also invaded THE GREAT WA Trench life Infantrymen wait in a trench near the front line for the order to go over the top.
Conditions in the trenches were appalling—muddy, waterlogged, and infested with rats.
Ottoman Mesopotamia , while in 1916 the British incited the Arabs to revolt against Ottoman rule.
At sea, the expected clash between the naval fleets of Britain and Germany never really happened.
There were battles in the South Atlantic and at Jutland in the North Sea, but although German U-boats did substantial damage to Allied shipping, the British navy was the stronger force.
ALBERT JOUBAIRE, A FRENCH SOLDIER AT VERDUN, 1916 THE GREAT WAR World War | quickly escalated into a global conflict because so many of the European powers involved in it had alliances and empires that they were determined to protect.
April 2, 1915 The Second Battle of Ypres sees mustard gas used for the first time.
July 28, 1914 Austria-Hungary declares war on Serbia following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand. 1917 was a difficult year for all sides.
Germany ran out of wheat flour during the winter, while Britain had run out of sugar by April, and had only enough February 19, 1915 The Dardanelles campaign begins in Turkey.
August 1914 Germany declares war on Russia and France and invades Belgium, triggering Britain to declare war on Germany.
October 15, 1914 There are massive British losses at the First battle of Ypres.
April 25, 1915 Troops from Australia and New Zealand land at Gallipoli.
Publication of a telegram sent by the German foreign minister to Mexico outraged Americans, and in April the United States declared war.
The second event was the mass use of tanks by the British at the Battle of Cambrai in November 1917.
Tanks were one of the few developments in February 21, 1916 The German army attempts to capture Verdun. wheat to last six weeks. military technology during the war, along with airships and planes for reconnaissance, or bombardment.
Mutiny and revolution The French army mutinied in April as a result of the losses it had endured.
The Italians had weakened the Austro-Hungarians, but when the Germans attacked in November, only the swift deployment of British and French troops saved Italy.
The Allies launched a new attack on the Western Front at Arras in April, and in July at Ypres.
It was vital both in the United States and in Europe, where U-boat attacks and an economic blockade reduced food supplies.
In February 1917, Germany announced it would attack all foreign ships, in order to starve Britain out of the war.
The threat to United States shipping was clear, but Germany tried to divert American attention by encouraging Mexico to Women at work With men away fighting at the front, women were required to work in industry, services, and on the land.
By the end of the war, one million British women worked in munitions (as pictured left) and engineering works.
The final nine months In March 1918, Germany and Russia signed a peace treaty at BrestLitovsk.
Germany now shifted all its troops to the Western Front, and attacked on March 21 before United States troops arrived.
But the Germans outran their supplies and the attack was halted on July 18.
A mass tank advance by the British at Amiens on August 8 and French-US attacks to the south then forced the Germans back into Belgium.
Germany’s Bulgarian allies sued for peace at the end of September, while the Italians won a massive victory against the Austro-Hungarians in October.
The Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires then both signed an armistice with the Allies.
In Germany, food and fuel shortages led to the country collapsing from within.
After the naval fleet mutinied at Kiel, Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated and the new government agreed armistice terms.
DIXON, BRITISH SOLDIER, NOVEMBER 11, 1918 July 1, 1916 Battle of the Somme begins, with massive British losses.
May 31, 1916 Britain and Germany contest July 31, 1917 The Third battle of Ypres, also known as Passchendaele.
March 3, 1918 Russia agrees to April 6, 1917 The United States declares war on Germany in response to the sinking of United States ships by U-boats.
September 29, 1918 Allies the only large-scale naval battle of the war, peace with Germany in the push Germany back the Battle of Jutland.
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. beyond the Hindenburg line on the Western Front.
An estimated 6. million 2 civilians also died from 1 the fighting, or blockade, and disease.
Allied Powers The war had short-term political effects in redrawing the map of Europe, but had longerlasting social and economic consequences.
It lost its colonies to the Allies as ""mandates""— territories under the supervision of the League of Nations, an international organization founded to promote peace through diplomacy—and gave up territory to France, Belgium, Denmark, and Poland.
Germany's armed forces were limited in size; the Rhineland was demilitarized and the industrial Saar region became a League of Nations mandate.
THE MAP OF EUROPE REDRAWN The treaties of St Germain with Austria (September 1919), Neuilly with Bulgaria , and Trianon with Hungary redrew the map of Central and Eastern Europe, with defeated nations paying war reparations.
The Treaty of Sevres with the Ottoman Empire was agreed in August 1920 but later rewritten at Lausanne in July 1923.
REMEMBRANCE The profusion of red Flanders poppies growing along the Western Front after the war inspired the British Legion to sell paper poppies to raise money for injured soldiers.
On or near November 11 each year, commemorations are held across Europe to remember those who were killed or injured.
POPPY APPEAL TOTAL WARFARE World War | has been identified as the first “total war” in history, as the entire national economy, industry, and population were directed toward winning the war.
British success in this total mobilization was one of the main reasons tt, and the Allies, overcame Germany.
NICHOLAS II Nicholas was an autocrat, believing that only he had the authority to rule Russia; however, he lacked the strength of will to fulfill this role.
To remain a dominant European force, Russia desperately needed to industrialize, but with modernization came inevitable demands for civil rights from impoverished Russian workers.
Nicholas, a natural conservative, repeatedly failed to work with moderate forces and reform society, losing the opportunity to transform Russia into a modern nation.
In 1902, the party divided into two strands; the Bolsheviks, led by Lenin who advocated change through violent revolution, and the more moderate Mensheviks, who believed in a more gradual process of change.
Weakened by successive defeats, Russia signed the Treaty of Portsmouth in 1905, bringing an end to the conflict.
Petrograd experienced a brutal massacre when 200,000 disaffected workers and their families marched on the Winter Palace (the residence of the czar) to demand better pay and working conditions.
The protesters were met by Cossack cavalry who, sabers drawn, charged the crowd, killing many.
The Bolsheviks went on to create the world's first Communist state. n the wake of the 1905 a revolution , Nicholas II agreed to instigate a new constitution for Russia, which included the formation of an elected parliament, or Duma.
However, the czar retained the ability to disband the Duma at will, which he duly did when the assembly met in 1906 and 1907.
Two subsequent Dumas met in 1907-1912 and 1912-17, although they were in almost constant conflict with Nicholas, who struggled to remain in control of the worsening political situation.
The outbreak of World War I in August 1914 briefly united Russians against a common German enemy.
By 1917, having sustained enormous losses on the battlefield and with the war effort creating high prices and food shortages, resentment toward the czar increased.
With violence erupting on the streets of Petrograd and Moscow, Nicholas was finally forced to abdicate.
The Duma handed over power to the Provisional Government, which aimed to establish a liberal democracy.
But discontent was still in the air, as the government refused to withdraw from the war.
The power was increasingly contested by the Petrograd Soviet of Workers and Soldiers, one of many workers' councils springing up all over the country.
The Petrograd Soviet had the crucial support of troops garrisoned in the capital.
It denounced the new government as ""bourgeois"" (middle class), and claimed to be the only true representative of the Russian people.
Lenin was convinced that collapse of world capitalism, as predicted by Karl Marx, was imminent.
In April the Bolshevik newspaper Pravda published Lenin's demands for the overthrow of the government and withdrawal from the ""imperialist"" war.
Lenin's antiwar stance gained mass support in July, when a Russian offensive ended with huge casualties.
For three days, soldiers and workers rioted in Petrograd in an uprising so damaging that the prime minister, Prince Lvov, resigned.
However, Lenin's followers soon received assistance from an unlikely source.
Fearing that Kornilov intended to seize power for himself, Kerensky asked the Bolsheviks for assistance, which they duly provided, in the form of a mass of workers, who persuaded the troops to turn around.
The Kornilov affair seriously weakened the Provisional Government, and in October Lenin secretly returned RUSSIAN LEADER VLADIMIR ILYICH LENIN Lenin became politicized after his elder brother was hanged for his part in a plot to kill Czar Alexander IIl.
On his release, Lenin spent several years in Europe, where he studied Marxist theory.
Lenin came to power in the October Revolution, but died less than seven years later.
However, his politics provided the inspiration for further Marxist revolutions in many countries.
May Day protest On May 1, 1917, a massive labor demonstration took place in Petrograd.
October Revolution On October 25—according to the old Russian calendar, November 7 in the modern one— Trotsky’s men executed an almost bloodless coup in Petrograd.
The battleship Aurora, flying the Bolshevik Red Flag from its mast, dropped anchor in then Neva River with its guns trained on the Winter Palace, where Kerensky’s government was in session.
After the firing of a single blank shell from the ship and two shells from another gun position, the government surrendered.
That night, Lenin issued a powerful address to the Russian people, entitled “To All Soldiers, Workers, and Peasants,” in which he promised to transfer the lands of the aristocracy, the church, and crown to peasant committees and to establish the workers’ control over Russia’s industries.
The Bolsheviks moved quickly to secure supremacy over other political groups, ensuring that soviets took over control across Russia, and ensuring that they alone would form the new government.
Lenin’s immediate concern was to make peace with Germany and end an exhausting and costly war.
Firmly believing that revolution would soon spread across the capitalist world, he accepted Germany’s peace terms, failing to anticipate the furious international reaction against his new Russia that was about to be unleashed. i In the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, the Bolsheviks faced both internal and international opposition.
They acted ruthlessly to tighten their grip on power. pA — THE ROMANOV FAMILY EXECUTION OF THE ROMANOVS After his abdication Nicholas II and his family were kept under house arrest, moving in the spring of 1918 to Ekaterinburg in the Urals.
On July 17, as anti-Bolshevik forces were advancing, Nicholas, his wife, their five children and servants were taken into the cellar of the house and shot.
The family’s execution removed one of many threats to the Bolsheviks’ rule.
CIVIL WAR In 1918 the anti-Bolshevik White Army launched attacks against the new regime.
During the next three years the Bolshevik Red Army fought invasions in the Baltic, the Caucasus, Siberia, and Ukraine.
RED ARMY BADGE BIRTH OF THE SOVIET UNION By the end of 1920 the counter-revolutionaries were defeated and absolute Bolshevik military and political power was established.
Russia was renamed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or Soviet Union in 1922.
NEW ECONOMIC POLICY During the civil war, the Soviet economy teetered on the brink of collapse, and money became virtually worthless.
With the urban population and the army close to starvation, the state seized surplus food from peasant farmers without payment.
In 1921 Lenin's “New Economic Policy” replaced these seizures with a regulated tax and as trade increased, the economy revived.
COMINTERN Also known as the “Third International,” Comintern was founded to promote worldwide revolution.
JOSEPH STALIN he future dictator of the Soviet Union was born in 1878 in Georgia, in the southeastern Russian Empire.
Joseph Dzugashvili attended a theological college in the Georgian capital, Tblisi, where he became involved in radical politics.
In Russia, Stalin engaged in practical subversive activities, ranging from armed robbery to distributing illegal pamphlets.
His efforts attracted the attention of both the Bolshevik leadership and the police.
The future dictator was photographed and his fingerprints were recorded.
Rise to power Stalin proved himself a tough enforcer of Lenin’s policies during the upheavals that brought the Bolsheviks to power in 1917 and the Civil War that followed.
Hardworking and devious, once the Soviet Union was established he became one of the most powerful men in the country.
Stalin’s maneuvering after Lenin’s death in January 1924 was a masterly exercise in political manipulation.
He Father of the people Stalin's official portrait of 1940 is intended to suggest his farsighted wisdom.
By the time Leon Trotsky—once fellow Bolshevik and now bitter rival—was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1929, Stalin had established himself as the country’s undisputed leader.
In an early example of his taste for rewriting the past, Stalin celebrated his 50th birthday that year, discreetly adjusting his birth date to 1879.
The celebrations initiated the personality cult that was to continue for the rest of his life.
In practice, this meant building up the power of the Soviet Union, the one country where Marxist revolution had succeeded.
From 1928-29, Stalin aimed to transform the Soviet Union into a major international power, and the process of the collectivization of agriculture and industrialization reflected his belief in the use of terror to achieve radical change.
During the 1930s, millions of Soviet citizens were killed by the state, used as slave labor in prison camps, or died in famines to Stalin's censors distorted the past to preserve the myth of his infallibility.
Individuals who had fallen out of favor were eliminated from the historical record.
In charge of the secret police in 1956—38, Nikolai Yezhov, known as the ""Poisoned Dwarf,"" was responsible for the worst of the Stalinist purges.
When he was also executed on Stalin's orders in 1940, all traces of his association with the Great Leader were eradicated.
Thus Yezhov's image was removed from this photo taken at the Moscow-Volga canal. which Stalin's policies contributed.
Behind closed doors The situation in the country was & mirrored at Stalin's “court” in the Kremlin, Moscow, where his entourage lived in constant fear of arrest, torture, or execution.
The assassination of Sergei Kirov, a member of Stalin's inner circle, in 1934 precipitated a wave of arrests and executions—although it is possible that Stalin himself had Kirov killed.
Thousands were executed after grotesque “show trials” in which they confessed to absurd crimes.
Shrewd and cunning, he entered an alliance with Nazi Germany in 1939 that arguably gave him time to strengthen his military position before the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941.
Yet he showed poor judgment in refusing to believe evidence of the imminent German attack.
His military policy of “no retreat, no surrender” vastly inflated Soviet losses in the early battles of the war, yet he later bowed to his generals’ judgment.
Stalin used his military advantage to bargain for greater Soviet influence in eastern Europe.
He is pictured here with Churchill and Roosevelt at the Yalta Conference, where the leaders planned the future of postwar Europe.
ORIGINAL PHOTOGRAPH RETOUCHED * VERSION Opposing views This German cartoon satirizes the Stalinist state by showing it as fighting against itself.
In sharp contrast, this statue depicts Stalin as a regal leader. boost morale.
He handled the wartime alliance with the United States and Britain in masterly fashion, winning the trust of United States president Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and the grudging respect of the British prime minister, Winston Churchill.
Postwar and death Victory over Nazi Germany in May 1945 took Stalin to the pinnacle of power, but he became increasingly paranoid as ever more bizarre plots against him were allegedly uncovered by his secret police.
JOSEPH STALIN, ATTRIBUTED 1953, Stalin was responsible for the deaths of at least five million Soviet citizens, yet throughout the country people wept at the news of his death.
The horrors of his rule were denounced only three years later by his successor, Khrushchev.
Stalin seems destined to be remembered, like Ivan the Terrible or Peter the Great, as one of the monster-heroes of Russian history.
TIMELINE December 18, 1878 Born Joseph Vissarionovich Dzugashvili in Gori, Georgia, son of a cobbler.
October 9, 1917 Joins the Bolshevik Committee to make an armed seizure of power.
March 1919 Joins the Politburo, the most powerful body of the Bolshevik regime.
December 1922 In his “last testament,” Lenin calls for Stalin to be removed from his post.
October 19, 1926 Trotsky, Zinoviev, and Kamenev expelled from the Politburo.
P t ow a r Im ALLIED PROPAGANDA November-December 1943 Stalin meets United States president Roosevelt and British prime minister Churchill in Tehran; and again in Yalta in 1945.
March 1948 Coup in Czechoslovakia completes the Stalinist takeover of Eastern Europe.
July 1948-May 1949 USSR blockades Berlin, trying to evict the US, British, and French forces.
June 25, 1950 With Stalin's backing, North Korea invades South Korea, starting the Korean War.
Disagreements with Trotsky and other members soon led Lenin to favor Joseph Stalin, a rising star in the party.
Stalinism Over the course of Stalin's rule, Lenin's version of communism mutated into what became known as Stalinism.
Between 1928-37, Stalin instituted the first and second Five Year Plans, huge and ambitious schemes that aimed to transform the Soviet Union into an industrialized society.
The Hammer and In 1921, with revolution achieved, and civil war at an end, the Soviet Union entered a 20-year period of relative peace.
Land belonging to peasants and kulaks was confiscated and turned into vast farms that were collectively run and worked by cooperatives.
It was initially The 50 MILLION 77. of Russians who moved into cities and industrialized regions between 1928 and 1937, the time of Stalin's Five Year Plans.
Sickle disastrous, producing reduced grain yields, violence, and famine.
But over time, agriculture adjusted and living standards slowly began to rise.
Throughout his rule, while Stalin cultivated a propaganda image of himself as father of his people—benign, even godlike—the Soviet people suffered appalling hardships.
Living standards were often subhuman, work was compulsory, and absenteeism a crime.
Criticism of the communist system could lead to a sentence in those same forced labor camps created IINE. d LLLA ~ ' LNG $ The official truth Pravda, meaning “truth,” was the official newspaper of the Soviet Union between 1918 and 1991.
Ideal peasants Without mechanized equipment, a Soviet women's brigade uses crude rakes to gather up the hay harvest on a collective farm, in this 1941 photograph.
Images such as this one tried to | show that the peasants Aum were happily carrying out Heroic images Stalin's severe agricultural policies; the reality was often very different. used to promote himself.
X | À bb ' This poster links Stalin with the revered Lenin, and typifies the heroic images Stalin i | wae Sr a ~ il | | i | Soviet farm tractor In the 1930s, the first Soviet tractors were produced.
A network of new prison camps was erected west of Moscow to house the thousands who fell foul of Stalin’s demands.
The period 1936 to 1938, known as the “Great Terror,” saw the secret police launching witch-hunts against the party elite and the army.
Political opponents were forced to confess to plotting against Stalin and summarily executed.
Ra Symbol of socialism These figures raise the hammer, symbol of the industrial worker, and the sickle, symbol of the peasantry.
LEON TROTSKY Leon Trotsky was a key figure in the Russian Revolution, a brilliant Marxist theorist, and a believer in international “permanent revolution” In the early days of the Soviet Union he served as the People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and created the Red Army.
After a power struggle with Stalin, he was expelled from the Soviet Union in 1929.
Sentenced to death in his absence by a Moscow court—allegedly for plotting Stalin's death—Trotsky found asylum in Mexico.
In 1940 a Stalinist agent, who had befriended | Trotsky, assassinated him by driving an ice pick into his skull.
The Soviet Bloc The German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 caught Stalin by surprise, but after a bitterly fought war, his nation was ultimately victorious.
At the 1945 conferences of Yalta and Potsdam, intended to secure lasting peace in the postwar world, Stalin secured the territories of eastern Poland and the Baltic States for Russia.
New communist regimes emerged in Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany.
These became known as the Soviet Eastern Bloc, and were organized under Moscow’s control, replicating Soviet policies and institutions.
The Soviet Union had become the only world power to rival the United States.
MARXIST REVOLUTIONARY 1879-1940 AFTER Despite the hardships that the Soviet people had suffered during Stalin's rule, there was genuine grief on his death in 1953.
However, his legacy was a difficult one for the leadership of the Soviet Union.
DEATH OF STALIN Stalin died in mysterious circumstances after eating dinner with close political colleagues, including Lavrenty Beria, former head of his secret police, and Stalin's successor Nikita Khrushchev.
It has been suggested that he had swallowed warfarin, a type of rat poison.
His body was embalmed, and displayed in the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square.
After Stalin's crimes were exposed, his remains were removed in 1961, and reburied in the Kremlin wall.
DE-STALINIZATION Khrushchev swiftly began a process known as De-Stalinization, introducing basic legal rights, allowing writers and artists greater freedoms, and releasing huge numbers of political prisoners.
Khrushchev also encouraged foreign visitors to the Soviet Union, but travel abroad for citizens remained strictly controlled.
The dominance of Stalinism finally began to diminish and a lesser cult of Lenin returned.
That year, riots broke out in Poland, and the Hungarian people rebelled against Soviet rule.
Propaganda produced during the period celebrated the glory of the socialist government and its policies and achievements, while damning its enemies.
The red wedge represents the Red Army driving into the heart of the White Army.
Poster declaring ""We are Building Socialism"" and showing images of vast factories, strong workers, and busy production lines.
Anti-US poster from the Cold War period showing a caricature of an inflated Statue of Liberty supporting a fat capitalist.
NORTH AMERICA AFTER THE WAR The postwar recession was reasonably shortlived in North America.
Factories that produced goods for the war effort soon adapted to producing consumer goods, such as radios and cars, and from 1922 until 1927 the North American economies showed consistent growth.
EUROPE AFTER THE WAR European agriculture and industries failed to adjust to the reduced demand of peacetime trade, so when millions of soldiers returned home, many could not find jobs.
HYPERINFLATION IN GERMANY As the Germans thought they would win the war and intended to force the losers to pay for their costs, they chose not to finance it through taxation.
Instead, the government ordered the Reichsbank, or central bank, to print more and more money to cover its ever-increasing war expenses.
At the peak of hyperinflation the exchange rate was one trillion marks to the United States dollar.
WORTHLESS MARKS B REA In 1918 in Germany a loaf of bread cost 0.63 marks.
During the hyperinflation crisis the price rose to 201,000,000,000 marks in November 1923.
EFFECTS OF DEPRESSION The economic slump that gripped the United States spread across the globe.
Ill-conceived government measures exacerbated the hardships suffered in many countries.
The Great Depression The United States stock market collapsed in October 1929, triggering worldwide economic recession.
Authoritarian regimes rose to power as people lost faith in democratic governments. uring the early 1920s the D American economy flourished, but by 1927 the country was overproducing goods for which it did not have a market.
Agricultural and factory production soon slowed down, leading to the loss of millions of jobs.
The Wall Street Crash In October 1929, stock prices began to decline and investors lost confidence in their shares, opting to sell them all.
Some banks also Government intervention in what became known as 17 MILLION shares sold on United States stock exchange in 1921.
Many banks had made loans to businesses in frantic trading in 1929. lost money in the Crash—when people hit by the economic depression needed to withdraw their savings, the banks often did not have the money to give them.
This caused other bank customers to panic and demand their cash, so many banks were ruined.
As people lost their jobs and savings, mortgages on many homes and farms were foreclosed and the properties were repossessed.
European countries, including Germany, needed these loans to pay for their imports, and were unable to do so once the funds were taken away.
Other parts of the world were also badly hit as much of their trade relied on selling food and raw materials to Europe and North America.
The price of commodities, 1929 United States loans to and investments in Europe end, causing a worldwide slump in productivity and prices.
October 28, 1929 The London stock exchange collapses. and people who could no longer repay the unemployed. or traded goods, dropped drastically, Winter 1931 to 1933 Britain introduces protective import tariffs, but in the Ottawa Agreements gives preferential rates for its overseas territories.
May 1931 Austria's largest bank collapses, which in turn sets off a series of banking collapses all over central Europe.
March 9-June 15, 1933 The American Congress passes Roosevelt's New Deal program.
June 17, 1930 The Smoot-Hawley Tariff, the highest tax on imports to the United States in history, is signed into law by the American Congress.
June 20, 1931 President Hoover halts war reparations by Germany as part of an effort to limit the financial fallout of the banking collapse.
January 30, 1933 Hitler becomes German chancellor, winning the post by exploiting popular resentment of the depressed economic and social conditions.
On the road Evicted from their farm in Missouri, this family traveled to California in search of work on the farms there. falling to 45 percent of 1929 values in 1932.
Roosevelt extended United States government responsibilities into new economic areas and created social welfare assistance on a national level.
Ultimately this large-scale government intervention worked and was adopted by other liberal democracies.
Rise of the far-right Mass unemployment and poverty caused great anger, leading to civil unrest in some countries.
M THE GREAT DEPRESSION AFTER In an effort to avoid the economic problems that arose after World War I, delegates from 44 Allied nations met in 1944 to plan for the end of World War Il.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND New rules for financial and commercial transactions between states in the developed world were drawn up and the International Monetary Fund was established to implement international monetary rules.
WORLD BANK The World Bank was established to provide financing and advice for the economies of developing countries.
Some states set about building empires to secure supplies of raw materials.
The renewed war in Europe created new jobs in armament factories, revitalizing the world economy and ending the economic depression.
Roosevelt's New Deal was a series of programs that aimed to tackle economic depression and rescue millions of Americans living in need.
The program vastly increased the scope of the federal government's activities.
It built more than 20 dams and hydroelectric stations, turning the Colorado river basin into a vast wealth-producing area.
The group distributed a daily bulletin of the same name. p THE GERMAN IDEAL In the 19th century, the concept of an eternal, ideal German Volk and Volksgerst began to emerge.
The philosopher George Hegel spoke of the German spirit as the ""spirit of the new world"" and Friedrich Nietzsche envisioned a ""master morality"" in which strength triumphs over weakness, unrestricted by the ""tyranny"" of virtue.
ITALIAN NATIONALISTS SEIZE FIUME In 1919, Italian patriots, led by the poet Gabriele D'Annunzio, occupied the Italian-speaking port of Fiume on the Croatian coast.
This action, which had popular support in Italy, was born of fury at gaining a mere 9,000 square miles in post-World War | peace settlements.
Unemployment was rife as economies struggled to adapt to peacetime conditions.
Disillusioned with their existing forms of government, many people were drawn to a new brand of nationalism known as fascism. he emergence of fascism and Nazism in Europe was made possible by a range of conditions.
Violence and lawlessness erupted across much of Eastern Europe, Germany, Italy, and Spain, between communists and their political opponents.
Political thinking on the left was fractured, with communist, socialist, and trade union groups often in conflict with each other.
On the right of the political spectrum, the nationalist philosophies of fascism began to gain ground.
Fascists loathed communism ’s internationalist thinking and had no faith in democratic government.
With no attachment to church or monarchy, fascists put all their faith in love of their nation, favoring a strong, ordered state.
The massive human and economic costs of the World War I left Italy's government undermined.
In 1920, bands of “Blackshirts”—adopting the Roman symbol of the fasces , which represented their belief in collective strength and authority over individual freedom—began to take the law into their own hands, attacking FASCISM A radical nationalist ideology.
Fascists believe in strong, authoritarian leadership and a collective, classless society bound by racial allegiance. socialists and striking trade unions.
In the absence of government authority, the Fascists were widely seen as the protectors of law and order.
In October Italian coin ""Fascist"" comes from the Roman fasces—a bundle of sticks (weak on their own but collectively strong) surrounding an ax—a symbol of authority.
King Victor Emmanuel III refused to back his Prime Minister's request for military support and invited Mussolini to form a new government.
In 1926 Mussolini assumed absolute power, dissolving all other political parties and brutally silencing political opponents.
Known to his people as “Il Duce,” or “the Leader,” Mussolini cultivated an image of himself as Italy's one true leader, the choice of the masses.
A bitter civil war ensued which lasted until the nationalist victory in 1939.
Some, termed NeoNazis, believe in reviving Hitler's national socialism.
Neofascist groups share elements of Nazi beliefs and tend to concentrate ona nationalistic, anti-immigration stance.
Nuremberg Rally Int faithful at Nuremberg, as in the picture above. he 1930s the Nazis held annual rallies for the party to preserve Aryan racial purity.
Later, the Jews were to be wiped out in the on Germany by its victorious enemies.
His tirades against capitalists, communists, Thousands of soldiers stand listening to Hitler speak. of nation , Nazism's goal was to unite all German-speaking people in a great German Reich, or empire , that would last for a millennium.
Mass movements with fascist ideologies arose in many countries during the 1920s and 1930s.
In Britain, the politician Oswald Mosley formed the British Union of Fascists.
Mosley’s “Blackshirts” acted as guards at political rallies and fought with left-wing and Jewish groups.
March on Rome Mussolini’s Blackshirts, shown above, were ordered to march on the Italian capital, Rome, in 1922.
In 1918 the government of Germany’s new Weimar Republic also faced huge problems.
Economic troubles were made worse and Jews (at whose door he laid blame for all Germany's ills), would soon catch the public ear.
In 1915 he broke with the socialists over intervention in World War | and became a radical nationalist.
Republican movements pressed for greater democracy, and support for anarchism took root.
In response to violent strikes, King Alfonso XIII became increasingly dictatorial.
In 1921 Spain was defeated in a rebellion by tribes in its Moroccan colony, which aggravated the economic crisis, and domestic violence escalated.
In September 1923 General Miguel Primo de Rivera led a coup d'état and became military dictator until he lost the army's support and resigned in 1930.
The ALFONSO XIII result was overwhelming majorities for those who were in favor of a republic, and Alfonso was forced into exile.
SECOND REPUBLIC The left-wing Second Republic alienated many groups with its reforms.
In 1933, a right-wing election victory led to a general strike on October 4, 1934 and an armed rising in Asturias, northern Spain.
When the left-wing Popular Front won the 1956 general election, their radical rhetoric alarmed conservatives.
Tension mounted as street battles between rival groups and widespread strikes paralyzed the nation. that society should have no police, ANARCHISM is a political belief government laws, or other authority.
Some of the military tactics that were employed during the fighting foreshadowed those later used in World War Il. n February 21, 1936 Spain’s 0 new left-wing Popular Front government promised liberty, prosperity, and justice, but some people considered their policies to be too progressive.
On July 17 and 18, Spanish military forces based in Morocco revolted against the elected government.
They expected little opposition, but supporters of the Second Republic and its government resisted, and Spain found itself in the grip of civil war.
The Republicans received weapons and volunteers from the Soviet Union and Mexico, and aid from supporters of liberal democracy, communism, and the anarchist movement.
ARRL RI, SPANISH WRITER AND POLITICIAN, JULY 18, Call to arms During the Spanish Civil War, recruiting posters were an important means of communication as many people were illiterate.
The fascist Italian and German governments also became involved, supplying troops and weapons, which gave the civil war a dramatic international character.
On July 19, 1936, General Franco , a leader of the insurgent forces, assumed command of the Army of Africa based in Morocco and took it to Spain.
This army played a key part in gaining Nationalist control of southwestern Spain.
At the outbreak of the war, the Republican Army was about one-third larger than the Nationalist Army.
However, by the time the Army of Africa arrived in Spain, the figures were close to equal.
International Brigades Socialists and communists from all over Europe formed groups of volunteers called International Brigades and went FRANCISCO FRANCO Franco was born into a military family.
In 1926 he became the youngest general in Spain, and by 1936 he was chief of staff for the military.
After leading the Nationalist movement to victory in the Spanish Civil War, Franco dominated Spanish politics and was the formal head of state.
He wore the uniform of a captain general, a rank traditionally reserved for the king.
Within three years of his death in 1975, Spain became a fully constitutional monarchy. to Spain to protect the Popular Front government.
Their ranks included anyone who was opposed to fascism, and Spain became the cause célèbre for left-leaning intellectuals across the Western world.
The British government, which proclaimed itself neutral, warned that Britons who enlisted on either side would be liable to two years in prison, and urged other states to prevent the dispatch of volunteers.
Despite this deterrent, thousands of foreign idealists made their way to Spain, many of them to defend the capital city, Madrid.
Battle for Madrid At the outbreak of war, Madrid was controlled by the Popular Front government.
Franco was anxious to capture the capital, and bombing raids began on August 28, 1936.
On September 30, he captured Toledo, which is only 40 miles from Madrid.
Toledo had been in Republican hands since the beginning, despite the onslaught from thousands of Nationalist soldiers.
Its capture was a huge morale boost for the Nationalists and did much to enhance Franco’s reputation.
By November 1, 25,000 Nationalist troops under General José Varela had reached the western and southern suburbs of Madrid.
Five days later, Varela’s men were joined by the German Legion Kondor (a unit from the Luftwaffe, see 392) and the siege of Madrid began.
Nazi medal Fascist victory In December 1936, Benito Mussolini , Italy’s fascist ruler, began to supply the Nationalists with men and equipment.
Franco was under pressure from both Hitler and Mussolini to obtain a quick victory by taking Madrid, so he blockaded the road that linked the city to the rest of Republican Spain, and his troops attacked Guadalajara, 40 miles east of the capital, on March 8, 1937.
The Republican Army counterattacked, making use of Soviet tanks, and many lives were lost.
Infighting Meanwhile, there was serious infighting among Republicans in Barcelona.
On May 6, 1937, death squads assassinated a number of prominent anarchists, and rioting followed.
These events severely damaged the Popular Front and led to the formation of a new government under the leadership of Juan Negrin.
Negrin was a Communist sympathizer, and this enabled Joseph Stalin to influence the Spanish government.
In April 1938, the Nationalist Army broke through the Republican defenses in the north, and Franco moved his troops toward Valencia with the aim of encircling Madrid.
Negrin, eager to show that the Republican government was still viable, insisted on a policy of attack, rather than defense.
However, at the Battle of frontal assault in 5 THOUSAND foreign Ebro (July 251937, Franco's volunteers joined in the fight —— November 16, forces launched THOUSAND people lost 1938), the a campaign to 5 conquer the Basque Provinces, 2 Asturias, and the industrial areas of northern Spain.
During this offensive, the first large-scale aerial bombing of civilians took place, including the infamous German raid that destroyed their lives during the conflict THOUSAND people died from malnutrition Republicans were all but destroyed as an effective fighting force.
It expresses his feelings about the destruction of the Basque town of Guernica by German air raids in 1937.
Franco believed the war was over and urged the Republicans to surrender.
On January 27, 1939, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain recognized the Nationalist government headed by Franco.
The Nationalist Army entered Madrid virtually unopposed on March 27, 1939.
ARMY OF AFRICA A highly professional army formed of Spanish troops, members of the Spanish Foreign Legion (modeled on the French Foreign Legion), and Moroccans from Spanish Morocco, known as Regulares.
AFTER After the Spanish Civil War, Franco took control as the country’s dictator.
FOREIGN WITHDRAWAL A committee in London drew up a plan to enable those who had fought in the International Brigades to return rie home.
After months of negotiation, the other European powers finally gave their approval to DARIDAD ett the plan.
INTERNATIONAL BRIGADE STAMP FRANCO IN POWER The methods Franco used to restore order included censorship, banning strikes, and ensuring that the Nationalists formed the only legal political party.
HITLER, 22 AUGUST 1959 The Führer Nazi propaganda photos depicted Hitler as the towering leader—führer—of his people.
He was totally convinced by his personal myth, seeing himself as a “man of destiny” leading the German people to greatness. orld War I was the pivotal Like many other ex-servicemen, Ww event in the life of German Hitler found it impossible to demobilize dictator Adolf Hitler.
Before mentally, regarding himself as a the war, this son of a minor official frontline soldier for in the Austro-Hungarian Empire was the rest of hbis life. a failed artist, nursing fantasies of greatness but in reality living an Speaker and politician aimless, embittered existence on the Hitler had no particular interest in margins of society.
Four years serving politics before or during World War I, on the Western Front put Hitler in nor had he expressed any particular touch with the shared experience of dislike of Jews.
As a “runner” carrying messages to the frontline trenches, he was wounded three times.
For example, belief in the creation of a self-sufficient ""Greater Germany"" incorporating all ethnic Germans within its borders.
The term ""socialism"" was associated with ethnic exclusivity rather than equality.
Hitler strongly opposed Marxist socialism and purged from the party all those who wanted socialism in the sense of workers' power or the overthrow of capitalism.
While the supposed evil power of the Jews would be crushed and ""inferior"" races such as the Slavs would be used as slave labor, the privileged German ""Volk"" would unite in solidarity behind the heroic leadership of their Führer.
Hitler married her in his Berlin bunker on April 29, 1945; they both committed suicide the following day. was the victim of an international Jewish conspiracy.
It was while mixing in political extremist circles in Munich that Hitler chanced upon an exceptional talent.
When he addressed political meetings in beerhalls, his speeches stirred the crowd in a way no other agitator could achieve.
His hypnotic ability to dominate and sway his listeners' emotions gave him the first intoxicating experience of power.
By the mid-1920s, through the failed Munich Putsch, a coup in which Hitler tried to overthrow the government; his subsequent nationally publicized trial; and the publication of Mein Kampf, Hitler had reinvented himself as the messianic leader of a German national revival.
Those who thought they could control him—the military, politicians, businessmen— underestimated his power, to which they all eventually submitted.
Once in control, Hitler took little interest in the day-to-day business of government.
While his subordinates worked to fulfill what they guessed to be ""the Führer's will,"" the Führer himself dabbled in grandiose architectural projects, such as the huge Konigsplatz in Munich, or enjoyed the Alpine views at his Berchtesgaden retreat.
Hitler was a teetotal vegetarian obsessed with cleanliness—he had no taste for luxurious Final days On April 20, 1945, looking tired and haggard and facing imminent defeat, Hitler appeared in the Reichs Chancellery garden in Berlin with some of his officers.
His only intimate relationship was with Eva Braun, and little is known about it.
Having assured his dictatorial control of Germany, Hitler turned his obsession to the pursuit of power in foreign and military affairs.
He used the same tactics to get his way on the world stage as he had in domestic politics— alternating threats of violence with offers of peace, and taking outrageous risks to achieve his aims.
War and downfall In September 1939, Hitler invaded Poland and finally tipped Europe into war.
The startling success of German arms fatally confirmed Hitler's view of himself as an infallible leader.
By the end of 1941 he had gone to war with both the Soviet Union and USA, and taken direct control of the German armed forces.
When the tide of war turned against Germany, Hitler's mental and physical state deteriorated and his grasp on reality weakened.
Obsessed with his own historical greatness, Hitler was quite prepared to see Germany destroyed to create a grandiose funeral pyre for his ego.
Eventually, holed up in his Berlin bunker, Hitler realized he had been defeated.
BER y^ [^5 4 * XR WM eae eas | ADOLF HITLER | ‘ e Dm pas 3v ri tll My t April 20, 1889 Born in Braunau, Austria, the son of a customs official.
May 1913 Moves from Vienna to Munich to evade military service in Austria.
August 1914 Joins the German Army as a volunteer at the outbreak of World War I August 1918 Awarded the Iron Cross, First Class, after four years' service as a dispatch runner on the Western Front.
November 9, 1923 Attempts to overthrow the German government in Munich Putsch.
December 1924 Released from prison after serving nine months for treason.
March 1932 Belatedly takes German nationality and contests presidential elections, narrowly losing to Paul von Hindenburg.
January 30, 1933 Appointed chancellor through a backstairs deal with conservative German politicians and forms government.
March 23, 1933 Exploits crisis caused by a fire at the Reichstag on February 27; pushes through the Enabling Act to gain exceptional powers for four years.
August 19, 1934 Becomes dictator of Germany after the death of Paul von Hindenburg.
March 7, 1936 Sends German forces into the demilitarized Rhineland in defiance of the Versailles peace treaty.
AUSTRIAN STAMP 1945 September 1, 1939 Orders invasion of Poland, triggering World War Il.
March 30, 1941 Addresses his generals about the planned invasion of the Soviet Union and calls for ""a war of annihilation”; the invasion is launched on June 22.
December 11, 1941 Declares war on the United States after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
July 20, 1944 Survives an assassination attempt at his headquarters at Rastenburg.
April 30, 1945 Shoots himself in his bunker | in Berlin as the city falls to the Soviet Red Army.
MUNICH PACT The Munich Pact was agreed between Britain, Germany, Italy, and France in 1938.
It ordered the surrender of German-speaking areas of Czechoslovakia to Germany.
Anglo-French appeasement of Hitler's wishes is criticized, but in 1938 neither nation could challenge Germany.
HITLER’S QUEST FOR LEBENSRAUM The need for Lebensraum, or “living space,” informed Hitler's plans for war.
Anschluss (the union with Austria) was followed by occupation of the Czech provinces, Bohemia and Moravia, in violation of the ANSCHLUSS Munich Pact.
The Blitz After defeat in the Battle of Britain , Hitler launched 57 consecutive nightly bombing attacks on London, known as the Blitz.
Fire Guards, known as “the Midnight Watch,” were volunteer patrols who extinguished fires after German air raids.
The poster's tone is typical of the propaganda produced by the wartime government to promote the war effort.
Well-equipped German forces then pushed into Scandinavia and the Netherlands, crushing all opposition.
Within a year, a seemingly invincible German army had conquered vast tracts of Europe. ermany’s assault on Poland began with the airforce blanket-bombing roads, railroads, towns, and villages, sending terrified local populations fleeing ahead of the German advance.
The chaos of refugees on the roads disrupted Polish counterattacks, and the German land invasion swept across the country at astonishing speed.
The response of the British and French to German progress was hesitant.
In the next two weeks, they did little more than survey the situation, while the German armed forces, or Wehrmacht, soon had the Polish capital, Warsaw, surrounded.
Poland capitulated when the Soviet Union, which had made a pact of nonaggression with Hitler, invaded from the east.
There then followed several months of little military action, known as the “Phony War,” in which the Allies built up weapon stocks and dropped leaflets to persuade the German people of the evils of their Nazi leaders.
On April 9, 1940, Hitler invaded Denmark and Norway in a preemptive strike against the British, who had threatened to occupy Scandinavia.
Both British and French commanders believed that the Wehrmacht would be held at the Maginot Line, fortifications BLITZKRIEG The tactic used by the German army to invade Poland.
Meaning “lightning war,” it involved swift, intense attacks that aimed to destroy the enemy quickly.
It often included bombing raids. constructed along the German border, and by the Belgian forests of the Ardennes, which they considered impassable for tanks.
However, the Nazis swiftly broke through and BLITZKRIEG Air power RAF Fighter Command had a numerical advantage over the German fighter force for most of the Battle ool Britain.
The British built 1,900 fighter planes, such as this Spitfire, the Germans built usu 775. advanced to Abbeville, on the north French coast, trapping British and French forces.
From May 27 to June 4, Allied troops were evacuated from Dunkirk. 20 | m SPITFIRE MK V On June 22, 1940, it seemed that German citizens, untouched by war in 1941, Germany and its allies had Germany had all but won.
In an act their homeland, the process was easy. overrun Yugoslavia and Greece, and of revenge, Hitler forced France to sign with Romania, Hungary, and Slovakia an armistice in the Turning points in support, Hitler was confident of a Evacuating Dunkirk "" same railroad car where the terms of The Battle of Britain was waged from broad front for the attack.
The British end of World War I . be a turning point in Hitler S fortunes. campaign, Operation Barbarossa, people sailed their own fishing boats across the English Hitler’s popularity in Germany reached The battle, fought by air, was intended made rapid advances, but the Soviet Channel to support the Royal Navy's fleet.
The Red Army and a bitter Russian winter described the event as a “miracle of deliverance.” had achieved victory, and for many Luftwaffe targeted airfields and ports put paid to blitzkrieg tactics.
Long battles along the English Channel, but the ensued, some lasting many months, Royal Air Force’s early warning with enormous suffering and loss of life systems gave Britain the advantage. on both sides.
In August 1942 a fierce WINSTON CHURCHILL m —— » Hitler abandoned ^Operation Sealion,"" battle began at Stalingrad , | A his invasion plan, and began to target which resulted in a German defeat.
The tide of war had begun to turn. joined the army in his youth and served with z Perhaps if Hitler had consolidated his the 4th Queen's Own Hussars, which gave him gains in Western Europe, Germany valuable firsthand knowledge of war.
But Hitler parliament in 1899, holding many posts, including E im chose to invade Russia.
By In France, the government collaborated with Hitler, insisting that Britain should go down å j the Nazis, but here, as throughout occupied fighting.
He is famous for his pugnacious war ""d Europe, resistance movements formed. leadership and brilliant oratory.
The alliance between Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and VICHY FRANCE eats tends MR ee aia later Japan was known as the Axis.
Vichy France s Frontiers, 1937 ee EM 5 "" was administered by the French Government sow.
Petain sympathized with Nazi German occupation ^ UNITED North 3 M | ideology.
He replaced France's motto of “Liberty, 3 Italian territory IRELAND IG DOM Sea DENMA A Sea Riga ` „Moscow Equality, Fraternity” with “Work, Family, Axis satellite E p Copenhagen — Fatherland,” and formed a militia that sent © Finnish territory E NETHERLANDS E es À RECS SARIAT French Jews to die in Nazi concentration camps.
Ae Kharkov a French organization, attacked German ATLANTIC Sle. cKiev 9 NU A Loos | Le OCCUPIED FRANCE Mii talingrad installations and helped stranded British airmen.
Stalingrad In the early hours of February 2, 1943, the last German general still fighting in the Russian city of Stalingrad surrendered to the Soviet Red Army.
At noon a German Luftwaffe reconnaissance aircraft circled over the city.
The most decisive battle on the eastern front during World War Il was over.
The industrial city of Stalingrad stood on the west bank of the Volga River in southern Russia.
It controlled the vital river and rail connections that carried oil supplies to the armament factories of central Russia and to the Soviet Red Army itself.
Operation Blue, the German offensive that began on June 28, 1942, aimed to capture the Caucasus oilfields to the southwest and establish a secure position on the Volga.
The Soviets responded to the German advance by concentrating their forces in Stalingrad, threatening the northern flank of the German army.
On July 23, Hitler ordered General Paulus and his Sixth Army to capture Stalingrad at all costs.
The same afternoon, German troops reached the Volga, north of the city.
By September 3, Stalingrad was surrounded, with the only means of escape east across the river.
Stalin, the Soviet leader, had ordered “Not One Step Backward,” for this city bore his name and could never be surrendered.
German air and artillery shelling reduced buildings to rubble, but the Soviet troops held fast.
As the Germans advanced into the city, the Russians fought them house by house.
The two sides were often so close they fought each other from different stories of the same building.
On November 19, with the Russians now occupying a narrow strip along the riverbank, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus, an audacious attack on German positions from the rear.
The battle raged into the New Year and, worn out by constant Soviet attacks, cold, and hunger, the remnants of the German army finally surrendered on February 2.
Fighting for each floor A Soviet sniper perches in a bathtub as he takes aim from a ruined building.
Snipers were well suited to close combat, picking off German troops one by one.
ALFRED JODL, GERMAN MILITARY OFFICER, FEBRUARY 1943 1914-PRESENT BEFORE From the start of World War II, governments sought ways to unite people in the war effort.
When the United States entered the war in 1941 the Allied cause was bolstered.
PROPAGANDA Governments at war mobilized their citizens with propaganda; posters were a favored means of communicating War aims.
All sides used propaganda to encourage people in the war effort and boost morale.
THE ANGLOAMERICAN ALLIANCE The Alliance was signed in December 1941 as the United States entered the war.
It set up joint British and American military command for all AngloAmerican operations.
The two nations entered a period of cooperation, which helped Britain in the war.
United States POSTER Storming of Bardia 1942 The Allies captured territory held by the Italians with relative ease early on in the North African Campaign.
The German navy began to target United States merchant ships carrying weapons, raw materials, food, and eventually troops across the Atlantic Ocean to Britain.
German submarines, or U-boats, sank three million tons of Allied shipping was won partly by the development of longer-range aircraft that could reach U-boats.
Support from the Canadian and United States navies played a major role, as did better intelligence, and the development of centimetric radar to find submerged U-boats.
Initially the British drove the Italians back to Libya, despite Italy's superior numbers of troops and equipment.
To aid its weaker ally, Tobruk against Rommel's forces before over the course ol the war.
Churchill later admitted that the threat to the lifeline of United States supplies was the one thing that really terrified him; without it, Britain might have been starved into submission.
The Battle of the Atlantic, as this theater of war became known, The number of days Australian troops held out under siege at where mobility was crucial for crossing being relieved by Allied troops. the deserts.
Mussolini had wanted to extend the Italian empire by invading Egypt in 1940.
Desperate to protect British interests in Africa, troops from Britain and Commonwealth countries (former British colonies, see Germany sent in the Afrika Korps under Field Marshal Rommel.
It was not until October 1942 and the British victory under Total War As the war in Europe raged on, the Atlantic Ocean and the deserts of North Africa became backdrops for fierce battles.
Securing vital supply lines from the United States enabled Britain and its allies to drive back the German and Italian troops.
Depth charge Coastguards stand on the deck of the United States Cutter Spencer watching the explosion of a depth charge blast a Nazi U-boat out of the water.
The U-boat's target was the large convoy of merchant and troop ships seen on the horizon.
Allied support and the advances in radar technology ensured Britain's Atlantic lifeline to the United States and Canada stayed open. , General Montgomery, at El Alamein, Germans were lost.
Once Belgium The Road to Berlin | that Rommel's advance was checked. and the Netherlands were liberated, By 1945, r m ; rd D The next month, the ""Torch Landings"" the Allies entered Germany from the MAE UMS, the Allies held the advantage.
British and United States forces in Morocco and Algeria brought Allied west and Russia invaded from the east. landed in Italy, while Soviet troops swept across Eastern reinforcements with United States tanks and fresh The Red Army’s arrival in Berlin in Europe.
Within six months, after fierce April 1945 was followed by Hitler's and Allied bombings, the Nazis faced attack on all fronts. fighting in Tunisia, the Axis powers suicide and unconditional were defeated in Africa.
Victory The Axis surrender in North Africa in Europe was was followed by the successful Allied declared on invasion of Sicily, after which Hitler's May 8, 1945. key ally, Italy, secretly surrendered.
After the liberation of OG EAN France, Germany made one last stand | at the Battle of the Bulge in the Shetland I Ardennes, Belgium, where more ;Z Orkney Is. than 80,000 United States troops and a similar number of i TOTAL WAR AFTER Relief at the end of war in Europe was tempered by grief at the immense loss of life and a resolve to achieve world peace.
ENDING THE WAR After the Red Army took Berlin, the end of the war in Europe was officially declared on May 8, 1945.
SH COSTS OF WAR & city severely bombed yi DP The costs of World War Il were immense.
In è& major battle terms of loss of human life, the statistics are e partisan resistance 2b appalling.
The financial costs have been —— frontiers 1942 ilingrad estimated at over $2 billion.
They reach British troops are enter Paris and France signs Paris in August. evacuated from Dunkirk. an armistice one week later.
June 21, 1942 At the May 8, 1945 Victory Battle of Gazala, Rommel January 22, 1944 in Europe for the Allies May 1940 Belgium and Holland September 7, January 22, 1941 Australian wins Tobruk, but it falls to February 2, 1943 German Allied landing at Anzio is declared when the surrender as German offensives 1940 The Blitz troops capture the port of the Allies at the Battle of forces are defeated by the Soviet meets with strong German surrender is sweep west toward France. on Britain begins.
September 1, 1939 Hitler July 10, 1940 The June 22, 1941 1942 Hitler's “Final Solution"" of September 3, 1943 The 1944-45 The Red invades Poland, and Britain Battle of Britain Operation Barbarossa the mass murder of Jews begins Allies invade Italy and the Army advances and France declare war on begins.
Italian army surrenders through Eastern Germany two days later. the RAF's success causes invades Russia, ending five days later.
Hitler to postpone the Nazi-Soviet Pact. i eae UC THE DEFEAT OF GERMANY planned invasion of Britain, indefinitely.
From 1939 to 1941, Nazi Germany blazed across Europe, annihilating any opposition in neighboring territories.
With troops fighting in North Africa and facing the Soviet Red Army outside Moscow, German forces had conquered vast territories by the winter of 1941.
Yet in April 1945 the Allies were swiftly advancing on the German capital, Berlin.
D-Day After almost four years of planning, a combined American, British, Canadian, and Free French force launched Operation Overlord, aiming to wrest control of Europe from Nazi Germany.
Beginning on D-Day with a five-pronged attack on the coast of northern France, the operation was to prove a crucial turning point in World War Il.
The largest of the five assault areas was at Colleville-sur-Mer, codenamed Omaha Beach.
Heavy Allied air and naval bombardment, effective at the other landing points, had made little impact on the well-prepared German defenses at Omaha, where the United States 29th Infantry Division—untested in combat—attacked alongside the United States Ist Infantry Division.
Horrendous weather had forced General Dwight D Eisenhower, Supreme Commander of the Allied forces, to delay the attack for 24 hours.
The mission launched with little improvement in conditions, but further delay would have set the operation back by several weeks.
Of 29 amphibious tanks launched at Omaha Beach, 27 sank with their crews still trapped inside them.
Many of the soldiers emerging from the landing craft were swept off their feet by heavy surf and drowned as they attempted to wade ashore, while others proved easy targets for German fire, picked off from the Omaha beach The first wave of troops to land at Omaha Beach arrived just before dawn.
Waist-deep in the icy sea with bullets tearing into the water around him, he captured the intense struggle as they fought their way onto the beach. clifftops as they struggled up the beach, weighed down by wet gear and heavy sand.
By early afternoon, American troops had managed to secure a small strip of beach, 6 miles wide, and around 2 miles deep.
Encountering less resistance at beaches codenamed Utah, Gold, Juno, and Sword, the Allies landed 150,000 troops by nightfall.
Six days later they had linked the five beachheads into a continuous front and begun using artificial ""Mulberry harbors"" to land armored vehicles, heavy artillery, and more troops with which to further the advance.
On June 27, after two weeks of intense fighting, American forces captured Cherbourg; on July 9 the British and Canadians overcame two Panzer divisions to take Caen; and on July 25 the tanks of the United States 7th Army advanced south through Saint-Lô, breaching the German defenses.
This was the vital breakthrough that led to the liberation of Paris on August 25 and, in early September, the crossing of the Siegfried Line into Germany.
Hither way, Hitler saw the Jews as an evil, implacable enemy of Germany who should be driven from the Reich.
Genocide-the murder of a group of people, for their religion or race, for example—has long been part of human life.
The Holocaust is the result of such a policy, but it was not the first genocide of the 20th century.
ANTI-SEMITISM IN EUROPE AND RUSSIA Anti-Semitism has its roots in the Roman Empire when early Christians attacked Jews, blaming them for the death of Jesus Christ.
The Nazis in power Hitler took power in January 1933 and began a slow process of reducing the civil rights and economic position of the country's half-million Jews.
They were removed from civil service and from many of the professions in 1933-4 and their shops and businesses boycotted.
Thousands took refuge in exile abroad, and by 1939 fewer than half of Germany's Jews remained.
In September 1935 the notorious Nuremberg Laws stripped Jews of their German citizenship and prohibited marriage or sexual relations between ANTI-SEMITISM Discrimination, hostility, or prejudice directed at Jews as a religious, racial, or ethnic group, expressed in actions that can range from individual hatred to stateprosecuted persecution and violence.
ARMENIAN MASSACRE In April 1915, the government of the Turkish Ottoman Empire accused the 1.75 million Armenians under its control of collaborating with the enemy, Russia.
A further 400,000 Armenians lost their lives when the Turks invaded the Russian Caucasus in 1918.
The massacres continued until 1922, when the remaining Armenians were driven from Turkey.
From 1940, three labor and death camps were built here; more than 1 million Jews died here from 1941 to 1945, when the Soviet Red Army liberated the camps.
In 1936 a program was set in motion to strip Jews of their assets, and by the outbreak of war, most Jewish property had been taken by the state or bought at reduced prices, to be sold on to ""Aryan"" owners.
It was not until November 1938 that the Jews were threatened with widespread violence.
A pogrom, known as the “Night of Broken Glass"" , led to the destruction of 7,500 businesses and the Poster advertising ""the Eternal Jew"" In the film made by Joseph Goebbels, Hitler's Minister of Propaganda, scenes of Polish Jews living in Warsaw were intercut with images of rats.
The term is most closely associated with the deliberate attempt to annihilate the Jewish race in Europe from 1941 to 1945, probably the most shocking and far-reaching act of the age.
After this 8,000 Jews were expelled from Berlin and around 25,000 Jewish men sent for a short spell in German concentration camps, where they were subjected to a brutal regime of punishment and labor.
Jewish isolation Initially, Hitler's goal was to exclude the Jews from Germany.
But by 1939, as thousands more Jews came under German control in Austria and areas of Czechoslovakia, it proved difficult to get other countries to accept Jewish immigrants.
At the Evian Conference 5 _( MILLION Jews were killed, including 3 million Polish Jews.
THOUSAND disabled people 70 in Germany were killed. in France in July 1938 on the refugee question, only 2 out of 32 countries present agreed to accept higher quotas of Jews.
Britain restricted Jewish access to Palestine due to the growing civil war there between the Arab population and Jewish settlers.
Ghettoization and murder The German invasion first of western Poland in September 1939, and then of the USSR in June 1941, radically and tragically transformed Germany’s antiSemitic policies.
With 3. million Jews in Poland and 2. million in the western Ghetto roundup Across Poland and occupied Russia, Jews were herded into walled or fenced ghettos in poor urban areas, where they had little or no food.
MINUTES OF THE WANNSEE CONFERENCE, JANUARY 20, 1942 USSR, as well as more than a million in occupied France, the Low Countries, the Balkans, and Scandinavia, the Nazi authorities’ reliance on emigration and small-scale attacks to “clear” Jews was no longer feasible.
Thousands more were sent to labor camps, where they worked for Death train Jews across Europe were rounded up and sent to the five main death camps in Poland.
Mass murder After death, Jews were stripped of everything, even their hair and the gold in their teeth.
These shoes come from one day of gassing at Auschwitz. the German war effort.
As German troops swept into the USSR, the SS shot, or gassed in mobile vans, as many Jews as they could find.
The “Final Solution” Although a written order from Hitler has never been found, historians now date a decision on the “Final Solution of the Jewish Question” to late 1941.
On January 20, 1942, Reinhard Heydrich, head of the Gestapo, summoned senior bureaucrats to a villa at Lake Wannsee in Berlin to ensure their support for his plans.
Jews were now to be transported to camps in Eastern Europe, where they would be worked to death, or killed on the spot.
Death was caused by mass gassing in sealed chambers, and the disposal of the bodies took place in huge crematoria staffed by Jews themselves.
The death camps— Auschwitz, Belzec, Chelmno, Majdanek, Sobibor, and Treblinka—were supplied with trainloads of Jews from occupied and Axis Europe, except for Bulgaria, whose king refused to cooperate.
Reports filtered out to the Allies, and the Auschwitz camp was photographed by a United States reconnaissance plane in August 1944, but photo-interpreters were more concerned with a nearby chemical factory.
THE HOLOCAUST AFTER The Holocaust ended in 1945, but its legacy is still with us.
Jews now have a homeland, but it is not without problems, and largescale massacres of people solely due to their race or beliefs have continued to occur.
The Law of Return made Israel home not only for its inhabitants, but for all Jews, wherever they might live.
Anti-Jewish pogroms broke out in Poland in 1947, resulting in the deaths of some Jews who had survived Auschwitz, while 2 million Cambodians were killed by their revolutionary government in the “killing fields” of Year Zero in 1975-79.
RWANDAN REFUGEES YAD VASHEM The Jewish national Holocaust memorial at Yad Vashem, Israel, remembers those who died, and focuses on the resistance of Jews to Nazi terror.
Memorials now exist in many European cities, notably Berlin, and a National Holocaust Day is commemorated in many countries on January 27, the anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz.
Yet ""Holocaust denial"" has gained ground in recent years, as some historians and politicians have tried to rewrite, or even obliterate, historical events for their own ends.
China was the first target in Japan's plan to create an empire in Asia and the Pacific, and it soon began to stage incursions into Chinese territory.
In July 1937 a minor incident, involving a missing Japanese soldier, caused Japanese and Chinese forces to open fire on each other at the Marco Polo Bridge near Beijing.
Although European colonial interests were affected, they were absorbed by growing problems in Europe and resisted involvement.
S president Franklin D Roosevelt had transferred his navy's battleship force to Pearl Harbor, Hawaii in April 1940, to deter Japanese aggression.
The combined effects of war with China and foreign trade embargoes left Japan desperate for oil and other raw materials available in European colonies in the Southeast Asia and the East Indies.
The Japanese raid on Pearl Harbor destroyed many United States battleships and killed around 3,000 United States personnel, reducing the threat to Japan's southward expansion.
Having gained an advantage, Japanese leaders put their plans into action.
Their aim was to construct an United States FREEZES DEPOSITS German victories at the beginning of World War II encouraged Japan to start empire building in earnest.
It signed the Three-Power Pact with War in the Pacific In 1941 Japan attacked the United States navy base at Pearl Harbor, throwing down the gauntlet to all Western powers seeking to restrict the expansion of the Japanese Empire.
World War Il had arrived in Asia and the Pacific and was now truly global. imperial perimeter around Southeast Asia and the central Pacific.
Pearl Harbor was followed by the Japanese invasion of most of their target territories, including Burma, British and Dutch Borneo, Hong Kong, and the Dutch East Indies.
Between March and June of 1942, the Japanese survived fierce confrontations with Allied forces to conquer Singapore, Guam, and the Philippines, and established control in Indonesia, Malaya, and Burma.
Having ousted the old colonial regimes, Japan made attempts to win over the mass of Asian peoples so that they would support them in the war.
A degree of independence was granted to a few Burma river patrol Forces were sent into Burma to protect British colonial interests in the country.
In the picture above, British troops patrol villages along a river as they search for Japanese soldiers.
Atrocities were committed against Chinese citizens and in Japan’s notorious prison camps, where medical experiments were conducted on prisoners of war.
Turning points The Japanese advance was checked in May 1942 when a naval force heading for southern New Guinea was defeated in the Coral Sea.
A far more significant defeat came at the Battle of Midway in early June.
The Japanese Admiral Yamomoto assembled a powerful force of aircraft carriers, battleships, submarines, and destroyers with the intention of surprising the United States fleet at the American-held Midway Islands.
However, United States intelligence had cracked the Japanese code and the United States Navy was well-prepared for their arrival.
In the ensuing battle, Japan lost its main fleet of aircraft carriers and hundreds of pilots.
The Allied counteroffensive As was the case in Europe, the tide of war in the Pacific turned in favor of the Allied Powers during 1943.
This change was in many ways due to the Kamikaze A Japanese volunteer kamikaze pilot flies his explosiveladen plane into a United States battleship.
Once the United States war effort was mobilized, Japan began to struggle to match its enemies, and Allied troops began to recapture occupied territories.
In early 1945, British troops invaded Burma, under Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten and Field Marshal Sir William Slim, liberating the country in May.
During 1944 and 1945, United States power at sea and in the air began to have a decisive effect.
A sea blockade of Japan cut off all imports, strangling the Japanese war economy.
Another decisive United States naval victory at the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944 opened the way for America to regain the Philippines.
In February 1945 the United States invaded the island of Iwo Jima, gaining a base for fighter escorts to support Pearl Harbor Japan carried out a surprise bombing raid on the American fleet at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941.
Thousands of American lives were lost, as well as many battleships, as seen engulfed in flames above.
Victory in the Pacific was in sight for the Allies, but still Japan refused to surrender.
On August 6, 1945. the Allies dropped an atomic bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima , and three days later on the city of Nagasaki.
As news of the devastation sank in, the Soviet Union broke a neutrality pact with Japan by declaring war and invading Japanese-occupied Manchuria.
These events persuaded the Japanese to sign an unconditional surrender on September 2, 1945.
After the war, communists won power in China, causing nationalists to flee.
COMMUNISTS SEIZE POWER IN CHINA During World War Il, Chinese political factions had united against the Japanese, but open civil war reignited in 1946.
CHINESE REGIME IN TAIWAN After his defeat, the nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek fled China with 600,000 troops and two million refugees.
Chiang refused to acknowledge Mao's government and established his alternative government in Taipei on the former Japanese colony of Taiwan.
United States OCCUPATION OF JAPAN Japan was occupied by the Allies until 1952.
In 1947, a new constitution introduced universal suffrage (the right to vote) and banned Japan from having an army.
In the 1950s, a memorial park was built in the center of Hiroshima in remembrance of the nuclear attack.
HIROSHIMA PEACE PARK United States GENERAL GENERAL MACARTHUR United States General Douglas MacArthur was the Supreme Allied Commander in the Pacific.
At the end of World War II he became Supreme Allied Commander in Japan and oversaw the drafting of a new Japanese constitution.
Hiroshima Around 7:15 am, Japanese radar detected three American aircraft flying south at high altitude.
Because the planes were thought to be on reconnaissance, the air raid alert was lifted.
At 8:16 am, the unchallenged leading B-29 bomber, named Enola Gay, dropped “Little Boy” over the city of Hiroshima.
The decision to bomb Hiroshima, and military uses, and scientists in the Nagasaki three days later, was made UK and United States grew concerned that by United States president Harry Truman.
The Germany might use it to make war against Nazi Germany had ended bombs.
On August 2, 1939, Albert in May, but Germany's ally, Japan, Einstein and the Hungarian physicist refused to surrender.
X | P release immense amounts of energy. nuclear war might have acted as a ` w^ ""x he eis Pl In 1938, German scientists Otto Hahn deterrent and kept the peace.
The ability t atoms by bombarding them with to destroy Morla, however, has neutrons.
The process used, known made our planet an infinitely more as nuclear fission, had obvious dangerous place.
Atomic cloud The devastating force of the explosion threw a huge mushroom cloud thousands of feet into the sky.
The searing heat of the bomb was so intense it vaporized people, and caused a firestorm that destroyed the city.
The East-West divide between communism and capitalism dominated world events for the next 40 years.
Historic distrust and ideological differences between the Soviet Union and the United States led to tension in the wartime alliance.
Between 1918 and 1920, United States troops hen the Allied powers met at partisans.
It reacted fought on the side Ww Yalta and Potsdam to shape President Truman to pledge assistance by strengthening its own power base. of the White postwar Europe , to all states trying to defend democracy In 1947 Andrei Zhdanov, a senior Soviet Army against the Stalin’s insistence that Soviet borders against external threat.
Western imperialists the United States later sent aid and the Baltic states raised anxieties Truman argued that the spread of and socialist anti-imperialists.
He to the fledgling Soviet about his expansionist ambitions. communist regimes must be combated set up the Cominform, an organization state, diplomatic Between 1945-47, the Soviets gained or America’s national security would that supervised the strict ideological | relations were not in in influence as communist governments be at risk.
In the United States strength to the Soviet Union was the dollars in financial and there was unease about United States.
In 1947 the British military aid into nonKorean War propaganda The Korean communists produced anti-capitalist propaganda, such as this the rise of European communism 4€ 335, an prime minister, Winston Churchill, had communist European states, to request United States support in Greece, where bolstering their economic ideology that advocated a civil war was raging between the recoveries.
COMMUNIST POSTER Berlin Airlift ""4 Berlin's children greet one of the British and American transport planes that flew a total of 2. million tons of food, medicines, and fuel into their beleaguered city in 1948 and 1949.
TWO CAMPS ON THE BRINK At several points throughout the Cold War, tensions almost reached boiling point, but direct conflict or ""hot"" war between the United States and the Soviet Union was avoided.
After World War II, Germany was divided into four zones, each separately administrated by the US, France, Britain, and the Soviet Union.
The German capital, Berlin, was situated deep in the Soviet zone and was split into four allied sectors.
In 1948 the Western allies planned a separate West German state, uniting the US, French, and British zones.
The Soviets tried to stop this by cutting off land routes into the Western sectors of Berlin, leaving only air access.
For the next year, as diplomatic battles raged, the Berlin Airlift brought supplies to besieged Berliners.
The German Democratic Republic was created in East Germany and the 1961 The United States funds and organizes Cuban exiles in a bungled attempt to invade Fidel Castro.
For 14 days war seems imminent until Khrushchev agrees to United States President Kennedy's demands.
The Cold War hots up The superpowers' possession of weapons of mass destruction generated much of the fear and paranoia that characterizes the Cold War era.
Initially the United States was the only nation in possession of nuclear weapons, but once the Soviets tested their own nuclear LI Cuban missile crisis Warheads x 1000 1960 1965 1970 The arms race 1964-73 The United States enters the Vietnam War to back the South Vietnamese army against North Vietnamese communists, the Vietcong.
By the time a ceasefire is Cuba at the Bay of signed, 58,000 United States lives and many more Pigs and depose the Vietnamese are lost. communist leader Nuclear weapons were mobilized in Havana as the United States and the Soviet Union threatened each other with nuclear attack in an escalating argument over the building of Soviet nuclear installations in Cuba.
Each side rapidly developed the capacity to destroy | the world many times over, but both continued to Ld manufacture weapons at huge expense, competing — to develop missiles that were ever more efficient.
Eg 1970 The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, signed by the United States and the Soviet Union to build an effective system of controls to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, comes into effect.
The republicans are backed by the United States but the Khmer Rouge triumphs. bomb in August 1949, any future conflict carried the threat of global destruction.
In 1953 the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, promoted a policy of “peaceful coexistence” with the West, and periodic attempts were made on both sides to create a thaw in relations.
However, there were many flash points that reignited tensions and suspicions, bringing the world to the brink of catastrophe.
In 1962, crisis was narrowly averted after a tense standoff when Soviet missile installations were discovered in communist Cuba.
The superpowers continued to stockpile nuclear arms, reasoning that nuclear war could only be prevented if each side had an equal capacity to destroy the other.
A range of arms agreements were negotiated during the Cold War, but disarmament was not considered to be a possibility. * i || [ 1985 1980 1990 1995 2000 MISSILE STOCKS United States RUSSIA Strategic B6 strategic Tactical © Tactical Stockpile B6 Stockpile 1983 United States President Reagan announces the Star Wars program, which gives the United States space-based protection against attack from the Soviet Union, which he calls the Evil Empire. power in the Soviet Union.
He institutions and opens up talks THE COLD WA 1987 The IntermediateRange Nuclear Forces Treaty is signed by presidents Reagan and Gorbachev, ending the arms race.
Citizens set about dismantling it. reforms the country's failing on nudear disarmament.
DECISIVE MOMENT SIGNING THE NATO TREATY On April 4, 1949 the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was founded by the leaders of the United States, Canada, Britain, France, and several other European countries.
NATO was, first and foremost, a military alliance that guaranteed assistance between member states and, crucially, allowed the United States to maintain military bases in Europe.
In 1955, Greece and Turkey entered NATO but a Soviet request for membership was rejected.
The reforming political leader Mikhail Gorbachev unintentionally set off a chain of events that would break up the Soviet Union.
Two years later he became president and modernized the Soviet system, encouraging the creation of a private sector and openness with the West.
DISSOLUTION OF THE SOVIET UNION In the Baltic States, Kazakhstan, and other parts of the Soviet Union, nationalists rose up to demand independence from Moscow.
Gorbachev tried to hold the Soviet Union together, imposing sanctions and sending troops into Georgia and Azerbaijan.
His father was prime minister of the tiny princedom of Porbandar, part of British-ruled northwestern India.
Typical of privileged sectors of Indian society at that time, his life was shaped both by old Indian customs, such as an arranged marriage at an early age, and by the influence of European attitudes and ideas.
The young Gandhi was skeptical about his family’s Hindu practices, however, including the avoidance of meat, and leapt at the chance to study law in Britain.
Ironically, it was as a student in London that he first encountered the Bhagavad Gita, a sacred Hindu text that was to influence him profoundly, and he became a committed vegetarian.
When Gandhi went to South Africa as a 23-yearold lawyer in 1893, he had Handwritten letter This letter was written in 1914, the year in which Gandhi definitively quit South Africa after two decades of campaigning for the Indians’ rights.
He did not adopt traditional Indian dress until 1913. no clear purpose in life except to make money, at which he proved thoroughly successful.
But the experience of the | discrimination, prejudice, and mistreatment suffered by Indians in South Africa’s racially divided society drew him into political activism.
This was nonviolent civil disobedience, conceived by Gandhi as a moral and spiritual effort, seeking to bring about a change in the hearts and minds of the oppressors by — — Father of the nation In his white ""dhoti,"" Gandhi cut a strikingly odd figure at international political conferences.
For much of the 1920s and October 2, 1869 Gandhi is born in Porbandar, RU IL 1930s Gandhi focused on breaking Gujarat.
In a very could have led such an effective adherence to the truth and by the short time, Gandhi swept to the protest as the famous “Salt March” Ampl readiness to suffer.
Gandhi certainly forefront of Indian political life, of 1930, a symbolic defiance of the September 11, ; suffered himself, undergoing launching a campaign of total British tax on salt.
And his | Adopting the simple life over leadership of the moral authority in campaign oree M When Gandhi returned to live in India Indian National | a India was immense.
May 1915 Returning to India, he founds in 1915, he was not only a seasoned Congress, he made it In 1942, reluctantly, the Satyagraha Ashram at Ahmedabad. leader of political protest but also a into a vital nationwide he launched December 1921 Elected leader of the Indian man with a distinctive set of attitudes organization. the “Quit India” National Congress. based on the rejection of modern movement, provoking February 1922 Halts the noncooperation industrial civilization.
As he was Spiritual values brutal repression from campaign in shock at mob violence. influenced by Russian author Leo Gandhi never had a the British authorities.
March 1922 Arrested'andare dor NM Tolstoy and English social critic John politician's attitude, The drift of events Gandhi is sentenced to six years and serves two.
His goal was saddened his final believing in the virtue of small artisan not the attainment years.
He had made a vow of of power but the decided to grant India M | chastity (announced to his wife in spiritual and moral independence after anuar 26, 1330 M eis ae 1906), seeking spiritual fulfillment transformation of World War II, but the Sardis Pledge to tal aaa a through the renunciation of the Indian society.
Gandhi negotiates a pact with British India, where he could live according to killed 22 policemen loathed.
Even worse viceroy Lord Irwin to end civil disobedience. his principles, but he soon resumed at Chauri Chaura, northern India. was the violence that the subcontinent September-December 1931 Gandhi campaigning.
India was entering a Gandhi responded by calling off his was plunged into.
His conciliatory resigns from Congress. attitude toward Muslims enraged August 9, 1942 Gandhi and Congress Hindu extremists.
Gandhi is nonviolent political struggle, was influential after his death.
For Gandhi, satyagraha | was more than simply a way of achieving political objectives through civil disobedience.
He saw it as a path to spiritual improvement | through truth, love, and suffering. held in the Aga Khan Palace near Poona. a Truth n eve r November 1946 Begins a solitary da ma es a campaign to halt 8 massacres and seek conciliation between Cd u se th at IS Hindus and Muslims.
OF GANDHI'S DEATH GANDHI, FROM ""NONVIOLENCE IN PEACE AND WAR', 1948 bh — — Denied civil and political rights, Indians became increasingly disenchanted with British rule in the late 19th century.
By the 1920s there was a mass anticolonial movement demanding home rule for India.
In 1909 the Government of India Act allowed a very small number of Indians to sit on legislative councils, but their responsibilities were minimal.
INDIAN RIGHTS The Indian National Congress was founded in 1885 by Western-educated Indians campaigning for Indian rights.
Although the Congress represented all Indians, its members were mainly Hindu.
In 1906 some Muslims broke away from the INC to form the Muslim League.
In a long campaign of civil disobedience, known as satyagraha, Gandhi encouraged the boycotting of British goods, the nonpayment of taxes, and passive or nonviolent resistance.
VIOLENT RESISTANCE Not all Indians used peaceful means to resist British rule.
It created an Indian parliament to which Indian ministers could be elected to hold positions of responsibility in departments such as health, education, and agriculture.
Another act in 1935 allowed more Indians to vote, and the British kept only the most crucial departments—revenue, defense, and foreign affairs.
At the end of World War II, in 1945, the British agreed to hand over full power.
Direct action As independence drew closer, the leader of the Muslim League, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, started to demand a separate Muslim state.
Many millions of Muslims and Hindus caught on the wrong side of the border were forced to flee their homes.
On that day Muslims protested all over India to voice their demand for a separate homeland.
Tragically, the protest in Calcutta escalated into violent fighting between religious groups, and thousands of people died.
Drawing the line Lord Mountbatten, the last viceroy of India, saw that the only way for the British to withdraw was to partition India and to transfer power to two governments.
Among the major Indian leaders, only Gandhi refused to agree to partition.
He even urged Mountbatten to offer Jinnah the premiership of a united India rather than a separate Constitutional Assembly crowd A crowd of people gathered outside the Constitutional Assembly in Karachi as the ceremony to symbolize the transfer of power from Britain to Pakistan took place.
During the ceremony, Lord Mountbatten read a message from George VI pledging the support of the British Commonwealth (nations that were formerly part of the British Empire) to Pakistan.
India accuses Pakistan ETHNIC TENSIONS Ethnic and religious rivalries caused the partition of India.
Territorial disputes arising from the partition have led to 1947-49 India and Pakistan go to war when Pakistan supports a Muslim insurgency in the independent province 1958-60 Disputes arise between Pakistan and India over the rights to water in the Pakistani 1971 Civil war breaks out between West a series of conflicts between of Kashmir.
Riots erupt and thousands of people are killed. offensive in the Indian-held parts of Jammu and Kashmir.
India invades Lahore in retaliation. the two countries paves the way for the diplomatic recognition of an independent Bangladesh by Pakistan. independence and Jinnah became its first governor-general.
Congress president Jawaharlal Nehru, however, would not agree to this plan, nor would his most the next day, the independent state powerful Congress deputy, Vallabhbhai of India emerged with Nehru as its Patel.
As soon as the Jinnah and were eager to get on with new borders were announced, more running an independent India. than 12 million Hindus, Muslims, and In July 1947 Sikhs fled from Britain's Parliament their homes on one passed the Indian side of the borders Independence Act, -— Í to what they ordering the ^ di believed was refuge demarcation of the ^ D am on the other side. dominions of India Ex Oft RA ""X They traveled on and Pakistan and ""y » Dr; kena BAR] foot, in bullock sectarian attacks claimed the lives of dividing the assets i carts, and on 4,000 people. of the world’s largest trains.
Within These were located two months, about thousands of miles a million people apart, in the mainly were slaughtered Muslim east and in fierce religious northwest of the riots.
The Sikh region, respectively. population, who India was formed were caught on from the remaining area, with the the Pakistani side of the new border, exception of the northern province of suffered the highest percentage of Kashmir, which was free casualties.
The Nehru releases a dove The Indian prime minister, Nehru, launched a dove of peace at his 65th birthday celebrations in 1954.
Territorial and ethnic issues continue to cause conflict in the Indian subcontinent.
CONFLICT OVER KASHMIR India and Pakistan have contested possession of the Muslim-majority state of Kashmir since 1947, when the Hindu ruler, Maharajah Hari Singh, gave the province to India.
Since 1989 there has been an independence movement in the Indian-administered part of Kashmir.
India blamed pro-Kashmiri militants for the attacks on their parliament in 2001 and on Mumbai hotels in 2008.
SIKH SEPARATISTS No provision was made for Sikhs when India was partitioned between Muslims and Hindus.
NUCLEAR STANDOFF India and Pakistan conducted nuclear tests in 1998, causing concern in the international community.
The UN Security Council criticized the two countries and urged them to stop all nuclear weapons programs.
Tensions were reduced in February 1999 after Pakistan and India signed the Lahore Declaration, pledging to intensify efforts to resolve all the issues between them.
However, the threat of nuclear conflict still remains between the two countries.
Indian independence from British rule is followed by the partition of the subcontinent into India and Pakistan.
End of the Colonial Era The decline of Europe's empires gathered momentum after World War Il as domination of poorer nations by colonial powers came to be considered unacceptable.
The transition from empire led to the creation of self-governing nation states in much of the world, but this created many new conflicts. n 1945, the old justification for empire—that ""inferior"" races needed the guidance of ""superior"" Western civilization— came into question.
Many colonies had remained deeply impoverished and underdeveloped to suit the economic needs of empire.
However, European powers were now forced to admit that this could no BEFORE By the early 20th century the spread of nationalist ideas led to the growth of independence movements in the colonies.
In the Middle East, mandates granted by the League of Nations gave Britain and France administrative powers over the region.
COLONIAL ECONOMIES Colonial territories tended to be underindustrialized, and in many the standard of living was very low.
They supplied raw materials to power European industry, but the development of their own national economies was not seen as a priority.
RISE OF NATIONALISM Increasingly, citizens demanded the right to self-govern.
The imperial powers began to make some concessions toward power-sharing but remained determined to hold on to economic control of the natural resources of their colonies. longer be accepted and some countries reluctantly began to prepare for a withdrawal from imperial territories.
The transition to independent status of some former colonies was complicated by the superpowers—the United States and the Soviet Union—who competed for influence over the people's choice of government.
In the colonies themselves there was conflict between different social, political, and ethnic factions over who should govern.
In many cases, European powers caused resentment by trying to hold on to their interests in resources, such as oil and gemstones, even after independence was granted.
As a result, transitions to independence were often marked by civil wars and intervention from foreign powers.
The Dutch were unwilling to surrender their interests in Indonesian oil and rubber.
They invaded in 1945 to reestablish control, but conceded Indonesian independence in 1949, although they continued to occupy Western New Guinea.
During World War II the Germanbacked Vichy regime in French Indochina, which incorporated Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, also collaborated with Japan.
In 1945 the x ""ai oe Ai a 1997 Hong Kong, a British territory since its victory in the Opium Wars of 1842, is finally handed back to China on July 1, 1997.
GAMAL ABDEL NASSER From an early age, Nasser was interested in the fight for Egyptian independence.
During World War Il, he was involved in plans for a military coup to oust British forces from Egypt.
Nasser's victory in the Suez Crisis of 1956 (see right) established him as a figurehead for Arab nationalism.
Vietnamese nationalist Ho Chi Minh took advantage of the Japanese surrender to declare an Independent Democratic Vietnamese Republic.
French troops invaded the new republic and by 1946 had taken control of the south of the country, while Minh’s army held the north.
The French Indochina War lasted from 1946-54, when massive French losses at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu finally precipitated a settlement.
In the British colony of Malaya, an initially peaceful transition to selfgovernment developed into conflict in 1948.
Hostility toward Britain's intention to maintain business interests in Malay rubber and tin combined with political and ethnic divisions in the population to create civil unrest.
An armed insurrection by the communist minority resulted in the death of three European plantation managers in June Ships scuttled in the Suez Canal Ships sunk by Egyptian forces block the entrance to the Suez Canal.
On the extreme right of the picture, a British naval salvage vessel attempts to clear the channel.
British troops defeated the Chinese guerrillas in 1952 and withdrew from Malaya in 1957 once the Federation of Malaya had been established.
The Suez crisis The most significant crisis of British and French withdrawal from empire came in 1956 when President Nasser (see left) nationalized the Suez Canal.
The canal, which links the Mediterranean and Red Sea through Egyptian territory, had been under British and French control since its construction in 1869.
It represented a key route for the transport of raw materials to Europe.
The crisis ended in a victory for Arab nationalism and signaled the decline of the old powers of Europe.
African conflicts France's determination to maintain control of Algeria in northern Africa led to guerrilla fighting between the Algerian Front de Libération Nationale and French security forces from 1954.
By 1960, the violence had escalated and the independence issue was bitterly dividing the French nation.
The struggle left deep scars on both French and Algerian national consciousness.
The dismantling of colonies in Africa spawned many territorial wars between African Nations.
As imperial powers withdrew, many nations also descended into civil war.
When the Belgian government abruptly granted independence to the Congo in 1960, violence erupted as different Congolese factions struggled to gain control of the nation’s remarkable natural wealth.
The Congo’s nominally democratic government, installed at independence, failed in 1965 when Lieutenant General Mobutu seized power in a military coup.
After independence Through the 1960s and 70s, transitions to independence became generally peaceful and independence was established across most of the world.
However, independent government in the Third World has not equalized the distribution of global wealth and power.
Paris riots Growing opposition in France to French suppression of the Nationalist Movement in Algeria exploded into riots on the streets of Paris as French protesters clashed with the French Army and the notorious CRS riot squad in 1961.
AFTER In many cases, democracies established post-empire failed to survive, and military or one-party rule was established.
MILITARY REGIMES In some countries power was seized in military coups, such as that led by Idi Amin in Uganda in 1971.
Ethnic violence and political repression were rife under the military regimes.
DEMOCRACY With a few exceptions, such as the independent Republic of Ghana, democracies established post-empire have failed in much of Africa.
Elected national parliaments have often $ been unable to establish unity in countries, such as Sudan, that are divided along tribal lines.
By 1897 they were demanding their own state, and in 1917 the British agreed to the foundation of a Jewish state in Palestine.
ZIONISM Zionism became an organized political movement in 1897 when its founder, Theodor Herzl, convened the First Zionist Congress.
The congress called ' ee for a Jewish state EARLY ZIONISTS in Palestine.
France gained the mandate for Syria and Lebanon, and Britain was granted the mandate for Iraq and Palestine.
MANDATE An Ottoman or German l territory that was handed to another country to run after World War I THE BALFOUR DECLARATION The 1917 Balfour Declaration was a policy drawn up by the British government that accepted the need for a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
In 1948 the modern Jewish state of Israel was established in the region, causing fury among Palestinian Arabs and in the wider Arab world.
It has proved one of the most contentious political acts of modern times. he period of British rule in Palestine, which formally began in 1919 when the British Mandate (see BEFORE) was granted, was marked by controversy and violence.
The majority Arab population strongly contested the Jewish settlers’ claim on their country, and some Arabs resorted to aggressive attacks against Jews, their homes, and their businesses.
The Jews, feeling that the British authorities were giving them insufficient protection, began to form local defense groups, known collectively as the Hagannah, to protect their communities.
During the 1930s the Hagannah turned into a paramilitary organization, developing military training programs and sourcing arms from Europe.
Jewish refugee Like many of the Jews who emigrated to Israel in the 1950s, this Yemeni girl stayed at the Shaar reception center in Haifa when she first arrived in the Jewish state.
The British withdraw Guerrilla violence between Arab groups and the Hagannah became increasingly difficult for the British to police, so in 1939 they called together Arab Damascus and Jewish delegations to e the St.
In it the British made concessions to the Arabs on a wide range of issues, the most important of which was a restriction on the free settlement in Palestine of Jewish refugees.
This seemed like a death sentence for those Jews trying to flee Nazi Europe to Palestine.
Supporters of the Arab and Jewish sides held international conferences during 1946, but the year ended without any workable solutions to the problem.
Caught between Arab and Jewish demands, a cash-strapped British government declared its mandate in Palestine “unworkable” in February 1947 and referred the matter to the United Nations.
The UN proposed a partition plan, which allocated about 44 percent of the area for an Wreck of Altalena In June 1948 crowds gathered on the Tel Aviv beachfront to see the wreckage of the burntout Altalena.
Ben-Gurion refused to let it land in respect of a truce with the Arabs, and ordered warning shots to be fired.
One hit the vessel and it burned. stated in the McDonald Arab state and 56 percent for a Jewish state, with Jerusalem under international administration.
The Jews agreed with their decision but the Arabs did not, arguing that the plan ignored the rights of the majority of people living in Palestine.
DAVID BEN-GURION, OLORA MANIFESTO, 1948 a ISRAELI STATESMAN DAVID BEN-GURION David Ben-Gurion was born in Poland.
He moved to Palestine in 1906 and became a prominent member of the Zionist movement, leading the struggle to establish a state of Israel.
Until his retirement in 1970, he played a major role in Israeli life, developing the state's policies and institutions, and guiding Israel through years of conflict.
Despite this, Britain withdrew and on May 14, 1948 the Jewish state of Israel was established.
It was recognized by the US, the Soviet Union, and other UN members, but not neighboring Arab countries, which refused to accept Israel as a state.
Troubles in the homeland One of the first tasks for Israel’s new leader, David Ben-Gurion, was to create the Israeli Defense Force from the Hagannah and other Jewish paramilitary organizations.
A further threat to security was the Palestine Liberation Evacuation of Jerusalem This man was among thousands of Jews who were evacuated from Jerusalem by British troops in 1948.
Formed in 1964 when various Arab guerrilla groups and political factions joined together, the PLO's stated aim was the destruction of Israel through armed struggle.
The PLO sponsored innumerable guerrilla raids on Israeli civilian and military targets, giving the organization a worldwide reputation as a terrorist group.
In the 1980s, Yasser Arafat, chairman of the PLO since 1969, took on the role of statesman and used diplomacy to achieve the group's ends.
However, some Palestinian extremists believed Arafat gave too many concessions to the Israelis during diplomatic talks.
Entry visa Dated January 1939, this visa allowed the German Jewish holder to emigrate to the British Protectorate of Palestine.
By November of the same year restrictions had been placed on the numbers of Jews allowed to settle in the region.
Since tensions were also growing between Israel and Egypt over the Egyptian-held Gaza Strip, which Israel believed was a base for guerrilla activity, Israel, Britain, and France joined forces to invade Egypt.
SIX-DAY WAR In response to the massing of Arab forces on its borders, Israel launched a preemptive strike against Egypt, Jordan, and Syria in June 1967.
YOM KIPPUR WAR In 1975 Egypt and Syria launched a surprise attack on Israel on Yom Kippur, the Jewish Day of Atonement, a day on which they knew the Israeli military would be participating in religious celebrations.
The Arab forces made significant advances before Israel rallied and pushed the invaders back beyond the 1967 ceasefire lines.
MOVES TOWARD PEACE In 1978 President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel, and President Jimmy Carter of the United States signed the Camp David Accords.
The accords established a ""Framework for Peace"" in the Middle East, leading to the Israel/Egypt Peace Treaty in 1979.
ISRAELI OCCUPATION OF LEBANON In an attempt to curtail cross-border attacks by the PLO based in Lebanon, Israel invaded in 1978 and in 1982; they became an occupying force there until 2000.
In response to the killing of three Israeli soldiers and the capture of two others by Hezbollah, a Lebanese Islamic paramilitary group, Israel reinvaded in 2006.
OSLO ACCORDS The Intifada (a Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule) persuaded Israel to join talks.
The Oslo Accords agreed that Israel would withdraw from parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, allowing an interim Palestinian government in those areas.
It is the source of all true art and science.” sr EINSTEIN, 1930 erman-born physicist Albert Einstein had a largely uninspiring school career, although he displayed a natural talent for mathematics and a love of learning.
After graduating from a technical university with a teaching certificate, Einstein found a job at a patent office in Bern, Switzerland, in 1903.
Two years later, while still working there, Einstein submitted his doctoral thesis and published four scientific papers.
Three of these were to be profoundly important in the history of science.
The first of Einstein’s 1905 papers concerned the puzzling phenomenon known as the photoelectric effect, in which electrons are ejected from atoms of metal when light shines onto them.
Young Einstein Around the time of this photograph, Einstein—here with sister Maja—received a magnetic compass from his father.
He later said that he had found inspiration wondering why compass needles turn.
Instead of the ejection rate gradually building with the intensity of light shining onto the metal surface, the effect suddenly “switches on” when the frequency of light rises past a certain threshold.
This certificate tells a different story—in physics and math he scored a maximum 6. never supposed it to be literally true.
Einstein’s paper was the beginning of quantum theory—a field of physics that provides insight into the behavior of light, atoms, and subatomic particles.
Einstein remained at the heart of its development for the rest of his life.
Einstein's second landmark paper of 1905, entitled On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies, outlined his Special Theory of Relativity.
The starting point in this paper was the fact that the speed of light is always the same, however fast an observer is moving relative to a light source.
Einstein's last publication of 1905 was a bold extension of Special Relativity.
First identified by Italian physicist Galileo Galilei, it states that physical laws should behave in the same way in all isolated frames of reference unless they are being affected by external forces—in other words, natural laws are the same whether one is in motion or not.
This is because all motion is relative—there is no universal, fixed reference point.
Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity recondiles this principle with the fact that light always travels at the same speed relative to an observer no matter how fast they travel relative to its source.
In order to do this, Einstein explained how time and distance measurements become distorted at high relative speeds.
The bizarre results of special relativity are used routinely by experimental physicists.
In 1915, Einstein extended Special Relativity to create his General Theory of Relativity.
This theory explains gravity as a distortion of space-time, the fourdimensional ""fabric"" of the universe.
The two theories of relativity have been tested countless times and have never yet failed.
One effect of general relativity (illustrated by this Hubble Space Telescope image) is a phenomenon called gravitational lensing, in which light from distant stars and galaxies is deflected and warped as it passes close to stars and galaxies.
ALBERT EINSTEIN proved that mass and energy, too, are relative quantities, just as time and space are.
Furthermore, he showed that mass and energy are two aspects of the same thing, massenergy.
It was in this paper that he derived his most famous equation, relating mass and energy , via the square of the speed of liebetcs Emc.
This famous equation is also the source of the devastating energy of nuclear weapons.
Recognition In 1907 Hermann Minkowski, one of Einstein’s teachers, showed that time is equivalent to the three dimensions of space, and is intertwined with them.
He visualized “space-time” as a four-dimensional “fabric” of the universe.
Einstein, meanwhile, set about generalizing his Special Theory of Relativity to include gravity.
He realized that time slows down in intense gravitational fields—and one result of this is that light bends as it passes close to very massive objects, such as the Sun.
By 1946, Einstein was already proclaiming the need for nuclear disarmament . distortion of space-time, and published his ideas in 1915, as the General Theory of Relativity.
A total solar eclipse in 1919 provided a chance to test Einstein’s new theory.
A team of physicists photographed the area of the sky surrounding the Sun during the eclipse.
Stars in the dark sky around the obscured Sun appeared slightly out of place—a result of their light bending as it passed close to the Sun.
The shift was inexplicable using the traditional “Newtonian” (see 269) idea of gravity, but it matched Einstein's theory exactly.
He won the 1921 Nobel Prize for Physics , and stayed at the forefront of discovery during a period when physicists were beginning to unravel the universe's fundamental mysteries.
He was celebrated beyond the academic life of science, becoming a cultural icon, and one of the few scientists known by nearly everyone.
Political life One consequence of Einstein's fame was that people sought his opinions on a wide range of topics.
He was acquainted with many world leaders, wrote widely in newspapers, books, and magazines, and became involved with many political causes.
In his later years, he lobbied against racism in the United States and against nuclear weapons.
A German-born Jew, Einstein had Zionist aspirations, and was in favor of establishing a Jewish homeland in the Middle East.
Although Einstein's theories are only truly understood by physicists, most people recognize that his work radically changed our understanding of the world, and appreciate that this brilliant man was one of the most enduring characters of the 20th century.
TIMELINE March 14, 1879 Albert Einstein is born in the small town of Ulm, Germany.
He also publishes a paper in which he suggests ""stimulated emission"" could be possible—this is the principle behind the laser, which was not invented until the 1950s.
Einstein's divorce is finalized, and he is married for the second time, to his cousin Elsa Lówenthal.
Einstein takes up a position at the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study.
It was a time of wealth, peace, and unity, though not without its downsides.
BEFORE During World War Il many marginalized sectors were thrust into central roles, only to be sidelined again when the war ended.
WOMEN AND THE WAR Women played a crucial role in the United States victory in World War Il «€ 392405.
They served in the auxiliary army and navy services, and also the air force, flying new aircraft from factories to military bases or repairing those damaged in conflict.
Many women moved from low-paid administrative or catering Jobs into better-paid munitions or engineering work, but were rarely paid as much as men earned.
Most women in industry lost their jobs when men returned from the war in 1945.
ROSIE THE RIVETER SEGREGATION Segregation remained legal in the United States until well after World War II, despite the United States having fought against the Nazis, who held an explicitly racist ideology.
President Truman desegregated the armed services in 1948, prohibited segregation on interstate travel, and outlawed discrimination by employers and unions.
Pontiac Chieftain The American dream and the open road came together in stylish | automobiles like the soft-top Pontiac Chieftain.
Gas was cheap, and young people had diners, shopping malls, and drive-in movies at their disposal.
Cars such as the Pontiac and the Cadillac became status symbols of the new wealth and freedom that Americans enjoyed during the 1950s. ——— , j merica emerged from World War II as the richest and most powerful nation on Earth.
The only one of the wartime Allies not to be occupied or bombed, its industry— supplying its own military needs as well as some of those of Britain and the USSR—had provided full employment to its workforce and ended the Great Depression of the 1930s.
The new middle class This buoyant economy created a new middle class that made up 60 percent of families, who spent their money on consumer goods.
Some 83 percent of American homes had a television by 1958, and two-car families doubled from 1951 to 1958.
The United States had 6 percent of the world’s population (150 million in 1950), consumed one-third of the world’s goods and services, and made two-thirds of manufactured goods.
Compared to the starch-rich and relatively expensive diet of their forebears in 1900, food was affordable and varied.
The average American in the 1950s had a choice of green vegetables, frozen goods, fresh meat, and fast food.
As a result of an improved diet, children were on Consumer Society After World War Il, Americans viewed consumption as a patriotic activity that helped aid economic recovery.
The most sought-after items included refrigerators, cars, televisions, washing machines, toasters, and vacuum cleaners—all items that would modernize their lives. average two or three inches taller in 1950 than they were in 1900, women could expect to live to 71 instead of 51, and men to 65 rather than 48.
The flight to the suburbs One urgent need for this new class was decent housing.
The postwar economy provided food and clothes, but good housing was still in short supply.
One answer came from pioneer Bill Levitt, who won a contract in 1941 to build 1,600 row houses for shipyard workers in Norfolk, Virginia.
Frustrated by union rules and having to organize numerous skilled workers to build and equip a single house, he divided the building process into 27 separate steps, training 27 teams of workers to carry out each one.
GALBRAITH, United States ECONOMIST, ON THE DISCREPANCIES IN AMERICAN SOCIETY IN “THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY,” 1958 Eating out With increased disposable income, young couples could spend money on recreation, drinking after work, or eating out regularly at the local diner.
Such facilities were, however, still segregated in many southern states. principles to his first development of 2,000 two-bedroom houses for war veterans on Long Island.
Each house cost $6,900, with no down payment for veterans and a mortgage guaranteed by a federal housing bill.
Levittown, as it became known, grew in four years to 17,447 houses and a population of 82,000 people.
The houses were Aa Š all identical, but their inhabitants soon personalized them, adding porches and patios and building extra rooms.
Some 13 million new homes were built from 1948 to 1958, almost all of them in new suburbs.
This turned many American cities into social doughnuts, with a rich commercial and business center surrounded by a poor, largely African-American-inhabited inner ring of social housing, surrounded in turn by largely white suburbs.
The idea oi the “teenager” emerged as young people developed their own culture.
Country and western was popular among the white working class, while African-Americans had blues, gospel, and, in the late 1940s, rhythm and blues.
A new hybrid music—merging African-American rhythm and blues and white country and western—by white singers Bill Haley in 1954 and Elvis Presley in 1956, gave young people their own music.
Rock 'n' roll was the music of rebellion and teenage angst, echoed in the movies of James Dean and Marlon Brando.
Jazz, the Beat poets, novelists like Jack Kerouac, abstract expressionists Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko, and folk and protest songs of Woody Guthrie and, later, Bob Dylan, defined American culture as much as rock ’n’ roll or movies.
It raised fears of a “red menace” against American society in the Cold War.
Suburbia The mass production of housing resulted in streets with row after row of identical houses.
The 1950s was a conservative decade, based on white, middle-class family values where men went to work and wives stayed at home—only 36 percent of women worked in 1955.
Segregation in jobs, housing, education, and democratic rights was rife, most notably in Southern states.
His anticommunist witch-hunt struck a chord as the Cold War with Russia intensified, but when he attacked the army in 1954 he was censured by the Senate.
Jazz music After the artistic excesses of Charlie Parker and bop music in the 1940s, 1950s jazz cooled down to find a new audience, with musicians like trumpeter Miles Davis and college circuit favorite, pianist Dave Brubeck.
What appeared to be a cohesive, affluent society was revealed as divisive and fractured along lines of race and class.
IMMIGRANTS The idea of the American dream is still powerful for many Hispanic immigrants.
The Death of Kennedy On Friday November 22, President John F Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline visited Dallas, Texas, to drum up support for the 1964 United States presidential election.
As the motorcade drove through Dealey Plaza, at least three gunshots rang out, killing the president instantly.
The American people had lost a president they loved, and they had been robbed of their future.
Three days after John F Kennedy’s assassination, the world stopped again, united in grief.
The funeral of the 35th president of the United States was watched by a million people lining the procession route, and millions more on television.
During his brief time in office, the charismatic young president had come to epitomize the hopes of his nation—belief in a better future and the energetic pursuit of progress.
A lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald, was arrested shortly after the shooting and charged with murder.
He never came to trial; two days later he was shot dead while in police custody by Jack Ruby, a gangster who later gave contradictory reasons for the killing.
Kennedy's successor, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, quickly established an official investigation into the assassination headed by Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United States.
After a 10-month investigation, the commission concluded that Oswald had acted alone, as had Ruby, and A son salutes Moments after his father’s casket was carried down the steps of St.
Matthew's Cathedral, John F Kennedy Jr., whose third birthday it was that day, saluted his father.
His uncle Bobby Kennedy, who stands behind him, was himself assassinated just five years later. that there was no conspiracy to kill the president.
Many people have refused to accept these conclusions, but no firm evidence has ever come to light to suggest otherwise.
After the assassination, the body of the president was flown back to Washington.
It first lay in repose in the East Room of the White House and on Sunday afternoon was taken to lie in state in the Capital Rotunda.
Over the following 18 hours, 250,000 people lined up in near-freezing temperatures to pay their respects.
On Monday the funeral procession returned to the White House and then moved on to St.
Heads of state and representatives from 92 countries attended the service.
It was at the height of the Cold War , yet even the USSR sent a representative.
The Archbishop of Boston led the mass, at which Kennedy's writings and speeches were read.
Populist movements, some authoritarian, others revolutionary, swept new regimes to power.
In some countries, governments were imposed on the population by the military.
INDEPENDENCE FROM COLONIAL RULE The transition from colonial rule to selfgovernment in Latin America {318-19 was generally smooth in terms of economic stability.
In the early years of the 20th century, many Latin American countries had flourishing economies, based on the export of crops and minerals to North America and Europe. was owned by one percent of l 8 PERCENT of land in Brazil the population in 1910.
THE MEXICAN REVOLUTION Mexico's popular uprising of 1910 preceded and influenced the revolutions in Russia «€376-77 and Eastern Europe.
Porfirio Diaz's military regime was overthrown in 1911, but widespread conflict continued as Mexican soldiers, workers, and peasants joined in a struggle for civil rights and agricultural reform.
Although briefly calmed by the Constitutional Congress of Mexico in 1917, violence flared again in the 1920s.
DEPRESSION AND INDUSTRIALIZATION The world economic crisis triggered by the market crash of 1929, and the ensuing Great Depression €€384-85, devastated Latin America's export market and created shortages in imported manufactured goods.
The political response was to create economies that could provide for their own populations without reliance on foreign markets.
SOCIAL UNREST In trends similar to those of 19th-century Europe «€336-37, the growth in Latin America's urban workforce led to a rise in political activism and calls for social and political change.
The fall of Diaz's regime in Mexico set a precedent that popular uprising could succeed. n 1930, economic problems led a the Brazilian military to install Getulio Vargas as provisional president.
Although it operated as a dictatorship—a government ruled by one person with absolute power and no recognized opposition, or restriction from the country's law—his government permitted liberal measures such as social and welfare reforms.
He was democratically reelected in 1951, but committed suicide in 1954, after the army demanded his resignation.
Perón's ""Third Way"" In Argentina, a populist government came to power in 1946 led by Juan Perón.
He transformed manufacturing in Argentina, launching an iron and steel industry, and ship and car production.
Radical change came as women were given the vote, and corporations were nationalized.
Comparisons have been made with fascist regimes, and although he never pursued mass violence, he did crush any opposition to his rule.
Cuba breaks with the United States In Cuba, the military regime of Fulgencio Batista was overthrown after a long struggle with revolutionaries.
A guerrilla war ensued, in which small groups of armed rebels carried out repeated attacks to wear down the enemy, before the rebels seized power in 1959.
The United States continues to impose an economic embargo on Cuba, but Fidel Castro's regime still survives.
Chile's brief democracy In 1970 an Increased desire for extreme political change, or radicalism, brought socialist Salvador Allende to the Chilean presidency.
Concerns were raised in the United States when Allende established diplomatic relations with communist regimes in Cuba, China, North Korea, and North Vietnam.
He attempted to restructure Chile’s unstable economy, but was soon threatened by a variety of political opponents.
Eager to influence the next regime, the United States backed General Augusto Pinochet’s military coup against Allende in 1973.
When attackers entered the presidential palace, Allende was found dead from a gunshot wound.
Castro's camp This photograph, taken around 1957, shows the bearded revolutionary leader Fidel Castro with commanders of his rebel army at a secret camp in Cuba.
The rebels were poorly armed, but Castro's guerrilla tactics won the conflict.
The Peróns Juan Perón and his wife Eva address an economic planning meeting in Buenos Aires.
Although Eva Perón was not elected, she was influential in her husband's government.
They enjoyed cult status in Argentina, and Eva's death in 1952 resulted in scenes of mass mourning.
As a young man, he traveled extensively in Latin America, and became convinced that only revolution would solve the problems of poverty and social inequality that marked the continent.
A visit to President Guzman's populist regime in Guatemala in 1953 confirmed Che's enthusiasm for radical political solutions and, in 1956, he joined Fidel Castro's rebel army.
In 1965, Che left Cuba with the intention of sparking revolutions in other countries.
He was captured by the CIA—the United States secret service—in Bolivia in 1967, and executed by the Bolivian army.
After authoritarian, often military-backed regimes in the 1960s and 1970s, many Latin American nations became more democratic.
COUNTERREVOLUTION In the 19705, the revolutionary and socialist ideals of previous decades were swept aside.
ANTI-AMERICANISM Left-wing presidents such as Venezuela's Hugo Chávez 438» and Bolivia's Evo Morales have increasingly spoken out against United States policy in Latin America.
OVERTHROW OF THE MANCHU EMPIRE In 1905, the political revolutionary, Sun Zhongshan , founded the Revolutionary Alliance with the aim of driving out the Manchus and establishing a republican government in place of monarchical rule.
Nationalist soldiers seized Wuchang on October 10, 1911, and within weeks south China's provinces had broken away from the empire.
When the Manchus asked the commander of the Northern Army, Yuan Shikai, for support, he encouraged the emperor to abdicate, and in March 1912 he became president of the republic.
In January 1916 he accepted an invitation to become emperor, but shortly afterward he gave up the position and died.
There Sun Zhongshan, with help from the Soviet Union, reorganized the party.
WARLORDS FILL THE VOID From 1916, China had no effective central government and was controlled by regional warlords.
Zhang Xun, the “pigtailed general,” who briefly restored Puyi, the Manchu emperor; Feng Yuxiang, the “Christian General,” who barred his troops from gambling: and Yan Xishan, the “Model Governor” of Shanxi, who supported educational reform.
The incident gave its name to the radical May Fourth Movement, which attacked Confucianism «€ 131, called for a “literary revolution,” and welcomed a wave of new ideas.
MAO ZEDONG, 1950 China's Long March After the fall of the Manchu dynasty in 1911, China experienced a long period of political turmoil.
The Nationalists reunified the country, but were frustrated by the 1937 Japanese invasion.
The Communists came to power in 1949, and over the next 25 years attempted a revolutionary transformation of society.
But the alliance collapsed in April 1927, when the Nationalist leader, Jiang Jieshi, ordered hundreds of Communists in Shanghai to be killed.
Mao Zedong led a revolt called the Autumn Harvest Uprising, and after defeat by the Nationalists, retreated to the southern province of Jiangxi.
There, Mao formulated a new revolutionary n 1923, the Chinese strategy combining the formation of the Red Army—the military arm of the Communists—with land reform, and a promise to emancipate China’s women. it reformed the currency, and established modern banks.
New schools and colleges were opened, and railroads and roads were improved.
Over the next decade, The Long March In October 1934, the Communists abandoned their Jiangxi base, broke through a Nationalist blockade, and began the “Long March"" to shake off their enemies.
War with Japan Japanese encroachment on Chinese territory had begun in 1931 with the seizure of Manchuria.
The Nationalist government relocated 1,000 miles up the Yangzi River, while the Communists operated behind Japanese lines.
Civil war and communist victory With the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 , the Sino-Japanese hostilities became absorbed in the wider conflict of World War II, and Japan was ultimately defeated by the Allies.
While the Nationalist government was being seriously damaged by galloping inflation, the Communists were gaining rural support with revolutionary land reform in favor of the peasants.
Manchuria fell to the Communists, Mao's "" and when, in January 1949, around 300,000 Nationalists surrendered, Mao's troops marched triumphantly into Beijing.
On October 1, 1949 the communist People’s Republic of China was established.
Jiang Jieshi and two million of his supporters fled to the island of Taiwan, where they established the rival Republic of China.
Consolidation The People’s Republic then occupied all territory claimed by China, including Tibet.
Mao negotiated the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance and, in 1950, when the Korean War broke out China intervened on the side of North Korea.
CHINESE COMMUNIST LEADER MAO ZEDONG The son of a rich peasant, Mao moved to Beijing from Hunan province at the time of the May Fourth Movement , where he first encountered communist ideas.
As head of the country from 1949 until his death in 1976, Mao's attempts to implement his radical ideas led to disastrous famines.
Farming was collectivized, so peasants handed over their land to agricultural producers’ cooperatives.
The radical years In 1958, Mao Zedong introduced the radical policy known as the Great Leap Forward.
Industrial and agricultural cooperatives were amalgamated into communes—with collective kitchens and daycares—and industrial targets were raised.
At first it seemed as if spectacular increases of output had been achieved, but later evidence showed that these policies had caused disastrous famines and the death of millions of people.
In 1966, the Cultural Revolution was launched, with the aim of cleansing the country of ""bourgeois"" influences.
Children were recruited as Red Guards and, to rekindle the spirit of revolution, were encouraged to report their schoolteachers and relatives if they failed to display sufficient communist fervor.
GANG OF FOUR Mao's wife Jiang Qing, party chief Zhang Chungqiao, critic Yao Wenyuan, and Wang Hongwen, a factory worker, expected to succeed Mao after his death.
Instead, they were arrested, and found guilty of plotting to seize power.
TIANANMEN SQUARE When pro-democracy students demonstrated in Tiananmen Square, Beijing, Premier Li Peng instructed the army to act.
The Nationalist government struggles to control the economy as Mao’s forces use guerrilla tactics.
China under Mao A clever military strategist and propagandist, Mao's ruthless policies had a dramatic effect on China’s economy and society.
Mao restores control by disbanding the Red Guard units and creating new Revolutionary Committees.
In central Potsdamer Platz, men used pneumatic drills to break up the cobblestones and set up concrete pillars.
These disturbing scenes were the first signs of a physical division of Berlin.
In February 1945, the leaders of the US, USSR, and Britain met in Yalta (now in Ukraine but once part of the Soviet Union) to plan Europe’s future after the defeat of Nazi Germany.
They agreed to partition Germany and its capital, Berlin, into four zones of occupation divided between their three countries and France.
Berlin lay deep inside the Soviet zone, but access between the western zones of the city and the three western zones of Germany was guaranteed along specified land and air links.
The election of an anticommunist mayor for Berlin in early 1948 and the planned creation of a federal state with a common currency in the western zones of Germany annoyed the Soviets.
On June 24, 1948, they blocked traffic from entering the city from the west.
The British and Americans responded with a massive airlift of supplies to sustain West Berlin until an agreement with the Soviets was reached in May 1949.
For the next 12 years, Berlin remained the uneasy epicenter of the Cold War.
The western half became linked with West Germany, while the eastern half became the capital of communist East Germany, both created in 1949.
Economic disparities between west and east led thousands of East Germans and Berliners— almost 200,000 in 1960 alone—to cross the open frontier between east and west in search of a better life.
Crossing points between East and West Berlin were sealed off with barbed wire and concrete posts.
In places, this barrier ran down the middle of streets to keep from touching West Berlin’s soil.
Russian tanks waited outside the city, while the Americans sent 1,500 troops to reassure West Berlin.
Over the next 19 years, the wall was strengthened with reinforced concrete blocks 12 ft high and set back from the original fence to create a heavily armed “no-man’s land” in between.
The wall became the symbol of a divided world, but ultimately symbolized the futility of such confrontation.
This photo, taken in 1962, shows a young woman standing precariously at the top of the western side of the wall to speak to her mother in East Berlin.
The United States experienced economic growth, as did Germany, France, and Italy.
In Britain, food rationing, which had been in place since 1940, ended in 1954.
Employment rose throughout Europe, and with it came the beginnings of a consumer boom.
NEVER HAD IT SO GOOD In 1957 the British prime minister Harold Macmillan said, “Most of our people have never had it so good,” a sentiment that echoed around the developed world.
People bought luxuries and labor-saving devices, developments in communication began to change the way people lived, and television took off as a mass medium.
It was music for a new generation— teenagers—and it shocked older, more conservative people.
The greatest and most controversial star of the new genre was Elvis Presley.
The Sixties The 1960s witnessed the rise of new forms of entertainment and a new political and social agenda.
The changing attitudes to youth, gender, class, place, and race challenged the established order. t the end of World War II in 1945, soldiers returned home and started the families they had put on hold for four years.
In the United States alone, some 70 million “baby-boomers” became teenagers and young adults during the 1960s.
As the decade opened, it was a time of youthful optimism when anything seemed possible.
Where previously young people had aped their elders, new music such as rock 'n' roll empowered the younger generation, and adults were often left dumbfounded by what they considered the strange behavior of the youth.
Swinging sixties In an age of increased middleclass affluence, the population had greater employment opportunities and a new buying power.
In response to this, music and fashion became massmarket industries and were quick to cater to the demands of the youth market.
The growing popularity of television helped spread popular culture around the globe, so trends could take off rapidly.
Programs such as Top of the Pops in the UK and the Ed Sullivan Show in the United States made the 1960s swing to the beat of pop music.
Their first album, Please Please Me, became famous around the globe within a year.
Music groups provided the inspiration for fashion, from neat mod styles and blue jeans, to Elvis jumpsuits and the ethnic clothing of singers such as Joan The Beatles The Beatles’ 8th album, Sgt.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band was released in 1967, and is often voted the most influential album of all time.
This fashion revolution burst onto the retail scene, led by designers like Mary Quant.
Both dressed in T-shirts and jeans; boys grew long hair; girls copied the model Twiggy by cutting theirs in a short “gamine” style.
Boutiques sprang up to sell the new fashions, which were colorful, cheap, and informal.
There were many who felt that some laws were outdated and belonged to a bygone era.
In 1966 the UK abolished the death penalty, and in the United States support for the death penalty was at an all-time low.
Gay rights came to the fore, and in the UK in 1967 new laws were passed that allowed adult homosexuals to behave as they wished in private.
Abortion became legal in the UK, and legal in some United States states.
Some insisted it would make society more permissive, or willing to accept what had once been considered “deviant” behavior.
Others believed that these changes were the sign of a more tolerant society, willing to accept all people equally.
In 1963 Betty Friedan published The Feminine Mystique, reigniting the movement for women’s rights.
Friedan and journalist Gloria Steinem challenged remaining areas of sexual inequality, giving birth to a wave of radical feminism known as the Women’s Liberation movement.
More Isle of Wight festival Three music festivals were held on the Isle of Wight, situated off the south coast of England, at the end of the 1960s.
In 1970 it became the largest-ever music festival, with over 600,000 people in attendance.
INVENTION Before the development of “the Pill,” women all over the world used a variety of different birth control methods, which were often ineffective and sometimes dangerous.
American nurse Margaret Sanger was a lifelong advocate of birth control and underwrote the research necessary to create the first human birth control pill, described as the most significant medical advance of the 20th century.
Between 1962 and 1969, the number of users worldwide rose from approximately 50,000 to one million.
TT ay | women went out to work, challenging conventional ideas of women as housewives and homemakers.
Above all, the emergence of the contraceptive pill (see left) liberated women, offering them a reliable method of birth control for the first time.
Turn on, tune in, drop out Known as the “Summer of Love,” 1976 was the height of the hippie movement.
Hippies embraced rock music, mystic religions, and sexual freedom, and many experimented with drugs such as marijuana and LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), a drug that was claimed to open the mind to previously uncharted areas.
In June 1967, Monterey, California, held the first open-air CN mass pop festival, which È was attended by over 200,000 people.
Its potent combination of youth culture and pop music is seen as the apex of all that the 1960s stood for.
However, ~ The New Wave | A Bout de Souffle , 1960, directed by Jean-Luc Godard, is one of the bestknown films of French New Wave cinema. the optimism of the decade soon started to unravel, influenced by the assassinations in the United States of Senator Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968.
The United States saw race riots in the inner cities, and the civil rights movement shifted from a nonviolent position when elements of it were taken over by radical extremists.
In France, the student revolt of May 1968 in Paris linked up with a general strike of 10 million workers, who called for the overthrow of Charles de Gaulle's government.
At Woodstock, 450,000 people attended the three-day festival, gathering in the spirit of love and sharing, but at Altamont, a black fan was stabbed to death by a gang of white Hells Angels.
In Britain there was a downturn in economic fortunes and unemployment was on the increase.
PUNK The commercialism of pop music was soon challenged in the 1970s by Punk music.
SEX PISTOLS GLOBAL POP In the 1980s MTV was launched, and pop artists became global stars.
LIBERTY LOANS The American public's support for its armed services dates back to World War |, when people bought billions of dollars of Liberty Loans to finance the war effort.
Known as the Truman Doctrine, this guided United States foreign policy throughout the Vietnam War.
COLONIAL VIETNAM In 1941 Ho Chi Minh, a Vietnamese nationalist and communist, created the Viet Minh to fight Japanese occupation.
The Geneva Accords of 1954 divided Vietnam temporarily into a communist north and a pro-American south. [he Vietnam War The Vietnam War was the longest and bloodiest of the many conflicts of the Cold War.
The American army was technologically superior, but was defeated by the far more effective tactics of the Vietnamese nationalist and communist army wishing to unite their country and free it from foreign control. he division of Vietnam in 1954 Vietnam—these elections never took although many were nationalists—took did not bring peace place.
In 1955, United States president Dwight D up arms to fight Diem's government, to the country.
The United States wished Eisenhower helped the anticommunist led by the National Liberation Front, to prevent the spread of communism Ngo Dinh Diem to take power in a an alliance of political groups based in throughout Southeast Asia, believing corrupt election in the south, and sent North Vietnam. coast in the Gulf of Tonkin.
The ship that one country after another would hundreds of military advisors to support Eisenhower's support for South was fired on by two torpedo boats fall to communist regimes (the so-called the new government.
Vietnam increased under his successor, challenging its presence in North “domino effect"") and was prepared North Vietnam did not accept the John F Kennedy.
It fired back, to use military action to prevent this. partition of their country and launched South Vietnam had received $500 sinking one boat.
On August 7, the The Geneva Accords had stipulated attacks on South Vietnam.
United States bombing raids targeting Viet Cong only served to alienate those it claimed to support. 4"" d E Fj | m A u oe a"" Viet Cong Viet Cong fighters lacked the sophisticated weaponry and equipment of the United States military, but they had the advantage of local knowledge and support.
Protests at home United States protests against the war were supported not just by traditional pacifists but also by a much larger constituency of peace campaigners, including civil rights campaigner Dr.
The war divided United States society as no event had done that century.
HO CHI MINH, NORTH VIETNAMESE LEADER, MAY 8, 1954 United States troop deployment The first United States marines arrived in South Vietnam in March 1965.
By July that year, more than 50,000 were in the country, as well as increasing numbers of United States airmen and sailors.
In addition, 320,000 South Koreans, 47,000 Australians, and contingents from the Philippines, Thailand, and New Zealand fought alongside American troops.
The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese troops received military aid and financial support from communist China and USSR, although no ground troops were committed.
However, they did have the advantage of fighting on home soil, often with the active support of the local people.
The American plan in Vietnam was to attack North Vietnam from the air to stop it from aiding the Viet Cong.
Operation “Rolling Thunder"" targeted bridges, roads, factories, fuel depots, and military installations, but failed to achieve its objectives.
North Vietnam had a formidable air defense system, and kept supplies flowing to the south along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, a 12,500-mile network of tracks and paved roads through the jungles of North Vietnam and neighboring Laos and Cambodia.
The trail was well defended by antiaircraft batteries and hidden from observation by the jungle through which it passed.
The United States tried to deny the Viet Cong jungle cover by spraying Agent Orange, a chemical deployed to defoliate the jungle.
It also used napalm, an incendiary liquid that burned everything it touched.
THE VIETNAM WAR The effect of the Vietnam War was felt for many years afterward, but Vietnam is now a peaceful and prosperous nation.
CASUALTIES OF WAR One million Vietnamese troops on both sides lost their lives in the war, along with 4 million Vietnamese civilians and 58,000 United States troops.
More than 153,000 United States troops were seriously wounded; the total number of Vietnamese casualties is unknown.
UNIFICATION The Paris Peace Accord held until renewed fighting broke out in January 1975.
A final communist offensive captured Saigon on April 30 and reunified the country in 1976 as the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
Thousands who feared for their lives under the new government fled Vietnam in boats, many drowning before they could reach safety in neighboring countries.
Veterans' associations in the United States are a vocal force in modern United States politics.
MODERN VIETNAM In 1986 the Vietnamese government relaxed its previous hard-line communist economic policies in favor of a more liberal policy of doi moi and began to welcome foreign investment.
War damage was immense due to heavy United States bombing and the country continues to rely on overseas aid for reconstruction. further alienated the US-backed South Vietnamese government from the people.
United States withdrawal The Vietnam War was opposed by increasing numbers of Americans who did not see why their troops were fighting a war with no just cause.
The first major antiwar demonstrations took place in 1965, and grew in strength as more and more young men were drafted, or forced into military service.
Television brought the reality of the war into American homes on a daily basis.
The last five years railroads, airfields, oil refineries and authorized Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon B Johnson, “to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed forces” to defend South Vietnam.
Without a formal declaration of war, the United States had committed itself to military conflict in Vietnam. of the war were bloody and painful for both sides.
The United States started peace talks in Paris in August 1969 in order to find an orderly way out of the conflict.
The talks continued until a peace accord was signed on January 27, 1973.
United States troops left South Vietnam to the Vietnamese 60 days later.
King was recently married and newly established as a Baptist pastor in Montgomery, Alabama, when the Montgomery Bus Boycott, protesting against segregation on the city transit system, propelled him onto the national stage.
King came to believe that by suffering violence without responding in kind, campaigners might build up an A gift for eloquence Martin Luther King's personal courage, eloquence as a public speaker, and unswerving dedication to nonviolence made a vital contribution to the progress achieved by the civil rights movement in the United States in the 1950s and 1960s. 2 | ih The King family Martin Luther King Jr. and Coretta Scott King had two sons and two daughters between 1955 and 1963.
All four of the King children grew up to follow in their parents’ footsteps, becoming civil rights activists. boycott in December 1955 and only reluctantly agreed to lead the campaign.
When the boycott was shown on national TV, King's speeches and great dignity had an immediate impact. ln 1957 the Southern success of the Montgomery Bus Boycott.
While unswerving in his commitment to nonviolence, King was prepared to pursue civil disobedience energetically, breaking laws he considered unjust and provoking Dexter Avenue Baptist Church It was during his time as pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama, from 1954 to 1960, that King became an acknowledged leader of the civil rights movement.
His predecessor as pastor, Vernon Johns, had also been a tireless campaigner against racial discrimination.
Christian Leadership Conference was formed to build on the confrontation with racist authorities and the police.
He did not then, or later, control the civil rights movement, which was a popular mass protest to which many individuals and groups made their diverse contributions.
But King’s charismatic example both inspired activists to engage in civil disobedience and attracted the support of white liberals for the movement.
Relentless campaigning In the first half of the 1960s, King’s influence was at its peak.
He linked local direct action against segregation and for black voter registration in the southern states of the United States to pressure at a national level for civil rights legislation.
Many traditional black community and religious leaders felt King was too radical, for example, in backing the campaign of sit-ins at segregated lunch counters and other public facilities by the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in 1960.
President John F Kennedy and his brother, Robert F Kennedy, repeatedly urged him to moderate his position.
But in 1963 King raised the campaign to a high pitch of intensity, encouraging confrontation between protesters and police in Birmingham, Alabama—confrontations that resulted in police violence that shocked world opinion—and mounting a “March on Washington” by around 250,000 demonstrators.
Outlawing discrimination The passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1964, making many forms of discrimination illegal, and the Voting Rights Act the following year were the culmination of King’s campaigning efforts.
Awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, he stood at the height of his world fame.
King’s integrationist views—he wanted all races to have equal rights in a desegregated society—had always been rejected by black separatists.
Many young African-Americans also began to turn away from nonviolence, asserting the right to use force in self-defense.
Young activists launched the aggressive slogan “Black Power,” while King appeared hesitant and indecisive.
His attempt to establish contact with African-Americans in the ghettos of Chicago in 1966 was only partially successful.
His outspoken opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War ‘SPOCK Running for United States president King had planned to run in the 1968 elections with anti-Vietnam War campaigner Dr.
Benjamin Spock. offended many AfricanAmericans, who were proud of their sons’ service in an integrated army.
His shift away from rights and race to poverty was seen as controversially “socialist” in an American context.
Assassination in Memphis The hatred provoked by King’s views had always made him a target.
King salutes the crowd in front of the Lincoln Memorial during the ""March on Washington"" on August 28, 1965.
This was the occasion for King's “I have a dream...” speech, arguably his most inspired and inspiring flight of oratory.
Federal Bureau of Investigation , whose head, J Edgar Hoover, alleged that King was a communist and | was trying to use | evidence of his alleged sexual promiscuity to | blackmail him.
On | April 4, 1968 King | was shot dead on a balcony of a motel in Memphis, Tennessee.
A petty e criminal, James Earl Ray, was convicted | of the killing, though his guilt has been contested.
Born Rosa McCauley, Rosa Parks was an active campaigner against sexism and racism from the 1950s.
Her refusal to give up her seat to a white man on a segregated bus and her subsequent arrest in Montgomery, Alabama, on December 1, 1955 ignited the civil rights movement and the Montgomery Bus Boycott.
Rosa Parks grew famous, but she was forced out of her job in a department store and left Alabama for Detroit, Michigan.
In 1996, Parks was named the ""Mother of the Modern Day Civil Rights Movement"" by the United States Congress.
September 1954 Becomes pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama.
December 1955 As head of the Montgomery Improvement Association, King becomes spokesman for the year-long Montgomery Bus Boycott protesting against segregation.
January 11, 1957 King is elected head of the civil rights organization that will become the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
October 1960 King is imprisoned for participating in a sit-in protest in Atlanta, Georgia; presidential candidate John F Kennedy contrives his release.
April 16, 1963 Imprisoned during civil rights protests in Birmingham, Alabama, King writes his ""Letter from Birmingham Jail,"" affirming the need to defy unjust laws.
August 28, 1963 During the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, King delivers his “I have a dream..."" speech from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.
July 2, 1964 Witnesses the signing of the Civil Rights Act, outlawing discrimination.
December 10, 1964 At the age of 55, King becomes the youngest male recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize.
January 22, 1966 Moves into a tenement in a black ghetto in Chicago to draw attention to the issue of black urban poverty.
The idea that everyone should have equal rights arose in the 18th century.
In 1789, the French Revolutionary Assembly issued the Declaration of the Rights of Man «€ 303.
It stated that “all men are created equal"" and defined various democratic principles, such as equality before the law and freedom from arbitrary arrest.
In 1791 the United States Bill of Rights guaranteed rights, such as freedom of speech, but it did not apply to blacks or American Indians.
PHILOSOPHICAL RIGHTS Individual social reformers and philosophers were also important in the growth of human rights.
The political thinker Tom Paine helped to draft the United States Constitution and wrote 7he Rights of Man in support of the French Revolution «€ 30203.
English philosopher John Stuart Mill defended the freedom of the individual against state control.
She was active in the League of Women Voters and the Women's Trade Union League.
She hoped it would be a “Magna Carta of all men everywhere,"" the word ""men"" applying to both sexes.
Civil Rights The demand for civil and human rights has been a major feature of political and social movements worldwide since the early 20th century.
Among the many causes that have been fought for are the right of women to vote and equal rights for ethnic minorities. uman rights are built on the IL idea that all people should enjoy minimum standards in many areas of life, including the right to liberty, freedom of expression and conscience, to be treated equally before the law, and not to be tortured or subjected to degrading treatment.
Other United Nations Conventions (agreements among member countries) have followed, including the elimination of racial discrimination , outlawing torture , and the rights of the child (19897.
By contrast, civil rights are written into the laws or constitution of a country to protect its citizens.
Most democracies, including the United States, Canada, France, and Germany, have civil rights written into their constitutions, although this does not necessarily mean that in practice all people are treated equally.
In 1936, the Soviet Union proclaimed a new constitution outlining civil rights, but they only existed on paper and were never implemented.
The right to vote A fundamental civil right is the right to full citizenship, but women and ethnic minorities have often had to fight hard to obtain it.
In the early Hunger strike medal of honor In July 1909, Majorie Wallace Dunlop became the first suffragette to go on hunger strike.
In retaliation, the British government introduced the brutal process of force-feeding.
Selling The Suffragette Women had to overcome many barriers to claim their right to vote.
In 1912 the Women’s Social and Against the vote Opponents of women’s right to vote used any methods to attack the suffragettes.
Posters lampooned them as harridans, who should be forcibly shackled and gagged.
IRA GLASSER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION, 1978-2001 20th century, in both Britain and the US, the demand for the vote for women became a major issue.
In Britain the campaign began in 1867 when Parliament proposed to extend suffrage to a wider range of men but still exclude women.
For the next 50 years a growing tide of protests, demonstrations, and petitions made this one of the most divisive issues in modern British politics.
In 1903, the militant Women’s Social and Political Union was formed by Emmeline Pankhurst.
Frustrated by the failure to achieve the vote by peaceful means, suffragettes, as these women became known, took direct action, including invading the Houses of Parliament.
The campaign finally achieved success in 1918 when women age 30 and over obtained the vote.
Equal voting rights with men were granted in 1928. won the vore in 1920.
In the end, in both countries, women got the vote as a direct acknowledgment of their crucial role in securing victory in World War I However, voting alone did not confer equal citizenship.
Discrimination in other areas continued, and from about 1970 a second women’s rights movement fought for and succeeded in changing the law to ensure equality at work and elsewhere.
This campaign showed that changes in the law mean little unless economic inequalities are also addressed.
Even if they have the vote, women worldwide still experience discrimination, as do other minorities.
Martin Luther King Jr. , fought for the end of segregation— whereby black people were discriminated against in many areas such as education and transportation— and full civil rights.
Years of civil disobedience resulted in a series of important legal changes that ended segregation in many areas and removed literacy tests preventing black Americans from voting.
In South Africa, too, a bitter struggle began against apartheid after 1948.
When apartheid ended after 1991 and South Africa held its first fully democratic elections in 1994, the sight of thousands of black voters lining up to exercise their new right to vote reaffirmed the AFTER Human rights remain a key issue, with many at risk or being eroded worldwide.
CHALLENGES TO CIVIL LIBERTIES Civil liberties, such as the right to privacy, may be suspended during wartime.
Some people think these laws threaten hard-won civil rights; others think they are justified to prevent terrorism.
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS CIVIL RIGHTS AROUND THE WORLD Since the 1960s, many minority groups have struggled to put an end to discrimination.
During the 1990s, Britain and the United States introduced disability acts.
Gay rights activists have struggled for years to achieve full citizenship.
Other European countries, such as France, Germany, Portugal, and Britain, slowly followed suit.
CIVIL PARTNERSHIP CEREMONY 1 89 4 The year that New Zealand became the first country to grant women equal voting rights.
The first state to grant women the vote was Wyoming in 1869; nationally, women Political Union launched its own newspaper, The Suffragette.
Hundreds of long-skirted women sold the paper in public, challenging social convention and risking public hostility. importance of a basic civil right many of us now take for granted.
Marching for rights National Guard troops watch with bayonets raised as African-American sanitation workers march peacefully in Memphis, Tennessee in April 1968.
This contrasts with a similar demonstration the day before, when a black teenager was killed by the police.
In 1782 Ireland received an independent parliament, but after revolts in 1798 this was abolished.
THE EASTER RISING Anger erupted in April 1916 in a rebellion known as the Easter Rising.
Militant Irish Republicans seized several key locations in Dublin and issued the Proclamation of the Republic, declaring Ireland to be an independent state.
After six days of fighting, the British suppressed the uprising and executed its leaders, which generated sympathy for the Republican cause and awakened nationalist sentiment.
IRISH FREE STATE In 1921 Michael Collins, a Republican leader, was sent to London to negotiate a treaty with the British.
MICHAEL COLLINS THE NORTH In the largely Protestant north, nationalists, in favor of a united Ireland, were seen as a threat.
This led to preferential treatment of Protestant Unionists in jobs and housing.
Despite brief campaigns by the paramilitary Irish Republican Army , formed in the 19205, the province was stable.
However, in 1966 Unionists formed the Ulster Volunteer Force in response to the Republican threat and the violence escalated.
Confrontation Civil rights protesters vent their frustrations at British soldiers dressed in riot gear, across a barricade in Derry on Bloody Sunday.
Rubber bullets were replaced with live ammunition, leaving 13 dead. n September 1968, the a Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association , a predominantly Catholic organization, announced a march was to take place in the city of Derry on October 5, 1968 to demand an end to discrimination against Irish Catholics.
A Protestant organization, the Apprentice Boys of Derry, announced they would also march at that time.
NICRA was barred from marching by the British Government but decided to proceed.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary , armed with truncheons, charged at the marchers.
It was sheer SECTARIANISM Division of a society into religious factions, such as Protestant and Catholic, in which strong identification with the values within each faction leads to exclusion of those with different values. along its route with iron bars and stones.
The Provisional IRA was determined to use force to reunite Ireland, and launched an armed attack against British rule.
Peaceful protest The Provisional IRA became closely involved in civilian demonstrations and riots against the British.
The British Government responded by implementing Operation “Demetrius” in Northern Ireland on August 9, 1971.
This introduced “This Sunday became known as Bloody Sunday and bloody it was... amok that day and shot without thinking... unadulterated murder.
MAJOR HUBERT O'NEILL, CORONER, AUGUST 21, 1973 the army ran * internment, which allowed the British army and RUC to arrest and imprison without trial those accused of being members of illegal paramilitary groups.
On Sunday, January 30, 1972, NICRA organized a march in the city of Derry against the internment policy, in which 10,000-20,000 people took part.
They were prevented from entering the city by the British army, so most moved to “Free Derry Corner"" to attend a rally.
The Horse and Groom pub was packed with young soldiers, many back from duty in Northern Ireland.
Four men, known as the ""Guildford Four"" were later arrested and wrongly convicted of the act.
THE TROUBLES Marking territory The Republican mural on the left commemorates the Easter Rising; the Unionist mural on the right shows the paramilitary group, the Ulster Freedom Fighters.
Both murals were in Northern Ireland's capital, Belfast. id [^ —gm. xd vol PAJ me de 1,99 7 we soldiers and members of the army moved to arrest them.
Reports of an IRA sniper were allegedly passed to the British command and the order to switch from rubber bullets to live rounds was given.
Within 30 minutes soldiers had shot dead 13 unarmed men and injured a further 14, many of whom were trying to flee. several Republican prisoners began a bitter struggle for status as political prisoners.
This culminated in the hunger strikes of 1981, in which ten inmates refused food and died of starvation in the prison hospital.
This alarmed London, leading to political initiatives by successive governments, all hoping to find a peaceful solution to the crisis. imposed direct rule from London and established the Northern Ireland Office to govern the province.
The Provisional IRA took its fight to force the British out of Northern Ireland to the mainland.
On October 5, 1974 the IRA planted bombs in two pubs in the town of Guildford, popular with army personnel, killing 5 and injuring 65.
On November 21, 1974 the IRA bombed two more pubs, this time in central Birmingham, killing 21 and injuring 182.
In response, the British Government introduced the Prevention Armed campaign The events of ""Bloody Sunday,"" as it came to be known, caused shock and revulsion worldwide.
In Ireland the killings increased support for the IRA, especially among disaffected young people.
In AFTER March 1972, British Prime Minister Edward Heath decided to suspend the Northern Ireland of Terrorism Act, which allowed suspects to be held without charge for up to seven days.
Most suspects were After bombing campaigns on mainland Britain, both political leaders and paramilitary groups moved toward peace. sent to the Maze prison, at Long Kesh in County Antrim.
In the late 1970s Parliament, which was formed in 1920 and sat at Stormont in east Belfast.
He MAINLAND BOMBINGS In the 1980s the IRA formed small groups in mainland Britain.
These acts were designed to put political and economic pressure on the British government.
GOOD FRIDAY AGREEMENT Changes in leadership in Britain, Dublin, and in Ulster Unionism led to the ""Good Friday Agreement"" in 1998.
It recognized Northern Ireland's right to exist, while acknowledging the nationalist desire for a united Ireland.
Voters elected a new Northern Ireland Assembly to form a parliament at Stormont.
STORMONT IRA DISBANDS The NIA was suspended when the Provisional IRA delayed the decommission of its weapons.
On July 28, 2005 the IRA ceased its armed campaign, but dissident Republicans who rejected the peace settlement continued attacks at a much lower level.
A NEW ERA In March 2007, the leaders of Sinn Féin and the Ulster Unionists, who had previously refused to work together, agreed to share power at Stormont.
Dictatorship and Democracy In the latter part of the 20th century, Latin American countries veered between nationalist, authoritarian, revolutionary, and civilian regimes.
From 1976, Argentina was ruled by a succession of military figures, including General Leopardo Galtieri, who was among a number of Latin American leaders given training at the School of the Americas, a United States army facility in Panama.
Both the Pinochet and Galtieri regimes were characterized by the suppression of opposition— thousands of dissidents were tortured or disappeared without a trace.
The corrupt Somoza dynasty, which ruled in Nicaragua from 1936, faced growing opposition in the early 1970s from the International Socialist BEFORE Latin America has been shaped by the interests and intervention of foreign powers, first by Europe, and later, the United States.
THE GREAT DEPRESSION Economic depression in Europe and North America in the 1930s had a catastrophic effect on Latin American economies, most of which were dependent on exports of raw materials.
The plight of the poor in many countries led to a growth of revolutionary movements «422-23.
INDUSTRIALIZATION During the economic crisis of the 1950s, many governments in Latin | America nationalized resources previously controlled by foreign | interests, and began industrialization programs | «422-23.
THE COLD WAR Rivalry between the Soviet ' Union and United States after World a War Il «406-07 even GENERAL PINOCHET extended to Latin America.
The United States supported the Pinochet coup in Chile, and the overthrow of left-wing regimes, while the Soviet Union backed communist Cuba.
The Soviet Union supported Cuba through an American economic embargo, and the United States gave funding and military support to keep their chosen regimes in power.
Sandinista rebels were supported by the Catholic Church and much of the Nicaraguan population.
In 1979, Anastasio Somoza was overthrown by popular revolution, and a junta of National Reconstruction dominated by the FSLN took over the country.
In 1970s El Salvador, the elitist government of Arturo Molina was resented by a population living in abject poverty.
Violence between right-wing paramilitary units known as “death squads” and left-wing revolutionary groups escalated into civil war in 1979.
Fearing a communist takeover, the United States funded the El Salvadoran military.
Fighting and human rights abuses continued throughout the 1980s until mounting foreign debt, and Argentina slid into recession.
In the 1980s, General Pinochet’s regime in Chile introduced some liberalizing measures as the state moved toward a free-market economy.
DISSIDENT An individual who disagrees, protests, or acts against established opinion, policy, or government.
Greater freedoms of speech led inevitably to calls for democracy, which was restored in 1989.
Chile experienced impressive growth in the 1990s and is one of the more robust postdictatorship economies.
GENERAL AUGUSTO PINOCHET, ATTRIBUTED mo 1992, 12 years or violence ended with the El Salvador Peace Accords.
After a period of spiraling inflation, President Carlos Menem introduced wide-ranging reforms in the 1990s, privatizing state assets and imposing a fixed exchange rate.
The oil-rich state of Venezuela had regained democratic rule in 1958, but the gap between rich and poor caused discontent.
In 1998, President Hugo Chávez was elected, vowing to bring greater equality.
He launched “Plan Bolivar 2000,” which introduced social and welfare reforms and halted the privatization of state assets.
Oil profits have helped ensure success for Chávez and growth in the economy.
United States intervention Frequently referred to as “America’s backyard,” Latin America has often seen United States interference.
In 1983 the United States invaded the island nation of Grenada after reports that an airport there was secretly intended for Soviet use, and even after the end of the Cold War United States troops invaded Panama in 1989, and removed General Noriega's government due in part to alleged drug trafficking.
Some Latin American nations have tried to avoid United States economic domination.
In 2007, the “Bank of the South” was formed by Hugo Chavez to finance regional infrastructure projects and social programs.
AFTER In the 21st century, a more politically stable Latin America is increasing its economic ambitions, and many of its leaders are calling for greater regional integration.
The United States Census shows that migration patterns have shifted radically since World War Il, when most immigrants were European.
Today the majority of the US's legal migrants are from Latin America, and many more enter illegally.
A large proportion of US's estimated 12 million illegal immigrants crossed at the Mexican border.
GREATER POLITICAL STABILITY Despite the problems in the region, in 2006, there were still democratic elections in 12 countries of Latin America , including the return of a socialist prime minister in Chile.
Protests against Pinochet Chileans take to the streets with pictures of those who went missing during Pinochet's military rule, when more than 5,000 were arrested and murdered by the authorities.
HUGO CHÁVEZ Elected president of Venezuela in 1998, Hugo Chávez introduced the ""Bolivarian Revolution,"" a brand of democratic socialism, prioritizing social reform.
An admirer of Fidel Castro, he was briefly removed from office in 2002 by the Venezuelan army, but was returned to power by a popular uprising.
His radical foreign policy criticizes the US, and calls for improved trade and international aid.
RESPON DA EE — In 1948 the state of Israel was created from land belonging to the Arab state of Palestine.
The oil-rich Arab nations denied Israel's legitimacy and began a series of military reprisals to regain the land.
FORMATION OF OAPEC The Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries was founded in 1968.
Its member states, which include Iran, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia, were all developing nations seeking to assert their rights in a market dominated by foreignowned multinational oil companies.
As oil reserves in other parts of the world dwindled, OAPEC became increasingly powerful.
In the Six-Day War that ensued, Israel defeated Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, and occupied land later known as the Occupied Territories.
UNREST IN MIDDLE EAST The territorial losses and humiliation of the Six-Day War intensified Arab resentment toward both the Israelis and the Western governments that supported them.
ISRAELI TANK IN SYRIA Fj m The Oil Crisis By the 1970s, rising industrial and domestic consumption of fuel created a growing dependence on imports of foreign oil for the industrialized Western powers.
Oil was the fuel of the global economy and most of the world’s oil reserves were concentrated in the Middle East. n October 1973, Egypt and Syria, backed by Iraq, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia, invaded Israel on the holy Jewish holiday of Yom Kippur.
The three-week Yom Kippur War represents a watershed in Middle Eastern history.
Oil supply cut The Yom Kippur War also saw OAPEC flex its political muscle for the first time.
Ten days into the war, OAPEC leaders King Faisel of Saudi Arabia and Egyptian President Anwar Sadat Fuel shortage An American gas station attendant ensures that motorists receive just their allocated ration of 10 gallons of gasoline per car during the oil crisis of 1973-74.
The OAPEC oil embargo caused fuel shortages and a massive rise in fuel prices in the US, Europe, and Japan. announced an embargo on shipments of crude oil to all Western nations that were providing supplies or aid to Israel.
The embargo targeted Israel's key ally, the US, but did not apply to all European nations.
The Netherlands, which sent arms to Israel and allowed the United States to use Dutch airfields for supply runs, faced a complete embargo.
Supplies to the UK and France, which had embargoed arms and supplies to both Arabs and Israelis, were not cut off.
However, the economic impact of restricting the flow of crude oil to the world market caused 2 Yom Kippur war The Israeli army attacks Syrian positions in the Golan Heights on October 12, 1973.
Six days earlier, the Syrians had invaded Israel, but they were quickly driven back beyond their own border. oil prices to triple.
Even if countries were not embargoed from receiving oil, many could not afford to buy it in anything like the same quantities.
Without fuel to power production, MU is ma """" ""UT D paii m MELLI g ay m T Pid Sip IR a zu Lf repeat as) THE OIL CRISIS PERCENT the annual rise Es Prices peak as The politics of oil in oil usage in the early 1970s. m | T United States banks begin This graph shows the rise and irc po E p.. m fall in oil production prices from 9 PERCENT the drop in oil | Mean 1970 and its relationship to imports to the United States from OAPEC. mep specific events.
Iran-Iraq War | p quus and domestic energy production, industrial output slowed dramatically, E begins, oil j —— mes: — Qs any political instability in the 'e S ê became all too clear that the economic boom experienced by Western nations in the postwar years had been entirely dependent on their ability to dictate low fixed-rate prices to the oilsupplying nations.
Energy crisis When the embargo hit the US, inflation rose to over 10 percent, interest rates rocketed, and an enormous trade deficit developed.
Schools and businesses adopted policies of regular closures to save on heating oil, while homeowners were called on to turn down their heating thermostats.
Unemployment rates, a growing issue since the start of the 1970s, continued to rise as industries were forced to lay off workers.
The price of gas for domestic consumption quadrupled during the embargo period, and up to 20 percent of United States gas stations were without fuel during the crisis.
In an economy where 85 percent of the workforce drove to their place of work, people began to line up for hours at a time to refuel their cars.
At President Nixon’s request, gas was rationed to a maximum of 10 gallons per customer.
Price rises m crude oil had a huge impact in Europe, especially in the UK, which imported over 80 percent of its oil from the Middle East.
Before the crisis struck, Edward Heath’s Conservative government was already struggling with rising inflation and trade union unrest.
In May 1973, 1. million workers went on strike to protest against the introduction of pay restraints.
As the year progressed, relations between workers and government steadily worsened.
In November 1973, a ban on overtime by electricity and coal workers exacerbated the British fuel shortage.
Coping with a “car-free” Sunday During the oil crisis, an enterprising German hotel owner circumvents the nationwide vehicle ban on Sundays by reverting to horse power.
Three months into the oil crisis, the article suggests it will be a cold holiday season for Americans.
When coal miners went on all-out strike in early 1974, the government introduced a compulsory three-day week to save on both energy consumption and the wage bill.
The crisis ended with a settlement for the National Union of Mine Workers, which cost the country over $250 million and increased the national wage bill by 30 percent.
With full-time coal production reestablished, Britain returned to a 5-day working week in March 1974, but restrictions on the use of electricity were retained for several months.
Coping with the crisis A range of conservation measures were introduced by governments to cope with the oil crisis.
In the US, the consumption of oil dropped by 20 percent, as the public made efforts to conserve both oil and money by switching to more affordable forms of energy, such as coal, or solar and wind power.
The United States also extended Daylight Saving Time and, like Germany, developed a policy of ^car-free"" Sundays.
In Britain, the public became used to living and working by candlelight during a long winter of phased energy-conserving power cuts.
Other restrictions included ending television broadcasts by 10:30 pm, turning off streetlights at midnight, and canceling soccer matches played under floodlights.
Civic Christmas lights were allowed to remain switched on by special government dispensation.
OAPEC's embargo inflicted serious damage on the global economy and left the leaders of many of the industrialized nations determined to reduce their reliance on Middle Eastern oil.
Many began to fund research into alternative energy sources such as wind, tidal, and solar energy.
In the US, President Nixon approved the building of a Trans-Alaskan oil pipeline, designed to supply 2,000,000 barrels of oil a day to the American market.
Big automobile manufacturers began to consider smaller, more economic alternatives to the large “gas-guzzling” cars of the 1950s and 1960s.
Japan, in particular, pursued reforms in its energy policy to avoid a similar future crisis, developing its nuclear energy capacity and pioneering some of the world's most successful energy-efficient Prices fall sha LÁ O PE I... i has also pushed up the price of oil and other commodities. rply 2006 2010 cars.
Unlike other industrialized nations, Japan revived quickly after the crisis.
This turnaround in economic fortune is generally credited to the Japanese government's investing in such industries as electronics that are not dependent on oil.
AFTER Since 1973, the United States has pursued policies to protect itself from a repeat of the oil crisis.
MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS The oil embargo radically changed the OAPEC nations’ power and standing in world politics.
Western nations were forced to give Arab objections to the existence of Israel a fair hearing.
From his inauguration in 1977, United States president Jimmy Carter pursued a peaceful resolution to Arab-Israeli conflict.
In March 1979, the signing of a bilateral peace treaty between Israel and Egypt was a first step along this difficult diplomatic road «€ 415.
United States ENERGY POLICY The National Energy Act of 1978 continued to exercise controls over industrial energy use, promoting greater use of renewable energy and introducing higher tax rates for fuel-inefficient vehicles.
This led to the development of efficient hybrid cars that can run partly M on electric motors.
HYBRID CAR THE United States IN THE MIDDLE EAST United States intervention in the Middle East was not confined to peacemaking.
The instability in Iraq after the 2003 invasion led to questions about America’s long-term influence over the region’s oll.
DEOBANDI ISLAMIC MOVEMENT Al Imam Mohammad Quasim Nanotwi established the Deoband Madrassa (religious school) in British-ruled India in 1866.
The school taught Shariah law and aimed to purify Islam of ""un-Islamic"" practices, particularly the influences of British colonial culture.
THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD | Founded by Hasan al23 Banna in Egypt in 1928, EX the Muslim Brotherhood agitated for the introduction of Shariah law.
The Brothers’ leader bemoaned the sickness of the Ummah, or larger Muslim community, and gave the Brothers Jihadia to help the ""struggle in the way of God"" against them.
COLONIAL RULE [he Iranian Revolution The growth of Arab nationalism in the aftermath of World War I was accompanied by the rise of “Islamism” in some Arab nations.
The Islamist movement aimed to overthrow secular, pro-Western governments in the Middle East and establish Islamic states governed by Shariah law. any citizens of the Middle East M resented the post-World War I settlements, which gave Britain and France mandates to administer their nations.
Leaders of Middle Eastern countries were chosen for their willingness to collaborate with the foreign powers, and many were corrupt.
While Britain did provide constitutions and elected assemblies, its advisers ensured that British interests were served in any governmental decisions.
In World War I, Persia was divided between Russia and Britain, but the Russians withdrew after the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 , leaving Britain sole rights to exploit Persian oil.
In the early 1920s, the British identified Reza Khan, a senior figure in the Persian military, as a leader who could maintain the Anglo-Persian status quo.
With British backing, Khan led an armed campaign to crush political opposition, declaring himself Shah of Persia in 1925.
Modernization and secularization A fierce believer in Westernization, the Shah modernized the infrastructure of the country, which was renamed Iran in 1935.
He abandoned Islamic education in favor of a more secular Lavish lifestyle Mohammed Reza Shah—shown here with his daughter, Princess Shahnaz, in 1957—had an opulent lifestyle, while the majority of his people lived in abject poverty.
Cold War tensions and the need for Iranian oil led Western powers to ignore the Shah's misrule.
WAHHABISM A form of Islam named after Muhammed Ibn Abdul Wahhab , who reintroduced Shariah law to the Arabian Peninsula.
Shariah imposes religious rules on every aspect of life, including politics, sexuality, and social issues.
Wahhabism became the formal doctrine of Saudi Arabia in 1800. curriculum, discarded much of Shariah law, and discouraged Iranians from obeying the call to prayer or from making pilgrimages.
While the upper classes became more secular and Western in their outlook, the masses— who were forced to pay heavy taxes to fund the Shah’s reforms—remained impoverished and deeply religious.
World War II and after Reza Shah offered support to the Nazis in World War II, hoping that Germany would help Iran to rid itself of British influence.
The Shah’s Nazi sympathies threatened Allied access to Iranian oil, so when Germany invaded Russia in Protest against the Shah The corrupt and brutal regime of Mohammed Reza Shah produced waves of demonstration during 1978.
Protesters thronged the streets clutching pictures of the exiled religious cleric Ayatollah Khomeini.
In December, the Shah abandoned his attempts to hold on to power and fled Iran, leaving the way open for Khomeini to return to Iran. att "" birt.
In the postwar years, students spearheaded a backlash against secularism and corruption.
In 1951, political unrest forced the Shah to loosen his grip on power and appoint Mohammed Mossadeq as Prime Minister.
Mossadeq soon nationalized the assets of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company.
With the Cold War at its height , fears of growing Soviet influence in the Middle East led Britain and the United States to block sales of Iranian oil.
In 1953, Western intelligence services supported a military coup, which restored absolute power to Mohammed Reza Shah.
While his security police ran a terror campaign against dissenters and many of the rural poor were suffering from malnutrition, the Shah led a lavish life on oil revenues, which grew from an annual $285 million in 1960 to $18,523 million by the mid-1970s.
Islamic revolution In Iran's mosques, the teachings of an exiled ayatollah (high-ranking Muslim cleric) were gaining ground.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini had been exiled in 1964 for calling the Shah a “puppet” of the West.
His teachings called for an end to the Shah's reign, insisting that only clerics should rule, since they are the true representatives of God.
Triumphant return After 14 years in exile, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini arrived in Tehran to an ecstatic reception.
Iran hostage crisis Student militants burn a United States flag on the roof of the United States embassy in Tehran during the early days of the 1979 hostage crisis, when embassy staff were held hostage by protesters.
Pro-Khomeini demonstrations were brutally suppressed, but unrest still spread from city to city as clerics, nationalists, and moderates united in a struggle for change.
Although martial law was imposed, many troops refused to shoot at protesters.
In December, the United States tried to persuade the Shah to liberalize his regime, but revolution was now inevitable.
After initial fighting between political factions, a popular referendum voted for the creation of an Islamic republic.
A new constitution named Khomeini as Iran's supreme leader, clergy were appointed to run state institutions, and Shariah law was introduced.
The Iran Hostage Crisis On October 22, 1979, United States president Jimmy Carter allowed the Shah to enter the United States for cancer treatment.
Outraged Iranian students, who wanted the Shah AFTER Since the Iranian Revolution, the world has seen tensions between Muslim groups, as well as continued hostility in some Islamic factions toward Western regimes.
THE MANY STRANDS OF ISLAM Khomeini's traditionalism is not the only view of Islam.
Like Christianity, Islam has a number of different interpretations and several distinct denominations, or groups.
Sunni Muslims form the largest group, comprising about 85 percent of the world's Muslims; Shia form approximately 15 percent.
All denominations have a slightly different understanding of the Qur'an, the central religious text of Islam.
IRAN AFTER KHOMEINI After the death of Ayatollah Khomeini in 1988 largely came to nothing, hopes for a moderation in the Islamic regime rose with the election of the reformist cleric Mohammed Khatami as president in 1997.
However, his attempts at reform were hampered by political conservatives, hard-line clerics, and the state security apparatus, and in 2005 he was replaced by the ultraconservative nationalist, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
Since the 1980s Iran has been accused of meddling in Syria to support the Islamist Hezbollah militia, and favoring Shia factions in post-Saddam Iraq.
It has also pursued the development of a nuclear program despite fierce opposition from other countries that fear this is aimed at producing nuclear weapons.
THE POWER OF FAITH returned to Iran to face trial, invaded the United States embassy in Tehran, taking 63 Americans hostage.
The crisis finally concluded with the signing of the Algiers Accord in January 1981.
By the time Khomeini died in June 1989, Iran was a well-established Islamic state.
After several days of internal power struggles, a party leader and Marxist scholar, Noor Mohammed Tureki, became the President of Afghanistan.
Kalashnikov AK-47 The CIA, the United States foreign intelligence agency, funneled extensive aid to the Mujahideen via Pakistan, including hundreds of thousands of AK-47s.
A LANDLOCKED COUNTRY Afghanistan lies at the heart of Asia, nestled between Iran in the west and Pakistan in the south and east.
Made in the USSR, they were cheap, Tureki was the leader of the former.
STABILITY AND UNREST establish a communist government in Between 1933-73, Afghanistan was stable under Afghanistan, the Khalq and the in Kabul.
He was murdered in killed and jailed many Parchamis and September 1979, Tureki tried to was to continue for the next half1978 when the communist People’s Democratic pressed ahead with a rapid program assassinate his prime minister, Hafizulla century.
Amin had Tureki arrested, and politicians in anticommunist Muslim Great Saur Revolution. secularism, equal rights for women, took control of the government.
He and land redistribution; but within later announced that Tureki was dead.
Fighting back COMMUNIST months insurrection was breaking out l l From machine gun nests like this one above the TAKEOVER all over the country.
In the 1950s and such as state control of MILLION Afghans died in 1960s, four United States presidents faced agriculture.
In 1978, a treaty the war. the significant task of defending was signed allowing the MILLION Afghans became American interests in the Middle East use of Soviet troops if and South Asia, particularly in the vast reservoirs of oil and natural gas in and 5 THOUSAND Soviet soldiers around the Persian Gulf and the were killed or wounded.
With the onset of PRIME MINISTER SARDAR DAOUD KHAN requested by Afghanistan. refugees in nearby countries.
War in Afghanistan When Soviet armed forces invaded neighboring Afghanistan in December 1979, they were supremely confident of seizing immediate control.
However, the Russian troops found themselves bogged down in a ten-year war that proved to be a disaster for both countries.
The war hastened the breakup of the Soviet Union, and plunged Afghanistan into a state of lawlessness. and Arab states, such as Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, This was the beginning of a curious relationship between the United States and Islam.
With the PDPA in power, United States president Jimmy Carter and national security advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski authorized the covert funding and training of antigovernment forces.
Soviet withdrawal In May 1988, Afghanistan, Pakistan, the USSR, and the United States signed agreements to end foreign intervention in Afghanistan, and the USSR began withdrawing its forces.
H A T Ne w^ volunteers, the Mujahideen (Persian for ^warriors""), who opposed the Marxists.
Citing the 1978 Treaty of Friendship, allowing Soviet military intervention if requested , the Soviets stormed into the capital city of Kabul on December 24, 1979.
The 110,000-150,000 Soviet troops arriving in Afghanistan (assisted by 100,000 pro-communist Afghan troops) were met with Mujahideen resistance.
Despite Russia's superior weapons, the rebels frequently eluded them in the hostile mountainous terrain.
The conflict settled into a stalemate, with Soviet and The international response ranged from government forces controlling the urban areas, while the rebels operated freely in the mountains.
As the war progressed, the rebels improved their tactics and began using imported and captured weapons.
Their leaders favored sabotage, such as blowing up government office buildings.
On September 4, 1985, insurgents shot down a domestic plane as it took off from Kandahar airport, killing 52 people.
In February 1988, under increasing international pressure, Soviet President Gorbachev announced the withdrawal of troops, a task completed a year later.
The war left Afghanistan with severe political, economic, and ecological problems.
Many had died or fled the country, and economic production was curtailed.
The guerrilla forces that had triumphed were unable to unite, and Afghanistan was divided between regional warlords.
These divisions set the stage for the rise of the Taliban later in the decade.
Following Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan in 1989, the United States and its allies did little to rebuild the country, leaving a dangerous leadership vacuum.
THE WARLORDS Mujahideen factions gained power, but ethnic fighting broke out, giving rise to warlords.
RISE OF THE TALIBAN The Taliban, led by Mullah Omar, was a political and religious force, which was initially supported by US-backed Pakistan.
After taking control of most of Afghanistan, it imposed a strict interpretation of Islamic Sharia Law.
THE WAR CONTINUES In December 2001, major leaders from the Afghan opposition groups agreed to form a democratic government, and Hamid Karzai was elected president in 2004.
The Taliban regrouped on the border with Pakistan and has, since 2006, mounted severe attacks on NATO forces based in Afghanistan.
Karzai’s re-election in 2009, disputed by his political opponents, has done little to bring stability.
By 2010, though the Taliban had yet to be defeated, the United States and other NATO forces planned to withdraw.
HAMID KARZAI BEFORE The Soviet Union was economically stagnant and corrupt during the 1960s and 1970s.
THE ERA OF STAGNATION In 1964, Leonid Brezhnev succeeded Nikita Khrushchev as leader of the USSR and stayed in office until 1982.
Under his leadership the economy stagnated, and slow growth was experienced in some sectors.
There were perennial shortages of manufactured goods and food, and reduced consumer options caused frustration among the people.
LEONID BREZHNEV DOUBLE STANDARDS IN THE SYSTEM Although all Soviet citizens were officially equal, in reality, the system was corruptible; bribes secured better jobs or housing and senior communist party officials had access to privileges unattainable by ordinary people.
He did not question Lenin's view that communism could only be achieved through disciplined, central organization, but aimed to address failings elsewhere in the Soviet system.
Gorbachev also recognized that state repression of those who criticized the CPSU had created problems in Soviet society.
He pledged a new openness—glasnost— in political affairs; exiled intellectuals were allowed to return and political debate was encouraged.
At first, glasnost and perestroika were met with general excitement, although there was resistance from those who resented reforms aimed at reducing their power and privilege.
By the end of 1986, however, with the economic situation worsening, Gorbachev's talk of progress began to sound like an empty promise.
He introduced limited rights for private enterprise, but most production remained under control of the state, where restructuring failed to stimulate growth.
Glasnost had enabled all Soviet citizens to express their dissatisfaction with both the CPSU and the Soviet system.
In 1988, Gorbachev began to face internal resistance as nationalist movements in Kazakhstan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and the Baltic States demanded independence from the centralized Soviet government.
In 1989, hoping that the Soviet people would accept a new “humane communism,” Gorbachev allowed Down with Lenin Gorbachev's decision to allow criticism of the communist system resulted in demands for an end to repressive one-party government.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT MIKHAIL GORBACHEV Mikhail Gorbachev was born in Stavropol in southwestern Russia.
He became active in politics at an early age and became leader of the Soviet Union in 1985.
He attempted to solve Soviet economic and political problems through programs of domestic reform.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, he made several failec attempts to retu the political stag in Russia.
However, he soon faced demands for greater concessions from a newly elected people’s deputy, Boris Yeltsin.
Gorbachev and Yeltsin Yeltsin had become popular in the Soviet Union because of his open criticism of Gorbachev and perestroika.
In 1990, he was elected President of the Russian Federation, the largest Soviet republic.
He used this position to attack Gorbachev and the CPSU, insisting that the party should no longer dominate government.
Throughout 1990, Gorbachev struggled to hold the Soviet Union together, sending troops into The former USSR in 1991 After the USSR's collapse, the vast nation split into 15 separate states, the largest of which was the Russian Federation.
On August 19, 1991, a committee of CPSU hardliners staged a coup, arresting Gorbachev and his advisors.
They declared a state of emergency and announced their intention to reestablish old-style Soviet rule.
Yeltsin rushed to the White House (the Russian Parliament building), and called on the people to come and protect their parliament.
Gorbachev was reinstated as president after four days, but Yeltsin was the true hero of the hour and Gorbachev’s prestige was irreversibly damaged.
YELTSIN IN POWER Following the collapse of communism, Boris Yeltsin introduced a market economy in the Russian Federation.
Russia was plunged into recession with greater material hardships than had been suffered under communism or perestroika.
In 1993 the Congress of People's Deputies attempted to impeach Yeltsin, but he survived in office, eventually resigning in 1999, a deeply unpopular figure.
BORIS YELTSIN WAR IN CHECHNYA After 1991, the Russian Federation faced independence demands from its southern province of Chechnya.
In 1994, Yeltsin sent troops into Grozny, the Chechen capital, to crush the rebels.
After Russian withdrawal, the unrest continued and a second war began in 1999.
Inhabitants of Eastern Europe were prohibited from crossing into the West, and most people knew little about the way of life on the other side.
BEFORE As the Cold War intensified, the Soviet Union acted to increase its control of political policy in the satellite Eastern Bloc states.
EUROPE DIVIDED After World War Il, new national boundaries were created and countries divided as the victorious Allies determined the future shape of Europe.
Stalin ensured that the Soviet Union incorporated eastern Poland and the Baltic States.
COMMUNISM IN EASTERN EUROPE By 1949, communist regimes had been established in Albania, Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany.
Although nominally independent, these nations were dominated by the Soviet Union.
Collectively known as the Eastern Bloc, these Soviet satellite states were required to mirror Soviet political structures and to join the Soviet military alliance, the Warsaw Pact.
SOVIET IMPERIALISM The Soviet Union did not tolerate rebellion or divergence from its party line.
In 1955, Soviet troops suppressed riots and a general strike in East Germany, and when, in 1956, discontent with the Hungarian communist government led to nationwide revolt, the uprising was crushed with massive military force.
In 1968, during a period known as the ""Prague Spring,"" Czechoslovakia introduced liberalizing measures.
Forces from the Warsaw Pact invaded and reestablished communist party discipline.
In 1983, United States president Ronald Reagan's decision to fund a space-based missile defense system, known as Star Wars, suggested a continuing escalation of the arms race (the competitive stockpiling of more and more powerful weapons), but in 1986 Gorbachev stunned the international community with a call to eliminate all nuclear weapons by the year 2000.
This move led to the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 1987—a first step toward dismantling the superpowers' massive nuclear arsenals.
Casting off communism With the threat of Soviet interference removed, communist governments found it difficult to keep control.
Romanian revolution People shelter behind army tanks in Bucharest during Eastern Europe's most violent transition to democracy.
More than 1,000 Romanians were killed in clashes between demonstrators and security forces.
Turbulent times A revolutionary holds a Romanian flag, the communist symbol defiantly torn from its center, and looks down on Palace Square in Bucharest, days before the overthrow of Ceausescu's regime in December 1989.
A wave of popular protest developed within the Eastern Bloc countries, calling for an end to communist rule.
By 1989, East Germany was faced with a rapidly depleting workforce as thousands of citizens decamped to West Germany via Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
In November the government agreed to open its borders with West Germany, and A new Hungary Citizens wave pro-democracy banners as the Republic of Hungary is proclaimed on October 23, 1989—-the anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian Uprising against the Soviet Union. citizens poured across the border to greet their former countrymen.
In 1990 politicians on both sides agreed to the reunification of Germany.
Solidarity wins out In Poland, popular desire for change led to the emergence of the Solidarity Trade Union Movement in the early 1980s.
THE FALL OF THE BERLIN WALL The Berlin Wall was the most famous physical manifestation of the Iron Curtain.
The East German government built the wall in 1961 to prevent skilled workers from crossing into West Berlin to work, describing it as an ""anti-Fascist Protective Rampart” For the next 30 years movement of citizens between West and East was highly restricted.
In the 1970s and 19805, graffiti artists covered the western side of the wall with paintings and slogans protesting at the division of Berlin.
On November 9, 1989, when the abandonment of border controls was announced, tens of thousands of celebrating Berliners converged on the wall.
Over the following days, the city's inhabitants began to dismantle the wall with their own hands.
The communist government attempted to repress Solidarity, but, by 1989, was forced to accept more open elections.
Solidarity was elected as Poland's largest governing party by a huge majority, and its founder, Lech Walesa, served as president from 1990 to 1995.
Democracy spreads 1989 also saw the ""Velvet Revolution"" in Czechoslovakia, when mass protests secured the overthrow of the communist government.
Alexander Dubcek, hero of the Prague Spring , was brought back from political isolation to serve in a new federal parliament.
Hungary and Bulgaria also made peaceful transitions to democracy in the early 1990s.
The Hungarian communist government tried offering reforms while maintaining a one-party system, but popular pressure led to the declaration of the Third Hungarian Republic and the promise of multi-party elections.
RAISING THE IRON CURTAIN AFTER The transition to democracy triggered nationalist conflicts and economic hardship.
Consultations on international security are held between NATO and nonmembers, including Russia and Ukraine.
THE ORANGE REVOLUTION Thousands took to the streets of Kiev, Ukraine, to protest the disputed election in 2004.
This forced a revote that brought pro-EU leader Viktor Yushchenko to power, but five years later the Orange coalition had collapsed and he was defeated in presidential elections by his COE former opponent from 2004.
OUT IN KIEV Violent overthrow Romania's communist leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, ran a particularly repressive and ruthless regime.
His overthrow in 1989 is the one instance of violent revolution during this period.
He was succeeded by Ion Iliescu, a former member of the communist regime.
Iliescu, a dominant political figure in Romania since the revolution, helped develop a brand of democratic socialism that retains some policies from the communist era.
The last Eastern Bloc state to adopt parliamentary democracy was Albania, m 1992.
Charges or corruption and economic mismanagement followed, but by 2007 that country seemed to be progressing toward full democracy.
CZECH WRITER AND STATESMAN VACLAV HAVEL Born into a wealthy and cultured family, Havel's ""bourgeois"" roots meant that he was not entitled to a university education.
In the 1960s Havel’s first plays were produced on stage, but his work became increasingly subversive and he was imprisoned for dissent.
Havel was elected president of Czechoslovakia after the Velvet Revolution.
Profoundly convinced that a politician should follow his individual conscience, his decisions as president were often controversial.
Havel resigned in 1992, but was reelected in 1993 and remained in office until 2003.
The world witnessed some of the worst atrocities committed since World War II, NATO faced its gravest challenge concerning a sovereign nation, and Bosnia was transformed into a killing field.
It included the formerly independent kingdoms of Serbia and Montenegro as well as the former Austro-Hungarian territories of Croatia, Slovenia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
JOSIP TITO'S DICTATORSHIP Yugoslavia was invaded by Nazi Germany in World War Il «€ 392—405.
But the Germans faced fierce resistance from Yugoslav communist partisans, a resistance force under Josip Tito.
Thanks to their ruthless tactics, and a flow of Russian, British, and American aid, Tito's partisans emerged at the end of the war as masters of the country.
Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Montenegro, Macedonia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Until his death in 1980, Tito ruled Yugoslavia as a one-party dictatorship.
JOSIP TITO DISINTEGRATION OF YUGOSLAVIA For the rest of the 1980s, Yugoslavia was ruled by a committee composed of the presidents of the six republics and two regions.
The country slipped into economic crisis, and national and ethnic rivalries between the republics intensified.
In 1990 the republics held multi-party elections, which further inflamed the ethnic tensions.
DEMISE OF YUGOSLAVIA From the initial calls for independence in 1991 to the peace accord in 1995, Yugoslavia was scene of many bloody battles and human rights violations.
July 1991 Milosevic's Serbian forces invade Croatia; the city of Vukovar is bombarded and reduced to rubble.
In 1990, in the first multi-party elections held in Yugoslavia after the end of the communist era, both Slovenia and Croatia elected nationalist governments and national groups demanded independence throughout Yugoslavia.
In 1989, Milosevic began a crackdown on the politically assertive Albanian Muslim majority in Kosovo, a semi-independent region in southern Serbia.
In 1991, when the republic or Slovenia declared its independence from Yugoslavia, the Serb-dominated Yugoslav army intervened to prevent it from seceding.
The Yugoslav army was badly prepared and had to withdraw, but when the Croatian republic also claimed independence, the Yugoslav army under Milosevic launched a full-scale offensive.
The city of Vukovar in eastern Croatia was destroyed, and Serbs began mass executions of Croat men.
International August 1993 Shocking photographs emerge of emaciated Muslims held in April 1992 Bosnia Bosnian Serb prison camps. and Herzegovina declare independence.
April 1992 Open warfare begins as Bosnian Serbs commence fouryear-long siege of Sarajevo.
April-May 1993 UN Security Council declares six “Safe Areas” for Bosnian Muslims.
The United States officially recognized Slovenia and Croatia’s independence, but did not intervene in the conflict.
In late 1992, the United Nations brokered a ceasefire between the Serbs and the Croats.
War in Bosnia Bosnia was the most ethnically diverse of the six Yugoslav republics, with 43 percent of the population Bosnian Muslim, 31 percent Serbian, and 17 percent Croatian.
Bosnian Muslims and Croats favored independence, but Bosnian Serbs preferred to remain a part of the wider Yugoslavia.
In 1992, following a referendum that was boycotted by the Bosnian Serbs, Bosnia declared itself independent from Yugoslavia.
Milosevic’s Serbian forces responded by attacking the non-Serb population of Bosnia, and Bosnian Serbs laid siege to the capital Sarajevo.
Many Bosnian Muslims were imprisoned in harsh Serbrun prison camps and Muslim women raped.
The international media began to use the term “ethnic cleansing” to describe the systematic expulsion and killing of ethnic and religious groups as practiced by the Serbs in Bosnia. ir) J z The siege of Sarajevo Under siege from Bosnian Serbs, the mainly Bosnian Muslim civilians of Sarajevo struggled for survival.
The threat from snipers was constant and venturing into the streets perilous.
A ceasefire was declared in late 1995, although the siege was not officially lifted until February 1996.
KOFI ANNAN, UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY GENERAL, 1997 February 1994 NATO jets shoot down four Serb aircraft for violating UN no-fly zone.
December 1995 Bosnia, Serbia, and Croatia sign the Dayton Peace Accord to end the war in Bosnia.
July 1995 Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic are indicted for war crimes.
Although the international community imposed economic sanctions on Serbia, UN troops in Bosnia were prohibited from using military force.
Throughout 1993, confident that the UN would not take military action, Serbs continued to commit atrocities.
Over a million people were driven from their homes by Serb forces under Radovan Karadzic, president of the Bosnian Serb Republic.
UN intervention In 1994, a marketplace in Sarajevo was struck by a Serb mortar shell, killing 68 people.
Scenes of the carnage were relayed around the globe, intensifying calls for intervention.
The United States issued an ultimatum through the North Atlantic Treaty Organization demanding that the Serbs withdraw their arms from Sarajevo.
Serb forces also took hundreds of UN troops hostage and used them as human shields, chained to military targets.
In August 1995, NATO war planes began a fierce air campaign against Serb troops throughout Bosnia, and the Serb Kosovo NATO peacekeeping troops clamber through an abandoned house in Kosovo.
Forces were sent in following the 1999 war between the Serbian government and Kosovan Albanians fighting for independence from Serbia. leader Slobodan Milosevic finally agreed to peace talks.
Fighting between ethnic Albanian minorities and the Macedonian and Serbian governments continued.
Eventually, Serb forces withdrew from Kosovo and in 2006 the province formally declared its independence.
AFTER The 1995 Dayton Peace Accord provided only a brief respite from troubles in the area.
AFTERMATH The Dayton Peace Accord ruled that Bosnia would be split into the Bosnian Serb Republic and the Muslim-Croat Federation.
Karadzic was captured in 2008 to face trial at the Hague, but Mladic remains at large.
WAR CRIMES Slobodan Milosevic lost the Serbian presidential election in 2000.
He refused to accept the result, but was forced out of office by strikes and massive protests.
He was handed over to a UN war crimes tribunal in the Hague, in the Netherlands, and put on trial for crimes against humanity and genocide.
He spent five years in prison and died of a heart attack shortly before the trial was concluded.
SERBIA-MONTENEGRO In February 2003, what remained of Yugoslavia was replaced with a loose federation called Serbia and Montenegro.
The charter gives the UN Security Council the power to take collective action in maintaining international peace and security.
Although soldiers deployed by the UN share a uniform, they remain members of their respective armed forces.
POSTWAR REPARATIONS In the aftermath of World War Il, European governments struggled to provide basic necessities for their populations.
Initially, Allied nations demanded reparation payments from Germany, in the form of coal and other natural resources.
German machinery plants and factories were dismantled and transported to Britain, France, and the Soviet Union.
France wanted to ensure that Germany could never rearm again and took administrative control of key industrial regions.
REBUILDING DRESDEN THE MARSHALL PLAN In 1947, United States secretary of state General George Marshall introduced a plan to address ""the dislocation of the entire fabric of the European economy"" by proposing massive, long-term financial aid.
Concerned that Communist revolutions in Eastern Europe would soon spread to West Germany and beyond, the ban on German industrial reconstruction was partially withdrawn.
Over the next five years, the United States poured billions of dollars into rebuilding Western Europe.
Symbol of unity Twelve gold stars on the blue background of the European flag represent Europe as a whole and the equality of all nations within the union.
In the decades following 1945, Europeans became inspired by a new vision of a united continent, where combined economic and political purpose would make wars between their nations unthinkable. rom 1945, Europeans began I to demand reform in domestic government policies; welfare provision, such as free healthcare—an accepted ideal in Sweden by then— became a key feature of legislative changes across much of the continent.
Widespread calls for a different approach to foreign relations led to some truly radical changes in political thinking, particularly in Germany and France.
Konrad Adenauer, the chancellor of West Germany, skillfully pursued policies of reconciliation with Germany's European neighbors.
In 1950, he sanctioned French political strategist Jean Monnet's proposal to integrate the French and German coal and steel industries, ensuring that neither country could rearm without the support of the other.
Monnet's strategy, known as the ""Schuman Plan,"" led to the founding of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, which pooled the coal and steel resources of France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.
Economic cooperation between these six nations was extended in 1957 with the formation of the European Economic Community , or Common Market.
The BEC allowed free movement of goods, services, and labor between member states and developed mutually beneficial joint agricultural, welfare, and foreign trade policies.
European Union Britain and the EEC Britain rejected the opportunity to become an EEC founder member.
However, the economic growth of the six nations soon outstripped that of the UK and, in 1961, Prime Minister Harold Macmillan began negotiations to join.
Throughout the 1960s, Britain and the EEC argued over terms of British membership.
By the end of the decade, the newly elected British prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, was calling for reductions in EEC controls and a return to a freemarket economy.
European Union Continental Europe took a different view, seeking to strengthen rather than relax economic cooperation.
In 1986, French President Francois Mitterrand and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl created the “Single European Act,” establishing a single European market.
In 1992, the “Maastricht Treaty” renamed the EEC the European Union and its powers were increased.
By 2007 the EU had 27 member states, representing VOTING IN THE COUNCIL OF THE EU Government ministers from each EU member state vote on legislation, budget, and economic policy.
The bigger the country’s population, the more votes it has, although there is some weighting to favor less populous countries.
Beyond economic success, the EU has built on policies of reconciliation and nations have worked together to achieve unprecedented peace and unity in Europe.
FORMER GERMAN CHANCELLOR HELMUT KOHL, 1 MAY 2004 MARGARET THATCHER Margaret Thatcher served as prime minister of Britain from 1979 until 1990.
Her administration followed a disastrous period of recession in Britain, and Thatcher was elected on the promise of tough measures to improve economic performance.
Her attitude to the European Union was famously confrontational, but she signed up for the Single European Act of 1986, which formally established the single European market and closer European political cooperation.
She is remembered by many for bringing radical social and economic change to Britain, but many disliked her for her role in selling off state assets and weakening trade unions.
This map shows m Key industry Cork m Key industry Tourism m Key industry Agriculture m Key industry Fashion States that have joined since 1981.
Supported by the umbrella of economic unity, newer member States with developing economies hope to emulate the economic growth of the established nations.
European industry is successful in areas from agriculture and tourism to finance and fashion.
He served a 27-year prison sentence for his part in antiapartheid activities.
Released from prison in 1990, he became South Africa's first black president in 1994.
Mandela has unrivaled global status as a pioneer for peace and democracy.
NELSON MANDELA, INAUGURAL ADDRESS, MAY 9, 1994 BEFORE South Africa’s ruling powers maintained a divided population for much of 20th century.
THE PRE-APARTHEID ERA Between 1910 and 1948, the South African Government pursued measures to deprive blacks and “coloreds” of the right to vote or to own land.
Acts such as the Native Urban Areas Act of 1923 resulted in “surplus” blacks being removed from cities, creating many ""whites-only"" areas.
The extreme inequalities created in South African society under apartheid raised voices of protest not only among blacks, “coloreds,” and sections of South Africa's white population, but also internationally.
This massacre in the township of Sharpeville triggered a shift to | more militant tactics among activists.
In 1961, Nelson Mandela became leader of the military wing of the African National Congress ] political party, beginning ""See a campaign of sabotage targeting government installations.
Mandela and other members of the ANC were arrested in 1962 and subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment.
At his trial, Mandela spoke of freedom, democracy, and equality for all South Africans.
His long imprisonment became a subject of growing international condemnation.
These areas were impoverished rural areas with no real capacity to function as separate states.
The relocation of blacks to the homelands ] 4 PERCENT of the country was divided into 10 homelands.
Apartheid and Beyond Apartheid was a brutal system that imposed the will of a minority on the majority of the South African population.
When it ended in the 1990s, there followed an extraordinary attempt to come to terms with the past, as South Africans of all races cooperated in a process known as “Truth and Reconciliation.” , a legal system that completely segregated the political, social, and cultural lives of white and black South Africans.
APARTHEID LAW Early apartheid measures included “blood laws,” such as the Immorality Act and Population Registration Act , which banned intermarriage and sexual relations between races.
Public transportation and amenities were divided into separate areas for whites and blacks, and segregation of the education system and employment ensured that blacks had no prospects other than menial low-paid work.
A OFFICIAL SEGREGATION > APARTHEID A policy of segregation and discrimination against the nonwhite population of South Africa.
All dissent was suppressed by a police force and military who habitually committed atrocities, including torture.
In 1986 the international community imposed economic sanctions on South Africa in an attempt to force an end to apartheid but, even with the majority of whites now opposed to the system, the government still failed to respond with significant reform.
A new beginning It took a new administration to open the way for change.
President F.W. de Klerk was elected in 1989 and lifted bans on the ANC and other opposition groups.
Mandela and de Klerk achieved the transition of South Africa to democratic majority rule under difficult circumstances.
They faced different views from tribal and political factions within the black community and opposition to change from some whites.
The new government recognized that if unity was to be achieved between its divided communities, it must take action.
The antiapartheid campaigner Archbishop Desmond Tutu was appointed head of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission , which was a historic attempt to address the violence and human rights abuses of the apartheid era.
Over a three-year period the commission heard the testimonies of both the victims and the perpetrators of crimes.
Although never intended as an instrument of punishment, the TRC alia ANC logo On the flag, black represents those who fought for freedom; green, the land reclaimed from oppressors; and gold, South Africa's natural wealth.
The shield and spear represent the early years of struggle, and the wheel is a symbol of unity. bore witness to the suffering of victims and could grant perpetrators amnesty from possible prosecution.
Atrocities committed by all sections of society were condemned, including the actions of the black vigilante group Mandela United Football Club, led by Nelson Mandela’s former wife, Winnie.
The extraordinary ambition of the TRC was to heal the wounds of a brutal past by acknowledging their truth.
South African willingness to engage in this process won the nation worldwide respect.
Act of defiance Archbishop Desmond Tutu addresses a gathering of the Defiance Campaign against Unjust Laws in Cape Town, in 1988.
LEGACIES IN SOUTH AFRICA The majority of the poor are black and the bulk of property remains in white ownership.
The government, led since 1999 by Thabo Mbeki, has introduced various measures to create greater equality.
South Africa has also played an active role in seeking an end to crises in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
AIDS AWARENESS RIBBON Freedom day On April 27, 1994, millions of South Africans lined up to exercise their newly won right to vote in the first free election held after apartheid.
Car manufacture This is a highly automated production line at the Hyundai car plant in South Korea.
Founded in 1947, the hugely successful Hyundai Group is a South Korean conglomerate that has pioneered robotic engineering techniques in car production.
Increased trade with the West led to an era of rapid industrialization.
The acquisition of territories on the Asian mainland came to be seen as essential for economic survival.
In 1957, a clash between Chinese and Japanese troops escalated into | i a renewed SinoJAPANESE TROOPS, 1931 Japanese War.
JAPAN IN WORLD WAR II In 1941, Japan began extending its empire in East Asia and the Pacific.
The new anxieties of the Cold War era led the United States to provide economic support to noncommunist governments in the region.
The rise of Japan After World War II, Allied forces led by United States General MacArthur occupied Japan. for six years.
MacArthur worked with Japanese Prime Minister Shigeru Yoshida to develop a blueprint for the future of Japan, drafting a new democratic constitution and reforming political and legal structures.
Japan was barred from maintaining armed forces of its own; all energy was focused on rebuilding its economic potential.
After the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 , large United States orders for Japanese-manufactured arms boosted Japanese yen The yen is the currency of Japan.
First introduced by the Meiji government in 1870, the modern Japanese yen has a stable reputation and is widely chosen alongside the United States dollar for foreign exchange reserves.
Although the United States occupation was a time of economic privation for | many Japanese, much of the country's later prosperity was based on the access granted to the American market, an arrangement that continued after occupation ended in 1952.
Having established the heavy industries—coal, steel, and energy production—the government began to support Percentage GDP growth from 1960 > S development of shipbuilding and car s F manufacture.
In spite of setbacks during the 1973 Oil Crisis and a period of recession in the 1990s, Japan’s Japanese growth This graph shows the astonishing growth in Japan's economy by charting the gross domestic product , which is the sum of the market value of all the goods produced within the country, from the 1960s.
This transformation has been called miraculous, but was in fact the result of efficient government control of finance.
Industries were systematically targeted for development, government loans made available to fledgling companies, and competition from foreign imports restricted.
For many years postwar, economic growth was an absolute priority and expenditure in other areas, such as housing, was severely restricted.
However, successive governments did prioritize education and Japan’s skilled workforce has contributed to the success and technical excellence of Japanese products.
Asian tigers Since the 1960s, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong have achieved economic Rise of the tiger economies The tiger economies grew rapidly from the 1980s but all suffered a drop after the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, as shown by the GDP growth charted left.
The Asian tigers are among the only former territories of colonial empire to have substantially closed their income gap with established industrialized nations.
A range of measures, including the creation of government banks, subsidized credit for industry, and incentives for foreign investors, fostered exportdriven markets, where the marriage of foreign technology with cheap labor produced goods at reduced cost.
The tiger economies’ dependence on exports makes them reliant on the behavior of the economies they supply.
In 1997, the Asian financial crisis occurred when foreign investors withdrew funds from Thailand.
The crisis deepened when investors panicked, thinking that if one country’s economy was failing, then others must be affected, and rushed to dump Asian assets.
Within a few years the markets rallied and fears of a long recession faded.
The economic rise of South Korea began with an emphasis on light 2000 2005 Singapore Harbor Cranes and cargo ships line Singapore City's bustling industrial waterfront.
E Towering success [ A symbol of Malaysia's | economic mirade, the rPetronas Towers in Kuala “ee Lumpur, Malaysia, were Peet designed by the architect N Cesar Pelli and built in Bta — 1995-98.
The Asian financial crisis caused the collapse of South Korea’s major car manufacturer KIA Motors, but assistance from the International Monetary Fund and marketorientated reforms restored stability.
An increasingly educated labor force is rising up against the regime’s repressive labor laws.
Commentators suggest that liberalizing reforms are needed to ensure continued growth.
In the 1950s, Taiwan, an island off the Chinese mainland, was a largely agricultural economy.
From 1962, economic reforms encouraged industrial development and attracted foreign investment.
Taiwan received support from the US, which was eager to bolster the regime against the threat of takeover by Communist China.
Initially most of Taiwan’s output was from labor-intensive industries such as textiles, but in the 1980s, focus shifted to production of high-tech products.
After gaining independence from Britain in 1965, Singapore’s government adopted an exportoriented policy framework, to encourage foreign investment.
The strategy resulted in growth of 8 percent per year between 1960 and 1997.
A skilled workforce and efficient infrastructure have attracted investment from over 7,000 multinational corporations, who account for over two-thirds of manufacturing output and direct export sales.
After 1950, the territory followed a similar pattern of industrialization, going on to become a market leader in toys and electronic equipment.
Since 2005, the growing confidence of the Hong Kong stock exchange has been cementing its status as a financial hub in Southeast Asia.
Second wave In the late 20th century, the Four Tigers were nearing fully developed economic status.
Investment in education and training had created skilled, educated workforces who INVENTION The Japanese Shinkansen or Bullet Train was one of the earliest high-speed trains.
Current research is aimed at reducing the noise of the trains, which create a loud boom on entering tunnels. required better wages and working conditions, and investors began to turn to other Asian countries—Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia—in search of continued profits.
During the 1990s, strong export-dependent economies evolved in these nations, securing foreign investment.
Thailand and Indonesia were badly affected by the 1997 financial crisis.
Since then, both governments have pursued “dual track” economic measures, which prioritize the development of domestic industry, as well as export-oriented production.
At present, the new tigers all show rapid growth, and Malaysia seeks to emulate the original tigers by improving education and refocusing the economy toward higher-technology production.
AFTER The term “tiger” is adopted by other nations with rapid economic growth, but the impact of such growth on workers raises concerns.
LOW-WAGE WORKERS Asian tiger governments have been accused of running their economies in the sole interests of investors, resulting in low pay for workers.
A World Bank report noted that they were “less responsive than other developing economy governments” to having a minimum wage.
ASEAN Founded in 1967 with five members, the Association of South East Asian Nations has grown to encompass almost all of Southeast Asia, increasingly adopting policies to produce a single market in the region.
Rapid economic growth, particularly in Malaysia, Thailand, and Singapore, has allowed enormous strides in development.
Scientific inventions have often generated changes undreamt of by their makers.
Albert Einstein , the brilliant physicist who formulated the Theory of Relativity, saw his discovery used to create the atomic bomb.
Aerospace Space travel is perhaps the greatest symbol of technological progress in the modern age.
This was achieved in 1969 when the United States Apollo 11 spacecraft landed on the Moon, and millions across the world watched astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin step onto the lunar surface.
In 1975, the superpowers adopted a policy of cooperation and simultaneously launched crewed spacecraft, a mission known as the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.
Production of the classic VW Beetle peaked at 1. million in 1971 and ceased in 2003.
Modern Technology Technological advances continue to transform daily life.
Today we can understand the workings of the universe down to its tiniest particles and change the nature of living organisms.
We live longer and travel farther and faster than the most optimistic of inventors would have predicted in earlier centuries.
BEFORE Scientific discoveries have at times caused controversy, but advances in radio, computing, and new materials in the 19th century made future breakthroughs possible.
SCIENCE AND ETHICS Throughout history, the scientist's quest for understanding has led many into serious trouble.
COMPUTERS In 1801, Joseph Jacquard invented a power loom, which could base its weave on patterns read from punched wooden cards.
In 1890, BAKELITE TELEPHONE P Herman Hollerith used ^ E punchcard techniques | E] in the Hollerith Desk, | a prototype computer.
SYNTHETIC MATERIALS Many materials used in modern technology were invented in the 19th century, including parkesine, the first manufactured plastic, in 1855, and cellulose triacetate, the earliest synthetic fiber, in 1869, a forerunner of rayon, nylon, and polyester.
In 1907 Leo Baekeland created the first plastic made from synthetic materials and named it Bakelite.
MARCONI Subsequent collaborations have included the European Space Station, Mir, and the International Space Station, which draws on the scientific and technological resources of 16 nations.
First views of the moon DISCOVERY Nuclear fission occurs when the nucleus of an atom splits into two or more smaller nuclei.
Scientists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassman discovered the process during research carried out in 1938-39.
In 1942, a team led by Enrico Fermi created the first controlled selfsustaining nuclear chain reaction.
With World War Il raging, governments funded scientists to develop an atomic bomb.
Uses for smart alloys are being investigated by the aircraft industry, seeking ways to improve aircraft maneuverability, and by the medical profession—for example, by incorporating flexibility into the metal plates and pins that are used to support broken limbs while they heal.
Progress in the understanding of natural polymers (compounds made up of simple repeating molecular units), led to the development of synthetic polymers, which are used in plastic-based materials such as Plexiglas, polythene, and many modern textile fabrics.
Commercial production of nylon, the first fiber to be made completely from petrochemicals (substances derived from petroleum), began An American boy watches as the first televised pictures of the Moon's surface are beamed back to Earth in March 1965.
The Ranger 9 uncrewed probe showed viewers unprecedented images of the lunar terrain.
Nylon was the first of a new breed of manufactured items are made from materials specially developed to be durable, portable, and efficient.
The production of so-called ""smart materials"" has had a big impact in recent times.
Smart materials have the capacity to alter their properties when external conditions change.
They include smart alloys or “shape memory alloys,"" metals that “remember” their own geometry and can return to their original shape after being distorted. manufactured fibres, which include polyester, Lycra, and Kevlar.
In 1986, microfibers further revolutionized fabric technology, producing materials made from minute filaments that are as Apollo rocket At 9:32 am on July 16, 1969 a plume of flame signals liftoff of the Apollo 11 Saturn V space vehicle.
United States astronauts Neil Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Buzz Aldrin leave the Kennedy Space Center, heading for the Moon.
The lightness and durability of microfibers was first used in suits for astronauts, but is now found in sportswear.
This trend for ""high end"" technology to filter down into everyday life is common.
The polymer Teflon— discovered accidentally during a refrigeration experiment—is used to insulate coat bullets, but also forms the surface of a nonstick frying pan.
Technology in everyday life Breakthrough inventions of the 20th and early 21st centuries have entered everyday usage as a result of mass production techniques.
The invention of household machines has led to an increase in leisure time in developed countries and the very concept of progress has become synonymous with the ready availability of new technology.
The development of the microchip has 1925 John Logie Baird creates the first mechanical television, successfully transmitting pictures in his London attic.
Miniaturized technology combined with the advent of the Internet has provided access to global instant communication.
Modern applications include engineering products and motor sports, sailing, and cycling equipment.
VINYL RECORD CARBON FIBER BIKE AUDIO TAPE PLAYER, MANUFACTURED 1950 FRANK WHITTLE Frank Whittle joined the British Royal Air Force as an aircraft apprentice, at the age of 17.
During his training he wrote a thesis proposing that piston aircraft engines be replaced by turbines.
He worked with engineering manufacturers, such as Rolls Royce, and then became a research professor at the United States Naval Academy.
SPACE EXPLORATION The space elevator is a proposed structure that would consist of a cable anchored to Earth's surface and attached to a counterweight in space.
Theoretically, vehicles could climb the cable and escape the planet's gravity without the use of rocket propulsion.
Scientists are also pioneering the use of robots, such as the Mars Exploration Rover, to explore nearby planets.
SOLAR PANELS HUBBLE TELESCOPE MOVING MATTER Scientists are also developing the process of quantum tunneling in the hope of achieving matter transportation.
MARS EXPLORER ADDING MACHINE, MANUFACTURED 1950S PORTABLE TRANSISTOR RADIO DVD 1969 The Concorde flies for the first 1977 The Commodore PET (personal 1983 The first cellular phones were sold 1990 The Hubble space 2001 Apple produces the iPod, a portable time.
The commercial supersonic electronic transactor) was one in the 1980s but were conceived in 1947. telescope is launched into Earth digital audio player. iPods have developed airliner entered service in 1976 and of the first consumer-level At that time the technology required was orbit.
It has confirmed theories the technical capability to incorporate video set many speed records, computers to be launched, nonexistent.
Newer ""smartphones,"" such as about the birth of planets and and cell-phone technology.
The technology including the circumnavigation and it revolutionized the BlackBerry, have computerlike functions, produced images of galaxies at was developed further with Apple's iPhone of the world in 31 hours, home computing. including email access. various stages of development. in 2007 and the iPad in 2010. 27 minutes and 49 seconds.
THE ADVENT OF MECHANIZATION By the middle of the 19th century, steam engines were driving farm machinery.
At the end of the 19th century the development of oil-powered traction engines led to a revolution in agricultural | methods, allowing greater areas to be | farmed by fewer workers.
In the Soviet Union, | tractor stations rented machines to nearby collectivized farms—small peasant holdings that were joined together into vast cooperative farms under Stalin.
Both Europe and America had begun to depend on imports of guano (dried excrement of fish-eating birds) from South America.
Compounds of heavy metals, including copper and arsenic, were used to combat plant diseases.
The efforts of agriculturalists and scientists resulted in improved fertilization and pest controls and the development of specially bred strains of high-yield, disease-resistant crops. he founding of the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization in 1945 signaled an international desire to create change in the postwar era through a sharing of knowledge and resources to improve crop performance and eliminate hunger.
The FAO focused special attention on rural areas in developing nations, as this is where the majority of the poor and hungry were, and still are, located.
New methods In the 1940s the biochemist Norman Borlaug initiated an experimental program to assist America’s breadbasket Resembling a work of modern art, green crops cover what was once shortgrass prairie in Kansas.
Over a 20-year period he developed a strain of high-yield dwarf wheat that was resistant to a variety of diseases and pests.
Borlaug's wheat was cultivated in India and Pakistan with spectacular results.
In 1960 the International Rice Research Institute was established in the Philippines to improve the production of rice, the staple diet of much of the world's population.
The institute's work has helped rice farmers increase production by an average of 2. percent each year since 1965.
These transformations in agriculture became known as the Green Revolution.
Research continues to develop a range of rice varieties or “cultivars” to suit the needs of different regions including INDIA AND PAKISTAN almost doubled their wheat production between 1965 and 1970.
New Rice for Africa —a strain of rice suited to Africa's dry ecosystems In the 1960s the insecticide DDT was the first of a range of new organic chemical insecticides that were widely used for their capacity to control multiple species of pests with a single treatment.
However, in 1962 the American biologist Rachel Carson cataloged the environmental impact of spraying DDT and said it may cause cancer.
New methods, such as intensive irrigation, were introduced to maximize productivity on poor farming land.
This graph charts world population against global grain output. cruder forms, killed not only the targeted pests but also other insects and organisms that previously acted as natural inhibitors of the pest population. children died before foreign aid was received. large percentage of their income on new chemicals as they struggle to combat pest and disease resistance. been the biggest suppliers of food aid, but worldwide demand has often outstripped the ability to supply it.
Food production has matched the growth in worldwide population, but hunger and malnutrition remain a problem in some areas.
The governments of many African FEEDING AMERICAN SCIENTIST NORMAN BORLAUG A key figure in the Green Revolution, Norman Borlaug was born into a farming family in Iowa.
His groundbreaking work brought him many honors, including the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970. countries are dependent on food aid.
In 2003 climate conditions led to crop failure and famine in southern Africa and in 2006 droughts created crises in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia—stark evidence that the inequalities that the Green Revolution sought to erase persist.
Rising oil prices and a switch to growing biofuels led to big rises in basic food prices from 2007, provoking the “tortilla riots” in Mexico in 2007 and violent protests in many African countries in 2008.
The Indian famine of 1944 and China’s great famine of 1959-61, where 30 million starved to death, triggered an international undertaking to establish secure and sustainable forms of food supply.
Nations producing a food surplus pledged to maintain food supplies in the event of widespread crop failure.
The US, the European Union , Canada, Japan, and Australia have Pests develop resistance to chemical treatments and the same is true of plant diseases.
It is not uncommon for new plant varieties to become obsolete in the space of three to four years, which is the time it takes for diseases and insects to adapt and destroy the crop.
One serious effect of this problem is that the poorest farmers of the developing world are spending a While poorer regions are still dependent on one or two crops for survival, in the developed world an abundance and variety of food are available.
Increased incomes have enabled an expanding middle class to adopt high-protein diets, and in the richest nations health risks associated with obesity are a growing problem.
Many Western governments have felt compelled to introduce healthier eating initiatives to encourage the consumption of a balanced diet.
Concerns have also been raised about the health risks created by chemical residues found in, or added to, produce.
This has led to an increased demand for organic food, produced without the use of chemicals or artificial additives.
Rice research Seedlings for “Golden Rice,” a new rice variety modified to contain extra vitamin A, are grown in test tubes at an International Rice Research Institute laboratory.
AFTER on Food consumption Although total food production has kept Genetic modification is one of the newest pace with the global rise in population (see methods of creating stronger crops. | above), the situation differs from country 3,500 to country.
Poorer nations have far less GENETIC MODIFICATION _ food available to their growing populations -— ar GMOs are organisms whose genetic material than more developed countries.
This is A í . "" reflected in the daily average caloric has been modified by adding extra material to 3 consumption (energy consumed from generate new and useful inherited noo food) per person, as shown in this graph. traits.
ZA » ` — — we Central African Republic better pest resistance, disease resistance, — Democratic Republic of Congo shelf life, and taste.
SANITATION In British cities 1850, infant mortality was about 50 percent—half of all children born died before 5 years of age.
In the second half of the 19th century, sewers were built and water was piped into cities.
HOSPITAL HYGIENE In the 1840s, the Hungarian physician Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis noticed that cases of puerperal fever, which killed thousands of mothers after giving birth, were reduced if nurses and doctors washed their hands between handling corpses and treating patients.
VITAMINS In the early 19005, scientists investigating the link between diet and health identified key nutrients in food.
In 1912, Cashmir Funk named them ""vitamines""; “vita” meaning life, and ""amine"" from compounds isolated in his experiments.
ALEXANDER FLEMING Born in Scotland, the pharmacologist and biologist Alexander Fleming made huge contributions to the fields of bacteriology, immunology, and chemotherapy.
He is famous for isolating the antibiotic substance penicillin from the fungus Penicillium notatum.
He shared the 1945 Nobel Prize for medicine with Ernst Chain and Howard Florey.
Protecting the troops Sailors in the British Royal Navy receive inoculations against cholera before deployment overseas during World War I Worl n the first few decades of the 20th century, Dr.
Baker’s health education program led to a significant reduction in infant mortality rates, and by the 1950s most industrialized countries had adopted similar measures.
Health education, better sanitation, and rising living standards in industrialized countries combined to produce steady, if unspectacular, improvements in public health.
In 1928, Alexander Fleming found that a rare strain of mold inhibited the growth of bacteria.
This discovery enabled him to develop penicillin—an infection-fighting “antibiotic” drug.
In the second half of the 20th century, mass vaccination programs, funded by governments and the World Health Organization , further reduced Changing attitudes A 1950s ad shows Hollywood star and future United States president Ronald Reagan promoting cigarettes.
Two decades later, a French cancer charity warns of the health risks of smoking to pregnant women and their babies.
Health The past century has produced astonishing advances in health and medicine.
Some infectious illnesses have been eradicated, but there are still many killer diseases at large, especially in the developing world. mortality rates.
Polio, too, is close to being eradicated; in fact, the general trend for most infectious diseases is downward.
Furthermore, chemotherapy has made huge strides in the fight against cancer, and heart and organ transplants are now commonplace.
Perhaps most amazingly, in vitro fertilization can allow couples who would previously have been childless to have a family.
Statistics show that children in the poorest countries have a mortality rate 2. times higher than their counterparts in developed nations.
The greatest killers in the developing world are waterborne illnesses such as typhoid, cholera, dysentery, and even diarrhea.
In fact, nearly 40,000 people die each day from drinking water contaminated by sewage.
Providing Sanitation and clean drinking water is a major challenge for the governments of developing countries.
Respiratory diseases such as bronchitis, emphysema, pneumonia, and lung cancer also take a heavy toll.
These diseases are often linked to the inhalation of smoke from indoor cooking fires.
A simple solution is to provide a smoke hood and a chimney, rather than an open Rich and poor Unfortunately, the great achievements in health care and medicine are not always passed on to the poor.
The diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough vaccine has been available since the 1940s, and has largely eradicated these diseases in the developed world.
However, in Africa, India, and Eastern Asia, less than 50 percent of children are covered by DTP programs.
The fertilized egg is then implanted into a woman's uterus so that a normal pregnancy process can occur.
Cholera in Bangladesh A father cradles his dying son during the 1971 cholera outbreak in Bangladesh.
Lack of sanitation and access to clean drinking water led to the deaths of 6,500 people.
ADVANCES IN MEDICINE 1932 In Germany, Josef Klarer 1960 The world's first 1967 South African heart Since the 1920s, tremendous makes the first sulfa drugs internal “pacemaker,” surgeon Dr.
Murray in Boston, MA. the US. and Allan Cormack develop the CAT or CT scan, which produces X-ray cross-sections of the body.
These carry genes—""instructions"" that determine every aspect of an organism.
In 2000, scientists announced that they had worked out the structure of the human genome, the sequence of thousands of individual nucleic acids that make up a DNA molecule.
CHROMOSOMES OF A HUMAN MALE Flu pandemic In Seattle, WA, policemen wear protective masks during the outbreak of “Spanish Flu” in 1918.
This was the most devastating pandemic in modern history. fire, but the first priority is education.
Public health efforts in rich countries are increasingly focused on excessive consumption of food, alcohol, and tobacco.
Incidence of obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and some cancers are seriously stretching healthcare systems.
Disease pandemics Even if the disparity between health in rich and poor nations is addressed, the world’s population will still be at risk from pandemics—epidemics that occur on a global scale.
Just after World War I, a pandemic of “Spanish flu"" killed up to 20 million people—more than the war itself.
AIDS (Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome), first identified in 1981, has claimed some 25 million lives.
In 2009 a flu virus crossed the species barrier from pigs, causing thousands of deaths.
Fears of future pandemics have also been fueled by the fact that the effects of antibiotics on disease have begun to weaken as bacteria develop immunity to drugs.
AFTER Whether it is anticipating new pandemics or battling existing diseases, there are many challenges facing 21st-century medicine.
NEW DRUGS, NEW VACCINES The rise of antibiotic-resistant ""superbugs"" means that new drugs and treatments will be needed to combat bacterial infection.
There is some experimental use of bacteriophages, which are viruses that attack bacteria.
Other priorities include developing vaccines against HIV/AIDS and malaria.
Malaria kills over 1 million people per year, and in some regions the malaria parasite that causes the disease is growing increasingly resistant to current drug treatments.
This strike by members of the Al-Qaeda terrorist network on symbols of Western power shocked the world.
It lead to an American declaration of “War on Terror” to end international terrorism.
At 8:46m. local time, American Airlines Flight 11 crashed into the north tower of the World Trade Center, killing the 92 people on board—and killing or trapping a further 1,366 people at or above the point of impact.
The hijackers, who were mainly Saudi-Arabian nationals, had taken over the California-bound flights soon after takeoff from East Coast airports.
They used knives, mace, and the threat of bombs to subdue crews and passengers, then directed the fuel-laden jets toward their targets.
People trapped inside made desperate calls to loved ones, begging for help or simply saying farewell.
Around the world, millions watched the awful sight of people hurling themselves from the burning building.
At 10:03m., United Airlines Flight 93 crashed into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvannia, killing all those on board.
As the plane hurtles toward the ground, the terrorists are praying fervently.
During World War II the British prime minister, Winston Churchill, ordered troops into Iraq to safeguard Britain's oil supplies.
THE ARAB LEAGUE was founded by seven Arab nations—Egypt, Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen-in 1945.
Five years later, its members signed a Defense and Economic Co-operation Treaty.
This encouraged Arab nationalists across the Middle East to push for independence.
In 1961, Iraq nationalized the oil concession areas, ending foreign interests in the industry.
IRAN-IRAQ WAR This conflict was triggered by a territorial dispute over the Shatt-al-Arab waterway between the two rival states.
Saudi Arabia, the US, and others sold weapons to the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein , who waged chemical warfare against Iranian forces.
IRAN-IRAQ WAR ""s * d | American carrier in the Suez Canal The Suez Canal allows transportation between Europe and Asia without the need to circumnavigate Africa and Is of great strategic significance.
In the image above, a United States aircraft carrier is covered by a gunner in an antisubmarine helicopter as it proceeds up the canal. [he Gulf Wars Conflict erupted in the Persian Gulf in 1990 when the United Nations moved to oust Iraqi forces from neighboring Kuwait.
A military operation led by United States forces put an end to the occupation, but concerns about Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein led the United States and Britain to enter a second war in the Gulf in 2003. n August 2, 1990 Saddam Hussein invaded the oil-rich gulf state of Kuwait.
The United Nation's Security Council demanded immediate and unconditional withdrawal, but Saddam, a brutal dictator who had recently appointed himself Iraq's ""President for Life,"" ignored the UN and announced that Kuwait had become a part of Iraq.
The United States acted to avert the crisis with a show of strength, sending substantial numbers of troops to the gulf region.
Many UN nations, including Britain and members of the Arab League followed suit.
Saddam responded by placing captured foreign nationals of “hostile countries"" at key strategic sites in Kuwait in the hope of deterring air attacks.
The First Gulf War In late fall, the UN issued an ultimatum effectively authorizing the use of force if Saddam did not withdraw from Kuwait by January 15, 1991.
The First Gulf War began on January 17 when the United States and coalition forces launched Operation “Desert Storm,"" attacking Iraq and Kuwait from the air.
Saddam's response was to launch the first of several Scud missile attacks on the Israeli capital, Tel Aviv.
As allied forces entered Kuwait, Iraq launched missiles on Saudi Arabia, but was ultimately no match for the fierce military onslaught of Desert Storm.
In late February, after five weeks of war, United States forces took Kuwait City and United States president George Bush announced a cessation of hostilities.
As Iraqi troops withdrew, they placed land mines around Kuwaiti oil wells before setting them alight.
The Kuwait oil fires burned for several months, causing massive environmental damage.
After the conflicts Saddam was faced with uprisings in the southern Shi'a region of Iraq and in the Kurdish north.
The extent of Saddam's brutality toward his own citizens was revealed years later when mass graves were uncovered.
In the aftermath of the war, the UN agreed that Saddam could remain in power, but economic sanctions would remain in place until Iraq destroyed both its stockpile and its manufacturing ability of weapons of mass destruction —nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons.
Over the succeeding years UN weapons inspectors visited Iraq to check this disarmament process.
Saddam frequently obstructed the inspections, moving and concealing weapons, and in 1998 ordered the inspectors out of Iraq.
The United States and UK retaliated by launching Operation “Desert Fox,” a bombing campaign aimed at destroying Iraq's weapons.
The horrific terrorist attacks on the United States in 2001 led to a decisive shift in United States tolerance of Saddam’s defiant behavior.
The United States was now prepared to make preemptive strikes against its enemies to combat any further potential terrorist attacks.
Bush instructed the Pentagon, the United States department of defense, to develop plans for war on Iraq.
The United States was supported in its plans for ""War on Terror"" by the British government, but there was grave concern Outdated weapons Coalition forces in the 2003 Iraq War had state-ofthe-art equipment; but Iraqi soldiers had outdated Soviet-made arms such as this RPG-7V grenade-launcher. among other world leaders about the legality of American intentions.
George W Bush insisted that they did, and he was supported in this view by the British prime minister, Tony Blair.
In September 2002, Blair released a dossier detailing the government's assessment of Iraq's military capability.
It claimed that Saddam had the capacity to deploy chemical and biological weapons within 45 minutes.
The reliability of the dossier was rapidly called into question, as it was revealed to be based in part on research written 12 years previously, SADDAM HUSSEIN Saddam Hussein was born to a poor family in rural Iraq.
He became Iraq's leader and gradually took absolute power, using torture, violence, and coercion to subdue the population.
He was captured by United States troops after the fall of Baghdad and tried and executed for war crimes. but President Bush continued to put pressure on the UN to sanction war against Iraq.
A second conflict With events escalating toward conflict, the UN sent weapons inspectors back into Iraq in an attempt to discover the truth about Saddam ’s military capacity.
In spite of the UN chief weapons inspector’s appeal for more time to verify the facts, United States patience had run out.
On March 17 the UN was informed that the diplomatic process was over, and on March 20 the US-led coalition attacked American helicopters in Kuwait United States gunship helicopters in the burning oil fields of Kuwait.
The “scorched earth” policy was ordered by defeated Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein.
It was heavily bombed by the coalition while blocked with retreating Iraqi forces.
The progress of the Second Gulf War, or Iraq War, was rapid and by April 9 the coalition forces took the Iraqi capital, Baghdad.
Fully expecting that the war would soon be over, the United States appointed a governing council to supervise the creation of a new Iraqi government.
Continuing violence The toppling of Saddam Hussein created national chaos as fighting erupted between different religious and ethnic Iraqi factions.
In July 2003 George W Bush reported that his forces now faced a “low-intensity” war.
A brutal and bloody conflict has ensued involving suicide bombings and guerrilla-style tactics.
Although the United States handed sovereignty back to Iraq in 2004 and Iraq subsequently elected a government, thousands of Iraqi civilians, police, allied soldiers, and political insurgents have died since the fall of Baghdad.
A fight for power Iraq's new government is Shi'a Muslim dominated, while insurgent groups are mainly Sunni Muslims.
Shi’a Muslims are the second-largest denomination of the Islamic faith and adhere only to the teachings of Muhammad and the religious guidance of his family or his descendants.
Sunni Muslims are the largest denomination of Islam and represent a branch of Islam that accepted the caliphate of Abu Bakr, as Muhammad's friend and successor.
The ongoing violence in Iraq is not simply directed against the foreign troops still attempting to keep the peace on Iraqi soil, but is increasingly a fight for power between rival Dictator’s downfall which carried out the 9/11 attacks , is among the many factions operating in Iraq today.
The war with Iraq was controversial, and large demonstrations in Europe and the United States protested against it.
In Iraq itself, although the insurgency seemed to have subsided by 2010, violence continued in many provinces.
The new United States president, Barack Obama, withdrew United States combat troops from Iraq by August 2010, but 50,000 United States service personnel remained in an advisory capacity.
Elections in 2010 produced a stalemate between pro-Sunni and pro-Shi’a groups and eight months after the vote a new government had still not been sworn in. religious and political factions.
IRANIAN NUCLEAR AMBITIONS Iran's determination to develop its nuclear capacity have raised international concern.
In 2007, the United Nation's nuclear agency confirmed that Iran had enriched small amounts of uranium.
Iran's president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad insisted that it was for peaceful purposes only.
However, his hardline attitude toward attempts to regulate his nuclear program has led to speculation that Iran is seeking to develop atomic weapons and that military strikes may be organized against Iran to prevent this.
The UN Security Council imposed sanctions on Iran for not halting the program.
ISLAMIC EXTREMISM Recent years have seen a rise in Islamic extremist activity.
Since the attacks on the United States in 2001, terrorists have struck many times.
In 2005 crowds at the Hindu festival of Diwali were bombed in Delhi, India.
THE IMF AND GATT AGREEMENTS In 1944, representatives of 45 nations met in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, and established the International Monetary Fund to increase world trade through cooperation between nations.
In 1947, the first General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade influenced over $10 billion worth of trade between its members.
G6 In 1975, France, Italy, Japan, Germany, Britain, and the United States formed the Group of Six—a forum for international trade policy discussions.
Known as G8 after Canada and Russia joined, they represent 65 percent of the global economy.
Some companies pay millions of dollars for an annual lease on a space in Times Square and tens of millions more to create an attention-grabbing advertisement.
ANTHONY GIDDENS, SOCIOLOGIST, 1999 Distant production In this toy factory in Guanyao, China, female workers assemble Barbie products.
The Barbie doll was created by Mattel in the United States in 1959 and Is now produced and sold all over the world.
Globalization A phenomenon of the modern world, globalization often refers to the rise of multinational corporations that wield extraordinary economic power.
Today, as United States manufacturers make products in Southeast Asia for the European market and customer inquiries in Britain are dealt with through call centers in India, McLuhan's prophesy of an interdependent world seems truly visionary.
The globalization of economies has allowed business to market products internationally, forming many global partnerships and alliances.
The global system During the 20th century, national governments tended to provide ""infrastructure"" services such as transit systems, and energy supplies.
By the 1980s, economists agreed that underinvestment in these infrastructures had led to problems of low productivity and poor service quality; state control of the infrastructure hampered economic growth.
From the 1980s onward, governments began to liberalize their economies, privatizing state assets, and encouraging ""open"" competitive markets.
The tonnage of goods traded worldwide is currently estimated to be 16 times greater than in 1950.
Since China turned its back, economically at least, on the communist system and opened up its markets to international trade and investment, it is estimated that there has been a seven-fold increase in income per head.
The growth in global trade is due in part to international trade agreements, another Global product After the huge success of the iPod , which launched in 2001 and sold over 42 million worldwide by early 2006, Apple went on to produce the iPhone. major factor being the impact of technological advances.
The advent of the Internet and digital communications systems has added new dimensions to the world's economic infrastructure.
International trade can be conducted quickly and efficiently, and companies are expanding their operations across the globe.
Multinational growth The rise of multinational corporations is a major feature of globalization.
Many have annual turnovers larger than the value of the economies of many small countries.
A feature of the products and services provided by multinationals is that they offer customers an identical experience.
This is particularly true of branded food companies, such as McDonalds, CocaCola, and Starbucks, and manufacturers of sports equipment, such as Nike and Reebok.
The presence of these companies’ logos, or “brands,” promises the same product whether we purchase it in Melbourne, Mumbai, or Miami.
Worldwide, the possession of “designer label” goods is seen as a mark of success, a marketing triumph that has generated phenomenal profits for the multinationals.
However, the uniformity of experience provided by such companies has resulted in complaints as local, regional, and even national cultural distinctions are being lost.
Many of those opposed to multinational industry also complain that their wealth gives them the power to influence the economic and political decisions of governments, particularly in the area of trade restrictions.
Some companies have been guilty of exploiting cheap labor to produce items that are then sold at a profit to Western consumers.
Whatever their opinion of the globalization of the world economy, commentators are united in the view that the world has been transformed by its impact.
The consequences of these rapid and massive changes are only just beginning to be understood.
GLOBALIZATION On November 30, 1999, riot police in Seattle, WA, used pepper spray and tear gas to disperse antiglobalization protesters at a World Trade Organization conference.
Since the 1990s, the number of staged protests against global trade agreements has increased.
Protesters are concerned that in order for governments and multinational companies to make a profit, there is a requirement that poor countries must remain the impoverished suppliers of raw materials and cheap labor.
Globalization has contributed to a growing sense of global responsibility.
Governments and multinational businesses are now doing more to combat Third World poverty and conserve the environment.
FIGHTING POVERTY For many people the inequalities between the lives of rich and poor are no longer acceptable and multinational companies and governments are increasingly facing demands to address world poverty.
Campaigns such as “Make Poverty History” promote issues including trade justice for poorer nations and the cancellation of Third World debts.
Changes in Earth's climate are directly linked to higher levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere created by human activity.
International agreements such as the Kyoto Protocol, enforced since 2005, and the Copenhagen Agreement of 2010, have attempted to promote cleaner manufacturing practices in industry in order to try to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
LOW OUTPUT When Mao died in 1976, China had roughly the same economic output as Canada, a country with a much smaller population of 23 million.
Deng Xiaoping advocated economic growth as the supreme goal— to be achieved at any cost.
Special economic zones A raft of measures in 1979 put the country on its new path.
Four Special Economic Zones were established at the southern Chinese ports of Zhuhai, Shantou, and Xiamen, and foreign firms were invited to invest capital on favorable terms.
Western capitalist businesses were given the opportunity to exploit cheap Chinese labor, while in return China gained foreign exchange with which to buy imported goods and was given access to new technology from the West.
At the same time, in rural areas, where 80 percent of the population lived, families were encouraged to cultivate their own land for profit.
When challenged by those who objected to capitalist freemarket economics, Deng defended his new policies as a practical path to | | Superpower | China By embracing the free market, from the 1980s China achieved extraordinarily rapid economic growth and underwent a major social transformation.
Many non-Chinese observers believed that economic freedom would be linked to political freedom.
Butin 1989, when communist regimes were toppling in Europe , pro-democracy activists in China had their demands for reform brutally rejected.
Despite this political stance, there was no turning back from the economic reforms.
Although proceeding in stages and strictly supervised by the state, the LZ NE [ d A11 11 x ee EE EE T “Poverty is not socialism.
DENG XIAOPING, 1979 transition to a free market economy gathered pace through the 1990s.
So thorough was the transformation that in 1997 China was able to absorb the British colony of Hong Kong, one of the major centers of global capitalism, without noticeably affecting the territory's business community.
The success of the new policies in creating economic growth was huge—between 1979 and 2002 China's real Gross Domestic Product grew at 9. percent per year, the fastest growth rate of any major country.
By the beginning of the new millennium a considerable part of the Chinese population had become part of a modern consumer society.
It was said that under Mao people had wanted the “Four Musts”—a bicycle, a radio, a watch, anda cade sewing machine; but by the 1990s, they aspired to the “Eight Bigs""—a color television, a refrigerator, a stereo, a camera, a motorbike, a set of furniture, a washing machine, and an electric fan.
By 2005 China had overtaken the United States in sales of televisions and cellular phones.
Gap between rich and poor The transition to a free market caused massive social disruption.
Corruption was rampant and a wide gulf opened between the winners and losers in the new economy.
While successful Chinese businessmen drove around in Mercedes, millions of people in rural areas were subsisting on less than $1 a day, and pay for factory workers was pitifully low.
KJ Tee "" A EFE Pinna an "" E E c Fe a The Three Gorges Dam Spanning the Yangzi River, the world’s largest hydroelectric river dam, when fully operational, will provide power and improve flood control.
By 2020 it may be the world’s most popular destination. were displaced from the land, roaming the country in search of work.
Many migrated to China’s cities; others went abroad, making China one of the world’s major sources of illegal migrant workers.
Urban unemployment also soared as the government struggled to reduce the vast workforce relying on state employment.
By the first decade of the 21st century, jobs in the state sector were disappearing at arate of around 10 million a year.
Into the future Deng Xiaoping died in 1997, the last Chinese leader of the heroic generation of the Long March.
Prestige events, such as the launch of China’s first crewed space flight in 2004 and the staging of the Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008—and an increasingly assertive foreign policy—appealed to most Chinese, who looked forward to their country being recognized as a major world power in the century ahead.
T, -k F L L PIT pote | Alien X o n —-€*aig PERPOWER CHINA If growth rates continue as they are, China will become the world’s largest economy, overtaking the United States in about 2030.
HARMING THE PLANET Rapid economic growth in China has been accompanied by severe environmental damage.
POPULATION GROWTH Since 1980, the Chinese government has exercised a “one-child” policy.
Despite this, China's population is expected to stabilize at 1. billion by 2050.
CHINESE MOONSHOT A crewed Chinese moon landing is projected for 2020 at the latest.
With global urban population numbers rising by 180,000 each day, it is predicted that by 2050 two-thirds of the world’s population will be city dwellers.
Many migrants lawlessness” in certain cities. are rising at a dramatic rate. move countries in search of a better Third World cities are currently ae SS n^ — life, generally moving from developing expanding at the fastest rate.
Cities are political, cultural, sub-Saharan Africa, 70 perand commercial centers where much cent of the urban population of a nation's essential work is done. are slum-dwellers.
However, expanding urban population numbers place heavy demands on the KEY infrastructures of modern cities where — City population in 1950 poverty often exists side by side with © City population in 1975 great affluence.
Shifting city populations San Francisco's Chinatown was a ghetto established by Chinese immigrants in the city's downtown area in the 18505.
It was once an impoverished area shunned by non-Chinese, but today it is a vibrant, thriving tourist destination.
URBANIZATION In 1800, one in four British people lived in Cities, but by 1900 it was three in four.
The Western world gradually addressed these social problems, developing infrastructures that could provide the necessary support for their industrial workforces.
FE ia inhabitants, the poorest of whom live in shanty towns or favelas.
Brazilian troops were among the masses of military personnel that were deployed around the world during World War Il.
This movement led to many more marriages between peoples of different nationalities.
Postwar, many brides returned to live in their husbands’ home countries.
DYNAMIC POPULATIONS Urban growth is predicted to continue, and this will bring new challenges to overcome.
WORLD URBAN FORUM In 2006, the UN established a forum to address the challenges of increasing urbanization.
The Stated priorities of the forum are to find solutions for urban poverty and to improve access to basic facilities such as shelter and sanitation for the urban poor.
Irkutsk, Russia is typical of European industrial cities that sprang up before World War Il, with large-scale factories and plants utilizing a large labor force.
The city was transformed from a small Utopian city planning movements in the interwar years aimed to improve the quality of city life.
Architects and town planners created custom-built new town during the 1930s as Stalin's great towns,"" often using experimental industrialization programs took design, such as these circular housing effect . developments in Denmark.
New arrivals often populate inner-city areas, congregating in enclaves.
Then, as they assimilate, these groups move out into more mixed communities, making way for the next wave of migrants.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT A major effect of growing urbanization Is the increase in CO, emissions generated by both congestion and industry.
In capsule hotels, the sleeping quarters are stacked one above another, creating affordable accommodation from minimum space.
INDIAN OCEAN Immigration regulations in most countries of the developed world seek to control population numbers by limiting the number of people officially allowed to enter.
Economic migrants, who are often fleeing terrible poverty, may take huge risks to circumvent these rules.
Large numbers of Europeans relocated to Australia after World War Il, and in the 1970s the numbers of Asian migrants increased.
Researchers have suggested a range of natural causes for this warming, including variations in Earth's orbit, fluctuations in the Sun's output, and volcanic activity.
The current situation In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change published a report in which it projected probable rises in temperature of between 3. and 7°F by the end of the 21st century.
The panel declared themselves confident that the “net 84 20 10 PERCENT of Antarctic glaciers have retreated since 1950.
The IPCC was set up by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Program to investigate climate change.
Plants and trees naturally counteract emissions, by incorporating CO, into their tissues, and by releasing oxygen into the atmosphere, but 13 million hectares of the Climate Change Earth’s atmosphere has a natural capacity to warm the planet.
Without this heat, the planet could not sustain life—but the world is rapidly getting warmer.
Many experts believe human activity is to blame, calling for urgent action to prevent a global crisis and protect the planet for future generations. y, 6,000 ~ Total | -— Petroleum N j — Coal | Natural gas | Cement production Million metric tons of carbon/year 1,000 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 Years Fossil carbon emissions The graph indicates the rise in carbon emissions in the atmosphere since 1850.
Steady increases in industrial activity and in vehicle numbers, along with growing CO, emissions caused by burning fossil fuels and producing cement and natural gas, mean that global fossil carbon emissions are now more than 7 billion tons per year.
The oceans also absorb CO, and contain the largest store of the gas on Earth, but warming of the oceans reduces the sea’s capacity to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
There has been widespread retreat of glaciers in nonpolar regions, and a The Shining Mountain According to some scientists, Mount Kilimanjaro's ice fields could be gone by the year 2020.
These images show the peak in February 1993 and February 2000 . decrease in global snow and ice cover since the late 1960s.
Experts also believe climate change is responsible for changes in rainfall patterns, which have created severe water shortages in many regions of the world—tens of millions have suffered from drought in Africa since the 1980s.
Climate change probably contributes to the increased intensity of heatwaves and tropical storms, although no direct causal link has been established with such extreme weather events as Hurricane Katrina, which devastated the north-central Gulf Coast in 2006.
The implications The IPCC and many other organizations predict dire consequences for the world, and especially for the poorest nations, if CO, emissions continue to rise.
Increasing sea levels could displace tens Lengthy fast ———— An adult female polar bear hauls herself out of the Arctic — waters.
The progressively earlier breakup of sea ice shortens the vital spring hunting season for female polar — bears.
As a result, weight loss is affecting their ability to —— reproduce, and the survival of their cubs. of millions of people from low-lying areas such as the Ganges and Nile deltas.
The reduction of Arctic summer sea ice is jeopardizing the survival of some species, including polar bears.
The IPCC suggests that the summer sea ice will disappear entirely in the second half of the 21st century.
The message from environmental lobby groups worldwide is that governments must act, and act now, to reduce CO, emissions.
The increased levels of this gas in the atmosphere heighten the greenhouse effect, pushing temperatures upward.
Level of CO, in parts per million offset programs in which people are encouraged to plant trees to offset their “carbon footprints.” is not universally persuaded that human beings are—or have been— a major cause of climate change.
AFTER However, given the number of trees needed to offset the per year and fact that large carbon emissions of just one car Natural climate variability is certainly a factor, but most scientists believe that Earth is undergoing significant warming as a direct result of human activities—and that this trend of global warming will continue.
However, in order to assess climate change, they must form a picture of past climates.
Scientists studying glaciers are able to analyze air bubbles trapped in the ice and determine the levels of gases in the atmosphere at the time the ice was formed, giving them information on how the atmosphere has changed over the centuries.
TIDAL POWER Investigations into harnessing tidal stream power, where energy is drawn from tidal currents, are showing promise, and prototype wave energy converters are also producing good results, but both these techniques are at an early stage of development.
At La Rance, France, a tidal barrier built in the 1960s generates 240MW of power, but such barrages are expensive to build.
SOLAR POWER Photovoltaic cells convert solar energy into electricity and provide a clean source of electricity, but the technology is expensive and cannot provide enough power for large commercial needs.
In principle, however, much more solar energy falls on Earth than the amount of energy generated by burning fossil fuels; so solar power generation remains a key area of research.
WIND POWER The conversion of wind energy into electricity currently provides just one percent of the electricity used worldwide.
However, it is a popular form of sustainable energy in certain European nations.
Nine percent of the electricity used in Spain and 20 percent of electricity used in Denmark is generated by wind power.
This technology is not without drawbacks—the construction of the platforms for each turbine uses large amounts of cement, a major contributor to CO, emissions.
British engineers George Stephenson and Isambard Kingdom Brunel contributed to the development of efficient rail transport systems, making travel across countries and continents faster and more affordable.
Improvements to the size and speed of ocean-going ships increased the transport of freight around the world, while the success of wire-based telephone and telegraph systems allowed instant communication across physical space for the first time.
THE BIRTH OF TOURISM Until the late 19th century, tourism, or recreational travel, was the preserve of the better off, but many more people were taking vacations by the 1900s.
Companies such as Thomas Cook & Son, the first travel agent, began to organize package tours, including a ""round-the-world trip."" ince World War I, advances in E technology have transformed global communications and transportation systems, allowing both economic and personal connections to flourish on a worldwide scale.
Revolutionizing travel The 20th-century boom in travel was largely due to advances in the design of the internal combustion engine, which still powers most motor vehicles, ships, airplanes, and helicopters.
The Ford Motor Company began to Transatlantic liners Cunard Cruise Liners represented the height of luxurious travel for tourists crossing between Europe and the United States during the interwar years. speed up car production.
Global statistics predict that by 2030 there will be 1. billion motor vehicles in use worldwide.
The first ""highspeed"" intersection-free road, the Automobil-Verkehrsund Übungsstrafe , was constructed in Berlin in 1912.
Soon, multilane highways, such as Route 66, which runs from Chicago to Los Angeles, shortened travel times, allowing the transport of people and mass-produce combustion engines in ""1 1906, pioneering “assembly lines"" to | I ri N | GM jit g Sfar | goods over longer distances.
In recent DEM o aA trots years, high-speed rail links have seen Passenger jets Lining up on the runway at Gatwick Airport near London, UK, a passenger jet takes off every few minutes while others land nearby.
Over a million people pass through the airport every year. major investment.
Advances in maritime engineering have produced faster, larger ships that are able to transport millions of tons of cargo around the world.
Improved refrigeration techniques allow perishable foodstuffs to be carried by both sea and air, making products that were once a luxury readily available.
The development of cheaper and faster modes of travel has brought previously inaccessible parts of the world within reach of ordinary people.
In the century following the Wright Brothers’ first powered flight in 1904, aeronautical science has revolutionized aircraft design.
Today, wide-bodied, high performance jet airliners carry millions of passengers every year.
Going places Tourism is one of the world’s most rapidly growing industries, driven by higher levels of disposable income in some societies, as well as developments in technology and the transport infrastructure.
Taking vacations ¢¢ became the social norm in the developed world as terms of employment began to include periods of paid leave in the early decades of the 20th century.
At first, people tended to vacation in domestic locations, but from the 1950s, mass tourism, particularly between European destinations, became common.
Long-haul travel between Personal communicators These video phones are the latest development in cell phone technology.
Utilizing digital multimedia satellite broadcasting, the video phones broadcast news, music, and drama channels.
From 1909, he began mass production of the Model T Ford, using assembly line methods and wage incentives.
Soon the company was producing a complete car in 1 hour and 33 minutes and its price fell from $1,000 to $360.
He opposed World War | and sponsored an international conference to try to negotiate an armistice.
In the 1930s, he was violently opposed to unions and was the last car manufacturer to recognize union workers in his factories.
Satellite communications A Western journalist transmits a report by satellite phone from the hills of Northern Afghanistan.
MARGARET MEAD, United States ANTHROPOLOGIST led to an increase in long-haul traffic.
This upward trend has continued, with growing numbers of people traveling between continents for their vacations.
In recent years, tourism has become Personal computers One of the first personal computers was this Sinclair ZX Spectrum, which was used in association with an ordinary TV set.
This made it cheap and accessible for everyone to have their own computer. more specialized.
With the growth in ^niche markets"" catering for special interests such as extreme sports, the market has both grown and fragmented.
Destinations that were once the preserve of intrepid explorers, such as the Galápagos Islands , are now tourist hotspots.
Nowhere is inaccessible—even Mount Everest, the summit of which was only reached for the first time by Edmund Hilary and Tenzing Norgay in 1953, has become a tourist destination.
Microtechnology has touched most fields of manufacturing and engineering, from weapons design to medical robotics.
Microchips provide the “brains” for computers, personal communicators, and cellular phones, allowing instant global communication and the storage of vast amounts of information.
Data that previously filled libraries can now be stored on one tiny chip.
The creation of the Internet allowed this information to be shared among computer users worldwide.
It is often said that the 21st century will be the “Communications Age"", Global Positioning System This GPS receiver picks up signals transmitted by global navigation satellites to determine its location and direction.
GPS technology has become an important tool for mapmaking, land surveying, and navigation.
AFTER The seemingly insatiable public appetite for travel to exotic locations shows no sign of fading in the 21st century.
Not content with gaining access to the remotest corners of Earth, there is now a new demand for vacations that are literally out of this world.
SPACE TOURISM The British entrepreneur Richard Branson has poured millions of dollars into the Virgin Spaceship to take passengers into space.
Wealthy individuals and corporations are already booking ""personal spaceflights"" with the Russian Space Agency.
Tourists have to undergo rigorous physical training and medical tests before being declared fit to travel.
To date, five people have vacationed in space, paying as much as $25 million for the privilege.
The first tourist, California financier Dennis Tito, described his eight-day voyage as “a trip to paradise.” an age centered on shared information between individuals, businesses, and nations.
In the past, geographical distance impeded communication, but technology has broken down these barriers.
The Communications Age f BILLION people worldwide regularly 2 access the Internet. offers the chance for knowledge to be shared across the world.
INVENTION British physicist Tim Berners Lee invented the World Wide Web in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Lee developed the concept of “hypertext” in order to share research with fellow scientists across a single computer network.
Lee currently heads the World Wide Web consortium that concentrates on improving Internet technology and accessibility.
C.35000BCE Possible first date for human explorers to cross the land bridge from Siberia and begin to hunt and roam in the far northwest of the continent.
C.130005BcE Earliest evidence of colonization in the northwest of the continent as the last Ice Age ends.
C.9000BCE Hunter-gatherers spread to the Great Plains and the southern deserts.
C.100BCE The Hopewell people settle in the Ohio Valley and begin to build burial mounds.
Soon after this, hunters on the Great Plains first use bows and arrows to kill buffalo.
C.600 People in the Mississippi River valley begin to build small towns and burial mounds.
The Pilgrims A 19th-century image depicts the relieved English pilgrims landing at Plymouth Rock, Massachusetts, in December 1620—a seminal moment in American history.
The pilgrims were a group of puritans intent on preserving their cultural identity.
CENTRAL AMERICA North and C.700 The city of Cahokia is built in the northern Mississippi River valley.
A vast, earthen temple mound, used for religious purposes, dominates the city.
Hardier strains of corn and beans increase food production in the Mississippi valley, allowing the population to increase.
C.1000 Vikings build a settlement in what is now Newfoundland, the first contact between Europe and the Americas.
Central America The continent of North America stretches from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the isthmus connecting Central America in the south with South America, and includes the many islands of the Caribbean.
The US, Canada, and many of the islands are predominantly English-speaking.
Once entirely colonized by European countries, all but a few islands are now independent.
He is the first European navigator to realize that the lands Columbus had reached were not in Asia but part of a new continent.
At first, this name applied to South America only, but in 1538 Flemish mapmaker Gerardus Mercator became the first person to designate both North and South America on a world map.
The Africans revolt, set fire to the settlement, and live among the American Indians as the first black settlers in North America.
As the Spanish continue their exploration of the region, more African slaves escape.
His expedition ends in disaster and only four men survive by making an eight-year trek on foot to another Spanish settlement.
Augustine on the west coast of Florida, the oldest permanent United States city founded by Europeans.
The nearby French colony at Fort Caroline, established in 1564, is destroyed by the Spanish as a potential threat to their transatlantic fleets carrying gold bullion to Spain.
The Dutch sail up the Hudson River to establish Fort Nassau in what is now Albany in 1614.
In 1638 the Swedes establish their own colony of New Sweden on the Delaware River, although it is seized by the Dutch in 1655.
When William Tucker is born around 1623, he becomes the first AfricanAmerican born in the 13 colonies.
By 1675 the total number of African slaves in the North American colonies grows to more than 5,000.
The English are now the dominant colonial power on the eastern seaboard, establishing 13 colonies from New Hampshire and Massachusetts in the north to Georgia in the south.
The French control the Mississippi River valley, the Great Lakes, and the St.
Lawrence River valley of Canada, while the Spanish control Florida, the southwest, and the west coast of North America.
They follow the Staunton River through the Blue Ridge and emerge on the westerly flowing New River, following it to the Ohio River.
Soon, other explorers are discovering new routes through the mountain range.
Further conflict between the two colonial powers breaks out during Queen Anne's War, known in Europe as the War of the Spanish Succession , during which the French raid Connecticut.
The White House Work on the United States president's official residence began in 1792 after a design by Irish architect James Hoban was chosen by George Washington from among nine competition entries.
After being burned by the British in 1814, it was restored and painted white.
Over the next 50 years, thousands of slaves arrive in the colonies each year.
Hostilities continue after the war in the Ohio River valley, where the French try to halt British expansion westward by destroying Fort Pickawillany in 1752.
The French are at a disadvantage because their total number of colonists in North America is only one-tenth that of the British colonies, while Britain's Royal Navy is able to stop trade and troop reinforcements from reaching French colonies.
Initially the French have some successes, but after their defeat in Canada in 1759, the British are supreme.
Under the Treaty of Paris that ends the war, Britain gains control over French Canada and that portion of Louisiana lying east of the Mississippi River.
The 1774 Québec Act extends British Canada's boundaries south to the Ohio and Mississippi rivers.
Both measures are widely seen as restrictive limits on colonial freedom and expansion.
The Stamp Act, which places a tax on newspapers and other items, is widely resented and, after much opposition, is repealed in 1766.
Forces of the 13 rebel colonies, led after June by George Washington, struggle at first but eventually overwhelm the British, with French and Spanish support.
The victory of the French fleet over the British off the Chesapeake Capes forces the surrender of the British at Yorktown in 1781.
The western border of the new state stretches to the Mississippi River.
In 1800 the federal government moves from Philadelphia to begin work in Washington; the same year, John Adams becomes the first president to live in the White House.
The matter is decided by the House of Representatives, who make their choice after 36 ballots.
DECISIVE MOMENT THE United States CONSTITUTION The United States Constitution was drawn up by the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in 1787 and finalized on September 17.
It establishes the three branches of government—the legislative , the executive , and the judiciary (the courts)—and builds in checks and balances so that each acts as a restraint on the actions of the other two.
Alongside the federal structure of government established by the Constitution, state and local govermments complete the American system of democratic government.
The original 1787 draft Article V of the Constitution allows for it to be amended.
Notable amendments are the first 10, known together as the Bill of Rights, which were added in 1791.
Subsequent important amendments include the 13th, abolishing slavery in 1865; the 15th, establishing equal voting rights for blacks and whites in 1870; the 18th, prohibiting the sale of alcohol in 1919; and the 19th, granting votes to women in 1920.
The 21st Amendment of 1933 repealed the 18th, allowing Americans to drink legally once again.
The valley of the Connecticut River soon became America’s first major industrial region.
France, having regained Louisiana from Spain in 1800, sells it to the United States for about $15 million.
The purchase effectively doubles the size of the United States, extending its western borders to the Rocky Mountains.
United States naval forces clash with the “Barbary States” of North Africa (Algiers, Moroccco, and Libya) over raids on American shipping and the states’ demands for bribes to cease the attacks and to release captured sailors.
A peace treaty, signed in June 1805 and ratified by the Senate in 1806, largely ends the conflict.
Charles, Missouri, in the hope of finding a route along the Columbia River to the Pacific coast.
Although they reach the Pacific in 1805, the route they find is not easy.
Lewis and Clark 1809 Jefferson is succeeded as president first by James Madison and then, in 1817, by James Monroe, both associated with Jefferson’s Democratic-Republican movement.
This movement stresses states’ rights as opposed to the federalist views of the second president, John Adams.
United States at war with Britain because of Britain's refusal to recognize American commercial neutrality during Britain's lengthy war with Napoleonic France.
The United States tries but fails to dislodge the British from Canada; in response the British invade and in 1814 burn Washington.
A peace treaty is signed in Ghent, in what is now Belgium, but news arrives too late to prevent General Andrew Jackson's forces from inflicting a massive defeat on the British at New Orleans in January 1815.
After a second war in 1835-42, many Seminoles are forcibly relocated to Oklahoma.
There were fears when Missouri applied for statehood in 1819 that the balance of 11 slave-owning and 11 free states already in the Union would be upset.
The northern states strongly object | to slavery, but the Constitutional Officially known as the ""Corps of Discovery,"" Lewis and Clark's expedition to explore Louisiana included Sacagawea, a young woman of the Shoshone American Indian nation, who proved invaluable as an interpreter.
Convention of 1787, while prohibiting the import of slaves, protected slavery from federal interference.
The Missouri Compromise allowed the slave state of Missouri to join at the same time as the free state of Maine, thus balancing both interests within the Union.
After a Texan garrison is massacred at the Alamo in San Antonio, the Texans defeat a Mexican army at San Jacinto, winning their independence.
Had he won, the United States would have excluded British Canada from the Pacific coastline.
In effect the act ends the Missouri Compromise, as both territories were meant to be free from slavery.
This makes the Missouri Compromise unconstitutional and destroys the balance between free and slave states.
South Carolina becomes the first state to secede from the Union over the issue of slavery.
The conflict begins when seven secessionist states form the Confederate States of America.
The Confederate States eventually surrender on April 9, 1865, at Appomattox, Virginia, following the fall of Charleston and Richmond.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, ILLINOIS REPUBLICAN STATE CONVENTION, JUNE 16, 1858 Union soldier's cap The narrow-brimmed hat known as a “forage cap” was worn by most Union troops.
Union forces had standardized, mass-produced clothing and gear; the Confederates usually had to improvise. the Army, takes office as President of the Confederate States of America.
On April 12, Confederate troops fire on Union-held Fort Sumter in the harbor at Charleston, South Carolina.
The first major battle of the war, First Bull Run, fought in Virginia, ends in a Union defeat.
A Union offensive up the peninsula between the James and York rivers, aimed at taking the Confederate capitol, Richmond, ends in defeat, but Union naval forces succeed in capturing New Orleans, Louisiana.
In June, Robert E Lee takes command of the Confederacy’s Army of Northern Virginia.
At the end of the Civil War, slavery is abolished by the 13th Amendment to the Constitution.
The 14th Amendment of 1868 gives former slaves United States citizenship, while the 15th Amendment of 1870 guarantees their right to vote.
Lee again invades the North, and the Army of Northern Virginia and the Army of the Potomac clash at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania , which ends in a Union victory.
In September, the Union’s western army, under General William T Sherman, captures Atlanta, Georgia.
The victory helps Lincoln win reelection to a second term in the presidential election in November.
At the beginning of April, Grant resumes the offensive toward Richmond.
An amnesty is granted to former Confederates who pledge allegiance to the Union.
The measure passes the House of Representatives but does not achieve the necessary Senate majority.
After the fire, the city is rebuilt in stone and steel, and the world’s first skyscrapers are constructed.
Although he loses the office in 1889, he wins reclection in 1893 the rst and only time that a United States president has served nonconsecutive terms.
Industrial protests against low wages, long hours, poor conditions, and lack of union recognition soon spread throughout America.
Movie capital The attraction of more sunlight, varied settings, and lower wages turned Hollywood, a suburb of Los Angeles, California, into the center of the United States film production industry after 1910.
Mass-production The first Model T Fords were individually built in the factory at Detroit, but in 1913 they became the first cars to be mass-produced on an assembly line, a process that reduced their cost considerably.
Theodore Roosevelt, who had stood down in favor of William Taft in the 1908 election, stands against him, | splitting the Repubican vote and letting | the Democrats in.
This has the power to control the supply of money and raise or lower interest rates to prevent financial collapse.
In response, the National Guard is mobilized along the US-Mexican border and a force under General John J Pershing is sent into Mexico itself, but Villa eludes capture.
The mood of the country became increasingly anti-German, however, after the sinking in 1915 of the SS Lusitania off the coast of Ireland.
In February 1917 Germany announces it will attack all foreign ships in an effort to starve Britain and France of much-needed supplies.
When this policy is revealed by the publication of a secret telegram sent by German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmerman to his minister in Mexico, the United States declares war, on April 6.
Approximately 56,000 United States troops are killed and 204,000 injured in the war.
In September he collapses and later suffers a stroke, ending any chance of the United States agreeing to join the League.
The ban has the effect of driving drinking underground into illegal speakeasies and the hands of criminal gangs, as well as supporting a massive illegal trade in bootleg liquor.
Neighboring Canada and Mexico both benefit from cross-border smuggling.
Small quotas are allowed for Syria, Turkey, and Palestine, but all other Asian immigration to the United States is now banned.
The previous year, Don Juan had become the first movie with a synchronized musical score.
United States WRITER JOHN STEINBECK The third American writer to win the Nobel Prize for Literature , Steinbeck's novels describe the plight of ordinary Americans struggling to survive difficult times with empathy and insight.
FRANKLIN D ROOSEVELT, PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATION ACCEPTANCE SPEECH, CHICAGO, JULY 2, 1932 1929 First Academy Awards are presented in Hollywood.
Faced with near economic collapse and a run on the banking system, he calls an immediate session of Congress.
Among the many new institutions he sets up to reduce unemployment are the Federal Relief Emergency Administration, the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Tennessee Valley Authority, and the Civic Works Administration.
The Act is one of the most important pieces of social legislation passed in the United States and remains the basis for most federal welfare provisions today.
Roosevelt's subsequent attempt to reform the court's membership fails, tarnishing his reputation.
The first peacetime program of compulsory military service is introduced, providing for the registration of all men between ages 21 and 35.
Other measures are taken to prepare the country for a possible war against Germany or Japan.
Soon-to-be supplied items are the mass-produced Liberty ships, each one taking at most 42 days to build.
United States OVERSEAS TERRITORIES INCORPORATED TERRITORIES PUERTO RICO The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is the easternmost of the Greater Antilles chain in the Caribbean.
Its population density is higher than in any United States state. 15th century Puerto Rico is discovered by Columbus and colonized by Spain.
NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands lies in the western Pacific.
The program, led by army general Leslie Groves and civilian scientist J Robert Oppenheimer, involves a massive yet secret effort that ultimately costs $2 billion.
The first bomb is successfully tested at Alamagordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945.
On the morning of December 7, Japanese planes launch a surprise attack on the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, later attacking the UNINCORPORATED TERRITORIES AMERICAN SAMOA Island group in the southern Pacific.
Both battles are fought at sea using aircraft carriers operating over vast distances.
In November, United States and Allied troops land in North Africa to fight against German and Italian troops.
Conferences between the Allied leaders in Québec, Tehran, and Cairo map out the war strategy.
The United States Army Air Forces continue their strategic bombing campaign against Germany.
United States and Allied troops take part in the largest-ever amphibious landings on the beaches of Normandy in France as they begin the liberation of Europe from Nazi rule.
American units seize an intact bridge across the Rhine River in March, allowing the encirclement of the Ruhr region.
Within a month, the defeat of Nazi Germany brings the war in Europe to an end.
United States troops under General Douglas MacArthur occupy Japan and begin to demobilize Japanese troops and reconstruct the country along democractic principles.
He overreaches himself when, in 1954, he attacks the president, and is condemned by the Senate for misconduct.
Mesi ed n tate. a E le Leads in Ai e [3 ""m wu TRAN Harry S Truman's 1948 victory was a great political upset; before the polls closed, many newspapers (like the one held aloft by a grinning Truman the following morning) prematurely announced a Republican victory.
Us and allies fight under the UN to prevent a communist takeover of Korea.
African—Americans, seeking rights, begin a campaign of civil disobedience.
President Kennedy pledges to land a man on the moon by the end of the decade.
Robert Kennedy is assassinated in Los Angeles while running for president.
ToS A mco wed — '* E i big Pa aorta mae d 2 $9542 ATi Nixon in China In 1972 President Nixon attempted to normalize relations with communist China by making a historic visit.
He did not know until he landed whether he would be allowed to meet Mao.
A proposed amendment guaranteeing women's rights is passed by Congress in 1973 but falls three states short of ratification in 1982.
Delaware 1787 1 Dover 1,954 OS) AZ 1973 Withdrawal of United States troops from Florida 1845 27 Tallahassee 53,927 18,537,969 Vietnam; 58,000 United States troops have been EN 1788 ; Ad 9.829211 killed in the conflict.
Two years later, the d dana 97,906 i d North Vietnamese take over the south Hawaii Lo 20 Honolulu 6,425 MAS and reunify the country.
House minority leader Gerald Kansas 1861 54 Topeka 81,815 2,818,747 Ford is appointed vice president.
Paul 79,610 5,266,214 "" ""A E rats Mississippi 1817 20 Jackson 46,907 2,951,996 mS Missouri 1821 24 Jefferson City 68,886 5,987,580 of Representatives begins impeachment proceedings, but Nixon decides to iste nl UN) eee ui Helena [laoa Sacris resign.
He is unharmed in North Dakota 1889 39 Bismarck 68,976 646,544 both incidents.
Carter, a former Utah 1896 45 Salt Lake City 82,144 2,784,572 governor of Georgia, is the first candidate Vermont 179] 14 Montpelier 9,250 621,/60 from the Deep South to be elected Virginia 1788 10 Richmond 39,594 7,882,590 president since the Civil War.
Washington 1889 42 Olympia 66,544 6,664,195 West Virginia 1863 25 Charleston 24,077 ean Wisconsin 1848 30 Madison 52.
Easy to use and expandable, it helps create a market for personal computers in homes, offices, and schools.
Born to a family of modest means in Illinois, he was a Hollywood actor before entering politics.
In 1962 he switched allegiance from the Democrats to the Republicans, winning the California governorship in 1966 and the United States presidency in 1980.
A genial and relaxed personality, Reagan is credited with revitalizing America’s economy after a recession.
Nicknamed “Reaganomics,” his policies consisted of job creation, tax cuts, deregulation, but soaring budget deficits.
Reagan was reelected by a landslide in 1984, after record-breaking economic growth.
Though virulently anticommunist, his good relationship with Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev helped bring a peaceful end to the Cold War.
In three days of violence in Los Angeles, more than 50 people are killed and the city sustains about $1 billion in property damage.
Bush's popularity had soared following the successful conclusion of the Gulf War, but an economic recession (and Bush's violation of his pledge not to raise taxes) hampered him in the months prior to the election.
In midterm elections, the Republicans gain majorities in both houses of Congress.
Newt Gingrich, architect of the victories with his “Contract with America,"" becomes Speaker of the House.
The first phase of the war, Operation Desert Shield, is the buildup of United States and other coalition forces (including those from several Arab nations) in Saudi Arabia.
The second phase, Operation Desert Storm, begins with a massive air offensive, followed by a land campaign that lasts three days before the Iraqis retreat from Kuwait.
Oprah Winfrey One of the most influential media figures in the world, Winfrey overcame poverty to create a media empire incuding a talk show, a magazine, and stage and screen productions.
Ceremony at Ground Zero On September 11, 2002, relatives of those who died in the attack on the World Trade Center gathered to mark the first anniversary of 9/11.
Gore receives more popular votes than Bush, but the contest is decided by a few thousand highly controversial ballots cast in Florida, home state of Governor Jeb Bush, George Bush’s brother.
By the end of the year, however, the so-called “Internet Bubble” has largely burst, driving many companies out of business and others to suffer big drops in share value.
This offensive topples the country’s Taliban regime, which is accused of harboring the Al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden.
Suspected Al-Qaeda members and others are held in the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
They are classified as “illegal combatants,” and denied the rights of prisoners of war under the Geneva Convention.
The United States holds more than 2 million people in prison, almost a quarter of the world’s total.
African—Americans comprise 12 percent of the United States population but 44 percent of its prisoners.
US, UK, and other allied troops occupy the country and hold democractic elections, but a large-scale uprising against the occupation and sectarian violence soon result in a state of near civil war, with rising United States and UK casualties.
Saddam Hussein is captured, and found guilty by an Iraqi court of crimes against humanity; he is executed in December 2006.
By now several states legally recognize same-sex civil unions or domestic partnerships, but the use of the term ^marriage"" to describe these is highly controversial.
While Kerry is a Vietnam veteran, a conservative media campaign questioning his wartime service hurts his candidacy, as does the perception among some voters that he doesn't offer a credible plan for ending the conflict in Iraq.
There is widespread criticism of the federal government's slow response to the crisis, which leaves hundreds of thousands of people—most of them poor and African-American— homeless and destitute.
The state capital, Phoenix, is now the fastestgrowing city in the United States and sprawls over an area larger than Los Angeles.
Due to legal and illegal immigration, the percentage of foreignborn Americans is now at least 11 percent nationwide, according to the 2000 Census.
It expresses “profound regret"" for slavery and the exploitation of American Indians by white settlers.
The apology is all the more important as Virginia was at the heart of the Confederacy during the Civil War.
United States Representative Nancy Pelosi is sworn in as the first female Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The massacre is not only the worst school shooting in United States history, but also the country's deadliest single episode of gun violence.
Congress approves a $100 billion spending package to continue financing the war in Iraq.
The bill passes without setting a timetable for United States withdrawal from Iraq.
The investment bank Lehman Brothers goes bankrupt, while the giant Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac mortgage-underwriting companies are taken under government control.
The government pushes through an Economic Stabilization act and guarantees billions of dollars of support for other banks to prevent a complete meltdown of the global banking system.
His first priority is the managing of the economic crisis, but he seeks also to mark a change from American foreign policy under George W Bush by reaching out to Muslim countries, offering a dialogue with Iran.
He pledges an increase in United States troop levels in Afghanistan and pushes through a substantial health care reform bill.
By the time the well is sealed in September, around 5 million barrels of oil have leaked out.
Intense political pressure on BP in the United States results in the company pledging a $20 billion fund to compensate those affected by the disaster.
P e ""As * Surge in Iraq Despite widespread political opposition to a continued United States presence in Iraq, in January 2007 President Bush committed an additional 22,000 troops in a bid to secure Baghdad from sectarian violence.
CONSTITUTIONAL CRISIS OVER QUEBEC, 1981 French-speaking Québec's often-fraught relationship with English-speaking Canada reached a new low on November 4, 1981, when Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau met with every provincial premiere except Québec's Réne Lévesque to seek their signatures on a new Canadian constitution.
Québec still hasn't signed the document, and 14 years later the Québécois rejected independence in a referendum by a 1 percent majority.
For the first time a clear majority of French-speakers voted for secesssion, and Québec's future remains uncertain.
Chrétien stands down as federal prime minister in favor of Paul Martin.
The fleur-de-lis or lily was the traditional symbol of royalist France.
Mexico A large, mostly Spanish-speaking nation that won independence from Spain in 1821. bs C.1325 The Mexica start construction of the city of Tenochtitlán on Lake Texcoco.
By the 15th century, the Aztec Triple Alliance of Tenochtitlán, Texcoco, and Tlacopán dominates the Valley of Mexico, and its power reaches the Pacific and Atlantic coasts.
His government, known as the Porfiriato, was economically successful, but his rigging of the 1910 general election led to his overthrow in 1911.
He faces opposition from Zapata in the south, Pancho Villa in the north, and from within his own elite from Venustiano Carranza.
Wilson also sends warships to Tampico and troops to Veracruz in order to safeguard United States interests in Mexico.
Carranza is himself murdered a year later on the orders of his own army commander, Álvaro Obregón, who assumes the presidency.
Land reform accelerated, cooperative farms established, railroads nationalized, and United States and UK oil companies expelled.
In the concurrent presidential election, PAN's Felipe Calderón wins by a tiny margin over the PRD's Andrés Manuel López Obrador.
C.250-900 cE Maya city-states flourish in modern-day southern Mexico and Central America.
Maya civilization collapses as the cities are abandoned in the 8th and 9th centuries.
US-sponsored coup The CIA backed the coup of 1954 that overthrew President Arbenz after plantations run by the USowned United Fruit Company were expropriated.
The United States rejects the coup and the Organization of American States suspends Honduras.
Zelaya attempts a return but is not reinstated, so goes into exile in the Dominican Republic.
Hurricane Mitch A devastating blow to Nicaragua came in October 1998, when Hurricane Mitch wrecked the country, destroying the tourist industry and causing at least 3,800 deaths and many more injuries.
Multi-party elections result in the surprise defeat of Ortega and the victory of Violeta Chamorro, widow of a Somoza opponent assassinated in 1978, at the head of antiSandinista coalition.
In the second half of the century the territory is annexed to the Captaincy-General of Guatemala and becomes a European-oriented society of small landowners.
The army is then abolished and a highly developed welfare state is introduced.
It immediately grants the United States rights over an Atlantic-Pacific corridor through its territory so that a canal can be built between the Caribbean and Pacific Ocean.
Using an ingenious system of locks to carry ships up over the isthmus, the canal dramatically affected shipping, shortening the sea journey between America’s east and west coasts and obviating the need for a perilous rounding of Cape Horn at the tip of South America.
The canal resulted in a massive increase in international trade and improved the fortunes of Panama.
Lacking a legislative majority, she struggles to meet her promises to help the poor.
Cuba prospers under a slave-labor economy with access to North American markets.
Martí is killed on the first day of fighting and thousands of Cubans subsequently die in Spanish concentration camps.
Castro takes over with his brother Raül, Che Guevara, and Camilo Cienfuegos as his deputies.
Soviet deployment of nuclear weapons in Cuba leads to extreme SovietUnited States tension; war averted by Khrushchev ordering withdrawal of the weapons.
His brother, Raúl takes over and a slow process of liberalization begins.
In September, Cuba is devastated by Hurricanes Gustav and Ike, leaving 200,000 homeless.
Attacked by many for the lack of democracy and human rights in Cuba, Castro's policies have nevertheless given Cubans one of the highest life expectancies in Latin America and a high literacy rate.
Sugar cane, cotton, and cattle are established in a slave-labor economy.
The PNP is the oldest political party in the English-speaking Caribbean.
Portia Simpson-Miller Prime minister of Jamaica since 2006, Portia Simpson-Miller is the third female head of government in the anglophone Caribbean.
NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA 1992 Percival Patterson becomes prime minister upon Michael Manley's retirement. 1999 violent protests over fuel tax increases.
The first area actually to be settled by Spaniards, it becomes the center of Spanish activity and rule in the region, producing gold, sugar, and finally cattle.
E 1632 After settlement by the Spanish and French in the 16th and early 17th centuries, a permanent British settlement is established under Sir Thomas Warner.
Kitts & Nevis These popular tourist destinations lie at the northern end of the L| Leeward Islands.
Kitts, and on Nevis in 1628; the islands become a British colony in 1783.
Dominica Small Caribbean island named after Sunday, the day Christopher Columbus first landed there.
The production of sugar cane is established using slave labor, followed by cotton and coffee.
A new constitution is introduced as Dominica and other Windward Islands achieve separate status.
Vincent & the Grenadines lie towards the southern end of the Cl Windward Islands.
Republic of Gran Colombia formed including presentday Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama.
Against the state The combination of left-wing guerrilla groups, such as the M-19, and drug cartels made Colombia one of the world's more dangerous countries in the 1980s and 1990s. "" í Ty | Po d The 12 countries of South America—the world’s fourthlargest continent—were colonial outposts of European powers until the early 19th century.
A series of wars with local nationalist movements resulted in independence for most of the continent by the 1820s.
Right-wing paramilitary groups start a murder campaign against UP politicians.
Violence by both left-wing groups and death squads run by drug cartels continues.
Indigenous peoples' democratic rights are guaranteed, but territorial claims are not addressed.
Right-wing independent candidate Alvaro Uribe Vélez wins the presidential election.
José Antonio Páez rules Venezuela; coffee planters are effectively in control.
Construction begins on a new railway system and Guzmán develops agriculture and education.
Its ports are blockaded by British, Italian, and German warships in response.
The oil industry is developed and Venezuela becomes world's largest exporter of oil.
A military coup overthrows him and Carlos Delgado Chalbaud becomes president with United States and military backing.
DECISIVE MOMENT BATTLE OF CARABOBO, 1821 On June 24, 1821, independence fighters led by Simón Bolívar defeated Spanish royalists on the plains to the west of Caracas.
Bolívar is shown here accepting the standard after a victory that all but freed Venezuela from Spanish control, with independence finally assured two years later.
Breaking the terms of an armistice he had signed with the Spanish government in November 1820, Bolívar had attacked the royalist garrison on Lake Maracaibo.
A sharp fall in world oil prices leads to cuts in state welfare and social unrest.
Chavez embarks on a “Bolivarian Revolution” of social and political reform, using oil revenues to fund education and health programs.
Chavez narrowly loses referendum on extending his constitutional changes.
High oil revenues have funded President Chavez's ambitious program of social reform.
Guyana 1 A former British colony, Guyana is the only English-speaking nation on the continent.
Tensions remain high until the PNC leader, Desmond Hoyte, dies in 2003.
Most live in the Netherlands, boosting the national economy with remittances.
Of the home population of 450,000, more than 90 percent live near the coast, the rest in scattered villages in the interior.
Centered around Quito, the region rapidly develops into an important commercial center.
C.1527 On the death of Inca Huayna Capac, the Inca Empire is divided in two between Huáscar in Cuzco and his younger brother Atahuallpa, who is based in Quito.
Atahuallpa defeats Huáscar in 1532 in a battle outside Cuzco to become sole ruler, only to be captured by Pizarro later that year.
The war of succession fatally weakens the Inca Empire, which falls to the Spanish invaders.
It is transferred to the jurisdiction of the Viceroyalty of New Granada in 1739.
Simón Bolívar incorporates Ecuador into Gran Colombia, along with Colombia, Panama, and Venezuela.
The country is also a net exporter of oil obtained from Amazonia, east of the Andes.
Peru Once the heart of the Inca « Empire, Peru has a large indigenous population of Quechua speakers.
It is followed by the Nazca,200 BcE-800 cz, who first develop large-scale irrigation systems.
By the 15th century, the Inca Empire reaches as far as presentday central Chile, and the Inca language, Quechua, has been imposed on all its subjects.
The Spanish melted down many such objects found in the Inca capital, Cuzco, for shipment to Spain.
Victor Raul Haya de la Torre founds nationalist and radical American Popular Revolutionary Alliance in exile in Mexico.
Land reform begins to redistribute land to poor peasant farmers, but the military is used to suppress a communist-inspired insurgency.
It attempts to alleviate poverty and adopts a policy of widespread nationalization.
Alberto Fujimori, an independent, is elected president on an anticorruption platform and introduces austerity program.
A referendum DECISIVE MOMENT CAPTURE OF COMRADE GONZALO, 1992 The self-styled Comrade Gonzalo, Abimael Guzmán, was captured in Lima on September 12, _ 1992.
A philosophy teacher, Guzmán founded the © Maoist guerrilla group Shining Path in 1970, drawing support from among the marginalized rural poor.
Shining Path embarked on a campaign. $ of bombings and murders throughout the 1980s, in which an estimated 140,000 people were killed.
His capture was a severe blow to the group, which thereafter declined as a threat.
The end of Shining Path power allowed Peru to promote tourism for the first time in years.
Behind bars The Fujimori government displayed a defiant Guzmán for the benefit of the world’s press.
Without his charismatic leadership Shining Path soon lost momentum. approves a new constitution allowing him to stand again as president.
Within three decades, Potosí is the largest city in the Americas with 120,000 inhabitants.
Three Amerindian revolts over the seizure of ancestral lands are crushed.
Bolivia loses coastal Atacama and its rich nitrate deposits to Chile and is left landlocked.
He officially ends the War of the Pacific with Chile and starts a | program of wide-ranging social, administrative, and economic reforms, building new railroads and developing the mining industry.
Paz Estenssoro of the MNR takes power with the help of national police and a militia recruited from the mines.
Education is reformed, universal suffrage is introduced—giving full rights to the Amerindian community—and the tin mines are nationalized.
President Paz Zamora makes pact with 1970s dictator General Hugo Banzer, leader of the nationalist Democratic Action party. 1990 4 million acres (1. million hectares) of rainforest are recognized as Amerindian territory.
A new constitution guarantees greater rights to the indigenous majority.
South America's only Portuguese-speaking nation was a 19th-century empire in its own right.
He is accompanied by Jesuits who play a key role in the unification of the colony and the exploration of the interior.
They are expelled in 1567 by Mem de Sá, who founds the city of Rio de Janeiro.
The Portuguese cannot expel them as their country is now part of Spain; in the end, the Dutch are expelled by a naval force sent from Rio de Janeiro.
Pedro uses a former British admiral and a former French general to help him drive the Portuguese out of the country.
Although no set battles are fought, both sides use guerrilla tactics in the war before the Portuguese eventually withdraw.
Rivalry between the states and the influence of the army in government cause political tensions.
DECISIVE MOMENT STUDENT RIOTS, 1968 Inspired by rioters around the world, notably in France and Mexico, students took to the streets of São Paulo on September 3, 1968, to protest the military dictatorship that had seized power in 1964.
In the following years, hundreds died in leftand right-wing guerrilla warfare.
State censorship of the media was tightened and many of Brazil's intellectuals were forced into exile.
Emergency measures were kept in place until 1978, and the military remained in power until 1985.
Students on the rampage A police van is enthusiastically trashed before it is torched by a protester during riots in São Paulo.
Brazil's military dictators suppressed the protests with extreme brutality.
PEDRO I OF BRAZIL, SPEAKING AT THE IPIRANGA RIVER, SEPTEMBER 7, 1822 1930 Coffee prices collapse.
There is rapid industrial growth as measures are taken to reverse the country's growing economic dependence on coffee through import substitution industrialization.
Vargas, although a dictator, wins applause for his nationalist policies and economic success.
General Eurico Gaspar Dutra is elected president, but the economy falters as inflation soars.
Faced with economic problems and political infighting, he commits suicide.
He leaves behind a letter blaming “dark forces"" (meaning the United States and its local supporters) for blocking his efforts to make reforms.
He tries to break dependence on United States trade, but his autocratc and unpredictable manner arouses opposition and undermines his reforms, and he is forced to resign after only seven months in office.
He bans all existing political parties, but creates two official new ones.
Fast-track economic development, the so-called “Brazilian Miracle,” is counterbalanced by ruthless suppression of left-wing activists.
Leftand right-wing terrorism, including the capture of several diplomats, becomes a feature of Brazilian politics.
Illegal diggers rush in by the thousands, threatening the way of life of the indigenous Yanomami.
Chico Mendes, the rubber-tappers' union leader and leading environmentalist, is murdered.
President ""Lula"" The first working-class president in Brazil's history, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva came to power in 2003 pledging to abolish hunger by putting three meals a day on the plates of every Brazilian.
In 2006 he was reelected with more than 60 percent of the vote, despite a corruption scandal that tarnished his reputation as a reformer.
Collor de Mello resigns and is impeached for corruption; he is the first Brazilian president to be impeached by Congress.
Congress resists constitutional reforms, but approves privatizations of state monopolies.
He is elected on a social platform to fight poverty and hunger, but in office his policies resemble those of his predecessors.
Brazil's ethanol industry makes it a world leader in cutting carbon emissions.
The Guarani, settled agriculturalists who live in the Paraguay river basin, help the Spanish conquer the southern Chaco area, home to nomadic hunters who raid Guarani settlements.
Over the next 50 years, it is ruled by dictatorships and cut off from the outside world.
It is protected from the unrest affecting its neighbors and becomes an economic power.
He is the first of three dictators that dominate the history of the country.
General Stroessner Dictator from 1954 until he was deposed in 1989, General Alfredo Stroessner was the son of German immigrants and a virulent anticommunist who used torture and kidnappings to sustain his rule.
His son Francisco succeeds him, but brings about disaster with the War of the Triple Alliance.
More than two-thirds of its population are killed in the war, plunging the country into a lengthy period of economic decline.
Recovery is slow as warring caudillos set up short-lived dictatorships.
His repressive military regime stifles opposition and rigs elections to win repeated electoral success.
He accuses his predecessor Lino Oviedo of plotting against him and is embroiled in a controversy over his alleged fathering of children while a bishop.
Lautaro, the leader of the Araucanian Indians, who offer fierce resistance, is killed in 1557.
Chile extends its territory northward and ends Bolivia’s access to the coast.
His policies are blocked by the legislature, and he resigns 19924 but is recalled im1925 after the army intervenes to support him; a revised constitution bolsters his powers.
Bernardo O'Higgins The illegitimate son of an Irishman in Spanish government service, O'Higgins spent his childhood in Europe but returned to Chile in 1802 committed to its independence.
Brutal dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet begins, who imprisons, tortures, and kills many of his opponents.
Pinochet, who has returned to Chile, is deemed unfit to face trial, and is released.
After an explosion, 33 miners are trapped underground, but are all safely rescued after 69 days.
By end of the century, the whole country is divided into large cattle ranches.
Batllismo creates the first welfare state in Latin America, with pensions and free education and health service; also implements nationalizations, church is disestablished, and death penalty abolished.
Decade of great prosperity follows until world agricultural prices plummet.
Political freedoms are denied and the left is brutally repressed.0,000 emigrate.
Sometimes described as a large cattle ranch with a country attached, Uruguay is a successful wool and meat exporter.
Livestock products bring in more than a third of current export earnings.
Conflict ensues between Unitarians advocating a centralized state ruled from Buenos Aires and the provincial Federalists of the interior.
His rule is authoritarian, even requiring the wearing of red to show support for the regime.
SOUTH AMERICA ARGENTINIAN PRESIDENT JUAN PERON Juan Perón first came to prominence as part of a group of proto-fascist army colonels who overthrew the government in 1943.
As secretary of labor and later vice president, he backed welfare legislation, winning the approval of the trade unions, who became the backbone of his later support.
He pursued a path between capitalism and communism and was strongly nationalistic, anti-US, and anticommunist.
In power Perón became increasingly authoritarian, jailing opponents and censoring the press.
While his wife Evita launched a public charm offensive, he purged the trade unions of communists and reorganized them along fascist lines.
Perón's second term as president from 1973-74 was not a success, but Peronism continues to be major political force.
Savings are wiped out as the peso is devalued, ending parity with the United States dollar.
EY 4^ on United Kingdom A small island kingdom í that once ruled the largest empire in the history of the world.
Over the next century Anglo-Saxon invaders push the native Celtic population out of the south and east of the island.
Augustine settles in Canterbury and begins to convert the kingdom of Kent to Christianity.
For his victories against the Danes, his wise rule, and his artistic patronage, Alfred is known as “the Great,” the only English king ever to be known by this title.
After the capture of London in 886, he is recognized as king of all England.
The world’s second-smallest continent has a great variety of landscapes, climates, and ethnic groups.
Twice in the last century, conflict in Europe led to world war, but the continent is now largely at peace, with many countries members of the European Union.
As William I, or “William the Conqueror” , he crushes a succession of rebellions and starts an ambitious castle-building program, including the Tower of London.
This protects the nobility's rights against the excessive use of royal power in matters of taxation, justice, religion, and foreign policy.
The charter lays down the respective rights and responsibilities of laymen and the church in relation to the power of the crown.
Important at the time, the charter's relevance lessened as feudalism declined, and under the Tudors it was forgotten.
The Model Parliament summoned by Edward I in 1295 is even more representative in its composition.
A treaty in 1360 gives Edward much land in return for renouncing his claim, but the French renew war in 1369 and drive the English out of many of their possessions by 1374.
Under the 1420 Treaty of Troyes, he becomes regent of France and heir to the French throne.
After 1429 the French, led by Joan of Arc, push the English out of France, finally ending the war in 1453.
After the end of his marriage to Anne Boleyn in 1536, he subsequently marries four more times.
Her childless marriage to Philip II of Spain, the leading Catholic monarch in Europe, makes her unpopular, as does loss in 1558 of Calais, the last English possession in France.
DECISIVE MOMENT DEFEAT OF LLYWELYN THE LAST, 1282 Wales has a much older history as a nation than England.
Driven out of England by the AngloSaxons in the 5th and 6th centuries, the Celts formed a number of principalities in Wales that were united in the early 1200s.
When Edward | came to the English throne in 1272, he summoned the Welsh prince, Llywelyn Il, to pay homage.
After the prince was killed that year in an ambush, Welsh morale was crushed and Edward swiftly reinforced his conquest by building castles such as Harlech to subdue his new realm.
The defeat established an English hegemony over Wales that endures today.
In all, 13 colonies are established along the eastern seaboard of America, as well as colonies in Canada and the Caribbean.
The creation of a British Empire during and after the 1600s brings huge wealth into the country.
A believer in the Divine Right of Kings, he rules without parliament from 1629-40. 1639 civil War begins in Scotland over religious differences between the king and the Scottish church.
A Catholic rebellion in Ireland in 1641 and civil war in England between king and parliament in 1642 turn the conflict into a threekingdom war.
In 1648 Charles is decisively defeated at Preston by the parliamentarian army, led by Oliver Cromwell, and in early 1649 is put on trial for treason. 1649 charles is executed and a commonwealth, or republic, is established.
Catholic opposition in Ireland is brutally crushed by Oliver Cromwell, who acts as Lord Protector from 1653 until his death in 1658.
An attempt by Charles's son Charles II to regain the throne in 1650-51 is defeated.
The English republic, however, is not a success, because it fails to gain support or establish lasting institutions.
Dalraida in the west, the Pictish kingdom in the north, Strathclyde in the southwest, and Lothian in the east.
The Scottish Parliament After the accession of James VI to the English crown in 1603, Scotland kept its parliament until the Act of Union in 1707.
With the passage of a Bill of Rights in 1689, Catholics are barred from the throne and a constitutional form of government is established, with parliamentary consent becoming necessary for the king to levy taxes, suspend laws, or raise a peacetime army.
When he eventually returns to Scotland in 1424, he proves a capable and enlightened monarch.
Scotland retains its separate legal system and Presbyterian Church, but the Scottish parliament is abolished.
A Jacobite rebellion in 1715 led by the son of James II is easily defeated.
In 1811 his son is made Prince Regent to govern the country until his father dies.
A Spanish garrison is also withdrawn in 1811, leaving islands uninhabited.
UK dispatches a task force, forcing Argentinian surrender after six weeks of fighting; about 1,000 people are killed.
Horatio Nelson defeats the French at the naval battles of the Nile and Trafalgar , where he loses his life.
The Duke of Wellington, successful commander of forces in the Peninsular War of 1808-14 that evicts the French from Spain and Portugal, finally defeats Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815.
Working-class men are enfranchised by the Reform Acts of 1867 and 1884, while the property qualification for all members of parliament is abolished in 1858 and the secret ballot introduced in 1872.
Victoria goes into mourning for 13 years, refusing to appear in public.
To pay for this, it taxes the rich, causing a major constitutional crisis with the aristocratic House of Lords, solved by the 1911 Parliament Act, which drastically reduces its powers.
Clement Attlee Prime minister from 1945—51, Attlee transformed Britain by introducing the National Health Service and by nationalizing industries.
UK and France collude with Israel to invade Egypt but are forced out under United States pressure.
The government is forced to nationalize the Northern Rock building society in February and in October the HSBC and Lloyds TSB banks are taken under majority government control.
The additional government expenditure sees Britain’s budget deficit rise to 11. percent of GDP by 2010.
UNITED KINGDOM NORTHERN IRELAND Northern Ireland consists of six counties in the north of Ireland that remained part of the UK when the 26 southern counties became independent.
The province is often called Ulster, one of the four ancient kingdoms of Ireland.
By the 1175 Treaty of Windsor, the High King of Ireland recognizes the English King as his overlord.
Scottish Presbyterian settlers move to Ulster, taking land from Irish Catholics.
The Irish parliament is abolished and Ireland obtains representation at the Westminster parliament.
The British execute the leaders, increasing support for the Republican cause.
They trade tin and other commodities up the Rhóne and into northern and western France with the Celts and other peoples.
The new territory is divided into Gallia Lugdunensis in the north, Gallia Belgica in the northeast, and Aquitania in the west.
He secures power by defending his Gallic Empire’s frontiers against barbarian attack.
Clovis's reign marks the foundation of the Frankish empire that soon covers western and northern France, except Brittany, and extends east into the Low Countries and Germany.
The Burgundians control the south and east, and the Visigoths the far southwest.
This wins them the support of their Gallo-Roman subjects and of eastern Roman emperors.
Gradually eliminating rivals, the Frankish kingdom becomes the strongest power in Europe by 600.
This has the effect of weakening the kingdom, resulting in instability, civil war, and assassinations.
In return for military help, Pope T4 Án ram uii. a pora ce e m sean 2E ae | E tW Y oy Hu.
As the ""parish church of the kings of France,"" it also saw the coronation of Henry VI of England, crowned king of France in 1431.
RENAISSANCE KING FRANCIS | Francis | succeeded to the French crown in 1515 upon the death of his wife's father, Louis XII, since women were prohibited from inheriting the throne.
Francis was France's first Renaissance king, surrounding himself with musicians and poets at his court, where visitors included Leonardo da Vina.
While his reign proved the catalyst for a flowering of the arts, Francis's political record was more mixed.
He was defeated by Habsburg emperor Charles V at the Battle of Pavia in 1525 and forced to surrender any daims in Italy after a period of imprisonment.
Zacharias authorizes him to depose the Merovingian king and assume the kingship of the Franks himself as the first Carolingian king.
The empire is briefly reunited under Charles the Fat but it finally breaks up into five kingdoms as Burgundy and Provence break away.
He defeats an Anglo-German invasion at Bouvines in 1214, recovering all English lands in France except Gascony, and makes France the strongest nation in Europe.
Under the 1420 Treaty of Troyes, he becomes regent of France and, by marrying King Charles VI's daughter, heir to the French throne.
His successor, Charles the Bold , unites his territories, but the French king Louis XI seizes French Burgundy while the rest becomes part of the Habsburg family lands.
In 1525 the capture of Francis I by Spanish troops at Pavia and his subsequent imprisonment in Spain brings the wars to a climax.
Francis renounces French claims in Italy, notably Milan, but hostilities are renewed and are only settled at the Treaty of CateauCambrésis in 1559.
The Huguenots are granted freedom of worship in the 1598 Edict of Nantes.
He is succeeded by Louis XIII, whose first minister, Cardinal Richelieu, consolidates the monarchy's standing both at home and abroad.
France defeats Spanish attacks and gains Roussillon from Spain in 1642.
In 1640 the French support Portuguese and Catalan revolts against Spanish rule, and they aid the Neapolitan revolt in 1647.
Louis on the Senegal River marks the start of France's colonial empire in West Africa.
During his reign, the absolutism of the ancien régime reaches its peak.
Abroad he establishes French hegemony over much of Western Europe in a series of victorious military campaigns, pushing France's borders north into Flanders and east to the Rhine.
However, from 1700, as Europe unites in resistance, his position begins to be undermined.
Philip is eventually recognized as Bourbon king of Spain, but renounces any future claim to the throne of France.
His successor, Louis XV , lacks interest in government and politics and is less successful in campaigns abroad and in countering growing opposition at home.
As a result of British success in the war, France is obliged to cede almost all of its possessions in North America, the West Indies, and India to Britain, and lands west of the Mississippi to Spain, and is left with little of its large American empire remaining.
As the nobles and clergy (the first and second estates) lose control to the “third estate” , a national assembly is formed by the third estate and demands reform of the monarchy.
Louis XVI's indecisive response sparks the storming of the Bastille on July 14.
Further hesitation on Louis XVI's part prompts the women of Paris to march to Versailles in October to demand bread; they take the royal family to Paris as hostages.
However, they are brought back as prisoners and Louis is forced to accept the new constitution.
The Paris Commune led by Georges Danton seizes power and a national convention replaces the national assembly and abolishes the monarchy.
Control of the country passes from the moderate Girondins to the extremist Jacobins, led by Maximilien Francois Robespierre as the “Reign of Terror” begins with a series of mass executions.
A new constitution in 1795 establishes the more moderate Directory which, however, becomes increasingly corrupt.
At home he introduces many reforms, including the legal “Code Napoléon""; abroad he defeats the Austrians and Russians at Austerlitz in 1805 and the Prussians at Jena in 1806.
The Bourbon monarchy is reinstalled, with Louis XVIII, younger brother of Louis XVII, as king.
Louis XVIII returns again. oes EUROPE Paris Commune This medal was awarded to a supporter of the short-lived Paris Commune of 1871, formed in the period of turmoil following the Franco-Prussian war.
Charles-Louis Napoleon, nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte, is elected president with more than 70 percent of the total vote.
He proclaims a Second Empire based on plebiscitary autocracy and becomes involved in wars with Russia in the Crimea in 1854—56 and with Austria in 1859, gaining Savoy and Nice from Piedmont in 1860.
French armies are quickly defeated at Metz and Sedan, where Napoleon is captured.
The Third Republic is proclaimed and continues resistance until Prussian forces enter Paris in January 1871.
Napoleon III Nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte, Charles-Louis Napoleon twice tried to overthrow Louis-Philippe but was elected president of France in 1848, i seized power in 1851, » and became emperor the EN — following year.
The German advance toward Paris is stopped at the Marne, and by the end of 1914 a stalemate develops along the western front.
FRENCH OVERSEAS DEPARTMENTS & TERRITORIES CLIPPERTON ISLAND French Dependency off coast of Mexico, named after a pirate, John Clipperton 1855 Claimed by France.
EUROPA AND OTHER ISLANDS Five groups of islands off the west coast of Madagascar and claimed by that country.
SOUTHERN & ANTARCTIC TERRITORIES Islands in the south Indian Ocean plus the French Antarctic claim.
RESISTANCE LEADER AND PRESIDENT gi | CHARLES DE GAULLE The man commonly referred to in France as Général de Gaulle was a French military leader and statesman.
After war broke out, he reached the rank of brigadier general, becoming leader of the Free French government in London and of the French Resistance.
Following liberation in 1944, he led the French provisional government.
Called to form a government in 1958, de Gaulle was the Fifth Republic's first president, 1958—69.
GENERAL DE GAULLE, BROADCASTING FROM LONDON, JUNE 18, 1940 1918 The Allies break through German lines in the summer of 1918 and force an armistice in November.
By later agreements, France receives mandates over Lebanon and Syria, and territories in West Africa.
They withdraw in 1925 as the Locarno Pact confirms the existing FrancoGerman border and promises better relations between the two powers.
UK and France appease Germany at Munich in 1938, but offer support to Poland when Hitler occupies neighboring Czechoslovakia in 1939.
Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg in 1952, the first step on the road toward European union.
France hands over its remaining possessions in the subcontinent to India.
The National Assembly is dissolved but the Gaullists win the general election.
DECISIVE MOMENT STUDENT PROTESTS, 2006 On March 18, 2006, some 700,000 protesters converged on Paris and clashed violently with riot police.
The demonstrators were objecting to a controversial bill to deregulate the labor market by making it easier to fire people under 26.
The bill was perceived as grossly unfair because it made young people's jobs insecure.
Giving in to the protesters was seen by many observers as a missed opportunity for France to implement badly needed economic reforms and to free its labor market from stifling regulation.
Revolutionary spirit Young protesters storm the Place de la Nation in Paris and throw the government into turmoil. d 1969 De Gaulle resigns after defeat in referendum on regional reform and is replaced as president by Georges Pompidou, who dies in office in 1974.
The National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen’s strong showing in first round of voting sends shockwaves throughout France and leads to mass protests.
These elections are first with presidential and parliamentary elections fought on the same five-year timetable, ending difficulties of cohabitation.
Unrest among deprived immigrant youths sparks riots that spread throughout cities.
Tough new restrictions on immigration make it harder for unskilled migrants to settle in France.
President Sarkozy’s party suffers heavy losses in regional elections, losing in 20 out of 22 regions.
Monaco A tiny principality on the Mediterranean coast, E] used as a tax haven by Europe's super-rich.
A new succession law is passed, designed to keep the Grimaldi family on the throne if Crown Prince Albert has no heir.
The kingdom contines to grow at Muslim Spain's expense over the next century.
By this time, Córdoba, the capital city of the Umayyad Emirate, is the largest and one of the most prosperous cities in Western Europe.
James the Apostle in Compostela; the town soon becomes second only to Rome as a major pilgrim destination.
El Escorial Philip Il ordered the building of El Escorial, near Madrid, as a monastery and burial place for Spain's kings.
It was begun in 1563 by Juan Bautista de Toledo, a Renaissance Spanish architect . who had worked in Italy, and completed in 1584.
Spain now consists of the kingdoms of León and Navarre in the north, Castile in the center, Aragon in the east, and the Almohad Caliphate in the south.
Muslim Spain also supports a thriving Jewish population that is tolerated by the Muslim authorities.
Her claim is contested by Henry's heiress, Juana la Beltraneja, but is enforced through the skilful generalship of her husband, Ferdinand. i it 1478 The Spanish Inquisition is formed to test the sincerity of Jewish converts to Christianity.
It is not officially abolished until 1834, and acquires a sinister reputation for its work.
Moorish ceramics This delicately patterned ceramic dish dates from the period of the emirate of Granada.
Moorish arts and architecture achieved a high degree of sophistication during the 13th and 14th centuries.
In Cuba, the original indigenous peole are reduced from 50,000 to about 5,000 in 1550, due to deaths from European diseases against which they have no immunity.
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, IN A LETTER WRITTEN IN 1500 involved in lengthy battles with Protestant princes in the empire, and in wars with France, to the neglect of Spain.
His brother Ferdinand rules the Austrian Habsburg lands and becomes Holy Roman Emperor, while his son Philip II rules Spain along with Sardinia, Naples and Sicily, the Duchy of Milan, Franch-Comté, and the Netherlands and Luxembourg.
Tunis was first recaptured by the Ottomans in 1569, but recaptured by the Spanish in 1572, only to be lost again two years later.
Philip II invades to enforce his claim, winning the Battle of Alcantara.
Baroque king King Philip IV, seen here in a portrait by Diego Velázquez, Spain's outstanding painter of the age, was an active patron of the arts.
The French campaigns are directed by Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister to Louis XIII, who sets out to attack and dismember the Habsburg Empire in Europe.
The subsequent French invasion of Catalonia leads to a long, inconclusive conflict in the region.
Louis XIV of France claims the throne for his Bourbon grandson, Philip, while Britain and others propose the Habsburg Archduke Charles of Austria.
Spain and its European possessions become a battleground for competing Portuguese, British, French, and Austrian forces.
The French Bourbon candidate becomes Philip V of Spain, but renounces any claim to the French throne.
Spain loses southern Netherlands, Milan, Naples, and Sardinia to Austria; Britain keeps Gibraltar and DECISIVE MOMENT PEACE OF UTRECHT, 1713 The Peace of Utrecht comprised a series of treaties signed in the Dutch city of Utrecht in 1713.
By ending the War of the Spanish Succession, the Peace was one of the great achievements of 18th-century diplomacy.
The treaties were signed by the representatives of Louis XIV of France and Philip V of Spain on the one hand, and of Queen Anne of Britain, the Duke of Savoy, and the United Provinces on the other.
Savoy received Sicily and parts of the Duchy of Milan, while Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI received the Spanish Netherlands, the Kingdom of Naples, Menorca, and the right to supply slaves to Spain's American colonies.
Spain is now a minor power in a Europe dominated by France, Britain, and Austria.
The conflict spreads to Spain the next year and Napoleon places his brother Joseph Bonaparte on the throne, thus provoking a Spanish rebellion and British intervention in the Peninsular War.
Treaty between — Britain and Spain Sardinia, and most of the Duchy of Milan.
By the treaty concluded between Spain and Britain on July 13, 1713 , Britain received Gibraltar and Menorca.
Under Spain's 1978 constitution King Juan Carlos had handed power to an elected legislature and became a nonruling monarch.
This caused animosity within the armed forces, which led to the attempted military coup.
But within hours the coup collapsed when the king himself appeared on television, calling for public support for the democratic government.
Fascism's last gasp Colonel Antonio Tejero fires shots into the air as he announces the coup, telling deputies to await the arrival of a ""competent military authority"" who never came.
Right-wing military uprising against the republic coordinated by General Francisco Franco, who is subsequently appointed leader of the nationalists and invades from Morocco.
Germany and Italy support the Nationalists, the USSR supports the Republicans, with individual socialists and communists from across Europe joining the International Brigades.
The Guggenheim Opened to the public in 1997 and dedicated to modern and contemporary art, the Guggenheim Museum formed part of a large and successful regeneration plan for the northern city of Bilbao.
He takes a hard line on Basque separatism and skilfully manages a rapidly improving economy.
The Aznar government loses general election three days later to the PSOE, led by José Luis Zapatero, who pulls Spanish troops out of Iraq.
The goverment offers peace talks to ETA about the future of the Basque region.
ETA declares a “permanent ceasefire“ in 2006 but it is broken the same year by a car bomb at Madrid airport.
The rights vested in the house of Foix pass by marriage to the Kings of Navarre and, in 1589 on the accession of Henri of Navarre as Henri IV, to the crown of France.
Portugal An Atlantic-facing country with natural borders f and a long maritime and imperial history.
By 1539 over 12,000 slaves are being sold in the city's markets each year.
Territories are also acquired in Angola and Mozambique and the east Indies.
PORTUGUESE KING SEBASTIAO | The tragedy of King Sebastião is one of the seminal events of Portuguese history.
At the age of 24, he received permission from the pope to lead a crusade against the infidel in Morocco.
Landing on the North African coast, he unwisely led his troops inland, and, on August 4, 1578, was met by a well-equipped Muslim army at the Battle of Alcazarquivir.
Doubts over his fate gave rise to the legend of the king who would one day return.
In 1822 his son and regent, Dom Pedro, declares independence as Emperor Pedro I of Brazil.
Left-wing Armed Forces Movement overthrows Caetano in bloodless revolution.
After they leave, the Romans rebuild their city and protect it with the Servian Wall.
In 23 BCE he is awarded the title Augustus (“the deeply respected one”) by the Senate.
Emperor Constantine also establishes a new eastern capital of the empire at Constantinople.
E S Mp HUAN ARNAN i | i l SEM pe 4 "" > 4 H} l l 4 ] ‘oe $ A Ms B m Sow ST The civilized invaders Many of the tribes that invaded the Roman Empire quickly absorbed Roman culture and beliefs.
This mausoleum was built in Ravenna by the Ostrogoths for their leader Theodoric.
After they defeat and kill Emperor Valens at Adrianople in 378, they are allowed to settle in what is now Bulgaria.
After the death of Theodosius I, the empire is now permanently split between eastern and western halves.
By the time the Vandals cross to North Africa in 1429 and capture Carthage, the western Roman Empire is on the point of collapse.
Many of these invading tribes, however, are already Christian or soon convert to Christianity, adopting Roman customs and culture and taking over many of the institutions and practices of the empire.
They never conquer the whole peninsula; Byzantines retain control of parts of Italy from Ravenna.
Writers such as Boccaccio and Dante, artists and sculptors such as Giotto, Fra Angelico, Donatello, Raphael, and Michaelangelo, and architects such as Alberti and Brunelleschi receive patronage from the various Italian princes and dukes and transform the Italian cities and courts into the leading artistic and cultural centers of Europe.
The wars end in defeat for France and also mark the decline of the city-states, which suffer major devastation and are adversely affected by the new economic conditions created by the severance of traditional land and sea é 4 routes across the Mediterranean to the east and the opening of the new Atlantic route.
France gains some land, but Spain is the big winner, controlling Milan, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia, and now dominates the Italian peninsula and the western Mediterranean.
The Reformation has little effect in Italy, which remains staunchly Catholic.
BUON A BROT’ states are caught up in the fighting as France threatens the Italian possessions of Habsburg Spain.
A revolt in Naples against Spanish rule in 1647 is actively supported by French troops.
After the War of the Spanish Succession its position is usurped by Habsburg Austria, which acquires Milan, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia.
Napoleon redraws the country’s map and absorbs Piedmont, Genoa, Tuscany, and the Papal States directly into France, and creates a kingdom of Italy in the north and Naples in the south.
Sardinia—Piedmont and the Papal States remain independent, while the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies gains its independence.
Nationalist revolts or popular uprisings against Austrian, papal, or illiberal Italian rule break out in Turin, Milan, Genoa, Modena, Parma, Naples, and many other Italian cities from 1830 onward, although all are easily crushed by authoritarian powers.
A Roman republic is established by radicals, including Guiseppe Garibaldi, but the republic is crushed by French troops called in to restore Pope Pius IX to power.
In the north, nationalist troops are defeated by Austrian troops at the battle of Novara; Austria regains control of its Italian possessions.
Renaissance man Michelangelo was a painter, sculptor, architect, poet, and engineer.
B -~ 1849 Victor Emmanuel Il becomes king of Sardinia-Piedmont and appoints Count Camillo di Cavour as prime minister.
They institute liberal domestic reforms and increasingly act as the leaders of the Italian nationalist and unification movement.
GIUSEPPE GARIBALDI, ROME, 1849 1859-70 The unification of Italy is achieved under the leadership of Victor Emmanuel II of Sardinia-Piedmont , Count Cavour, and the forces of Giuseppe Garibaldi.
Most of northern Italy is united by Sardinia-Piedmont after the War of Unification against Austria in 1859, won at the Battle of Magenta with the help of French troops.
Venice is ceded by Austria after a brief war in 1866, and Rome is occupied by Italian troops in 1870.
As the country is unified, the national capital shifts from Turin to Florence in 1865 and then to Rome in 1870.
Despite this unification under a single monarch, however, Italy remains more a union of provinces than a single country, with strong regional differences existing between the industrial and rich north and the agricultural and poor south.
British and French troops are rushed to Italy to save it from collapse.
In the closing months of the war, the Italians score a major victory over Austria-Hungary at Vittorio Veneto.
It also gains land in Libya from British-held Egypt and from French West Africa.
Italy, however, is dissatisfied with the peace settlement, believing it has received insufficient land or prestige as a result of having fought on the winning side of the war.
Proclamation at Teano On October 26, 1860, Giuseppe Garibaldi greeted Victor Emanuel II at Teano and hailed him king of Italy.
Thus Garibaldi sacrificed republican hopes for the sake of unity under a monarchy.
EUROPE DECISIVE MOMENT FASCIST MARCH ON ROME, 1922 On October 28 ,1922, groups of Blackshirts began massing at locations outside Rome.
Their leader, Mussolini , intended to seize power by marching on the capital, taking advantage of social discontent and the fear of a socialist revolution.
Italy's prime minister, Luigi Facta, ordered a state of siege for the city, but the king, wishing to avoid civil war, refused to sign the order.
As a result, the army did not oppose the fascists and Mussolini assumed power the following day.
Mussolini becomes Il Duce, or leader, and heads a coalition of fascists and nationalists.
After international pressure, Italy withdraws, although it receives a large indemnity from Greece.
In 1937 Italy also joins the AntiComintern Pact with Germany and Japan.
In 1941 it participates in the German invasion of the USSR, as well as acquiring control of parts of southeast France, western Yugoslavia and Croatia, the Adriatic coast, and much of Greece.
It soon loses its empire in East Africa to Allied forces, and only holds out in Libya with German support until 1943, when it is evicted from North Africa.
Mussolini is imprisoned but is helped to escape to the north, where he sets up a republican, fascist government.
Italy declares war on Germany, which promptly occupies most of Italy and and continues to fight the Allies on Italian soil.
Amintore Fanfani is prime minister on five separate occasions between 1954 and 1987, often for no more than a few months at a time, and also serves as interim president in 1978.
The Treaty of Rome At the signing of the Treaty of Rome on March 25, 1957, Italy became one of the founder members of the European Economic Community, the organization that gave rise to today's European Union.
Italy has remained a fervent member ever since, as its economy, industry, and infrastructure have all benefited massively from membership.
Former prime minister Craxi is convicted, while another former prime minister, Giulio Andreotti, is brought to trial accused of dealing with the Sicilian Mafia.
When he leaves office, Berlusconi has been the longest-serving Italian prime minister since 1945.
The new government has a working majority of 67 in the Chamber of Deputies but only 2 in the Senate.
Peter’s Basilica, ten other buildings in Rome, and the pope’s summer residence at Castel Gandolfo.
Italy accepts the himself as a conservative i Vatican City as an independent state, in theological affairs.
The basilica and its public square lie at the heart of the Vatican City.
The mountainous republic San Marino is dominated by Monte Titano, on which stands La Cesta fortress.
A large community is resident in the country by the 400s and manages to retain its independence.
In 1973 the Social Democrats are replaced by the Socialists and the tiny Movement for Statutory Liberties party.
John of the Hospital (the Hospitallers) by the Habsburg Emperor Charles V 1565 Malta withstands a lengthy Ottoman siege.
The Maltese rise in rebellion and the island is blockaded by the British.
In 1942 the UK awards Malta and its people the George Cross— EUROPE the highest civilian award for bravery—for their resistance.
Malta is the only British colony where integration with the UK is seriously considered.
His government favors a free-market approach to the economy, deregulating the banking, telecommunications, and trade sectors, introducing much-needed economic and administrative reforms.
DECISIVE MOMENT THE SIEGE OF MALTA, 1526 Forced out of Rhodes by the Turks in 1522, the Knights of St.
The assault then moved to the inner fortifications but was repulsed by savage fighting.
The arrival of a relief force on September 7 convinced the Turks to cut their losses, which had mounted to 24,000.
The foundation of the Red Cross in Geneva in 1863 by Swiss social activist Henri Dunant, and the signing of the 1864 Geneva Convention on the conduct of war, made Geneva a center of international diplomacy.
She is aquitted in 1990, but the case reveals that the Public Prosecutor's office holds secret files on 200,000 people.
A Rheinbund league of German princes, which is formed at the suggestion of Napoleon Bonaparte, does not outlast Napoleon, and in 1815 Liechtenstein joins the German Confederation, remaining a member until its dissolution in 1866.
This lasts until the dismemberment of the AustroHungarian Empire in 1918.
Slovenia The richest republic of the former Yugoslavia ‘ was also the first to declare independence.
IA CE The Roman general Gaius Octavius founds a city on the site of Ljubljana.
However his rule merely increases Serbian domination, bureaucracy, and repression by the police.
Slovenians celebrate Upon seceding from Yugoslavia on June 25, 1991, Slovenia was invaded by the federal army and a 10-day war ensued.
In 1282 he declares the title of Duke of Austria to be hereditary, thus founding the Habsburg domination of Austria that is to last until 1918.
Over the next two centuries, the Habsburgs steadily increase their lands through strategic marriages, gaining Burgundy, the Netherlands, and eventually Spain and southern Italy, as well as lands belonging to Hungary.
It heralds the start of the Habsburgs' long decline in relation to France and Prussia.
From now on, Austria takes the offensive against the Ottomans and steadily advances at their expense into the Balkans, gaining Hungary in 1699.
It recognizes his daughter, Maria Theresa, as ruler of the Habsburg lands, although Silesia is ceded to Prussia.
In 1795 it gains ""lesser Poland,"" including Cracow, in the third partition.
The end of Poland as an independent nation is confirmed by treaty in 1797.
In 1806 Franz I of Austria (who had declared himself emperor the year before) is obliged to renounce his title as Holy Roman Emperor as the empire is dissolved by Napoleon.
In 1809-13 Austria is allied with France after a massive defeat at Wagram, but changes sides to defeat Napoleon at the Battle of the Nations at Leipzig in 1813.
The Congress of Vienna of 1814-15, which settles the map of post-Napoleonic Europe, brings territorial gains to Austria, most significantly in northern Italy, and makes Austria titular head of the German Confederation, largely due to the astute diplomacy of Chancellor Metternich.
Marie Theresa Only 23 when she came to the throne in 1740, Marie Theresa became one of the outstanding enlightened rulers of the 18th century, famed for her courage and determination.
His fear of socialist revolt led him in March 1933 to suspend parliament and, in February 1934, to use the army against the socialists in Vienna.
In May he introduced a fascist-style constitution, but he was an isolated figure, hated by the left and by the Nazis who wanted a union with Germany.
On July 25, 1934, he was shot dead by Nazi agents who had entered the Chancellery.
Dollfuss's death weakened Austria, and opened the way to Hitler's takeover in 1928.
Austria-Hungary invades Serbia, but is unsuccessful until the following year when its armies are supported by German troops.
Germain between Austria and the Allies reduces Austria to a rump state as a result of territorial concessions made to the new states of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Yugoslavia.
Elections produce a stalemate and a return to the “grand coalition” of the OVP and SPO in 1987, which lasts until 1999.
Roman rule over those tribes living west of the Rhine had already been accomplished by Julius Caesar in 56 acr.
From then on, Romans make no serious attempts to conquer the Germans again, although they do send punitive expeditions across the Rhine against troublesome tribes.
CE Romans begin annexation of Agri Decumates, the triangle of land between the Rhine and Danube rivers, and fortify its frontier with the Germans along the Roman Limes.
By the time the Roman Empire in the west finally collapses in 476, the powerful Frankish kingdom in the west and the Burgundian kingdom in the southwest of Germany are established.
However, the empire does not survive for long after Charlemagne's death in 814.
HOLY ROMAN EMPEROR FREDERICK | BARBAROSSA Frederick | Barbarossa was the German emperor who challenged papal authority and established German dominance over much of Europe.
He was elected king in 1152 and immediately challenged the authority of the pope.
Crowned emperor in 1155, he embarked on a series of six military campaigns against the Lombard leagues in northern Italy.
In 1177, Barbarossa finally recognized Alexander Ill as the true pope, and was reconciled to him.
Within the empire, Barbarossa struggled violently with Henry the Lion, duke of Bavaria, who was eventually stripped of his possessions.
At the same time, Vikings from Scandinavia raid the north coasts and sail up the rivers searching for plunder.
His kingdom includes most of western Germany and the Low Countries, although expansion eastward along the Baltic is only temporary, the lands being lost again in 982.
The German emperors have control over ecclesiastical appointments of bishops, abbots, and others, and grant lands as fiefs to these churchmen for them to administer, thus retaining control as the lands pass back to the crown on the death of the celibate churchmen.
This system works as long as the emperor can keep control over the ecclesiastical appointments and acts as a balance against the powerful landholdings of the hereditary nobility.
However, Frederick is challenged by powerful territorial princes, notably Henry the Lion of the Welf family, while his attempt to tighten imperial control in Italy is defeated by the Lombard League of northern cities at Legarno in 1176.
Open warfare between the Guelphs, led by Henry the Lion and allies of the pope, and the Ghibellines, the imperial party, erupts.
By the time of Frederick’s death in 1190, the area covered by modern Germany is on the way to becoming a patchwork of nominally independent states.
An interregnum from 1254-73 sees great political instability as rivals fight it out for the imperial crown.
However, many new German cities are established in Poland during the 13th century as the empire continues to expand to the east.
This marks the start of the Habsburg dynasty's domination of Austria and Germany.
Habsburg power is not restored until 1438, when Albert II is elected emperor.
When he becomes emperor in 1493, Habsburg power in Europe grows considerably as more lands are acquired by marriage and diplomacy.
On the death of Maximilian in 1519, he acquires the Habsburg lands and becomes Holy Roman Emperor.
The League, an alliance of city guilds, established a powertul trading monopoly over most of northern Europe between the 13th and 17th centuries.
However, they are crushed by the army of Philip of Hesse, a Protestant who enjoys Luther's support, and 100,000 are slaughtered.
They offered the role of king to Frederick William IV of Prussia, who refused what he called “a crown from the gutter"" part and the Holy Roman Empire going to his brother, Ferdinand I; his Habsburg son Philip II inherits Spain.
Although Calvinism is excluded from the tolerance extended by the Peace of Augsburg, its main principle—allowing individual princes to decide their faith—allowed it to take root.
Fought mainly between Catholic and Protestant states within Germany, the conflict starts in Bohemia but ends temporarily in 1623 with Protestant defeat and the occupation of the Lower Palatinate by imperial and Spanish troops.
Intervention by Denmark in 1625 and then by Sweden in 1630 tilts the balance back in favor of Protestant states, but the intervention of France, a Catholic nation, against both imperial and Spanish Habsburgs in 1635 turns the conflict into a power struggle for control of Europe.
By the end of the war, Germany is economically devastated, and is now divided into numerous small kingdoms, principalities, and bishoprics.
It becomes a backwater within Europe, fought over by Habsburgs, the French, and others.
The Habsburgs continue to rule the empire, which now exists in name only, as real power, such as it is, is with the numerous small states.
During his reign he establishes Prussia as a major power in northern Germany, gaining Silesia during the War of the Austrian Succession in 1740-48 (which Austria fails to regain in the Seven Years War of 1756-63) and gaining Pomerania and East Prussia in the first partition of Poland in 1772.
A benevolent despot at home, Frederick II concedes full religious tolerance, abolishes torture, and liberates state serfs.
By 1800, France's armies have pushed the French eastern border up to the Rhine.
This comprises 16 princedoms and cities including Bavaria, Hesse, Saxony, Westphalia, and Württemberg.
It is replaced at the Congress of Vienna in 1814-15 by a new German confederation comprising 39 substantially independent states and with a diet under the nominal presidency of Austria, although dominated by both Austria and Prussia, now the main power in northern Germany.
This abolishes the complicated system of intra-German tariffs and allows the relatively free trade of goods across much of northern Germany, promoting trade and industry.
It also consolidates Prussian power, as Austria remains in favor of protection and outside the union.
By 1852 the Zollverein includes all German states except Austria, the two Mecklenburgs, and various Hanseatic cities.
In Frankfurt a constituent assembly is elected and discusses the drafting of a national and liberal constitution for a united Germany.
However, its offer of the German imperial crown to King Frederick William IV of Prussia is rejected by him, and opposed by Austria, while nonGerman minorities and German radicals refuse to accept the parliament.
By 1849 Austrian and Prussian forces have repressed the revolutions and the old order is restored.
By the Treaty of Frankfurt, France surrenders its two eastern provinces of Alsace and Lorraine.
The new German empire has a federal constitution with many powers conceded to individual German states.
These states keep their own monarchies and institutions, which leads to conflict between them and the imperial crown and parliament.
A second major congress in 1884-85 draws up the colonial map of Africa; by this stage, Germany is the diplomatic leader of Europe.
OTTO VON BISMARCK IN THE PRUSSIAN HOUSE OF DEPUTIES, JANUARY 28, 1886 1862 Otto von Bismarck becomes Chancellor of Prussia, a post he holds until 1890.
First he gains Schleswig from Denmark in 1864 and then in the Seven Weeks War of 1866 defeats Austria at the Battle of Sadowa, forcing her out of German affairs.
This results in the 1866 Peace of Prague which gives Prussia control of most of Germany north of the Main River.
In 1867 a North German Confederation is formed which unites all the north German states but excludes the southern states of Baden, Bavaria, Hesse-Darmstadt, Lichtenberg, Württemberg, and Austria.
Franco-Prussian war An artillery unit of the 400,000-strong French army is here seen manning an outdated muzzle-loading cannon.
During the conflict this proved no match for the power and range of the new German breachloading cannon.
It also gains Qingdao in China in 1897 and Samoa in the South Pacific in 1899, as well as islands in the western Pacific.
A second crisis in 1911, when Germany sends a gunboat to Agadir, is resolved in France’s favor.
Hopes for a quick victory on the Western Front are not fulfilled when Germany is obliged to retreat after the first Battle of the Marne in September 1914 and troops become bogged down in trench warfare along the Western Front with great loss of life.
There is greater success for Germany in the east where defeats for Russia precipitate two revolutions after which the new Bolshevik government withdraws from the war and accepts the degrading Peace of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918, surrendering much land.
Facing a mutiny by military and naval forces and popular disillusionment with the war, Kaiser Wilhelm II's abdication is announced on November 9 and he flees into exile in Holland.
Germany fought an effective U-boat campaign, sinking 50 British cruisers in the first 10 weeks of the war.
Ebert is elected president and the constitution of a liberal democratic Weimar Republic is approved later in the same year.
It is forbidden Anschluss, or union, with Austria, and loses all its colonies to League of Nation mandates.
The Saarland is placed under the League of Nations, demilitarized, and occupied by Allied troops for 15 years.
Germany is forced to accept its guilt in causing the war, pay financial reparations to the Allies, and limit the size of its armed forces.
However, the Weimar Republic proves too weak to weather the global economic recession that hits Germany after 1929 and soon causes mass unemployment.
The Reichstag finds itself increasingly unable to retain control of the situation as street violence escalates and Nazi supporters clash with their communist, socialist, and trade union opponents.
In March, after blaming the communists for an arson attack on the Reichstag, Hitler secures passage of an Enabling Act granting him dictatorial powers for four years.
By making himself the final arbiter between competing subordinates, Hitler increased his power.
Jews are also removed from the armed services, the civil service, and, in 1938, all Jewish businesses are ""Aryanized""—that is, transferred to ""German"" ownership with minimal compensation paid.
In March of the following year, in violation of the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, German troops reoccupy the demilitarized Rhineland.
At the Munich conference in September, UK and France agree to Hitler's occupation of the Sudetenland border region in Czechoslovakia.
By March 1939 all of Czechoslovakia is under Nazi control, with Slovakia becoming a puppet state.
By the end of the year Leningrad is under siege and German forces are just miles from Moscow.
On the eastern front 300,000 German soldiers die defending Stalingrad and Field Marshal Paulus is forced to surrender in February 1943.
Although Hitler does not immediately appreciate the significance of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 which brings the United States into the war, the addition of United States forces on the Allied side eventually turns the tide in the Allies' favor.
Allied forces land in Normandy, France, in June, liberating Paris in August, Brussels in September, and crossing the Rhine in March 1945, while in the East, Soviet forces advance through Eastern Europe toward Berlin.
Germany loses part of East Prussia to the USSR, and the rest of East Prussia and large parts of eastern Germany to Poland.
Around 6,000,000 Jews (half of whom died at the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp in Poland) have been massacred during the Holocaust.
He integrated the nation into Western Europe and cultivated a friendship with France.
German contrition In December 1970 the West German chancellor Willy Brandt visited Poland; at the Warsaw Ghetto memorial, he expressed sorrow for Nazi war crimes, and knelt in homage to the victims. western zones of occupation, which will become their future constitution.
The visit of United States president John F Kennedy to the city in June 1963, when he gives his famous Ich bin ein Berliner speech further raises morale in the city.
For his work in promoting peace in Europe, and for his policy of “Ostpolitik,” “east policy” or detente with Eastern Europe, Brandt is awarded the 1971 Nobel Peace Prize.
Agreements with the USSR about access to West Berlin reduce tensions in and around the city.
At first the East German government does not reduce its hardline rule, but it is told to change by Gorbachev.
As massive, peaceful protests break out across East Germany, notably in Dresden, the border is opened and Berliners begin to dismantle the Berlin Wall.
East and West Germany sign a treaty extending the West German currency and its economic, monetary, and social legislation to East Germany.
The East German parliament votes for union as the five East German lander join the Federal Republic.
The first allGerman elections held since 1933 result in a Kohl-led government.
A people's assembly meeting in East Berlin in 1948—49 prepared a constitution for the new state, which came into being on October 7, 1949, as the German Democratic Republic.
Industry was nationalized and agriculture collectivized, while reparations were made to the USSR for the cost of the war.
The resulting hardship led to riots and strikes in 1953, which were put down with Soviet troops and tanks.
EET RU pi n Ste i | 7 4 | j r ho d a, i $ 8 4 * E | L ; i i j . "" iij leading many East Germans to flee through West Berlin in search of a better life.
This outlet to the West was sealed in 1961 with the building of the Berlin Wall.
Relations between East and West Germany improved during the 1970s, with the East German parliament removing all references to reunification of Germany from its constitution in 1974.
However, a new exodus of East Germans through Hungary to the west as the Iron Curtain collapsed in 1989 threatened communist rule.
Noncommunists entered the government, but the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe spelled the end of East Germany, which united with the west in 1990.
Germany has also been a leading light in the EU’s Rapid Reaction Force, providing almost half its personnel.
The two main parties join a grand coalition led by Angela Merkel, the CDU leader and first woman to become German chancellor.
The company develops a major maritime trading empire in the East Indies.
Golden Age These elegant merchants' houses date from Amsterdam's 17th-century ""Golden Age,"" when the city was the wealthiest in the world and at the hub of international trade.
DUTCH REVOLT LEADER WILLIAM I OF NASSAU William | of Orange-Nassau, also known as William the Silent, became Prince of Orange in 1544.
He was the main leader of the Dutch revolt against the Spanish that started the 80 Years War and ended with the independence of the United Provinces in 1648.
Unhappy with the treatment of Dutch Protestants, William joined the Dutch uprising.
He was the most politically capable of the rebels, leading them to several military victories against the Spanish.
Declared an outlaw by Philip Il of Spain in 1580, he was murdered in Delft by a supporter of the king.
United Kingdom of Netherlands formed that includes Belgium and Luxembourg.
NETHERLANDS DUTCH DEPENDENCIES The Dutch once had a major trading empire in Asia, South Africa, and the Americas.
With Suriname's independence in 1975, that empire has now all but gone.
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES Island group consisting of Curacao and Bonaire off Venezuela, and Saba, Sint Maarten, and St.
Curacao and Sint Maarten become constituent countries of the Netherlands.
Antwerp The Flemish city of Antwerp rose to prominence in the 15th century as Bruges declined in importance.
The world's first stock exchange was opened here in 1460 and the city became Europe's chief commercial and financial center in the 1500s, helped by the arrival of Jewish diamond craftsmen expelled from Portugal.
The towns of Flanders and Brabant are among the most prosperous in Europe, with wealth derived from the trade in wool.
European powers decide to merge Belgium with the Netherlands under King William I of Orange.
French, Flemish , and German. 1993 culmination of reforms creating a federal state with greater powers for regions and city governments.
End of the line This railway station sign greeted the hundreds of thousands of troops arriving at the front in Belgium during World War I Four major battles were fought at Ypres, including the third, Passchendaele, in 1917, with disastrous loss of life.
In 1999 Claes is found guilty of bribery in connection with a defense contract.
Flemish separatists become the largest party in the subsequent general election.
When Denmark becomes a constitutional monarchy in 1849, pressure grows for a constitution for Iceland.
President Vigdís In 1980 Vigdís Finnbogadóttir, a former artistic director of the Reykjavíc Theater Company, became the world's first elected woman head of state, holding office until 1996. o 2008 Financial crisis forces government to nationalize all three major banks.
Central banks of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark put in place a 1. billion euro package to keep Icelandic economy from collapsing.
Norway A mountainous country f in Scandinavia that was ruled from Denmark for hundreds of years.
A brief rebellion led by Christian Frederik is ended by a Swedish invasion; the elderly Carl XIII of Sweden is elected king of Norway.
Center coalition government takes power with Lars Korvald as prime minister.
Sweden and Denmark are joined in personal union under Queen Margrethe I of Denmark.
In 1632 Gustavus II Adolphus is mortally wounded at the battle of Lützen, near Leipzig, although Sweden is victorious.
His chancellor, Axel Oxenstierna, continues to manage affairs of state during her minority.
She is an enthusiastic patron of the arts and the Swedish court attracts some of the best minds in Europe.
Having converted to Catholicism, she abdicates in 1654 and dies in Rome in 1689.
Gustavus Il Adolphus King of Sweden from 1611-32, Gustavus led a formidably experienced and well-equipped army into Germany in 1630 that turned the tide of the 50 Years War against the Catholic nations.
C.980 Harald Bluetooth establishes unified Danish kingdom. 1000s Christianity is main religion.
Unlike other occupied countries, Denmark's institutions continued to function as normal.
The Nazis considered it a model occupation until a wave of strikes and protests prompted them to take full command.
FINNISH WAR LEADER MARSHAL MANNERHEIM Baron Carl Gustav Emil Mannerheim was a Finnish field marshal.
Born into a noble Swedish— Finnish family, Mannerheim rose to the rank of general in the czarist army of Russian-occupied Finland.
In 1918 he led his forces against the Finnish Bolsheviks, and in the following year became regent of Finland.
Defeated in the elections of 1919, he retired and became a philanthropist.
But in 1931 he returned to the fore as head of the Finnish defense council and commanded the Finnish forces against the USSR in the Winter War of 1939—40 and again in 1941—44.
General Carl Gustav Mannerheim leads government to victory at Battle of Tampere.
The council moves to secede from Russia after the October Revolution when a Bolshevik government is imposed.
Declares independence February 1918. wy Historic Tallinn This ancient city has always been an important center for Baltic Sea trade.
During the 13th century it was the northernmost member of the Hanseatic League, the mercantile alliance of trading cities.
Latvia A Baltic nation with k sizeable Russian and other minority populations.
The last Russian military installation in Latvia—the Skrunda radar station—is dismantled.
Valdis Domrovskis of the center-right New Era party becomes prime minister.
Poles and Lithuanians join the uprisings against Russian rule in 1831 and 1863.
OI PU HPLC NOTTE RAT n; The last pagan The marriage of Lithuanian Grand Prince Jagiello and Queen Jadwiga of Poland in 1586 united the two countries; Jagiello, a pagan, converted to Catholicism, as did his people.
In the 15th century the Jagiellonian domains, the largest in Europe, stretch from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
The two capitals of Cracow and Vilnius are replaced by a single capital city, Warsaw, in 1596.
Russian troops invade and take Warsaw and direct rule from Russia is imposed.
DECISIVE MOMENT THE CREATION OF SOLIDARITY, 1980 The independent trade union Solidarity emerged out of a wave of strikes in the Gdansk shipyards in August 1980.
Led by Lech Walesa, an electrician, it soon became a vehide for Poles to demand widespread economic, social, and political changes and eventually to threaten communist rule itself. i EA 1.27 A Ua 1846 Austria annexes Cracow, established as a republic by Treaty of Vienna.
Solidarity movement forced into underground Outlawed in 1982 after martial law was imposed, Solidarity re-emerged in the late 1980s as communism collapsed.
It became a political party in 1989, electing Walesa as president of Poland in 1990.
Solidarity's success sparked 1989's anti-communist revolutions throughout eastern Europe.
Wg oe existence, and many of its leaders, including Lech Walesa, are interned.
His brother Jaroslaw loses presidential election to Bronislaw Komorowski of the center-right Civil Platform party.
Around this time, Prague is considered the third most important city of Europe, after Constantinople and Paris.
As leader of the “Prague Spring” of 1968, he tried to introduce communism with a human face, relaxing its totalitarian grip on power without ending its rule.
The policy failed when Warsaw Pact troops invaded in August and he was arrested, and later expelled from the party.
After the Velvet Revolution of 1989, he became speaker of the federal assembly.
The 1745 Treaty of Dresden confirms Prussian control over Silesia, except for a small part in the east known as Austrian Silesia.
German is decreed the sole administrative language of Bohemia and Moravia.
The Diet of Bratislava declares Slovakian independence under the protection of the German Reich and the leadership of a former priest, Jozef Tiso.
Gottwald, as leader of the largest party, is invited to lead an all-party coalition government.
The “Velvet Revolution” achieves its aims and the free elections are won by Civic Forum with Havel as president.
Laws passed fining anyone using a minority language inside government buildings.
SOOSCE The Magyars, a Finno-Ugric people from beyond the Ural mountains, move westward and conquer the region.
C.900 Semi-legendary prince Arpad, leader of the Magyars, founds a dynasty that lasts until 1301.
As part of the truce, Catholic missionaries arrive to convert the Magyars.
Mining of the country's gold, silver, and copper deposits makes it one of the richest countries in Europe, while success against the Turks brings it Bosnia , Moldavia and Wallachia , Moravia and Silesia , and a large part of Austria itself by 1485.
Matthias, nicknamed “Corvinus” after the raven on his emblem, did much to centralize the state during his reign, increasing taxes to pay for a standing army.
He also championed the arts and sciences, which flourished in his court.
Matthias successfully expanded Hungarian territory, taking many of Habsburg Frederick III's lands.
After his death in 1490, however, all these gains were quickly lost. win a massive victory at Mohacs, where King Louis II is killed.
The Turks now control central Hungary , while the west of the country submits to the Austrian Habsburgs.
Hungarian literature and sciences contribute to a growing Hungarian nationalism.
Ferdinand is persuaded to abdicate and is succeeded by his nephew, Franz-Josef.
Some 200,000 Russian troops crush the revolt and Kossuth flees the country.
The two semi-independent states are held together by the emperor, who is king of Hungary, his court, common armed forces, and a common currency and customs union, but there is no single government and very different constitutions.
Romania intervenes militarily and hands power to Admiral Horthy, who acts as regent for the Hungarian claimant Charles, but refuses to hand over power to him when he returns to claim his throne in 1921.
When the Soviet Red Army enters in October, Horthy is forced to resign.
When Nagy announces Hungary will leave the Warsaw Pact, Soviet forces enter the country.
The rebels seen here climbing onto a Soviet tank would soon be brutally rounded up and interned. to socialism in order to liberalize communist rule gradually.
Hungary’s airspace is used in the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia during the Kosovo crisis.
The Latinderived language and the country's name are hallmarks of lasting Roman influence.
Wallachia pays tribute to the Ottoman Empire from 1417, Moldavia from 1456, and Transylvania from 1526.
By the end of the war, Romania has lost 335,700 men, or 44 percent of all its soldiers, with another 120,000, or 16 percent, injured.
Coup by fascist Iron Guard as King Carol abdicates in favor of son, Michael.
Communist-led National Democratic Front wins majority in disputed elections.
He stressed the sovereignty of his country against the USSR, although he kept Romania in both the Warsaw Pact and Comecon.
His obsession with paying off the national debt impoverished the country, and his cult of personality, repression of minorities, and grandiose public works programs made him deeply unpopular.
When Romania turned against the communists in 1989, he and his hated wife were summarily tried and executed on Christmas Day.
Moldova Formerly part of Romania and then the USSR, y Moldova has decided to remain independent.
In 1349 first independent Moldavian state emerges, but is soon a subject of Poland.
By the end of the 16th century, Bessarabia is under Turkish control; Western Moldavia eventually becomes part of Romania.
Transdniestria (on eastern bank of the Dniester) also declares sovereignty.
Gagauzia in the south declares independence, but accepts autonomy in 1994.
In the revote a right-wing coalition is victorious, but in 2010 the Constitutional Court dissolves parliament and orders fresh elections to be held.
Bulgaria A mountainous Slav country on the Black Sea S that was once at the heart of the Byzantine Empire.
The Bulgarian Patriarchate is suppressed, and the church turns toward the Greek Orthodox Church.
It would have created a new, greater Bulgarian state stretching from the Danube to the Aegean.
Balkan mountains; Eastern Rumelia south of the Balkan mountains and under Turkish rule; and Macedonia and Eastern Thrace.
A dispute between Bulgaria and Russia results in the abdication of the Bulgarian ruler Alexander of Battenberg (elected in 1879), and the election in 1887 by the National Assembly of the pro-Austrian Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg to the throne.
Bulgaria feels aggrieved by the settlement and in 1913 attacks its former allies, who are now joined by Romania and Turkey, but is quickly defeated, losing Dobruja to Romania in the north, Thrace in the southeast to Turkey, and most of its gains in Macedonia to Greece and Serbia.
A succession of coalition governments lasts until a military government seizes power in a coup.
Bulgaria joins the Axis powers and takes part in the occupation of Yugoslavia, for which it is granted much of Macedonia.
An antifascist Fatherland Front coalition, including the Agrarian and Bulgarian Communist parties, takes power in a bloodless coup.
DECISIVE MOMENT CONGRESS OF BERLIN, 1878 Bulgarians celebrate their national day on March 3.
On this day in 1878 the Treaty of Stefano was signed, ending the RussoTurkish War and granting independence to Ottoman-controlled Bulgaria.
The UK wanted to limit Russian influence 1946 The country is renamed the People's Republic of Bulgaria.
A Soviet-style constitution is adopted and a one-party state established.
After he dies in 1950, he is replaced by “Little Stalin,” Vulko Chervenkov, who begins a BCP purge and mass collectivization.
The Union of Democratic Forces is formed. in the Mediterranean by propping up the failing Ottomans.
Meanwhile, Austria-Hungary wished to extend its influence in the Balkans.
As a result, Bulgaria was vastly reduced, losing Macedonia and Eastern Rumelia in the resulting Treaty of Berlin.
The aspirations of the peoples of the Balkans themselves were all but ignored in the new treaty, sowing the seeds for future crises in the region.
A general election produces no overall result but Zhelyu Zhelev, UDF leader, becomes president, with the BSP in government.
The country is renamed Republic of Bulgaria and communist symbols are removed from the national flag.
Presidential elections won by opposition UDF candidate, Peter Stoyanov.
A Croat duchy is formed, the Croats accepting rule by the Franks in the following century.
A truce in the conflicts with the Byzantine Empire and its maritime successors, the Venetians, is followed by expansion down the coast in Dalmatia.
Croatia is conquered by Hungary, Zvonimir's widow being the sister of the Hungarian king.
In 1102 Croatia unites with Hungary, although it retains some measure of autonomy.
Croatia is thus split between the Austro-Hungarian and the Ottoman Empires.
Recolonization of Croatia with Christians takes place, including establishing pockets of Serbian population in Croatia.
In 1849 Croatia becomes an Austrian crown land after a revolt in Austriancontrolled Hungary in 1848 is crushed, with the assistance of Croatian (and Russian) troops.
F^ a iii Mayhem at Móhacs Here, Turkish leader Suleyman the Magnificent rides to victory over the Hungarians at the Battle of Mohács in 1526.
In 1868 the Hungarians recognize the existence of the Croatian nation, albeit subordinate to Hungary, with its official language, parliament, and ruler, invoking the 12thcentury agreement to this effect.
A group of Croatian exiles in London helps in 1915 to form the Yugoslav Committee and continues to demand union with Serbia.
In December the Serbian prince, Alexander, proclaims the united kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.
A unitary constitution, promulgated in 1921, is opposed by Croat parliamentarians.
The Ustase persecute the Serbs and others, killing several hundred thousand of them in Jasenovac and other concentration camps.
Serb Chetnik resistance fighters retaliate by killing many Croats in Bosnia and elsewhere.
Up to 200,000 Ustase troops and civilians attempt to flee Evil of the Ustase Croatian fascists, the Ustase, summarily execute ethnic Serbs in Croatia during World War Il.
The Ustase were especially brutal, even by fascist standards, killing thousands and leaving a legacy of anti-Croat feeling, particularly in Serbia. to safety in Austria, but are caught by Tito's troops; at least 110,000 are killed.
Pressure from Croatia and Slovenia over greater republican autonomy is opposed by hardliners in Serbia, who demand a strong centralized state.
However the communist parties of the six republics differ sharply over how to achieve reform.
Nationalist parties win elections in Slovenia, Macedonia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Serb forces invade Western Slavonia and other regions, while the rebel Serb republic of Krajina, in the west of Croatia, is proclaimed.
In 1377 he is crowned king of Serbia, Bosnia, Croatia, and the coast, despite failing to prevent an Ottoman Turkish victory over the Serbs at Kosovo in 1389.
Under the Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 Bosnia is divided between the Ottoman and Habsburg Empires.
After occupying territory in Macedonia and Bulgaria, he is defeated and exiled.
Serbia, which has long aspired to unification with Bosnia, declares war on the Turks, but is swiftly defeated.
AustriaHungary occupies Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Sandzak of Novi Pazar, a narrow strip of land separating Serbia from Montenegro, after Turkey's defeat in the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78.
Without Russian support, can do nothing and the annexation is recognized by the major European powers in April 1909.
An Austrian ultimatum is rejected by Serbia and the war between them spreads across Europe.
Bosnia is united with Serbia in the kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.
In Bosnia—Herzegovina the local regime is characterized by corruption and authoritarianism.
Serbs declare “Republika Srpska,” an independent Serbian republic, in Bosnia.
A three-sided civil war begins with Muslims defending themselves against both Croat and Serb forces.
The Bosnian Serb commander Dusko Tadic was sentenced to 20 years in prison for crimes against the Muslims in Omarska and other detention camps.
The court has given a voice to thousands of victims who have testified as witnesses against defendants. and imposes sanctions.
It also condemns “ethnic cleansing” by Serbs of Muslims and Croats from parts of Bosnia, and approves the use of force to restore peace.
The agreement sets up two separate states within Bosnia—the Muslim-Croat Federation, and Republika Srpska—operating underneath a threecommunity rotating presidency and a two-chamber representative federal parliament.
Rebuilding bridges In 1993 the destruction by Bosnian Croats of the 16th-century bridge linking Croat and Muslim communities on either side of the River Neretva in Mostar symbolized the collapse of Bosnia itself.
In Bosnia, nationalist parties win largest vote share in elections, cementing ethnic divisions.
The Western Roman Empire declines in the 4th century and the territory is conquered, in turn, by the Eastern Roman Empire , the Huns and Bulgars, and the Avars, who bring Slavs to the area as vassals.
Eastern Orthodox Serbs in the south and west become part of the Bulgarian Empire at the beginning of the 900s but gain some autonomy under Stephen Vojislav in the 1030s. 1101 civil war breaks out in Serbia after the death of King Constantin Bodin.
Milos Obrenovic is recognized as hereditary prince of autonomous Serbia.
He attempts to expand Serbia, before abdicating in 1839 in the face of opposition.
A period of factional fighting is followed by a coup in 1842 that brings Alexander Karageorgevic to power.
His son Michael succeeds him in attempting to modernize the Serbian government, before being assassinated in 1868.
Such nationalist sentiments explain the brutal Serbian reaction to growing calls for an independent Kosovo in the 1990s. insurrectionists.
Russia declares war in their support in 1877 and, after the Turkish defeat, Serbia becomes an independent principality under the Treaty of San Stefano.
Under the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, Serbia loses some territory back to Turkey but gains land in the southeast from Bulgaria.
A period of nationalist and international conflict follows in the region.
His successor, King Peter, begins liberalization and allows parliamentary government.
Serbia protests but, without its Russian ally’s support, can do nothing.
Serbia increases its territory to the south after the defeat of Turkey, and then gains more land from Bulgaria after its defeat in Second Balkan War of 1913.
A unitary constitution, promulgated in 1921, is consistently opposed by Croat parliamentarians.
The majority Albanian region of Kosovo and the Hungarianspeaking province of Vojvodina in the north are given the status of autonomous regions within Serbia.
Pressure from Croatia and Slovenia for greater autonomy is opposed by hardliners in Serbia, who demand a strong centralized state.
Fighting in Slovenia as the Serbdominated Yugoslav National Army attempts to take control of the republic.
Elections in Kosovo, declared illegal by the Serbian authorities, result in victory for a Democratic Alliance of Kosovo, whose leader, Ibrahim Rugova, is elected president and proclaims independence.
Opposition candidate Vojislav Kostunica sweeps to power after anti-Milosevic protests.
Turkish rule leads to decline of Christian population through emigration.
Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization formed in 1893 calls for ""Macedonia for the Macedonians"" and a Balkan federation.
At the end of World War I in 1918, Serbian-held Macedonia becomes part of Yugoslavia.
In June, Milosevic agrees to withdraw military forces and a UN-backed force, KFOR, enters Kosovo.
Macedonians shatter ceasefire On June 22, 2001, Macedonia broke an 1 1-day-old ceasefire with Albanian rebels seeking greater autonomy, shelling alleged insurgent positions such as this mosque in Aracinovo.
SOOSCE Successive waves of invasions of the Balkans precipitate major population movements.
The country is divided into feuding principalities. 1380s Ottoman Turks subject local princes to their rule.
A Turkish reconquest, completed in 1501, leads to a strong Islamization.
Foreign travel is banned, and thousands are killed in political purges.
Albania is now completely isolated from the communist world and from western Europe.
Since 1974, the island has been divided into the Greek south and the Turkish north.
Richard marries Berengaria of Navarre on the island in 1191 and she is crowned Queen of England and Cyprus.
UK takes over the administration of Cyprus under continued Turkish sovereignty.
As fighting between the two communities intensifies, the UN sends in troops to keep the peace in 1964.
Turkey invades to protect the Turkish community, and partitions the island along what becomes the Green Line; 200,000 Greek Cypriots flee the Turkish north, while 65,000 Turkish Cypriots flee in the other direction.
Opposition communist leader Demtris Christofias wins presidential elections.
Alexander overthrows the Persian Empire and extends Greek rule as far as India.
Ottomans attempt to regain power, but the Greeks appeal for help from France, Britain, and Russia.
A mass migration of ethnic Turks into Turkey and ethnic Greeks into Greece ensues.
After an inconclusive election in 1936, a right-wing dictatorship under General Joannis Metaxas is established.
As the German army retreats in late 1944, the two groups fight for control of Greece.
The turning point in the war came with the destruction of a joint Ottoman—Egyptian fleet at Naravino Bay in 1827 by British, French, and Russian forces.
IKrTHHUIRSTTHIT OUTBREAK OF THE GREEK CIVIL WAR, 1944 On December 3, 1944, a bitter civil war erupted in Athens between the communist and royalist guerrilla groups that had jointly resisted the Germans during the wartime occupation.
After the German withdrawal an uneasy coalition existed between the two that soon broke as ELAS guerrillas overran the whole of Greece except Athens and Salonika.
Greek Rally, now the National Radical Union, passes to Constantine Karamanlis.
The “Colonels’ regime"" falls, having failed to help Cyprus; New Democracy wins elections with Constantine Karamanlis as premier.
For the Greeks the civil war left a deeper psychological scar than World War Il.
The left remained alienated and outside Greek politics until 1981, while many resistance fighters who had played an honorable part in the defeat of Germany lost their lives.
New Democracy narrowly wins reelection, despite criticism of its _ handling of the fires.
Varangians— the Swedish Vikings—use the river routes of the Dnieper for trade as far afield as Constantinople, the Byzantine Empire and the Middle East.
The polity of Rus has disintegrated since its golden age under Prince Yaroslav the Wise into quarreling princedoms ruled by members of the same dynasty.
In 1326 the Metropolitan of Russia moves his seat to Moscow, after residing in Vladimir since the fall of Kiev.
Moscow comes to regard itself as Constantinople's successor, “the third Rome"" and center of Orthodox Christianity.
When Novgorod falls to Moscow in 1471, the Russian princedoms are united.
The assault on the palace by Bolshevik forces in 1917 was one of the seminal events of the Russian Revolution.
Ivan Ill Grand Prince of Moscow from 1462, lvan assumed the title Sovereign of all Russia in 1493, and, in marrying a Byzantine princess, acquired the emblem of the two-headed eagle of Byzantium. 1501 ivan Ill invades Poland-Lithuania.
His reign effectively begins in 1547, when he becomes the first ruler to be crowned czar.
He conquers the Khanates of Kazan in 1552 and of Astrakhan in 1556, steadily expanding Russian territory south toward the Caspian and Black seas and opening up trade routes down the Volga and across the Urals to Central Asia.
He seizes the boyars' lands and hands them to a service nobility dependent on the czar.
The second half of his rule is marked by repression of the boyars, many of whom are executed for treason.
Fur trappers and traders establish a series of trading fairs in southern Siberia; the trade in furs is heavily regulated, and brings in great wealth.
On his death in 1605, the “Time of Troubles” begins—a turbulent period resulting from the lack of a natural successor to the throne, a rise in social discontent, and war in Russia sparked by Swedish and Polish aggression that decimates western Russia.
By the 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk, Russia abandons the vast region north of the Amur river to Manchu China.
Uprisings by Don and Dnieper Cossacks against Polish rule allow Russia to extend its territories south to the Ottoman client state of the Crimea and west to Kiev.
Initially he is joint czar with his mentally challenged half-brother Ivan V under the regency of their elder sister, Sophia.
Peter introduces, by force where necesssary, Western culture, customs, education, economy, and government to Russia.
War with Sweden prompts Peter to create Russia’s first navy and its first modern | army.
He dies in 1725, having had his son executed and established the right of the sovereign to choose a successor.
Defeat by the Ottomans at Prut in the Balkans in 1711 ends plans to expand into the Balkans and Russia is forced to hand Azov back, only regaining it in 1736.
Russia is defeated by Sweden at Narva in 1700 but defeats the Swedish king, Charles XII, at Poltava in Ukraine in 1709.
The treaties that end the war in 1720-21 give Russia control over Estonia, Ingria, and part of Karelia, giving it access to the Baltic Sea.
Her reign extends Russian territory at the expense of Poland and Turkey, and although initially the ideas of the Enlightenment are welcomed in the Russian state, they are suppressed after the French Revolution of 1789.
The second partition in 1793 brings west Ukraine; the third in 1795 brings Lithuania and most of Belarussia.
He is assassinated in 1801, after a conspiracy is hatched among sections of the increasingly alienated nobility.
He is succeeded by his son Alexander I 1801 The Orthodox Christian kingdom of Georgia voluntarily unites with Russia.
Czar Alexander I refuses to surrender; the French, cut off from their supply lines, are forced to retreat through the Russian winter, pursued by the Russian army.
The Congress of Vienna of 1815 redraws the political map of Europe, giving Russia control over the whole of Poland and establishing Russia as a major force in European affairs.
Antiautocratic ideas gain popularity among the young nobility during the military campaigns in the west.
The paper ruble These czarist bank notes date from the time of the 1917 Revolution.
Communist dreams of abolishing money were short-lived even though hyperinflation during the civil war left the paper ruble worthless.
Russian troops are sent at Austria’s request to put down the revolution in Hungary.
The conflict was prompted by Nicholas’s decision to occupy the Balkan provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia in 1853 and Russian threats to British interests in the Mediterranean and to the sovereignty of the Ottoman Empire.
By 1875 it has gained the whole of the large offshore island of Sakhalin.
However, in 1874-77 the failure of a Populists' crusade to win the hearts of Russia's peasants leads some factions to turn to terrorism.
Massive discontent remains, however, as the serfs have to pay redemption fees for the land they tilled.
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was created after the adoption of its founding treaty by the Congress of Soviets—workers' elected councils—in Moscow on December 30, 1922.
Delegates came from four republics— w Russia, Ukraine, Belorussia, and Transcaucasia.
By 1941, there were 15 constituent republics in the union, each with their own rights but subject to direction from the governing body of the Union, the central Presidium.
The 1936 constitution set up various councils and an assembly of deputies; in reality, all policy from 1923 was determined by the general secretary of the party, Joseph Stalin.
Petersburg by the terrorist group Narodnaya Volya , an offshoot of the Populist movement.
Alexander III establishes a period of reaction, russification, and militant Orthodoxy.
In the 1890s, Russian industry grows by an average of 8 percent a year, creating a significant and highly localized working class.
Marxism begins to attract considerable strength among intellectuals and radicals.
A mutiny on the battleship Potemkin in the Black Sea fleet spreads to other units in the army and navy, and there is a general strike, forcing Czar Nicholas to grant a constitution, a legislative Duma, and a prime minister.
In the October Revolution, the Bolsheviks seize power with Lenin as leader.
Russia loses Finland, the Baltic States, Poland, Belorussia, Ukraine, and states in the Caucasus.
Up to 7 million are arrested and 3 million killed through execution or internment.
In 2006 Russia supplied one-third of Europe's oil and 40 percent of its gas.
Russia has occasionally used these resources for political ends, cutting off supplies to Georgia and Ukraine.
Under the Yalta and Potsdam agreements between the USSR, US, and UK, eastern and most of southeastern Europe fall within the Soviet zone of influence.
Stalin, fearing the penetration of Western capitalist values, persecutes returning soldiers.
DECISIVE MOMENT CHECHNYA DECLARES INDEPENDENCE, 1991 On November 1, 1991, Chechnya, a Soviet republic, declared its independence as the USSR collapsed.
Fighting resumed in 1999 and has continued ever since, with great brutality from the Russian forces, who now identify the Chechens as Muslim terrorists rather than as a people seeking to rule themselves.
As Russia and the other republics leave the USSR and set up the Commonwealth of Independent States , the USSR collapses.
Russia takes up the seat of the former USSR on the UN Security Council.
Yeltsin resigns and the prime minister, Vladimir Putin, becomes acting president.
In a renewed military offensive against Chechnya, the Chechen capital Grozny falls to Russian forces.
He attacks the “oligarchs” who made fortunes in the privatizations of former state enterprises.
Russia and NATO establish a council to cooperate on countering terrorism.
Two years later, hundreds of children die in the Beslan school massacre.
The Kremlin says this is an economic decision, while Kiev claims political motives.
Relations with Georgia deteriorate after Russian officers are arrested on suspicion of spying.
Tensions with Georgia over the separatist South Ossetia region lead to war.
Russian forces pull back from positions in Georgia, but retain a strong presence in South Ossetia.
Russia threatens to deploy missiles in its Kaliningrad enclave in response to United States intentions to establish a missile shield in Europe.
Ukrainian famine This starving Ukrainian peasant was photographed around 1933.
Stalin's decision to requisition all grain for export led to the worst man-made famine in history.
The following year, Austrian Ukraine proclaims itself a republic and is federated with its Russian counterpart.
Stalin collectivizes agriculture, inducing famine to eliminate Ukraine as source of opposition; seven million die.
The accord allows the use of Ukrainian ports by Russia and division of the Black Sea fleet.
Kuchma replaces the reformist government of Viktor Yushchenko after parliamentary defeat.
Victor Yushchenko falls seriously ill and it is confirmed that he has been poisoned with dioxin.
Mass protests in Kiev during the Orange Revolution lead to a revote in December and victory for Yushchenko.
The Ukrainian parliament ratifies a 25-year extension of the Russian lease on the Black Sea bases.
Belorussia, as it was then known, becomes part of the LithuanianPolish commonwealth, participating in wars against the Teutonic Order, the Russians, the Tatars, and the Turks.
Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine later establish the Commonwealth of Independent States.
By the 500s sce their descendants, the Carthaginians, controlled most of the trading ports from Libya to Lixus and Mogador in Morocco.
By the time of his death in 1106, he also holds sway over Muslim Spain.
Battle of Alcazarquivir At Alcazarquivir in 1578 Portugal made an ill-fated attempt to suppress resistance to Portuguese rule in Morocco.
Since the 16th century, however, it has been ravaged successively by European imperialists, the slave trade, post-colonial dictators, civil wars, AIDS, and poverty.
When he dies in 1672 disorder reigns and it is only in 1677 that his son Moulay Ismail regains control of the region.
A large slave army wins back all Spanish coastal enclaves except Ceuta and Melilla.
Negotiations lead to Germany recognizing France's rights in Morocco in return for ceding territory in Congo.
Abd-el-Krim sets up a Berber republic in the Rif mountains and is eventually defeated by a vast French and Spanish army in 1926; a guerrilla campaign continues until 1933.
Armed uprising Protesters brandish weapons in a demonstration against French rule on August 19, 1955, in Khenifra.
Moroccan and Algerian nationalists clashed with French troops here and in 13 other strategically important towns.
After parties refuse his invitation, king appoints a nonparty government.
French forces numbering 450,000 are deployed in an attempt to retain control of the country.
After a referendum in metropolitan France and its colonies, including Algeria, where Muslim women are allowed to vote for the first time, the Fifth French Republic is established with de Gaulle as president.
Meanwhile, the FLN sets up a “free Algerian” government in Cairo with Ferhat Abbas as prime minister.
Ahmed Ben Bella is elected prime minister and, after the approval by referendum of a constitution, he is elected first president of Algeria.
President Boumedienne continues with land reform, a national health service, and “socialist” management.
France gives incentives for the return home of 800,000 Algerian immigrants.
The FIS wins most seats in elections to the National People’s Assembly.
E Eu ieee T j Dh 4 1 i"" | d cr la : COPIE : za. diria t» A ka ‘ : T PILLS T ues T A ug. laris i ir fAz] d ""1 T1 & i Pirates operating out of ports on the Barbary coast terrorized the Mediterranean for centuries.
The French tried to suppress them with battleships in 1688 , but it was not until 1815 that the threat was lifted. ees [ara ue assassinated.
C.1100 BCE Phoenician traders establish a port at Utica and gain control of the coastal region from the Berbers.
By the sixth century acr Carthage has a population of 400,000 and controls the coastal trading ports from Leptis to Lixus and Mogador in Morocco.
Ben Ali takes over the presidency after doctors certify Bourguiba senile.
C.700 BCE Phoenician traders establish settlements in Tripolitania, in the northwest, while Cyrenaica in the northeast is settled by Greeks.
Governorship of Tripoli becomes hereditary office of the Karamanli family.
Within a few years a militant Muslim sect known as the Sanusi or Senussi is founded.
In 1912 the Ottoman Empire yields control of Libya to Italy in the Treaty of Ouchy.
Roman Libya 1943 British forces finally capture Tripoli and set up a military administration.
Gaddafi launches the “Cultural Revolution”; occupies Aozou Strip in Chad.
A new constitution in 1999 leads to multi-party elections won by Mamadou Tandja.
By the 11th century sce, Egyptian control of Nubia is weakened and a separate kingdom is established in Kush, farther to the south, which between 770—716 BcE conquers Egypt.
Former rebel leader John Garang becomes vice president, but dies in a helicopter crash.
C.5000 BCE With the foundation of the Old Kingdom, the fertile lands of Upper and Lower Egypt along the Nile are united for the first time.
C.1580-1050 BCE The New Kingdom resumes expansion of Egypt's frontiers to the south and into Mesopotamia.
After her suicide DECISIVE MOMENT SUEZ CRISIS, 1956 On July 26, 1956, Egypt's president, Gamal Abdel Nasser, nationalized the Suez Canal, the shares in which were owned by UK and French investors.
Fearful that Egypt's assertion of sovereignty would result in an Arab attack, Israel invaded Sinai.
When both sides refused to halt military action, UK and French forces attacked Port Said on October 6 in order to seize the canal.
Pressure from the UN and United States forced a humiliating ceasefire on the UK and France.
The crisis marked the end of British influence in the region. in 30 Bce, Egypt becomes part of the Roman and successor Byzantine empires. 641—42cE Byzantine Empire loses Egypt to Muslim invaders from Arabia, who introduce Arabic and Islam.
Egypt effectively under British rule, although still part of the Ottoman Empire.
Sultan Ahmed Fuad becomes King Fuad and rules until his death in 1936, when he is succeeded by his son King Farouk.
During World War II Britain defends Egypt; Axis forces are repulsed at El Alamein in November 1942.
Mali Formerly French Sudan, “a the country is now named after the great medieval empire of the region. 700s-1050 Mali is part of the empire of Ghana.
Burkina Faso A former French colony a in the Sahel that is threatened by desertification.
Maurice Yameogo becomes the first president and bans opposition parties.
Cape Verde Islands A former Portuguese archipelago, Cape Verde has been democratic and stable since 1991.
Slaves are brought from mainland to work the small parcels of arable land.
Senegal An ethnically diverse x state with a strong economy based around the port of Dakar.
Referendum approves new democratic constitution. 2002 1,800 passengers are killed in Joola ferry disaster.
Gambia A narrow ribbon of land E along the river Gambia heavily dependent on peanut exports. 1200s First southward migration of significant numbers of Fula.
Guinea-Bissau An impoverished, lowx | lying country that has suffered frequent military coups and rebellions. 1000s Four main ethnic groups—the Balante, Fulani, Manydyako, and Molinke—live in the country.
In the subsequent presidential election, which is won by Malam Bacai Sanha, police shoot and kill one of the other candidates.
Guinea A former one-party state 5 whose transition to democracy has often been disrupted.
Its passengers were the first United States freed slaves bound for Monrovia, a city founded the following year by the American Colonization Society, which had purchased part of British Sierra Leone.
Efforts to send freed slaves back to Africa had begun in the American colonies in the 1770s.
Some proslavers wanted to send the freed slaves back in order to preserve an exclusively slave-owning white society, while some Christians hoped they would act as missionaries.
ECOMOG peacekeeping force backed by Nigeria and Ghana sent to restore order.
After Germany’s defeat in World War I, it is divided between France and Britain.
He is replaced by his son Faure, who wins elections widely condemned as rigged.
Benin A former slave-trading state and French colony wedged between Togo and Nigeria. 1400s Kingdom of Benin established under the Obas.
President Kerekou is beaten by Nicephore Soglo in elections in 1991 and respects the result.
Lieutenant Colonel Ojukwu calls for secession of oil-rich east under its new name, Biafra.
Over one million Nigerians die before secessionists are defeated by federal forces.
Beauty in bronze The kingdom of Benin flourished in southern Nigeria from the 1200s to the 1600s.
Its craftworkers used the lost-wax process to cast beautiful portrait heads like this one in bronze.
Military tribunal convicts former head of state General Olusegun Obasanjo and 39 others for plotting coup.
Vice President Goodluck Jonathan becomes president after Umar Yar’Adua dies following a long illness and prolonged absence in Saudi Arabia.
Spain later develops a trading post on islands off the coast of Rio Muni.
Forestry concessions and oil palm plantations are developed in Rio Muni, with small cocoa and coffee plantations later.
The Fang, moving south from the savannah lands of Cameroon, expel the indigenous peoples.
His son Ali Ben Bongo wins presidential election amidst allegations of fraud.
Emperor Bokassa | Dictator of the Central African Republic from 1966, Jean-Bédel Bokassa crowned himself emperor in 1977.
He was overthrown in 1979 and put on trial for the brutal excesses of his regime.
Congo An oiland timber-rich country appallingly governed in the years since independence.
Loango in the south, Makoko farther inland; the northern forest regions are the home of Binga pygmies.
He establishes a treaty with Makoko, chief of Teke, which he claims gives rights to the region.
In 2002, the Belgian government admits that it killed him and apologizes.
In the centuries before this Eritrea successively passed under the control of Arabs, Ottomans, and Egyptians.
Djibouti Little more than a port [| with a desert hinterland, Djibouti has historically depended on shipping.
Ethiopia The only African state to &. avoid colonization, Ethiopia was the cradle of an ancient civilization.
In 1868 he commits suicide rather than surrender to British expeditionary force.
In 1916 his son, Lij Iyasu, is deposed for converting to Islam and proposing alliance with Turkey.
Menelik's daughter, Zauditu, becomes empress with Ras Tafari as regent.
EPRDF wins landslide in multi-party elections and sets up first democratic government.
New ETHIOPIAN EMPEROR HAILE SELASSIE | Haile Selassie | was the emperor of Ethiopia , a throne supposedly descended from » King Solomon.
When Italy invaded Ethiopia in 1935, "" he led his troops in the field, but in 1936 was forced to flee and twice appealed in vain to the League of Nations for action against Italy.
In 1940, Haile Selassie returned to Africa with British aid, and in 1941 regained his throne.
In the 1960s and 1970s he worked for pan-African aims, particularly through the Organization of African Unity, but in 1974 the army seized control and arrested him.
He was killed in prison on the orders of the coup leaders in 1975. nine-state federation is formed as Eritrea gains its independence.
Ethiopian troops and United States gunships intervene to attack the Islamists, who flee in 2007.
Kenya A diverse nation of 70 different peoples, Kenya has had a difficult postcolonial history.
Corruption worsens. 2005 violent protesters in Nairobi reject proposed new constitution.
Power-sharing agreement between president Mwai Kibaki and Raile Odinga.
After he invades Tanzania in 1978 to claim new territory, Tanzania invades Uganda in 1979 and ends his brutal rule.
Rwanda An ethnically divided country and the scene Lif of an appalling act of genocide in 1994. 1000s Arrival of Hutu agriculturalists, followed by Tutsi cattle-owners in 1400s.
Genocidal violence killing 800,000 people is then unleashed by Hutu extremists against Tutsis and moderate Hutus.
Burundi A small nation torn between its Hutu majority Lif. and dominant Tutsi minority peoples.
Led by Agostinho Neto, it later receives support from Soviet bloc countries.
It receives substantial assistance from the United States and South Africa.
Independence is scheduled for 1975, and a transitional government is formed by the three nationalist movements.
NDONGO QUEEN NJINGA MBANDE 1975 The MPLA proclaims the People’s Republic of Angola with Neto as president.
Portuguese attempts to colonize the interior of Angola brought them into conflict with the strongly independent Ndongo kingdom.
A peace deal was struck in 1621 when King Ngola Mbande sent his sister Njinga to negotiate with the Portuguese.
She continued to fight the Portuguese, but when they overran her kingdom in 1629, she fled to neighboring Mtamba, captured its ruler, Queen Mwongo, and took control.
She ruled her new country successfully and independently until her death in 1663.
Almost half a century later the first Portuguese trading center at Quelimane becomes a center for slave trading to Brazil.
Later the Changamire of the Rozvi kingdom conquer the Mwene Matapa and push the Portuguese south of the Zambezi River.
The Portuguese introduce a system of forced labor when slavery is ended in the late 19th century.
South Africa agrees to cease funding Renamo if Mozambique ceases aid to the ANC; however, fighting continues.
Portuguese legacy An elegant cathedral in Quelimane is a relic of Portuguese colonial rule.
Madagascar One of the world’s poorest countries, which won independence from d France in 1960.
The Merina monarchy that rules the interior of the island is abolished as the French subdue the island.
A new constitution sets up a ""Democratic Republic"" in which only a single party is permitted from 1977.
In response, the incumbent president, Didier Ratsiraka, sets up a rival government in the port city of Tamatave.
As fighting breaks out, the High Court rules in Ravalomanana’s favor and Ratsiraka goes into exile.
The government dismisses Andry Rajoelina, mayor of Antananarivo, and the military mutiny in favor of him.
After a standoff, President Ravalomana resigns and is replaced by Rajoelina.
Ex-president Ravolomana is sentenced to life imprisonment for the shooting of protesters.
Comoros An archipelago republic off the east coast with a chaotic political system and frequent coups.
Mauritius An island republic in the Indian Ocean and one of the world’s most densely populated countries.
German colonists take best farming land and displace the indigenous people.
South Africa extends the German policy of reserves for the indigenous population, 17 of which are established by 1939.
Two further ICJ rulings, in 1955 and 1956, uphold the UN's right to supervise the administration.
Based on the Ovamboland People's Organization, formed earlier with the aim of ending the contract labor system, SWAPO has broader objectives; it seeks to mobilize all the people of Namibia against South African rule.
He is only allowed to return six years later on condition that he renounces the chieftainship of the Bamangwato.
Zimbabwe African National Union is formed by the Reverend Sithole and Robert Mugabe.
Ian Smith declares unilateral independence from the UK, which imposes economic sanctions.
The Opposition Movement for Democratic Change is founded the following year.
Tsvangirai boycotts the second round, alleging intimidation and Mugabe is declared the winner.
Subsequent negotiations between the two lead to a power-sharing agreement.
Despite fierce battles with the Zulus and others, they expand white occupation into what is now the Transvaal, Natal, and Orange Free State.
Natal (proclaimed a colony in 1843) remains under British rule and is populated by British settlers.
This is followed in 1877 by the annexation of the Transvaal with its gold fields.
The British also fight and defeat the Zulus, but suffer a huge defeat at Isandlwana in 1879.
After initial Boer successes the Boer capital, Pretoria, is captured in June 1900 and Boer guerrilla resistance is broken down.
The Boers £z Descendants of the Dutch colonists, the Boers were hardy farmers and tough fighters, maintaining their independence until overcome by the British in 1902.
This picture, taken in 1910, shows the wagons they used for defense if attacked.
Court orders the government to provide anti-AIDS drugs at all hospitals.
Thabo Mbeki is forced to resign as president over claims he interfered in corruption case against Jacob Zuma.
The colonists at first set up a provisioning station for Dutch East India Company ships, but subsequently ventured inland to farm the rich pastures.
By the end of the 18th century, Cape Colony was home to the largest concentration of Europeans in Africa.
The arrival of the British in 1795, however, changed the situation, as the Dutch were now the colonized and felt their Presbyterian culture to be under threat.
Power struggle between modernists and traditionalists in royal Dlamini clan.
An attempted bomb attack is blamed on them and the leader of the Pudemo party is detained.
Lesotho A mountainous and landlocked monarchy entirely surrounded [4 — by South Africa.
After administration by Cape Colony between 1871-83, Britain resumes direct responsibility.
South Africa intervenes after coup attempt, and reconciles king and parties.
TURKISH STATESMAN MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATURK The father of the modern Republic of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal forged a secular state from the ashes of the Ottoman Empire, leading the fight against the post-World War | settlement imposed by the Allies and overthrowing the sultan.
As president, Kemal introduced a European-style legal system and disestablished Islam as the state religion.
He is still revered by many Turks as the man who restored pride to a shattered nation.
The world’s largest continent, Asia extends from the Arctic to the equator and from the Mediterranean to the Pacific.
The first complex civilization arose in Asia, in ancient Mesopotamia , as did all the world’s major religions.
Treaty of Lausanne ends war with Allies, replacing the Treaty of Sevres.
Under a forced exchange, 1. million Greeks leave Turkey and 400,000 Turks leave Greece.
Prisoners and their relatives die in hunger strikes over conditions in high-security prisons.
AK leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan becomes prime minister after entering parliament through a by-election.
In a referendum, voters back reforms to give the government increased power over army and judiciary.
Eduard Shevardnadze The last foreign minister of the USSR and president of Georgia 1995-2003, Shevardnadze forged his reputation fighting corruption, yet was forced out in the Rose Revolution for vote-rigging.
Its army occupies South Ossetia and parts of Georgia itself, and advances close to Tbilisi.
President Medvedev withdraws troops from Georgia, but leaves them in South Ossetia.
Ist century BCE Under Tigranes II, Armenia becomes a powerful state, establishing an empire for itself.
First Christian state Two years after Armenia became the first state to adopt Christianity as its official religion in 301c, Saint Gregory the Illuminator founded this cathedral at Echmiadzin, Armenia's holiest city.
Armenian population of NagornoKarabakh vote to secede from Azerbaijan, leading to civil conflict.
After San Remo Conference awards Syria to France, he is ousted by French forces who proclaim new state of Greater Lebanon.
French fortress | «80-81 1976 With a peacekeeping mandate from Arab League, Syria intervenes to quell fighting in Lebanon.
The Damascus Declaration, an aid and defense pact with Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, and Oman, is signed.
It eventually fell to the Arab leader Baibars after a short siege in 1271.
Lebanon Once a refuge for a persecuted religious and political groups, Lebanon was shattered by civil war.
Pro-Western party led by Saad Hariri wins most seats in general election.
Thousands of Palestinians flee Arab-Israeli fighting to the West Bank and Jordan.
Hussein publicly backs the Palestinian uprising, or intifada, against Israeli rule.
C.990 BCE Jerusalem captured by King David; Israel unified as one nation.
ISRAELI STATESWOMAN GOLDA MEIR One of the founders of the State of Israel, Golda Meir was born in Kiev, Russia.
Poverty forced her family to emigrate to Wisconsin in 1906, where Golda became a Zionist.
She became active trade union politics before being elected to the knesset and serving as Minister of Labor 1949—56 and Foreign Minister 1956—66.
On the sudden death of Levi Eshkol in 1969, she succeeded him as prime minister at age 70.
Despite victory in the Yom Kippur War , she faced internal political squabbles and decided to resign in 1974.
The Arabs refuse to accept it; clashes follow, and 1,700 people are killed.
A provisional Jewish government is established with Ben-Gurion as prime minister.
Israel invades Sinai and Anglo-French forces invade Port Said in Egypt.
First Palestinian suicide bombing against Israeli civilians is carried out in response to a massacre of Palestinians at Hebron by an Israeli settler.
DECISIVE MOMENT PALESTINE AND THE OSLO ACCORDS, 1993 The Oslo agreement, which set up a Palestine National Authority and gave the Palestinians control over a limited portion of Gaza and the West Bank, was signed in Norway in September 1993 and tantalizingly offered the promise of a lasting peace.
With little progress made toward reclaiming the territory lost to Israel in 1948, the Arab states in 1964 established the Palestine Liberation Organization as a force to help liberate the Occupied Territories.
The PLO—some of whose fighters are depicted here—came to act as a proxy government-inexile for the Palestinians.
Despite a history of violent opposition to Israel, the PLO entered unprecedented talks with Yitzhak Rabin's moderate Labor government in an attempt to negotiate a ""land for peace"" deal.
Mecca becomes the center of Islam, but the Arabian peninsula is otherwise sidelined under the Umayyad and Abbasid Caliphates and the Ottoman Sultanate.
In 1921 he takes the title Sultan of Najd, and in 1926 he is named King of the Hijaz.
Ibn Saud had established the Ikhwan in 1912 as an elite fighting unit educated in the Wahhabi tradition of Islam.
As he swept to victory against Ottoman rule, Ibn Saud began to cooperate with foreign powers, in particular the British.
His defeat of the Ikhwan crushed all opposition and established the rule of the House of Saud.
Ikhwan on the move Riding camels with banners flying, the Ikhwan were ferocious Bedouin soldiers driven by an Islamic fundamentalist zeal.
Yemen In the poorest country in the Middle East, unified in sa 1990, tensions between north and south persist.
The interior is ruled by the Ibadite imams, while the sultan controls the coast.
The vote had previously been limited to tribal leaders, chosen intellectuals, and businessmen.
As service industries develop, construction of prestige highrise developments continues to boom.
UAE The oil-rich Emirates have developed rapidly over [5i the past 30 years, but remain autocratic regimes.
They elect half the members of the Federal National Council, an advisory body.
The following year, it announces its intention to close all bases “east of Suez"" by 1971.
Bahrain becomes a constitutional monarchy with an elected lower chamber of parliament.
Post-war, oil quickly replaces pearling and fishing as Qatar's main source of income.
Funded by the emir, it broadcasts to much of the Arab world, providing an Arab perspective on world affairs.
C.3000 BCE Sumerian civilization flourishes in Mesopotamia, the area of modern Iraq.
Iraq becomes political and cultural center of the Abbasid caliphate. 900s-1000S Baghdad falls to the Shi'ite Buwaihids.
Iraq is under Ottoman control for four centuries, save for a brief Safavid Persian occupation in the 1600s.
Baghdad claims sovereignty over Kuwait on the eve of Kuwait's independence.
The Iranians seek to topple the Sunni Saddam, who they see as oppressing Iraq’s Shia majority.
Iraqi government forces use chemical weapons in attack on Kurdish village of Halabja.
US-led military coalition launches massive air and ground offensives, which drive the Iraqis out of Kuwait.
UN supervises limited sales of Iraq oil to purchase humanitarian supplies.
Iraqi forces launch offensive into Kurdish safe haven, capturing Irbil.
United States expands southern air exclusion zone to just south of Baghdad.
IRAQI PRESIDENT SADDAM HUSSEIN ON THE IMPENDING AMERICAN OFFENSIVE TO RETAKE KUWAIT, 1991 1999 Grand Ayatollah Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr, leader of Iraq’s Shias, is assassinated in Najaf.
A US-led administration is installed in Baghdad, the Ba’ath party is made illegal, and the armed forces are dissolved.
United States restores Iraqi sovereignty to government under Iyad Allawi.
Parliamentary elections leave Shia-led United Iraqi Alliance as largest party.
Leader of Al-Qaeda in Irag, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, is killed in United States air strike.
The Iraqi parliament approves a security pact by which all American forces are to leave Iraq by the end of 2011.
President Obama announces withdrawal of most United States forces by late August 2010.
Legislative elections produce no clear outcome and allegations of fraud; it takes seven months for al-Maliki to be reappointed as prime minister.
Iran SHAH REZA KHAN Known as Persia until 1935, Iran blends theocratic government with modern nationalism.
He rose to be the Brigade's leader and in 1921 supported a coup that reduced the last Qajar shah to a puppet.
The royal capital of Isfahan is adorned with mosques and new public buildings.
He embarks on a major reform program of modernization and Westernization, but becomes increasingly reliant on Germany for support.
The Shah returns with Anglo-American backing. spectacular series of celebrations at the ancient Achaemenid capital of Persepolis.
Anti-Shah demonstrations break out during the funeral and subsequent mourning.
Ayatollah Khomeini returns from exile and declares an Islamic republic.
Death of Khomeini Ruhollah Khomeini's death in 1989 deprived the Iranian revolution of the spiritual leadership he had exercised for more than a decade.
His passing opened the way for more liberal movements to shape Iran's future. minister of the new regime.
Reza consolidated his power, suppressed all opposition, and in 1925 had himself declared the first shah of the new Pahlavi dynasty.
He introduced a series of economic reforms that required external finance.
He actively promoted social reform, forbidding traditional dress and the wearing of the veil by women.
By the 1930s, Reza's government had become increasingly despotic and unpopular.
His pro-Axis stance during World War II led the UK and USSR to occupy Iran in 1941, depose him, and install his son Mohammad Reza Pahlavi as shah.
Conservative Society for Combatant Clergy loses ground to more liberal factions.
Mohammad Khatami elected president, and begins to implement reformist agenda.
President Khatami visits Italy— first Iranian leader to be received by a Western government since 1979.
Despite this, conservatives control many of the levers of power and there is a crackdown on reformist press.
Violent protests alleging election fraud and a major crackdown on protesters ensues.
Russian settlement intensifies after 1917 as Kazakhstan is subjected to industrial and agricultural development.
DECISIVE MOMENT FIRST MAN IN SPACE, 1961 On April 12, 1961, Yuri Gagarin, pictured right in his spacesuit, became the first man in space.
His flight, a single orbit of the Earth lasting 1 hour, 48 minutes, began on top of a 4. ton Vostok rocket launched from the Soviet space center at Baikonur in Kazakhstan.
After Kazakhstan became independent in 1991, Russia negotiated an agreement to continue to use the center until 2050.
D rA Cities of the Silk Road 1500S The Shaybani Uzbeks rule an unstable region, from Bukhara and Samarkand.
Initially it is written in Arabic, but later it is changed to the Roman alphabet and finally to Cyrillic.
The spectacular Shirdar Madrasa at Samarkhand is one of the great Islamic schools of the world.
Uzbekistan lies on the ancient Silk Road connecting China with Central Asia and the Mediterranean.
His anticorruption purge results in the emergence of a new generation of Central Asian officials.
A new postSoviet constitution is adopted along Western democratic lines, but all religious and nationalist parties are banned.
Uzbekistan sends troops to Tajikistan to suppress violence and strengthen border.
The invasion, which takes Russian forces to the borders of Afghanistan and Persia by 1900, results in Turkmen tribes fleeing to Persia.
In power from 1990 to his death in 2006, he fostered an extreme personality cult in his country and enacted a number of highly eccentric laws.
His portrait adorns buildings, while towns, streets, and even months of the year have been renamed in his honor.
His spiritual guide to living, Ruhnama, was adopted as the national guidebook to be studied by all students.
Most dramatically, a giant gold statue of him stands in the center of the capital, Ashgabat, revolving every 24 hours so that the Sun always shines on his face.
A coup attempt later in the year is blamed on the group, leading to mass repression and imprisonment of opponents.
He is at first deposed but restored after a major Afghan revolt in Kabul, the capital.
Yaqub Ali Khan is later exiled and a new treaty is signed in 1893 with Emir Abdul Rahman, establishing the Durand Line, a contentious boundary between Afghanistan and British India that splits Pashtun lands in two.
A third, brief Afghan War breaks out that ends when the British bomb Kabul and Jalalabad.
By the Treaty of Rawalpindi, the British recognize Afghanistan’s full independence.
Later that year, Amanullah’s cousin, Nadir Khan, seizes power and becomes king.
Ill-fated Afghan adventures “We will not accept a government of wrong-doers.
Amin is then killed in a coup backed by the USSR that sends in 80,000 troops to support the new moderate Parcham PDPA government of Babrak Karmal.
The Mujahideen rebellion is stepped up into full-scale guerrilla war with United States backing.
British troops are seen here mobilizing in Kabul during the second Afghan War of 1878-81.
Britain fought three wars in Afghanistan to protect British India and keep the Russians at bay but failed to subdue the rebellious Afghans.
Hamid Karzai is reelected president amidst allegations of ballot rigging.
President Obama announces plans to increase United States troop levels by 30,000.
The Ghaznavid Empire rules the region until 1186, when the empire is overthrown by Muhammad of Ghur, who conquers northern India.
During the 13th century, the region falls under the control of the Muslim Sultanate of Delhi and, by 1600, the Mughal Empire.
In 1940 he led calls for the partition of India and the creation of the Muslim state of Pakistan.
He cleverly aligned the League with Britain during World War II, but lost British support when he adopted direct action in 1946.
He thus failed to achieve the six-province state he had wanted, but oversaw the independence of Pakistan when the British partitioned India on its independence in 1947.
He served as first governor general of Pakistan, but died 13 months later. evenly divided between Muslim and Hindu.
On August 16 Jinnah calls a direct action day in support of his demands, causing riots in Calcutta and elsewhere with at least 5,000 dead.
At independence on August 15, Pakistan is set up with Jinnah as the first governor general.
Muslim tribesmen backed by Pakistan invade the state to force it to join Pakistan, prompting India to intervene.
The proposed liberal constitution is opposed by orthodox Muslims, and the prime minister is assassinated in 1951.
In 1962 he introduces a new constitution creating an Islamic republic with two provinces— West and East Pakistan—and two languages—Urdu and Bengali.
First direct elections won by Awami League; West Pakistani parties reject results, leading to a military crackdown in East Pakistan.
War with India The two nations have gone to war twice over Kashmir, and once over Bangladesh.
The Pakistani Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud is killed by a United States drone attack.
After the fall of the Harsha Empire, Kannauj becomes capital of the Pratihara Empire.
By the 11th century, it includes the Maldives, parts of Burma, Malaya, and Sumatra.
Bronze Chola god This 11th-century Chola bronze depicts the Hindu god Rama.
Hinduism was the religion of the Chola Empire; its kings were thought to be descendants of the god Shiva.
C.1300 Muslim sultans of Delhi attack southern India, extending their kingdom.
Maratha Empire is established by Shivaji Bhonsle in central and nothern India.
DECISIVE MOMENT THE SEPOY REBELLION, 1857-58 The Sepoy Rebellion was a widespread revolt against British rule that began among Indian soldiers in the East India Company.
It was sparked by the introduction of the Enfield rifle, for which troops had to bite the ends off cartridges that were allegedly greased with pig and cow lard, contact with which was regarded as an insult to Muslims and Hindus alike.
More generally, however, the rebellion stemmed from discontent with insensitive British attempts to Westernize India.
Troops in Meerut who refused the 1947 End of British rule and partition into a Hindu-majority India and a Muslim-dominated Pakistan.
The larger faction is led by Indira Gandhi. rifles in April 1857 were severely punished.
In response their comrades shot their British officers and marched on Delhi, where the local Indian garrison joined a spreading revolt that was not suppressed until nearly a year later.
After the rebellion, which many in India now consider to have been a first war of independence, the British stepped back from imposing measures and began a process of consultation with Indians over policy.
Indira Gandhi assassinated by her Sikh bodyguards; her son Rajiv becomes prime minister and C leader.
Rajiv Gandhi is assassinated during the ensuing election campaign by a suicide bomber connected to Sri Lankan Tamil Tigers; Narasimha Rao becomes prime minister of a Congress minority government.
Talks with China are held in New Delhi aimed at reducing tensions at the border.
Hindu nationalist BJP is the largest party but fails to win vote of confidence; leftist United Front coalition government takes office.
In office, Gandhi began an ambitious program of modernization but in 1975 was convicted of electoral offenses relating to the 1971 election.
She responded by damping down on her opposition and the conviction was later overturned.
She lost the 1977 election and was out of office until reelected in 1980.
In 1984 she used the military to suppress Sikh rebels; a few months later, Gandhi was murdered by her Sikh bodyguards. government.
Sonia Gandhi, widow of Rajiv Gandhi, becomes president of C India detonates a nuclear bomb to widespread international condemnation.
BJP returned to power in elections triggered by a vote of no confidence.
BJP government implicated in major bribery scandal connected to illegal arms sales.
Bhutan A forested Himalayan kingdom isolated from F the outside world for most of its history.
Sri Lanka 1949 Indian Tamil workers are stripped of suffrage and citizenship rights.
An ancient civilization ravaged by civil war as the Tamil population attempts to secede.
He is succeeded by his widow, Sirimavo, the world’s first woman prime minister.
This elegant 8th-century gilded figure of the Buddhist goddess Tara is a superb example of Sri Lankan bronze casting.
British crown colony by Peace of Amiens, formalizing British control of areas occupied in 1796.
Civilian flights to Jaffna in Tamil north resume and road links reopen.
DECISIVE MOMENT CHILDREN PROTEST, 2003 On October 6, 2005, an unprecedented demonstration broke out among school children in Valachchenai in the east of Sri Lanka.
Despite fears of violent reprisals, they sat in the roads and blocked traffic in protest at the abduction of 23 of their classmates by the Tamil Tigers.
The abduction took place just hours after the Tigers had agreed a program with the children's charity Unicef to return child soldiers to their families.
The demonstration drew world attention to the plight of children, such as this one , forced to fight as soldiers by the Tiger rebels.
President Mahinda Rajapaksa's government finally wins a parliamentary majority after 25 opposition MPs defect to its side.
The Tamil Tiger leader Velupillai Prabhakaran is killed in the fighting.
Maldives An island nation making a difficult transition to democracy after years of colonial rule.
Prodemocracy demonstration turns violent and a state of emergency is declared.
Bangladesh A young, flood-prone country that surrounds the confluence of the Ganges and Jamuna rivers.
Rioting and guerrilla warfare follow Yahya Khan's refusal to convene the assembly.
The year ends with the worst recorded storms in Bangladesh's history—between 200,000 and 500,000 are killed.
Pakistani troops are defeated in 12 days by Mukhti Bahini—the Bengal Liberation Army.
Fifteen former army officers are sentenced to death for involvement in assassination of President Mujib in 1975.
Supreme Court declares the issuing of religious decrees to be a criminal offense.
Awami League leader Hasina steps down, becoming first prime minister to complete a five-year term.
Amid violent antigovernment demonstrations, President Ahmed assumes caretaker role as prime minister Zia completes her term and steps down.
Sheikh Hasina is charged with conspiring to murder a political rival; Khaleda Zia is put under house arrest.
A former British colony ` ruled since 1962 by the ve | military, who renamed it > u Myanmar in 1989.
A week after the election, Aung San Suu Kyi is released from house arrest.
Placed under long periods of house arrest she has refused the military's offer to free her if she leaves Burma.
In 1990, the military ignored the 80 percent of parliamentary seats that her party won in that year's election.
S 7 5/8 The world's most populous country, and for centuries the world's most advanced civilization. eth-5th century BCE Confucius passes his teachings down to his disciples to be recorded in the Analects.
Confucian thought is supplemented by the teachings of Mencius in the 4th century sce.
Lao Zu (possibly mythical) creates the philosophy later set down in the Dao De Jing as Taoist thought.
The first emperor, Shi Huangdi, infamous for his hardline suppression of subversion and mass execution of intellectuals, is also credited with the instigation of the Great Wall.
Stability allows major advances to be made in political thought, economics, invention, and administration, and Chinese territory is enlarged through several successful military campaigns.
During this period northern China is ruled by six different dynasties and the south by three.
The political institutions of the Sui are reformed along less repressive lines and the empire consolidated.
The Tang is referred to in Chinese history as a golden age, mostly for its arts (especially poetry and painting), which flourish under imperial patronage, and for unprecedented territorial expansion, but also for its political and religious tolerance.
In spite of rigorous attempts at centralizing control and defending itself against external attack, the Song never achieves the unity of the Tang.
Political and military instability breeds philosophical and religious ferment, including the development of neo-Confucian thought, which draws from ideas in both Confucian traditions and Buddhism.
Mongol armies under Ghengis Khan begin their gradual conquest of China.
Under the Mongols, agriculture, communications, and local administration are strengthened, drama flourishes, and advances are made in science and technology.
Like many dynasties before it, the Mongol dynasty deteriorates through corruption and is overthrown by peasant rebellions.
Indiscriminate executions and the establishment of a secret service ensure the unopposed rule of the emperor, and heavy censorship and editing of texts is instigated.
The novel is introduced as a new form of literature and The Water Margin and Journey to the West achieve particular acclaim.
The dynasty is consistently shaken by peasant uprisings, and weakened by the excessive power of the eunuchs in the court.
It is, however, Manchu invaders who bring about the fall of the Ming Dynasty.
They allow the Han to participate in government, while holding on to power.
Wearing of the hair in a queue is made compulsory as is neo-Confucianism, though most of the emperors are also Buddhist adherents.
While czarist Russia encroaches on Chinese territory in the north, European merchants begin to arrive by sea along the south coast and establish trade links.
During his reign , he opened China up to foreign trade and encouraged Western ideas.
Alarmed at the rise in opium use, the Chinese government attempts to limit its import.
China is defeated by the British in 1842, and forced to open ports to foreigners.
China is again defeated in 1860, this time by a combined Anglo-French force.
With restrictions lifted, the opium trade thrives and the number of users grows rapidly.
With the help of UK and United States forces, Nanjing is recaptured by the Manchu government in 1864 after a conflict that leaves about 20 million dead.
Although victorious, the Manchus’ authority is undermined in many parts of China.
Foreign troops are now stationed at every important junction between Beijing and Shanghai as the Manchu government is fatally weakened.
Sun became the first president of the Republic of China in 1912 when he returned from 16 years of exile to overthrow the failing Manchu dynasty.
He died from cancer before he was able to consolidate his power and reunify China.
Sun became the symbol of Chinese modernization after his death due to his unrivaled knowledge of the West and determination to develop China.
Start of the 7,450-mile Long March as the Red Armies of the CCP retreat.
Farming is collectivized and this contributes to millions of deaths during the 1959-61 famine.
China conducts its first test of a nuclear weapon in the Lop Nur desert.
Schools are shut down and the youthful Red Guards are encouraged to attack all authority and bourgeois ideas.
The cult of personality surrounding Mao is intensified and the Red Guards splinter into factions, each claiming to represent the will of Mao.
Temples are ransacked, books are burned, and intellectuals are persecuted.
By 1968, industrial production has dipped to barely 12 percent of the levels of 1966.
United States President Nixon visits China and meets Mao, as a more open foreign policy is initiated by Zhou Enlai.
On his death, the Gang of Four attempt to seize power, but is thwarted by supporters of Deng.
A massive earthquake at Tangshan in Hebei province leaves at least 250,000 dead.
Criticism of the Gang of Four and acknowledged past mistakes is encouraged, but when the present system is criticized, the Wall is closed.
Pinyin is adopted as the official system of transcribing Chinese into Latin alphabets.
Economic reform gathers pace, but hopes for political change are suppressed.
After initial hesitation by the government, the uprising is ordered to be crushed by the army, with the loss of 1,000—5,000 lives.
Beijing is placed under martial law and China briefly faces international isolation.
DECISIVE MOMENT LHASA UPRISING, 1959 On March 10, 1959, simmering tension between Tibetans and their Chinese rulers exploded in an uprising in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa.
Thousands took to the streets surrounding the Potala Palace to protest against the influx of Chinese settlers, which had begun when Chinese troops entered eastern Tibet in October 1950.
Tibet had declared its independence in 1911 when the Manchu had fallen, and governed itself for 40 years, but its poorly equipped army had been no match for the invading Chinese in 1950.
This proved true again and the uprising was crushed, leaving thousands dead.
The Dalai Lama, spiritual leader za ""WIE li IT j TELL TT] i| | if i ""m i li PIT eil | "" d 4 | of Tibet, was forced to flee across the Himalayas on foot.
He set up a governmentin-exile in India and has campaigned for an independent Tibet ever since.
Following the uprising, the Chinese government, which formally recognizes Tibet as an autonomous region, began a crackdown on Tibetan religion and culture.
The five-yearly party congress confirms Jiang’s leadership and backs his reformist policies.
The East Asian economic crisis leads to a sharp downturn in growth, but China avoids significant capital flight or currency devaluation.
NATO accidentally bombs the Chinese embassy in Belgrade leading to international crisis.
The quasi-religious Falun Gong sect is declared a threat to stability and outlawed.
As part of an official clampdown on corruption, a former deputy chairman of the National People’s Congress is executed for accepting a bribe.
China joins the World Trade Organization after a 15-year campaign to secure its entry to the world trading body.
United States President George W Bush visits China on the 30th anniversary of the visit by his predecessor Richard Nixon.
China’s first manned spacecraft is launched, with astronaut Yang Liwei on board.
SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGIONS AND DISPUTED TERRITORIES HONG KONG ISLAND was ceded to Britain in 1842.
It grants China sovereignty over Hong Kong after 1997, guaranteeing a high degree of autonomy in economic affairs and the continuation of the present legal and capitalist economic systems.
Violent anti-Japanese protests break out in Chinese cities over the coverage of Japan’s occupation of China in a Japanese school textbook.
Lien Chian, chairman of the Kuomintang party of Taiwan, visits mainland China and meets CCP leader Hu Jintao, the highestlevel meeting between Beijing and Taipei politicians since 1949.
The highly pathogenic H5N1 strain of avian flu is detected in migratory birds in Qinghai, China.
China and Russia sign an agreement settling a long-running dispute over their common eastern border.
MACAO occupies a narrow peninsula on the opposite side of the Pearl River estuary from Hong Kong.
The last European colony in Asia, Macao was handed back to China by Portugal in 1999.
An international merchant community establishes itself. 1800s Hong Kong replaces Macau as the major trading port of the region.
In 1949, when the communists ousted Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang from power on the mainland, he established the Republic of China on the island.
De facto military rule has been democratized progressively since 1986, and the KMT's grip was shaken by defeat in the 2000 presidential election.
Mainland China still considers Taiwan a renegade province, and only a few countries officially recognize the regime there.
Former reformist leader Zhao Ziyang dies after years of house arrest following the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Prime Minister Wen Jiabao addresses the Japanese parliament, the first Chinese head of government to do so, as the two countries agree to a process of reconciliation.
A scandal erupts as 50,000 Chinese children fall ill after drinking tainted milk. 2009 china and Russia sign a 20-year deal to supply oil to China.
Under the policy of ""one country, two systems,"" the island remains a center of international finance and trade.
Mongolia A remote, sparsely -. populated country that once ruled the largestever Asian empire.
Towards the end of the 700s, the kingdom begins to break apart as a result of uprisings and conflicts within the aristocracy.
Border line Here, UN forces beat a hasty retreat across the 38th parallel, the border between North and South Korea, 1904-05 Following the Russo-Japanese | while retreating from Pyongyang at the outset of the War, Japan conquers Korea.
North Koreans take much of the south, before United States intervention drives them back.
As a result, a limited number of North Koreans meet relatives from the south, separated since 1950-53, in a reunion.
North Korea says it is slowing down the dismantling of its nuclear program.
The North Korean Army bombards a South Korean island near Seoul, the worst attack since the Korean War.
The US, with UN backing, enters on the South's side; China unofficially assists the North.
Strong manufacturing base and exports drive massive economic development.
North Korean army shells South Korean Yeonpyeong island, leading to dangerous rise in tension.
The samurai resist the Yuan army, which is made up of Mongol, Chinese, and Korean soldiers.
Samurai fortress Himeji Castle, begun in 1333, has all the defensive and architectural features of a Japanese medieval fortress, including gun emplacements and stone-dropping holes.
Distrust of Europeans and fear of the subversive power of Christianity led the Tokugawa Shogunate to implement a series of anti-Christian and anti-foreigner measures, culminating in Samurai katana, 17th century 1281 The second Mongol invasion is repulsed after a typhoon wipes out the Mongol armada.
This typhoon is called a kamikaze, or divine wind, sent by the gods to save Japan from the invaders.
It is a period of devastating civil wars and the breakdown of central government, but also of growth in the arts and commerce.
C.1542 The Portuguese land in Japan, probably the first Europeans to do so.
Hideyoshi Toyotomi orders the execution by crucifixion of nine Catholic missionaries and 17 Japanese converts.
Addressed to two commissioners in the southern port Nagasaki, a stronghold of Christianity, the Edict forbade Japanese ships to leave for foreign countries, and ordered the execution by sword of anyone returning from abroad.
He is now officially the man authorized to keep the peace in the emperor’s name.
The period of sakoku begins, with trade restricted to limited dealings with the Dutch and Chinese through Nagasaki.
He renounces his warrior status to devote himself to poetry, perfecting the “new style” in the 17-syllable haiku form.
This is a direct challenge to the authority of the Tokugawa administration, the bafuku.
Angry at the idea of a conscript army, they march on Kumamoto Castle and the whole army is sent in to crush them.
Armed only with swords and a few Enfield rifles, the Satsuma are slaughtered—400 are left alive out of 20,000.
Only 1 percent of the population qualifies for office. 1894-95 war with China ends in Japanese victory.
China is forced to withdraw from Korea, and cede the Liaotung Peninsula to Japan.
Large-scale heavy industry is developed and foreign trade increases sharply. 1904-05 war with Russia ends in Japanese victory.
The country soon embarked on a rapid process of Westernization. with the US, replacing an agreement with the UK and marking a shift in power in the Pacific.
This is interpreted in the United States as a threat to its Pacific interests.
Japan responds in December by launching an attack on the United States fleet at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, and invading US, UK, and Dutch possessions in the Pacific.
Japan is placed under the control of a United States military government with General Douglas MacArthur installed as Supreme Commander in Japan.
In the subsequent election, the LDP remains in power but loses its outright majority.
The Recruit-Cosmos bribery scandal leads to the resignation of prime minister Noburo Takeshita.
He is replaced by Sosuke Uno, who is in turn forced to resign over a sexual scandal.
Pacifism is written into the constitution, as Japan renounces the use of force to resolve international disputes.
High executives of the largest industrial firms are removed from their positions.
Morihiro Hosokawa becomes prime minister at the head of a sevenparty coalition.
The first Shinkansen service linking Tokyo to Osaka is opened to coincide with the Olympics.
It is decided to concentrate investment in high-tech industries to reduce the country's dependence on oil imports.
Michinomiya Hirohito Emperor of Japan from 1926 until his death in 1989, the myopic Hirohito was worshipped as a living god until 1946.
His broadcast on August 15, 1945, signaled Japan's surrender in World War Il.
Members of the religious group Aum Shinrikyo attack the Tokyo subway with deadly gas, killing 12 people and injuring hundreds.
As the major creditor country of the region, Japan suffers. 1998 crisis over reform of the banking and financial system.
Nuclear power plant at Fukushima suffers serious damage and radiation leaks.
Following demonstrations, the king forces him to step down and reinstalls Anand.
People’s Alliance for Democracy protesters occupy government buildings in Bangkok and block flights from Bangkok airport.
The army suspended the constitution and declared martial law, but pledged to restore democracy.
Laos Since 1975 Laos has been a communist state but 3 market-oriented reforms are under way.
Premier Kaysone Phomvihane adopts policies for a “socialist transformation” of the economy.
Exiled Sihanouk forms Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia , backed by communist Khmer Rouge.
During World War II he led the Viet Minh guerrillas and established a government in Hanoi in 1945.
When the French tried to regain control he proclaimed independence and led the resistance that forced the French to withdraw.
President of North Vietnam from 1955, he successfully countered United States involvement in Vietnam in the 1960s, by which time he was in failing health.
He died six years before the United States finally withdrew from South Vietnam.
New prime minister, Tun Abdul Razak, creates the National Front coalition.
After the war the United States and Philippine authorities try to suppress the movement.
Opposition leaders arrested; National Assembly suspended; press censored.
Marcos is thought to have plundered a personal fortune of $10 billion while in office.
Indonesia A Muslim nation of 17,500 islands, Indonesia is the fourth most populous ***^ country in the world.
Ist century CE The peoples of the Indonesian archipelago first come into contact with the Hindu-Buddhist culture of India. 600s-700S The Buddhist, Sumatrabased Sri-Vijaya Empire emerges as the earliest known Indonesian kingdom; it subsequently extends from Sumatra over Malaya and southern Thailand. 1100s Islam begins its penetration of Indonesia.
Indonesia and Australia sign an agreement over the exploitation of resources in the seas between the two countries.
Five students are killed in violent clashes with antiinsurrection forces.
At the end of World War II, the Portuguese regain sovereignty over the East.
Trip is canceled after Indonesia objects to a member of the delegation.
Australia and Indonesia DECISIVE MOMENT conclude an agreement over the Timor Gap, an area of rich oil deposits.
Prime minister Alkatin resigns over his handling of the unrest and Jose Ramos-Horta takes over as prime minister.
The joint Indonesian-East Timorese Truth Commission report blames Indonesia for human rights violations on East Timor in 1999.
EAST TIMOR VOTES FOR INDEPENDENCE, 1999 On August 30, 1999, in a vote with a staggering 99 percent turnout, four out of every five East Timorese voters chose independence from Indonesia.
The vote dramatically marked the end of Indonesia's 23-year occupation of the country.
Euphoric crowds took to the streets of Dili to celebrate but violent clashes instigated by the Indonesian military broke out soon afterward.
An Australian-led peacekeeping force restored order and international outrage soon led to Indonesia withdrawing its troops.
He raises the British flag on an island off Cape York, claiming the territory for Britain.
The widely scattered territories of Oceania stretch across the Pacific Ocean but are home to only 0. percent of the world's population.
Robert O'Hara Burke and William Wills set out from Melbourne in 1860 and almost reach the north coast, but turn back and die on the way home in 1861.
As a Japanese invasion of Australia seems imminent, the government turns to the United States for help.
Under the treaty, Australia is committed to participate in the Vietnam War in the 1960s.
AUSTRALIA EXTERNAL TERRITORIES AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC TERRITORY 1933 Set up under imperial order.
The shooting of 35 people by a gunman in Port Arthur, Tasmania, prompts tightening of gun control laws.
The Senate passes a no-confidence motion against Howard for his handling of the Iraq crisis.
Rudd signs the Kyoto Protocol, reversing the policy of the previous Liberal PM John Howard.
Julia Gillard becomes first female prime minister and narrowly wins subsequent election, forming a minority administration—the first since 1942.
South Pacific islands first settled 1,000 years ago by > . the Maori, who call the country Aotearoa.
The Maori The first settlers in New Zealand were the Maori from Polynesia, who make up about one-eighth of New Zealand's 3.9-million residents.
OVERSEAS TERRITORIES New Zealand is an unwilling colonial power and has no wish to keep overseas territories.
Their economic weakness forces New Zealand to take responsibility for their foreign policy and defense.
SELF-GOVERNING OVERSEAS TERRITORIES COOK ISLANDS A group of atolls and volcanic islands in the South Pacific.
Maori reject government 10-year land claims settlement of NZ$1 billion.
Crown apologizes to the Maori and signs Waikato Raupatu Claims Settlement Act.
Waitangi Tribunal orders the government to return to the Maori NZ$6. million-worth of confiscated land.
Fiji and New Zealand expel each other's top diplomats in a row over Fiji's postponement of elections.
Full diplomatic ties are restored only in 2010. 2011 city of Christchurch on South Island hit by major eathquake.
Nauru’s offshore banks are closed after United States allegations of money laundering.
Everyone lives on the narrow coastal strip, as the interior is uninhabitable former mining land.
Marshall Islands g A collection of 34 widely scattered atolls in the central Pacific, of which 24 are inhabited.
Tarawa Atoll is the site of a fierce battle between United States and Japanese troops.
In 2000 Malaita rebels stage an unsuccessful coup and hold the prime minister at gunpoint for two days.
The chiefs of the islands sign treaties with various European powers in 1838-39.
Island immigrant Between 1879 and 1916, the British brought in laborers from India to work on the copra and sugar cane plantations.
By 1945 Indians like this farmer outnumbered ethnic Melanesian Fijians.
President Ilolo repeals the constitution, dismisses all judges, appoints himself head of state, and reappoints Frank Bainimarama as prime minister.
A state of emergency is declared after riots protesting the lack of democracy.
Richard Beatty and Sarah Levete for proof reading; John Breen, Michael Brett, Amy-Sue Bix, Howard Hotson, Rosamond MckKitterick, and Chris Scarre for advice on content; Joanna Chisholm, Tarda Davison-Aitkins, Julie Ferris, Ben Hoare, Margaret Hynes, Neil Lockley, and Debra Wolter for editorial assistance; Smiljka Surla for design assistance; Laragh Kedwell for DTP support; Claire Morrey, Christine Pascall, and Joanne Grey at English Heritage for access to Dover Castle; Adam Howard at Invisiblecities Ltd for artworks (model by Andy Kay); Ailsa Heritage for advice on maps.
Romaine Werblow at DK Images, Sonia Harder at AKG Images, Everyone at The Art Archive, Jenny Page at The Bridgeman Art Library and Nejla Burnazoglu.
Archaeological Receipts Fund ; D'Ephorate of Prehistoric and Classical Antiquities.
National Geographic / Justin Guariglia.0-371 Corbis: Rykoff Collection.
