Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Historical Committee Stella Kyranopoulou, Elinda Staikopoulou Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee INTRODUCTORY LETTER OF STUDENT OFFICER Dear delegates of the Historical Committee, My name is Elinda Staikopoulou.
My position in this year’s Anatolia College MUN Conference is the Director of the Historical Committee.
I have been attending the Conference for the past 4 years and have been a chair once already.
The Historical Committee is a special committee and an extremely demanding one.
You need to be fully aware of the background of the situation in Cuba, the Cold War and the situation in Berlin.
We, as the Directors, expect all of you to actively participate in the debates, deeply identify with your personalities and contribute in the formation of history.
It is inevitable that we will face pressure, disputes, as well as funny and unforgettable moments.
We are looking forward to cooperating with you and engage in three days of hardship and amusement.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE COLD WAR The term “Cold War” is referred to a period that was characterized by political, as well as military conflicts, proxy wars and economic competition and its duration was between 1946 and 1991.
The word “Cold” is due to the facts that no major military conflict took place and to the nuclear deterrent.
The tactic of détente was implemented, so that political tensions were reduced and that no direct political attack was provoked.
The great importance of the Cold War is related to the fact that nuclear weapons were used and the world came to the closest stage towards a nuclear war.
THE BEGINNINGS OF THE COLD WAR During the end of World War II and the defeat of Nazi Germany, the USA and USSR appeared to be the two most dominant superpowers on a global scale, something that implied that they had some major economic, but also political differences.
This provoked this competition between these two countries that a bit later led to this series of conflicts of various types.
The Soviet Union created the Eastern Block, which included the Eastern European countries it occupied, by either annexing some parts of them or by preserving some as satellite-states.
Concerning now the Soviet Union, it also launched the COMECON and the Warsaw Pact in 1955, so that it ensured that it had enough allies by its side.
There were also some countries that belonged to the Non-Aligned Movement, which means that they were more or less neutral. pg.
There were also some member-states called “satellite states”, which had actually been set free by the Nazis and later occupied by the Soviet Union.
These countries were Eastern Germany, PR of Poland, PR of Bulgaria, Pr of Hungary, Czechoslovakia Socialist Republic, PR of Romania and the PR of Albania.
Western Block NATO NATO or North Atlantic Treaty Organization is an intergovernmental alliance that was established in 1949 according to the North Atlantic Treaty.
The most essential objective of the organization is considered to be the collective defense and number of its member-states reaches the 28.
Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. pg.
Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee The Cold War was quite essential for the NATO organization, given that the Korean War that broke out in 1950 was proven out to be of great importance for the treaty.
It is unquestionable that it elevated the urgency of the treaty and the planning, as well as the exercise of concrete military plans took place.
The USSR asked for its entrance into NATO alliance, but this notion was rejected, given that the Western countries perceived that as an attempt aiming the destruction of the organization of it or the weakening of it, at least.
Germany’s entrance in 1955 was what completed its anti-Communist character, since it implied that then there was enough opposition against Soviet Russia.
CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS In April 1962, Nikita Khrushchev shared his idea with Fidel Castro of installing medium range missiles in Cuba.
Initially, Castro was not willing to accept such a proposal, but later he agreed with Khrushchev and the installation began.
The two leaders had some conflicts, related to the secrecy that the Soviet side wanted to retain, while Cuba wanted to let the others know what was on with the missiles, given that no clause of any International Law was omitted or surpassed.
On 29 September, U2 boats begin launching flights over Cuban territory.
On 16 October, photos revealing the presence of medium range, nuclear missiles in Cuba, placed 90 miles away from the United States coast were about to be brought to light.
Kennedy’s response came on 22 October, where he announced the event during his speech on TV and he claimed that a naval blockade would be imposed to Cuba from then on.
He made clear that any attack launched by Cuba to the USA would be received as an attack from the USSR to the USA and he ordered the removal of all the Soviet arms from Cuba, while Soviet commanders were told to use all their arms in case of emergency.
In addition, he created a council of twelve ministers, especially for this event that would be in charge of handling the negotiations related to the crisis.
Finally, Kennedy also ordered low-level reconnaissance missions to take place every two hours.
For example, Nikita Khrushchev visited Jerome Hines at the Bolshoi Theater, who was an American singer.
From the other hand, Kennedy was determined to do anything, in order to manage to pull out these missiles from Cuba, both in diplomatic and military means. pg.
Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee THE RUSSIAN PERSPECTIVE Nikita Khrushchev was a Russian politician, who was the one in charge of Russia’s foreign affairs, when the crisis in Cuba broke out.
However, after Stalin’s death his actions proved quite the opposite thing and he is considered to be quite responsible for the de-Stalinization that was followed by Stalin’s death.
Two key facts that verify such a statement are his quite liberal domestic policy, as well as the fact that he was the first one, who backed the Soviet Space Program.
In terms of prestige, Khrushchev was accepted and revered by the majority, since for many he was nothing more than an incapable politician, who speaks a lot.
The sayings of Harold Macmillan could be used as a great example related to that.
Nikita Khrushchev was removed by his own colleagues in 1964 and died in 1971.
According to many, the Soviet side was the one to blame for, but it would be quite simplistic if one stayed only to that.
First of all, it was the actions performed by the USA that provoked the crisis, given that the American arms had surpassed impressively the Russian ones and this consisted a great threat towards the Russian side.
For instance, if Russia had fifty bombers that could hit the USA, the second would have five hundred, so the crisis was nothing, but a cheap way for Russia to defend itself.
In addition, the American actions also implied a Cuban Invasion that was more than possible, before the Crisis.
Sabotage against the factories, attempts of assassination against Cuban politicians and especially Fidel Castro and civilians’ suffrage were the most prominent examples of the American policy towards Cuba.
The past, including the Bay of Pigs Invasion made the things even worse and the threat became greater.
Concerning now the Bay of Pigs invasion, it was an attempt launched by forces of Cuban exiles trained by CIA to enter the southern part of Cuba.
The United States government was completely aware of that action and it encouraged that attempt that aimed the destruction of the government in Cuba under Fidel Castro.
In April 1961, the invasion took place and the main territory, where it got developed was the Playa Giron, which is a beach placed at the mouth of the bay.
Finally, it should b noted that Kennedy was aware of the presence of the missiles even from the first of October, but he did not react.
The photos of the 16 th of October were nothing, but a final, typical confirmation.
However, at his speech Kennedy announced the event shocked and anxious, something that was not the case, given that he had known about that two weeks beforehand and no actions had been initiated for the solution of the crisis. pg.
Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee THE AMERICAN PERSPECTIVE John Fitzgerald Kennedy served as the 35th President of the US, from 1961 till 1963, the year of his assassination.
Having adopted the democratic views, Kennedy represented Massachusetts’s 11 th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953.
Being elected at the age of 43 the youngest at the office and the second youngest President of America, Kennedy’s incumbency was promising and some may claim advantageous.
It is remarkable that he was the only Catholic president and the only president being awarded a Pulizer Prize.
That group of people was called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, also known as ExComm.
Members of the ExComm were the participants of the National Security Council meetings, the brother of President Kennedy, the attorney general Robert Kennedy, and Theodore Sorensen, the President’s speechwriter and White House counsel.
The contribution of these two people helped Kennedy acknowledge the impact of the crisis on the political aspects domestically.
Another important personality that was included in the ExComm was Llewellyn Thompson, who was a former ambassador of the Soviet Union and well acquainted with Nikita Khrushchev.
Kennedy blamed himself for publicly warning Khrushchev about the missiles in Cuba.
He explained thoroughly to the rest of the members of the ExComm that the crisis was not a matter of personal affront and public denunciation.
An Anglo-American airlift frustrated the blockade of the Soviets, but ten years later, in 1958, Khrushchev revived the threat and continued in the same direction.
Khrushchev in cooperation with the East Germans decided in 1961 on building a wall around West Berlin to hinder the exit of East Berliners to Soviet-controlled areas.
Early in 1962, Khrushchev had shared his intentions of invading Berlin with Kennedy as soon as the United States congressional elections were over. pg.
Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee Based on that, Kennedy considered the implementation of missile sites in Cuba as the preparation of a showdown regarding Berlin.
United States policy was to protect and secure the population of West Berlin, approximately 1. million people, but lacked the physical means to achieve that.
Having been advised by the members of the ExComm to do so, Kennedy announced the measure of a naval blockade around the island of Cuba.
The aim of this action was to guard the island and prevent the entry of further missiles.
As a result, the Soviets would be forced to withdraw the already installed missiles.
TIMELINE 1959 Jan 1 Fidel Castro assumes power after the Cuban Revolution 1960 Dec 19 Cuba openly aligns itself with the Soviet Union and their policies.
Sep 11 Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei Gromyko, warns that an American attack on Cuba could mean war with the Soviet Union.
Oct 14 A U-2 flying over western Cuba obtains photographs of missile sites.
BIOGRAPHIES ADLAI E STEVENSON Adlai Ewing Stevenson is the Ambassador of the United States of America to the UN since 1961.
Kennedy was the one who defeated Stevenson for the third time for the position of president, but after his nomination, he chose Stevenson for the position of Ambassador to the United Nations, a position he gladly accepted, and has been working hard to promote United States Foreign Policy. pg.
Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee MAXWELL TAYLOR General Maxwell Taylor, or “twofold hawk”, was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy Administration and a member of EX-COMM, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.He was also involved in a committee charged with overthrowing Fidel Castro, Operation Mongoose.
He held managerial positions in the Moscow City Committee and in the Central Committee of the Komsomol till 1932.
From 1941 since 1944, he was an employer of the People’s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs.
Thereafter, he became the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union and a representative at UN Security Council on behalf of his country.
A descendant of a low class Belarusian family, Gromyko was inspired by the Bolshevik Revolution.
Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee PATRICK DEAN Sir Patrick Dean was born in 1909 and is the Permanent Representative of the UK to the UN since 1960.
He started his career as a lawyer, however, when the World War II broke out, he quitted the field of law and entered the British Foreign Office.
Described as a man of effectiveness, Sir Patrick Dean was knighted by Her Majesty, the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in 1957.
ALEX QUAISON-SACKEY Alex QuaisonSacky is the Ghanaian diplomat representing his country in the Security Council.
He has been holding the position of the permanent Representative of Ghana in the Security Council since 1959.
ARMAND BERARD Armand Berard is the French delegate to United Nations Security Council since 1959.
Although he studied History and Geography, he choose to follow a diplomat’s career.
Fluent in German, Spanish, Italian and English, In 1931 he joined the French Foreign Office and his first post was in Berlin during the first five years of the Third Reich.
In the 1940s he managed to escape to Algiers, through Spain, and join the De Gaulle’s Free France movement.
In the USA, which he first visited in 1938, Armand Berard served as First Counselor of the French Embassy in Washington DC, in which period he also assisted Henry Bonnet, the French delegate to the United Nations.
From 1949 to 1955, he served as the High Commissioner of the French Occupied Zone in Germany, primarily dealing with Berlin.
In 1959, he become the Representative of France in the Security Council.
MIHAIL HASEGANU Mihail Haseganu is the Romanian Representative to the United Nations Security Council since 1961, when by state degree he become the “Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary” in place of Silviu Brucan, the previous holder of the position.
He was a former rector of the Institute of Economic Sciences and Planning and in 1959 he become Director in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 | Historical Committee 1959, from where he was recalled in August of 1961 to assume the position of Ambassador of Romania to the United Nations.
ISMET İNÖNÜ İsmet İnönü was a Turkish politician and one of the founding fathers of Modern Turkey.
He kept his country neutral during the Second World War and improved its diplomatic relations with the West as well as with the Soviet Union.
He was a Cuban revolution initiator and politician, being in power since 1959 in the position of the Prime Minister of Cuba.
His political views adhere to these of Marx and Lenin, converting the Republic of Cuba into a one-party socialist state.
His plan aimed at the nationalization of private businesses and enterprises, while, at the same time, he implemented all sorts of socialist reforms within the society.
