Students study in new second floor study area in Coram, which will open 8:00m. to 11:00m. starting Monday.
Among the changes upperclassmen will notice this fall at Bates, perhaps the most welcome concerns Coram Library, which will be open from 8 to 11 daily except Sunday, when the hours will be 2 to 11 ""Every effort has been made to* create a quiet and pleasant area conducive to serious reading and study,"" Head Librarian Iva W Foster observed, describing the renovated second floor reading area.
This section makes the new schedule possible, as it will be open during the additional hours without the services of the library staff, while the library proper will be maintained on the same y basis as last year, open from 8:30 m. to 12:15m., 1:00m. to 5:30, and 6:30 to 10:00 The most important single improvement on the second floor is a panelled glass screen similar to that separating the main floor study room from the circulation desk and coat racks.
This glass wall completely encloses the entire area and eliminates noise from the front entrance and stairwell.
On the stairwell and in the large unit of the reading area, additional coat racks have been installed for student use when the major part of the library is closed.
Wednesday, September 26. at 4:30 Interest counts as much as experience. through the circulation desk.
The present seating arrangements are less crowded than before* and are more comfortable due to padded chairs.
Modern lighting fixtures have replaced the old and rather dim globes in the large room and the Stanton Room.
Other changes at Coram include a slotted book return, now in the ""experimental stage,"" which should help the librarians to handle reserve books more rapidly.
A badly-needed elevator has been installed, and the library staff will no longer have to carry armloads of heavy books from floor to floor.
Last year a Library Committee composed entirely of students investigated the study opportunities at Bates and suggested the adoption of longer library hours.
This year a study area with greatly improved facilities is open 15 hours daily, the responsibility for which will rest solely on the students themselves.
James Curtis of the class of 1963 and a member of the Deansmen then took the floor to lead the group in singing some of the Bates songs.
Debbie Peterson '63, a member of the Merrimanders, added her voice to Jim's, and both sang the songs so that the Freshmen could become familiar with the tunes.
The Freshmen added their enthusiasm, and The Bates Fight Song rang throughout the Gym.
Dean Lindholm then introduced President Charles F Phillips who turned his attention to the assembly.
President Phillips welcomed the students and their parents and explained that he and other administration members had decided that many parents might enjoy an opportunity to visit a college campus for a weekend.
Thus it was arranged to make parents part of the opening weekend, so that they could be more than porters for their child's bags.
He recalled the great expense of financing a person's education and Stu-C And Stu-G Outline General Policies, Program The Library calls the attention of the student body to the new fine schedule on overdue reserve books.
Beginning at 1:00m., an additional fine of 25 cents per hour or fraction thereof will be charged for each overdue reserve book.
This action has become necessary to encourage prompt return of reserve books in order that the books may be readily available at the Reserve Desk for the use of other students doing class assignments.
Yesterday you were introduced to the specific functions of these respective bodies.
In brief, the day to day duties of Stu-G entail dorm management under the Honor System, proctor selection, and freshman orientation.
Stu-C is concerned with selection of proctors, freshman orientation, intramurals, and dorm induction.
The scope of the Governments extends to representing the student body on various faculty and administration committees.
These committees integrate the faculty, administration, and student effors in social-academic fields.
For example, the Student Conduct Committee is concerned not only with disciplinary problems, but also attempts to clarify campus policies.
The Extra curricular Committee deals with scheduling all campus activities to avoid conflicts.
The Concert and Lecture Committee selects events for the many cultural programs at the school.
In addition this committee meets with the LewistonAuburn Lecture Committee to plan the series for the area.
The Campus Relations Committee is made up of members of all the major campus organizations, and discusses topics of interest to the whole campus.
Topics of general campus interest, including many of the above named activities, are handled by the Intergovernment Committee.
This past year the Intergovernment Committee worked to expand library facilities, to improve co-ed dining, and principally to draft a constitution for the proposed Student Senate.
The constitution for the Student Senate w^s overwhelmingly approved by the Student Body last spring and the Intergovernment Committee will now present it to the faculty and administration for their consideration.
It is hoped that a Student Senate will be formally esablished next spring.
The Senate constitution provides for separate dormitory management and problems related to either men or women.
The services pertaining to the campus-at-large presently performed by the separated governments will be handled by the Student Senate.
An area that holds great promise for more varied activities on related the story of the father who had sacrificed new clothes for himself for many years so that he could be present ""at his son's graduation.
President Phillips stated that because more and more people are now attending college, Bates may have to adopt a plan whereby classes would be held twelve months of the year.
Thus, one third more students could be educated in the same amount of time as now, but the student-professor ration would not be sacrificed.
He emphasized, however, that there is still a way of life for the men and a separate way of life for the women.
Each student was encouraged to keep up the academic standing of Bates College by working his best, yet still he was to try to join some of the campus organizations in order to make best use of his abilities.
President Phillips closed his welcome by encouraging each student to be proud of his school, so that he might become one of the many enthusiastic alumni.
In closing, Jim Curtis led all Bates students and alumni in singing the Alma Mater.
All stood and sang out proudly, and the Freshmen were officially part of Bates College.
Notice The Robinson Players invite the freshman class to a showing of ""Kind Hearts and Coronets"" with Alec Guiness free of charge, Thursday at 4:00 in the Little Theater.
September 29— ""The Mouse That Roared"" British October 13 — ""Panther Panchali"" Indian October 27 — ""Asphalt Jungle"" American November 22 — ""I'm All Right Jack"" British December 1 — ""Smiles of a Summer Night"" Swedish January 5, 1963 — ""The Stone Flower"" Russian February 1 — ""A Nous La Liberte"" French March 2 — ""Open City"" Italian March 30 — ""Der Hauptmann 3 TWO BATES COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER 20, 1962 Editorials Choose Wisely Some activities are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested.
The debt to Bacon is obvious, and if he were alive he might well echo the same advice.
Taste the many different clubs, organizations, etc., but commit yourselves to nothing at first.
After a semester you will be in a much better position to judge the merits of the deluge of activities surrounding you, to know your college self, and to contribute your abilities and interests deeply in one or two areas.
Admittedly, one should observe Aristotle's Golden Mean, but few err on the side of too much study.
College is nothing if it does not provide a forum for your intellectual expansion.
Consider the classroom, the teacher, the activity, not as ends, but as means to an ever expanding intellectual horizon.
Thus, commit yourselves to that one goal immediately; taste, and perhaps swallow, the others.
The students who last year labored over the library report should be praised, for their work has borne fruit.
The success of the library committee is just one example of the effectiveness of student opinion, thoughtfully considered, carefully prepared, and presented in a forthright but mature manner.
Not every request is met, nor should be; but if all requests were tendered in a manner similar to the library report's, the percentage might be higher.
The accumulation of many seemingly insignificant changes at Bates often goes unnoticed.
There have been advances, of less physical prominence than Carnegie's, but equally as significant.
FEATURE STAFF Peter Reich '65, Editor, Norman Gillespie '64, Assistant, Diane John son '65, James Kiernan '63, Richard Dow '64, Malcolm Mills '63, Eric Nisula '65, Peter d'Errico '65, Marty Stiles '65, Nina Jewell '65, Robert Livingston '63, Nancy Dillman '64, Pamela Ball '64, Joan Morris '64.
BUSINESS STAFF Stephen Barron '64, Business Manager; Robert Lanz '65, Advertis ing Manager; Katherine Mincher '64, Make-up; Sandra Parker '63.
Presents Purpose, Schedule And Goal For Coming Session By SUSAN HERMANN '63 Mention the Bates Christian Association in a crowded room, and among those who hear you there will be a variety of reactions.
This article attempts to clarify some of these misconceptions and to present this year's CA program.
At present the C in our title is probably more confusing and undefined than the C of the YM and YW organizations.
While calling ourselves the Bates Christian Association we also attempt to be an inter-faitfy commission.
Hence it seems that judgments made about the BCA will have to be based on what we do, not on our title.
However, this year these activities will not constitute the core of our program.
The basic aim of the future is to give the individual as many opportunities as possible to further hs personal development, spiritually as well as intellectually.
In addition to these opportunities, the CA is planning to intensify its ""thought provoking"" presentations.
The Wednesday evening Vesper Services from 9:30 to 10:00 will be continued.
A special service of this nature is planned for one Sunday afternoon a month.
The CA will continue to support its Thursday evening Bible Discussion Group in the Women's Union.
New to the program this year is the three-day religious convocation planned for early February.
Speakers representing different religions of the world will present the respective relationships of the individual to his God.
After each presentation there will be an opportunity for students to talk with the speaker.
Since the CA would be classified as ""filthy rich"" monetarily, if not spiritually, we have decided to attend to this asset by spending, spending, spending.
To the small fund available for chapel speakers we have decided to add our two cents, in the hopes that at least a few compulsory chapels might be more bearable.
The CA hopes that this year it may bring before you something well worth looking into.
Deans Discuss Challenge Bates Offers To Students Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year.
By DEAN BARBARA RANDALL Bob Hope in a commencement address last June told college seniors, ""You have been preparing for four years to go out into the world.
I presume, however, that everyone has been encouraging you toward a college education and accepting the four year challenge at Bates.
I, too, would encourage you to go and enter into this experience wholeheartedly, but not without being aware of several important things.
Perhaps you know all this, so I will just hope you are aware of two other very important ideas.
One of the most difficult aspects of your eager preparation and pursuit of excellence in contribution is getting so bogged down with the details of today that you fail to develop a sense of the future.
It is quite necessary that you be able to see the relationship of what you are now and what you will be in the future.
Too many of us are prone to satisfy our whims of the moment without taking time to correlate the relationship of what we do now and its impact on our future.
It is often difficult to associate poor judgment today with the possible pattern of tomorrow.
By DEAN WALTER BOYCE A fairly common dictionary definition of the word ""advice"" is that it is an opinion recommending a course of action.
In the past few days, I am sure that every first year man at Bates has been given more advice than he can be expected to assimilate in what can be an extremely confusing adjustment period.
I do not wish to take advantage of this opportunity to express myself by adding more words of advice, regardless of how good my intentions may be.
I would, however, point out that everyone who has already offered advice, or who will do so in the future, does so with a sincere desire to help.
The fact that advice on the same subject may prove to be contradictory simply points up the differences between the advisors as well as those of the advisees.
These contraditions should act as agents to sharpen a college man's ability to make his own decisions and then to stand whatever criticisms will obviously come from those who differ in their thinkng.
As an undergraduate, each man has, among many others, the task of learning to distinguish good counsel from bad, or helpful advice from the cynical remarks of the opinionated.
As in all aspects of college life, a high premium is placed upon a respect for truth and the development of sound judgment.
There are few, if any, men who can provide a text, the mastery of which will provide an infallible way of attaining these goals.
I certainly have no intention of trying to supply short cuts to the insights and understanding that must come from personal experience, although I am sure that in the course of the year I shall offer advice to many men in the class of 1966.
I would like to close by expressing the hope that each man in the first year class will take full advantage of the educational opportunity that will be his for the next four years.
Failure to do this will show up in many ways, but regardless of the variation, it will still be a failure.
I hope that even at this early point of the college year each freshman understands that we set high standards and we expect them to be attained.
Freshmen fill up on chicken and soda pop at annual Twin-City Barbecue following traditional Thorncrag hike.
BATES COLLEGE,SEPTEMBER 20, 1962 THREE Freshmen Describe First Week As(2ollege Students We arrive wide-eyed, apprehensive, and dazed — unmistakably freshmen, even from a distance.
The co-eds and eds find plenty of time for ogling at our first freshman assembly, but the speakers wrench our attention to the business at hand.
Our parents are more worried about our ability to adjust to college life than we are, or perhaps it is a fear of adjusting too well to the activities that President Phillips stressed as being a basic part of coeducation.
We are told to learn the Alma Mater by a senior who reads the words to us from a note card . . . a great boost to our confidence, self-esteem, etc.
At Thorncrag we fight over small, good-looking shoes, hoping that the girls they belong to are similar.
Somehow, one gets the impression that whoever invented the games that were played is a firm believer in close boy-girl relationships.
We should be ready for just about anything after another week of girls' dorm open houses.
Again, we are pulled to earth by registration and placement tests and book-buying.
We expect you to make mistakes and yet profit from them, we expect you to be honest with yourselves and with us, and we expect you to utilize your talents purposefully.
In meeting your ""moment of truth"" squarely you will be able to test and acknowledge your degree of maturity, good sense, and integrity.
Thomas Wolfe once said so wisely, ""When youth is gone, every man will look back upon that period of life with infinite sorrow and regret.
May your eollege life on the Bates campus be all that you and we expect it to be.
Good luck in organizing your time and developing good study habits, making an extra-curricular contribution and learning to live closely with others.
The ticket, costing $3.00, will admit the holder to the eleven movies scheduled for this year.
By purchasing mis ticket, an individual will save $2.50, for single admissions are 50c.
The film series tickets may be purchased from Robinson Players members or at the ticket booth on movie nights.
Stu-C campus, which would lie within the jurisdiction of the Senate, would be the N.S.A. program.
N.S.A. is the National Student Association, an association of several hundred colleges and universities.
We have presented the functions and purposes of the respective governments to acquaint you with the voice of the student body.
However, our work is futile without your expression of interest and active participation in the projects.
Do not hesitate to come to meetings, present ideas, and take advantage of the services that student government has to offer.
But After you've settled down (to study) and you find you need a short skirt, slacks, a pair of socks, another sweater or half slip, a dress for a special date, we'll be more than happy to show you what you ask for.
Many Bates Girls enjoy the convenience of a charge account with Ward Bros, We'll be very happy to explain how easy it is to send the bill home.
Customarily in the first issue of The STUDENT the Sports Editor warns incoming frosh of what to expect from their fellow students wearing the Garnet colors on athletic fields.
As this year should prove the exception to this rule I will not dwell on this subject.
It should be a good year for the Garnet athletes, both male and female.
The few alumni who mistakenly require Big Ten success from our coaches should be content.
Atlantic Coast Regional Championships at Teaneck, N J., shortly after the close of school.
The '62 gridiron season gets under way Saturday when the 'Cats face the powerful Tufts Jumbo's led by Little All-American fullback Ron Deveaux.
For the first time in many years there are a few rule changes to plague coaches, players, and fans alike.
As both coaches and players are fully aware of the new rule changes, I will briefly clue you fans in on the rule revisions and additions.
This rule allows the punting time to down the ball within their opponent's 10-yard line, thus conforming to professional football's rule.
Previously downing the ball inside the 10 constituted a touchback, giving the ball to the receiving team on its 20-yard line.
A team fouled while attempting a field goal on the last play of the game will be allowed to run another play after the penalty is assessed.
This infraction has caused confusion, even among game 'officials, because illegal motion which calls for a 5-yard penalty and an illegal shift can be so similar.
The other change this year is a shift from Z „c -5 yards the penalty for kicking an opponent's forward pass or placement.
In 27 years of college and high school coaching, Arlanson never has had a losing season, and he doesn't figure to start this year.
The Jumbos run out of a power-T and with fullback Deveaux able to plow through holes made by tackles Don Curtis, Carmine Parisi and Virgil Aiello, the Brown and Blue are potent.
The Medford team should be tough at the ends and center, but lack experience at the guard slots.
A veteran backfield compliments Deveaux, who was the leading scorer in New England last year.
Halfbacks Ralph Doran and Peter Titus, and southpaw Dennis Hickey round out the Jumbo backfield.
By AL MARDEN Sports Editor Seven lettermen will be opening up against Tufts Saturday, according to football mentor Robert W Hatch.
The 'Cats journey to Medford, Mass., where they will face the powerful Tufts Jumbo's.
The tentative starting lineup released by Coach Hatch yesterday has senior Paul Castolene and junior Pat Donovan at the end slots, senior Phil Tamis, and sophomore Jim Brown at tackles, junior John Schatz and sophomore Dave Cox at guards and senior Howie Vandersea at center.
In the backfield senior Bill Davis will open at quarterback, sophomore John Lanza and junior Paul Planchon at the halfback slots, and senior Web Harrison at fullback.
Castolene, Tamis, Schatz, Vandersea, Davis, Planchon, and Harrison are the returning lettermen on the starting squad.
The other returning letterman, senior tackle Bob Williams, is sidelined with a leg injury.
Donovan saw limited action last year but has impressed with his pass-catching ability during preseason drills.
Three Year Letterman Tamis is a three year letterman who was moved from the end position last year to the tackle slot and improved over the season to become the number one tackle at the end of last year.
Tamis hails from Nahant, Mass., and his 6' 1"" frame tips the scale at 200.
Brown is another Hatch convertee, moving over from his guard spot last year where he saw considerable action as a reserve.
Schatz, a Moorsetown, N J., resident, moves out of his offense guard slot to back up the line on defense.
A native of Milford, Mass., Cox is a former member of the ""pony squad"" who saw action last year in several games.
Mass., is a three year letter man and has twice been selected on the All-Maine team.
Co-captain Davis is perhaps the most versatile ball player Hatch has coached as the Gloucester, Mass., native has played all four backfield positions.
All-Maine Planchon is the third All-Maine team member on the squad and has lettered two years.
Planchon plays the halfback position on defense and is dangerous on punt returns.
Lanza is very fast and has impressed in preseason drills with his hard running and blocking ability.
Harrison is another three year letterman, having lettered at both the fullback and halfback positions.
Several freshmen show promise according to Coach Hatch and are expected to see considerable the season. action during Backfield candidates who are expected to help the squad early in the season are halfbacks John Uskis and Robert Fisher, and fullback Tom Carr.
Fullback Ron LeBlanc could see action as a punter as he has demonstrated a talented toe in practice sessions.
Linemen who Coach Hatch expects to get mileage from early in the season are tackles Wayne Pangburn and Charlie Lockhart, guards Rick DeStefano and Bill Farrington, and end Bill Davis.
Commenting on this year's freshman candidates Hatch said, ""We have fewer than normal , but there are six or eight who will really help us.
Two notable personnel switches have been made this year by Coach Hatch.
Dave Stockwell has been switched back to a guard, and Jim Callahan from center to end.
Surprising in preseason scrimmages have been end John Williams, who has sparkled in defense, and quarterback Ed Rucci who came off the bench in Friday's scrimmage to lead the 'Cats to a 7-6 victory over Maine Mar-i time Academy.
IMPORTANT NOTICE All cross country candidates, both varsity and freshmen, will meet in the field house at 1 tomorrow.
Coach Walter Slovenski IMPORTANT NOTICE All candidates for the Bates varsity soccer team will attend a brief but important meeting at 1:30m. tomorrow in Alumni Gymnasium.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, SEPTEMBER 26, 1962 By Subscription Concert Lecture Series Offers Four Programs The Bates College Concert and Lecture Series for 1962-1963 will present four campus programs for Bates students and interested residents of the college area.
This lecture, presented in conjunction with the Bates Chapter of Phi Beta Kappa, is open free to the public.
The George Colby Chase Lecture, open free to the public, is scheduled for Thursday, February 21, 1963, with Dr.
Goncharoff is Secretary, World Affairs Education, National Council of YMCAs.
All four programs will be held in the Chapel and are scheduled at 8 Admission for Bates students will be by I.D. card.
Tickets for the Nash and Lerner lectures will be on sale to the public at the door.
The Concert and Lecture Committee had attempted to provide a stimulating program and urges the students to take note of these dates.
Concerts Also Offered In addition, in cooperation with the Lewiston-Auburn Community Concert Association, a series of concert programs open to Bates students will be presented at the Lewiston High School Auditorium.
Faculty, frosh, and upperclassmen listen as chapel choir sings at Convocation.
Phillips Examines Merits Of US-Russian Education New geology lecture room in Carnegie is also new planetarium.
Light switches can simulate an entire day, sunrise through sunset, on thin fabric sky.
Freshman Discussions Concern Work By Contemporary Authors On Wednesday evening, September 19, as part of Freshman week activities, the Freshman class met in two sections to discuss two books on their summer reading list.
Snow's Two Cultures and Alan Patton's Cry The Beloved Country were examined.
Anthony S Abbott, Professor Robert M Chute, Elisabeth Little '63, and George Stone '63.
Snow's Two Cultures examines the gulf between the sciences and the arts.
Patton's Cry The Beloved Country illustrates the destructive effects of industrialization upon society.
Poll Shows Approval As a new Freshman week activity, an important question was whether it should be continued in the future.
An informal poll of the Freshman class showed that most thought that it had value as an introduction to college level thought, that the discussions provided a greater understanding of the books.and that the evening gave the student a chance to see how he stood in general ability, as compared with his classmates.
During this past Spring and Summer, President Charles F Phillips has been speaking to groups all over the East on topics of current interest in the fields of education, foreign and domestic affairs, and the state of Bates College.
From his many news releases comes this collection of quotes and ideas that cover the whole scope of Dr.
Phillips reported 'that the 1962 Bates College Alumni Fund reached a total of over $67,00.
Bates College completed its seventeenth consecutive year of operation with a balanced budget.
Phillips, speaking before the Massachusetts Association of BATES STUDENT Freshmen (and upperclassmen) interested in working on the student newspaper in any capacity — news reporter, feature writer, sports, business, photography — are URGED lo attend a brief meeting in the Publishing Association Office (facing on Chase Hall Ballroom), this afternoon, September 26, at 4:30 Interest counts as much as experience.
School Committees, said that a recent poll of school boards throughout the country indicates that local and state funds are sufficient to meet the needs of public education.
Phillips emphasized that the true value of an education must be measured by the kind of life one leads, rather than in dollars.
An alumni meeting in Philadelphia heard that the ratio of women to men is gaining in colleges across the country.
SpeciCOMMONS On Wednesday, September 26th, the Commons and Chase Hall will be closed for the evening beginning at 5:30 and the facilities will be used by Lewiston Auburn service clubs.
The Bobcat Den will be open as usual, but only the Chase Hall entrance nearest Roger Williams will be available for use.
Announcement of dinner arrangements for men (all will go to Rand Hall) will be made in the Commons prior to the 2Sth.
D., rejoined the Bates faculty to lead the traditional processional which marks the beginning of another academic year.
He expressed the idea that today's headlines deal only with crime, death, and other darker aspects of life.
President Phillips then proceeded to acquaint the assembled body with various Bates graduates who were changing the world without having their names on the front pages of leading newspapers.
Phillips stated, ""Interestingly enough, these men and women have certain common characteristics.
Each and every one of them puts in long hours of hard work at his or her career.
Each is concerned about the need for a high quality of performance concerning his daily career tasks, recognizing that others are depending upon him for important services.
DEBATE A meeting of all prospective debaters will be held Thursday, September 27 at 4:00 in the debating room, which is in the second floor corner of Pettigrew facing Libbey and Parker.
All freshmen and any upperclassmen who have any interest are invited to this meeting which will be concerned with explaining what debating entails in regard to time and work.
POETRY i as well as the name of the COLannounces its Annual LEGE attended.
ANY STUDENT attending either junior or senior college is eligible to submit his verse.
Shorter works are preferred by the publishers, because of space limitations.
There are NO FEES OR CHARGES for acceptance or the submission of verse.
ALL MANUSCRIPTS should be sent to the Offices of the NATIONAL POETRY PRESS, 3210 Selby Avenue, Los Angeles 34, Calif.
Phillips Compares fically, the number of men colloans to other countries,"" he said, lege students has increased fiftyfour per cent, while the comparable figure for women is a hundred and two per cent.
Phillips discussed the Russian educational system before the New Haven, Conn., alumni group.
He said that while the Russian educational system produces technically competent graduates, it fails to develop a background for independent thought.
Phillips told the graduating class that we are rapidly approaching the day when all young people who can benefit from a college education and who truly want to go to college will find it financially possible to do so.
The Bates College President pointed out that we provide a college education for a greater percentage of our people than does any other country.
Phillips has spoken often on foreign and domestic problems that face our country.
He told the Massachusetts Hospital Association that our pres ent method of giving foreign aid encourages socialism abroad.
This means that our aid is used mainly to d&velop government enterprises in the foreign country or enterprises which depend heavily upon government direction.
As a substitute for our present foreign aid program, the Bates College President urged that the underdeveloped nations encourage the growth of private firms.
Phillips said that recent retreats in Laos emphasized that the Free World is still losing the Cold War.
Finding our present policy a defensive one, he called for a policy ""under which we take the initiative.
We must train people from Communistheld countries to infiltrate these areas.
Phillips again say that our foreign policy is not sufficiently aggressive.
Mon., Tues.— ""THE INTERNS"" Cliff Robertson ""BANDIT OF ZHOBE"" Victor Mature Ann Aubrey Wednesday.
Instead we leave him free to carry out his present attack on Laos and South Viet Nam.
Similarly, he told the State of Maine Safety Conference that the United States must develop a program to return Cuba to the Free World.
Noting that Cuba is being used as a base for spreading Communism throughout South America, he emphasized that, except for one abortive invasion attempt, the United States does not have a positive program for returning Cuba to the Free World.
In fact, each day we fail to take action sees Communism gain strength in Cuba and makes our eventual action more difficult,"" concluded Dr.
Further inofrmation is available in the Guidance and Placement Office. for admission to certain graduate business schools or divisions on November 3, February 2, April 6, and July 13.
Bulletins of information and application forms are available in the Guidance and Placement Office.
CAREER MONOGRAPHS under various and interesting titles have recently been received by the Guidance and Placement Office.
Any interested students or THE ADMISSION TEST FOR* faculty are invited to consult GRADUATE STUDY IN BUSI1 these items in the Guidance OfNESS will be given to applicants I fice.
ALFRED HITCHCOCK'S WOT 1041 PICTURE tUSNNM CUiSK »t»rrin( JAMES STEWART Association of Life Underwriters, meeting in Montreal, Canada, that a tax cut is just one of several steps necessary to achieve more rapid economic growth in the United States.
In addition, we must reduce our cost of raw materials by changing our present farm program.
Manufacturing costs can be reduced by a concerted drive to eliminate featherbedding throughout economy.
MARINES On October 1, 1962, officers of the United Stales Marine Corps Officer Selection Team will visit Bates to talk with men who may be interested in obtaining information about Marine programs.
It is expected that they will be available for interviews in either Chase Hall or the Purinion Room of the Alumni Gymnasium between 18m. and 4 Concert Lecture Auditorium's right entrance.
The first concert program is scheduled for Wednesday evening, October 17, 1962, with a presentation by the Ballet Espagnol.
On Sunday afternoon, October 28, 1962, the Baltimore Symphony will perform with Peter Adler conducting.
A program by Olegna Fuschi, pianist, is offered on Wednesday evening, January 30, 1963.
The Westminster Choir, on Wednesday evening, May 1, 1963, will close the series.
RALLY A Senior rally for the football game with Norwich will be held in the Alumni Gymnasium Friday night.
The band will begin marching to the rally at 7:00, and the rally will begin in the Gymnasium at 7:15.
A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Many a businessman is discovering these days — to his pleasant surprise — that a gift to his Alma Mater can bring definite future tax advantages to his wife and family.
Maine BATES COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER 26, 1962 THREE Milius, Lloyd To Entertain In Theater's Introduction By SANDY PROHL '64 Everyone on stage! . . . calling all actors, actresses, scenery painters, ushers — everyone who enjoys the exciting atmosphere of the theater.
The occasion is the first meeting of the Bates College club in the CQUntry However> the Robinson Players.
The ""cast"" hopes to introduce you to some of the activities of the Players.
Included in the program will be an interpretive dance by Holly Milius '63, accompanied on the guitar by Tod Lloyd '64.
Also, the Robinson Players will present a scene from the play The Barreiis of Wimpole Street, in full 19th century costume.
During the ""intermission,"" Robinson Players membership cards and season tickets to their sponsored movies may be purchased.
The stage is set for a fun-filled year, so all freshmen and upperclassmen, don't miss this spectacular premiere performance — October 2, at 7:00m., in the Lit tie Theater.
Announces Year's Activities By NEALE SCHUMAN '63 Formed in 1920 to promote outdoor activities, the Bates College Outing Club has a structure similar to that of the Dartmouth After Hours By JOHN HOLT '64 I year, this column will be conLITTLE MAM, ON CAMPUS B.O.C. is unique in that the entire student body constitutes the membership.
The working Council consists of thirty-six members; twelve from each of the three upperclasses.
In February the annual freshman Open House is held in Chase Hall to meet those interested in participating on the governing body.
Usually, freshman year is the only time a student may be elected to the Council.
However, there have been some vacancies each year for upperclassmen, and when such openings occur, poster displays on the bulletin board provide appropriate details to those interested.
Included in a national literary cerned with > presenting a book rereview magazine last year (Satview The books to be reviewed urday Review, I think) was a semi-comprehensive article on what the American collegian reads outside of assigned material.
Also included were investigations concerning the extent of literature being consumed, and an evaluative appraisal of the reading habits and intellectual direction of 20th century students.
As expected, the article revealed that there is a wide diversity among students, ranging from those who have literally no interest in outside reading, regardless of subject matter, to the intense desire of those who seriously want to get an education, actively, rather than receive an education, passively.
Next week, and the weeks that follow throughout the school will be available in paperback, both fiction and non-fiction, and will be limited to writers of the 20th century, with emphasis on the recently-published variety.
The purpose of this format is to acquaint the student with material that would not be included in the courses at Bates, and to supplement the ""classics"" with contemporary material that is vital and necessary to an awareness of what is going on in the minds of men today.
Perhaps our attempt to achieve Jung's modernity may prove to be a vainglorious one.
Nonetheless, the ideal of a review of this type is objectivity, and, with a desire to avoid pretentious pontefication, the offerings begin next week.
If you talk about your troubles And tell them o'er and o'er The world will think you like 'em And proceed to give you more.
HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE ■ BUDGET JFWELFR 73 Lisbon Si.
The Board consists of seven directors, who organize the various O.C. activities.
The remaining Council members assist the directors especially in planning trips and Winter Carnival.
Hikes and Trips, Judy Bradshaw '63 and George Hunter '63; Cabins and Trails, Nancy Levin '63 and Cliff Baker '64; Equipment Room.
Penny Morse '64 and Lee Pollock '64; Hickories, Nancy Conway '64 and Al Pollock '63; Carnival.
The Council hopes that our schedule this year will increase the enthusiasm for outdoor events.
Everyone is welcome to meetings which are held every other Wednesday evening at 7:00 m., in the basement of the Alumni Gym, starting October 10.
For those who enjoy the foreign film and especially the English comedy — Mr Sellers is at the top of the entertainment list.
This Saturday evening, what was one of Mr Sellers' first ""big hits"" in this country, ""The Mouse That Roared"" will be screened in the Little Theater at 7:00 and 9:00m.
The ""mouse"" in this instance is the principality of Grand Fenwick located somewhere in Europe.
The tottering economy there forces the Prime Minister into some desperate diplomacy to avoid extinction, and the ensuing action revolves around war with the United States, desired defeat, and the devastating QBomb.
The assumption is that the United States will be a generous victor once again, and bolster its just defeated foes with ready cash.
The premise is that laughter is contagious and that Mr Sellers is an effective agent in his trio of roles.
Also in the film are David Hosseff as an inventor, William Hartnell as the sergeant, and Jean Seberg as the daughter of the Prime Minister.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main B E D A R D ' S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston.
Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents BILL LERSCH BILL DAVIS FOUR BATES COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER 26, 1962 0 Editorials Support The Robinson Players A perennial crisis on this campus is the purported lack of social life.
While Bates will undoubtedly never become a high keyed party school (desirable or not), there is something to do which isn't being done.
The Robinson Players' movie program is not being supported by the student body.
There certainly isn't a wealth of activities on any one Saturday night; the cost isn't prohibitory.
And a glance at the movie schedule indicates that although the films are not the extravaganzas one might find in Lewiston, they are first rate and have received critical acclaim.
Most would agree that the studentry has the right to a social life; but this right implies social responsibilities.
The studentry should support the work and planning of those who have organized the present social life, and do more than just talk about improvements, as was the situation last year.
HAZING SEEN AS TRANSITION PERIOD Now that hazing has formally begun, the usual controversy about this subject has started again.
This largely sophomorefreshman activity, with the frosh assuming the role of underdogs, has been investigated annually by the administration and the two student governments.
As a result, the rules about what the sophomores can and cannot do have tightened.
For example, on the women's side of campus, hazing takes place in. the dormitories only, with the exception of haze day, and only at a specified number of times.
The rules about the traditional ""rearranging of the, freshman girls' rooms"" on the afternoon of Stanton Ride have been changed too, to avoid any destruction of property or excessive messing of rooms.
While there were a few girls who became upset or angry about the spider-webbing (thread intricately woven throughout the room) and tissue paper, the great majority took the hazing in the friendly spirit in which it was offered.
After all, hazing is carried on to help the freshmen become adjusted to the school.
Moreover, if further restrictions are placed on this orientation period, the purpose will be defeated.
Hazing now unites the freshmen in giving them a common foe — the sophomores.
They survived the ordeal, carrying out of it memories of good times and humorous incidents.
If everyone remembers that it is ""all in fun,"" then hazing can help freshmen ease the jump from secondary school to college.
Congratulations to the Bates College Band for doing an excellent job at the season's first rally.
With only two practice sessions and numerous freshmen in the group, the band performed like a well-drilled unit.
George R Healy Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year.
Entered as second-class matter at the Lewiaton Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1870.
Texas Oil Draws Bates Students By PETER REICH '65 Money, for many of us who are big thinkers, is often synonomous with that magic word, oil.
This past summer, a friend of mine and I decided to discover exactly what was going on in the oil field.
We pulled every string we could, and were finally offered jobs by the Parker Drilling Company, one of the largest drilling companies, with major locations in Oklahoma, Texas, Boliva, and the French Sahara.
Odessa, Texas claims to be the largest oil field supply center in the world, and I would not doubt it.
The city is bustling with construction companies, drilling companies, well services, roustabout gangs, pipe companies, and many more.
Work is largely a sevenday-a-week proposition, and an eight hour day in the field is too often an oddity.
A man called a Toolpusher is foreman on the rig, and beneath him are three crews.
Until the crews ""break tower"" and start on the three eight-hour shifts, the men work 10, 11, and 12 hours a day, laying pipe lines, fixing machines, and setting up the various pumps, belts, and drilling mechanisms.
After a rig has started drilling, the work settles down to cleaning up the location, digging drainage ditches around the rig, adding pipe to the line, and changing reck bits.
Very often, to keep busy, roughnecks wash the machines, and frequently paint, the rig.
We spoke to Roughnecks who varied in age from 18 to late 40's, many of whom have roughnecked for 20 and 25 years.
Crater's Edge By JIM KIERNAN '63 San Cristobal de Las Casas — September 8, 1962 Tomorrow I enter Guatemala for the third time.
Each time it becomes increasingly difficult to enter, to stay, and then return to Mexico.
Each time I feel more like a soldier of fortune and less like an inquisitive tourist.
True, I am an incurable roman-* tic, but the ever present malignant threat is so real that every American feels the pressure, and even I wonder why I am returning.
The railroad runs through the jungle country, inhabited by Indians, drawn and malaria yellow, and climbs to the capital, Guatemala City; the city built and controlled by the United Fruit Company.
The road, when not washed out, runs through mountain villages to the capital, passing near two Indian trading centers, Huehuetenango and Chichicastenago.
On a market day one can see Indians from many different villages; the people of each village wearing a costume, in color and design distinctly different from each other.
The Spanish dressed each of the tribes this way to tell them apart; the Guatemalan government keeps them this way because it's good for the tourist business.
In fact, it's the government's desire ""to keep things the way they are""; that is the cause, in part, of the heightening • tension in this country.
This feature of every Latin American country is one which Americans, with a traditional belief, until recently, in no large standing army, must take with a grain of salt.
But aside from these garrisons, there is a huge force of country and city police, alarmingly disproportionate to' mainland the Guatemalan population.
They walk the near deserted streets with sub-machine guns on their shoulders.
Two weeks ago three men jumped one of these law officers and shot him with his own submachine gun.
The people in Guatemala quietly rejoiced, while some in Mexico more audibly praised the act.
While it has reversed the government's land reform program, it has assured the world that, at the present, it is not at all considering a reincarnation of the Inquisition.
The C.I.A., the force which directed this government into power and was at one time its main support, is no longer trusted.
It looks to The Alliance For Progress for its aid, which both Russian and American businessmen have called the greatest aid to American interests in Latin America since the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine.
When Jacky is not touring or playing touch football, he sends a few troops to help stabilize the Guatemalan government.
Their number is small but their presence there sufficiently proves to the people of Guatemala that we are not on their side.
When the Revolution comes, and I'm sure it will in the near future, there is no chance of us changing sides.
We have played our hand and whatever we do now, only Castro has the trump card.
The people of Guatemala, as people all throughout Latin America, admire Castro.
It gives them hope, as it once warmed our blood to see a David confront a Goliath.
Our economic blockade has worked to some extent; food is scarce and everything is very expensive.
Even a Chinese pencil (from the small course) costs almost two dollars.
The David is armed with a sling shot of public opinion and many more than three stones.
It is, of course, the opinion of people we usually don't count; the people of Guatemala, for instance.
It is less than assuring that something that Jacky might decide, Or something that the raving bearded man of Havana might do, could trigger a revolution which would sweep me away with the American made sub-machine guns.
Many welders often work 3 or 4 days with as many hours sleep when they are helping to rig up.
NOTICE ALL STUDENTS who are interested in working on THE GARNET editorial board are invited to submit brief letters of application to Harriet Schoenholz.
Scheduled for 7:15 in the gym, the first Football Night will be an informative affair designed to educate you, the football fan.
In addition to a brief explanation of Bates' offensive and defensive systems, those in attendance will witness a display of a football player's equipment, a film of a past Garnet game, and will be taught several of the new cheers.
A lot of work has gone into this, the initial rally of this fall's season.
To the upperclassmen who have complained of the poor quality of past rallies, I guarantee you'll be satisfied.
Put away the books for a few minutes and come over and show the team you'll be behind them Saturday.
A fine second half showing by the Hatchmen last Saturday indicates a promising season ahead.
With outstanding performances turned in by veterans Bill Davis, Paul Castolene, Red Vandersea, and Phil Tamis, and an awesome offensive show by frosh Tom Carr, the 'Cats seem in good shape for the coming campaign.
The game experience gained by thd newcomers to the starting lineup and by the many reserves who saw action in Saturday's tilt should pay off in the upcoming games.
Traditionally, those questioned hedge from doing so, as there are so many uncertainties to the game.
Finally, out of desperation and to get rid of those asking for the predictions, one makes a prediction usually with several qualifications, barring injuries, etc.
Thus far when I finally have broken down and given my predictions, I have done so with two qualifications, 1) barring injuries, and 2) the performance of Bill Davis.
After witnessing the better half of Saturday's game, I can remove my second qualification and can predict a winning season barring injury to key personnel.
Speaking again of Saturday's game, a page of the program of that game proves most illuminating.
A 34 year series between the two clubs shows a record of 24 wins, seven losses, and three ties for the Medford club.
Other schools on their schedule include Trinity, Williams, Amherst, Northeastern, and Coast Guard.
The only school on their card with a higher male population is Northeastern.
On the other hand, there is no school with a smaller male population on the Garnet's schedule.
I suppose the Tufts alumni and students want success, but when a school drops another from its roster because it consistently loses to it, as did Tufts in the case of Leigh, one wonders what price success.
I feel reasonably sure that the Bobcat players would rather schedule a team like Tufts, who we lose to more than we win, than a team like Union, where the shoe would be on the other foot.
This coming Saturday the Bates studentry will be able to see the Hatchmen in action as the Cadets of Norwich invade Garcelon Field for the annual Dad's Day.
This is the first year we have played Norwich in some time and personally I am glad to see this rivalry resume as it will provide a wellbalanced win, loss column for both teams.
Dad's Day is perhaps one of the best of Bates traditions as the father of each boy is invited to sit on a bench with the team and is introduced in pre-game activities.
It must give a Dad a tremen-, dous amount of satisfaction and pride to stand up as being the father of a performing Bates football payer.
The Hatchmen rallied from a 22-0 half time deficit as freshman Tom Carr tallied twice for the Garnet in the second half.
The Jumbos controlled the pig-* skin completely in the first half of the 34th renewal of the TuftsBates rivalry.
The second half of the initial game of both club's '62 cards was dominated by the Garnet and Gold clad Bobcats.
Doran Scores Coach Harry Arlanson's charges running around Bates' ends went 53 yards the first time they had possession to open the scoring.
Senior halfback Pete Titus and All-New England fullback Ron Deveaux gained large chunks of yardage to set up Ralph Doran's fifteen yard scoring scamper after taking a pitchout from quarterback Dennis Hickey.
Bottled up deep in their own territory, the Bobcats were unable to move effectively through the Jumbos' line.
Late in the first period the Garnet lost the ball on their own forty-three yard line after a short punt.
The Jumbos moved the ball to the Bates 24 before the period was over and on the first play of the second quarter the veteran Tufts backfield again hit the promised land.
Peter Titus, running from his right halfback slot, turned the left side on this 24 yard touchdown run.
The try for the point after was no good and after a minute of the second period Tufts led 14-0.
After taking over on the Bates 32, it took the power running Jumbo Juggernaut just six plays to cross the Bates goal line.
Ron Deveaux, the Jumbo senior fullback from Arlington, Mass., showed why he is one of the most feared by all carriers in the East when he burst into paydirt from one yard out.
Deveaux made the demonstration complete as he pulled over from the two yard line on a two point extra point PlayTufts Dominates Half At the half the scoreboard read Tufts 22, Bates 0.
The Jumbos, Starring quarterback Bill Davis rolls around end as he picks up six yards in the third quarter of Saturday's game.
Coming downfield to block for Davis are Vandersea , Quinn and Tamis . working out of mentor Harry Anlonson's tight power formation, had completely controlled the ball and held Bates to a zero figure in the yards gained rushing column on the statistic sheet.
The Garnet was never able to get their ground attack operating and out of their own territory throughout the first half.
Lacking operating room and pressed by the hard charging Tufts forward wall Bates was unable to open up its attack.
If the first half was all Tufts, the second half belonged to the Bobcat eleven.
After a rugged third quarter that saw the Gloucester General, quarterback Bill Davis, finally getting the Bobcat on the move, Tufts hit paydirt once more.
Junior left halfback Ralph Doran capped a forty-two yard drive in seven plays when he plunged over from the three.
Quarterback Dennis Hickey threw complete to halfback Pete Titus for a two pointer and after three quarters it was Tufts Uity 30, Bates College 0.
The senior passing combo of Bill Davis and Paul Castolene showed the way.
Moving 70 yards on the longest sustained march of the day, the Bobcats scored on a one yard plunge by frosh fullback Tommy Carr.
The Davis to Castolene combination tore off large hunks of vardage and the big freshman fullback Carr was always ready Tufts offense cold.
All-Maine center and linebacker Howie ' Vandersea and senior letterman tackle Phil Tomis led the charge as soph Archie Lanza came up from his defensive halfback spot to halt the Tufts offensive machine time after time.
The 'Cats had the ball again and the versatile Mr Davis wasted no time moving them.
It was the two freshman running backs Tom Carr and John Yuskis who were good for the short gain.
Driving to the Tufts one yard line the Bobcats were faced with a fourth down and goal to go situation.
Carr Scores Again Again fullback Tommy Carr got the nod and he slanted through the left side behind the hard charging Bates forward wall to paydirt for the second time.
The Garnet rolled to eleven first downs to Tufts' six in the second half.
The pursuit and gang tackling of the 'Cats were so superior in the second half that on one defensive play every member of the Garnet eleven but one were on one tackle during a second half Tufts march.
Bill Davis consistently drove for good yardp^j^ Com^t^d age on the keeper and found All1 Yds^GaiSeT Parsing New England end Paul Castolene Own Passes Intercepted with his bullseye passes.
A spirited Garnet defense stopped the previously effective Punts Punts Ave.
Robert B Priestley in his eighth year as head coach has 14 lettermen returning, led by senior co-captains Philip Cacciola, a guard, and Robert Mirabelle, a halfback.
The Cadets rely heavily on an aerial game combined with an adequate running attack Along with Marsh the other big gun in the Vermont boys' backfield is sophomore fullback Bob Nolan.
Rounding out the backfield are Robert Mirabelle and Al Pettingill, at right and left halfback slots respectively.
The Cadets' line is usually balanced but occasionally they will go unbalanced to keep the defense honest.
The strength of Norwich's offensive and defensive line play lies in their two strong tackles, Al Bradley and Freeman Carr, two big and rangy boys.
The Norwich secondary was not severly tested by Colby in their recent encounter and still stands as a question mark.
An example of the improvement of this year's Norwich team over last year's club, which compiled a 3-4-1 record, was pointed out by Coach Walter Slovenski, who scouted the game for Bates.
He said that even though the Colby team of this year is very similar to the Colby team of last year which defeated Norwich 34-6, the Cadets managed to come out on top this year.
A team that can exhibit that much improvement is bound to be a tough one.
Bobcat Of Week Senior quarterback Bill Davis was selected as the initial Bobcat of the Week on the basis of his outstanding performance Saturday.
In addition, he gained 37 yards on the ground despite being thrown for losses several times when he was back to pass.
I 0 Bowdoin 0 W P I 0 Middlebury WR JR WRJR, the Bates College Radio Station, will begin broadcasting on a regular basis beginning at 6:30 on September 30th.
The station is entirely student operated and broadcasts from 6:30 until midnight, Sunday through Friday.
All freshmen interested in working on the various staffs of the radio station please note further announcements and get-togethers.
IMPORTANT NOTICES Candidates for the basketball and tennis teams are requested to meet with Coach Ullom in the Alumni Gymnasium on Thursday, September 27.
Tennis candidates will meet at 7:00m. and basketball candidates at 7:30 Students are reminded that admission to Saturday's game is by identification card only and students should enter the specially marked entrance at Bardwell Street.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL INNER FILTER PURE WHITE DUAL FILTER Tareyton Product of \ t /mtue-an Jcrfaceo-^crytxiny'ja&xec&n our ft Hates Stuknt Vol.
Wright, who died Septem ber 20, 1961, was the head of the English Department at the time of his retirement in 1957.
A Bates faculty member for 31 years, his bequest will be used to establish the Edwin M Wright Fund with income used for the purchase of library books in the field of Eng lish literature.
Wright's years of fine service as a teacher and his influence on several generations of Bates students,"" President Phillips commented, ""it is particularly meaningful to have this Fund in his name.
A grant of $50,000 to Bates College from the Trustees of the Fuller Foundation of Boston was announced by Dr.
The grant is in memory of the Honorable Alvan T Fuller, former Governor of Massachusetts.
Phillips, ""to the Trustees of the Fuller Foundation for this generous grant.
Especially are we delighted that the Trustees made the grant to the memory of the Honorable Alvan T Fuller, whose career was considered so outstanding by the Trustees of Bates College that he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree by Bates College in 1926.
This Fund will make it possible to bring to the campus each year able young men and women who lack the financial means for a college education.
The total represents a 43% increase over last year when the companies inaugurated the plan.
The grants are the companies' matching gifts for contributions made by employees and their wives during the year ending June 30, and include additional 25% incentive payments to colleges and universities receiving gifts from 50% of their alumni.
Cope is currently a minister of the Unitarian Church of Princeton, New Jersey.
Lawrence Theological School where he was also a Professor of Religious Education.
For seven years he served as co-minister of the UnitarianUniversalist Church of Greater Buffalo.
The lecture is arranged through the Billings Fund of the Unitarian Universalist Association, in cooperation with the Student Religious Liberals and the Bates Christian Association.
That large, impressive structure rising daily on the Bates campus is not a new Pettigrew Hall and not a new Page Hall, despite its similarities to both.
One hundred eighty-six feet long and 42 feet wide, this two and one-half story brick palace will dwarf the older structure, as well as several other buildings on this quadrangle we call home.
Two executive offices, paint, carpenter, and electricians' shops, a threestall garage, and vast storage areas will all be housed within the building.
Three hundred and seventyseven thousand dollars will be the total cost of the project.
This price includes a new system of steam and electricity lines in the area surrounding the building, plus several additional lines to replace older lines in use since Reverend Mr Robert L Cope NOTICE Professor D Robert Smith will give an organ concert this Sunday at the Columbia Street Baptist Church in Bangor.
The concert is sponsored by the Bangor Chapter of the American Guild of Organists.
Bowie Demands Bates Appraisal For Betterment On Tuesday evening, September 25, the Class of 1964 held its first class meeting of the year.
Vice-President, Paul Goodwin; Secretary, Marion Day; and Treasurer, Eunice Janson also attended.
The president announced that meetings of several campus organizations will be held on the first Tuesday of each month from 6:15-7:00m.
Both the social committee and dorm representatives will also meet at this time.
The group then discussed the problem of the lack of social life at Bates and compared it to that of other colleges and universities.
It was stressed that the situation will not be changed until the students themselves begin to initiate new activities.
In conclusion, the class felt that action must be substituted for complaints.
But further evaluation will be necessary before continuing the discussion on October 2nd.
The benefits to be gained from the centralization of all maintenance equipment are obvious.
This one central building should fulfill our needs for the foreseeable future.
Mr Norman Ross, Bursar and Business Manager, explained that nearly three years of expectant planning and revision went into this new structure.
He then explained the difficulty of deciding what type of new building should be built with the available funds.
A maintenance building, Mr Ross added, is the heart-beat of the campus.
Although not ""spectacular,"" an efficient and dependable maintenance department is a necessity.
The final decision on what shall be built is held by the Trustees, he concluded.
Due to be completed next summer, this attractive new structure will prove that a building can be both practical and aesthetically pleasing.
Those campus organizations looking for a new home will be forced to look elsewhere, however, for this is a maintenance building only.
Debate Squad Holds Freshman Tryouts And Practice Sessions The plans, topics, and meetings for the coming debating season have been announced by Professor Brooks Quimby.
Tryouts for interested freshmen will be held this week, and practice debates will bring returning upperclassmen back into fighting trim.
Debate topics this year will be in the field of the foreign trade policy of the United States.
Fourteen upperclassmen are returning to the squad; one senior, nine juniors, and four sophomores.
Next Thursday, October 4, at 4:00,m. and 7:00m., there will be tryouts for freshmen and any upperclassmen who have not previously represented the college in debating.
October 9 at 1:00, there will be practice debates among members of the debate team in room 300, Pettigrew Hall.
Several topics in the field of the United States' foreign trade policy have been formulated.
Bates graduate Laurence Bagley, Director of Field Services for the Maine Teachers' Association, will speak.
This meeting will be open to both men and women of the freshman class and to any upperclassmen who have not previously represented the college in debate.
Candidates are requested to deliver an original five minute persuasive speech on a topic of their own choosing.
TWO BATES COLLEGE, OCTOBER 3, 1962 Stu G Names Dormitory Representatives For Year The Student Government Board began another year of activity on Wednesday night, September 26, by appointing secretary-treasurers for each of the women's dormitories on campus.
Page: Ann Noble '65, treasurer; Karen Smith '65, secretary Whittier: Linda Glazer '65 Mitchell: Judy Morris '65 Frye: Merrily n Brown '65 Wilson: Kathy Manchester '65 Hacker: Liz Frangedakis '65 Chase: Ellie Spare '65 Cheney: Marcia Rodgers '63 Rand: Barbara Morse '63 Milliken: Janice Kopco '65 The Board then voted to resume the dining-room eating schedule which had been adopted by last year's board to avoid congestion in Fiske.
It was decided to begin this program on Sunday, September 30, and to keep it in effect with the exception of weekends.
As no specific provisions have been outlined for this body, Stu-G decided that the Seniors would live under essentially the same plan as the other three classes.
At the October 3 meeting, Dean Barbara Randall and this year's advisors to Stu-G will be present.
Outing Club Council Announces Openings For Upperclassmen By MARGARET MORSE '63 Neale Schuman '62 opened the first Outing Club Council meeting of the year by welcoming Mr Sampson, Dr.
Sampson and Wright had both been advisors of the Outing Club before they went on sabbatical last year.
In addition to the returnees, there are two new openings available on the Council; one for a junior girl and the other for a sophomore boy.
Anyone interested should give their name to a Council member before October 6.
The election of the new members will take place at the next Council meeting.
There was a discussion as to whether the cabin is used enough to continue repairing it year after year.
Also on October 13, Lee Pollack '63 will lead a trip to Sabattus Cabin to replace five or six logs in that cabin.
All Wednesday nights the Council meetings are open to interested students.
Announcements of meetings are posted on the bulletin boards in Rand and Commons.
Thursday, October 4 Lecture Series, Little Theater, 8 Friday, October 5 Cross Country, Colby vs.
Bates CA Art Show, Chase Hall, 1-3 Football Dance, Chase Hall Ballroom, 8 r 12m.
Chapel Wednesday, October 3 Robert L Cope, Unitarian Church of Princeton, New Jersey, ""Tides and Trivia and Moments of Truth"" Friday, October 5 Fall Honors Day, President Phillips and Professor Quimby Monday, October 8 Music, Freshman Soloists Wednesday, October 10 Reverend John E Schroeder, United Baptist Church, Lewiston * Candidates Will Take Admissions Exams In Nov.
It will be given in November and February at Brunswick and in February at Waterville.
A candidate must make separate application for admission to each law school of his choice and should inquire of.each whether it wishes him to take the Law School Admission Test and when.
Since many law schools select their freshman classes in the spring preceding entrance, candidates for admission to next year's classes are advised to take either the November or the February test if possible.
The Law School Admission Test, prepared and administered by Educational Testing Service, cannot be ""crammed"" for.
The morning test contains questions measuring verbal aptitudes and reasoning ability rather than acquired information.
The afternoon session includes two tests, one of which provides a measure of writing ability and the other of general background.
Sample questions, and information regarding registration for and administration of the test, are given in a Bulletin of Information.
The Bulletin (which includes an application for the test) should be obtained six weeks in advance of the desired testing date from Law School Admission Test, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey.
Those who plan to take the November examination should send this bulletin and application form by October 3, 1962.
Applications must reach ETS at least two weeks before the desired test administration date to allow time for completion of necessary testing arrangements for each candidate.
INFORMATION AGENCY is recruiting young women to serve at its overseas posts as secretaries.
Applicants must be proficient in shorthand and typing and must have secretarial experience.
Fellowships in the Arts and Sciences, A Guide to Study Abroad, and Guide to Summer Camps and Summer Schools.
All interested students and faculty are invited to consult these materials.
INFORMATION AGENCY employs a class of management interns each year for the purpose of developing executive talent.
Applicants for the program must qualify under the management intern option of the Federal Service Entrance Examination which will be conducted by the Civil Service Commission four times in the ensuing school year.
Further information is available in the, Guidance and Placement Office.
THE INSTITUTE OF EUROPEAN STUDIES announces that the application period for the spring semester study programs conducted at the Universities of Vienna and Freiburg will open officially on Monday, October 8.
THE UNITED STATES ARMY currently has two programs whereby a young college graduate may apply for a direct commission.
Under the second program, individuals must possess either a Master's or a Doctor's degree, or a Bachelor degree with practical experience, in any of the technical specialties ranging from engineering to administration.
The College Board Competition is designed for students with ability in art, writing, fashion, merchandising, promotion and advertising.
Undergraduate women can qualify for College Board Membership by submitting an entry that shows ability in any one of these areas.
The College Fiction Contest offers $500 each and a MLLE publication for the two winners.
The Art Contest winners will illustrate the two winning stories for publication in the magazine and will receive $500 each for their work.
SECRETARIAL POSITIONS IN NEW YORK CITY are offered by the Ford Foundation.
For further information, consult the above mentioned materials at the Guidance Office.
BROWN PLAN OF TEACHER EDUCATION offers an internship leading to the degree of Master of Arts in teaching.
THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE oi ALL TYPES A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
The opportunity is enhanced, he believes, by the fact that the Massachusetts polit ical scene will be a point of major national interest this year.
A registered Democrat in the tradition of Roosevelt's New Deal, Hughes shied away from the Democratic primary chiefly because his chances of winning were nil.
He decided to run as an independent even though the ""law is written to make it hard for an independent.
With the help of what he terms a ""fabulous organization put together from nothing,"" the tall, softspoken, scholarly looking man of 46 • — so youthful in appearance he almost seems to be a graduate student — achieved a triumph in gaining the ballot that has won him the respect of old political pros, who were convinced that it couldn't be done.
A commitment that we will not, under any circumstances, be the first to use nuclear or biologic weapons; renunciation of first-strike weapons and maintenance only of retaliatory capability; gradual abandonment of our overseas nuclear bomber and missile bases which are ""an unnecessary provocation to the USSR""; renunciation of further above-ground nuclear-weapons tests; a pledge to refrain from transferring nuclear weapons to nations not now possessing them.
Favors Red China's Admission For the rest, Hughes favors the admission of Red China to the U N., wants the United States to declare her readiness to help create an effective international peace-keeping machinery under the U N., and to make surplus food stocks available to hungry people of all nations.
We must find an approach which can lead us to the peace and real security we want.
BATES COEDS FROM: LADY BENOIT During your summer vacation we've been real busy and have opened a new store — LADY BENOIT You'll love the lines: Pendleton, Villager, Petti, Mr Thomson and many others.
This year the fund paid the travel expenses of two juniors, David Harrison '64, employed by a chemical company in Germany, and Dave Whelen '64, a French major who taught swimming in a camp for underprivileged children.
Like most travellers, he visited the Louvre and other art centers and museums and, on the less cultural side, discovered that the Paris clubs contain a cosmopolitan mixture of students, workers, and tourists from every section of France, Germany, and the United States.
Tropez and as he travelled South he found fewer English-speaking people and an increasing number of Germans.
The ""Paris French"" which is curhently taught in American schools gradually gave way to a Southern dialect which, surprisingly, Dave found easier to understand.
Monsieur Plateau, the manager of ""L'Entraide Cooperative"", owns approximately twelve camps throughout France.
Of the twen ty counselors per camp, usually only one is an American, the rest being French students or work ers.
Although some of the coun selors had studied English for as many as eight years, their speak ing ability of the language was not too fluent.
Equipment Room By JACK McPARTLAND '63 Many students complain to their Outing Club representatives that the Outing Club does not do enough for the student body.
They expect the Outing Club and other campus organization's to ""spoon feed"" them with delightful activities to pass their leisure hours.
At some point the individual's initiative must take over and he must learn to do things for himself.
At Bates this is particularly true of recreational opportunities, for no campus organization can afford to continuously provide interesting activities for the student body as a whole.
One of the most overlooked areas of possible recreational enjoyment can be found in the Outing Club Equipment -Room.
Each one of you pays yearly dues to the Outing Club, and over the years a sizeable investment has been made in equipment for you to use.
At this point, I could set down a long list of all the things we have available.
Take five minutes of your time some day and stop in and see what we have, and how we operate.
Equipment Room is located on the Andrews Road side of East Parker Hall and is open from 4:00 to 5:00 on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.
Please let us. proach to Peace, states his views on the issues which led him to declare his candidacy.
HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER Bales student demonstrates ski equipment available in equipment room. fore surprised by their knowledge of American life and politics, as he was often asked about the Chessman case and President Kennedy.
American music is very popular in France, Ray Charles being a favorite singer.
Despite their interest in America, the French people are extremely proud of their national heritage.
Even kitchen workers at the camp were acquainted with authors and playwrights, from as early as the seventeenth century, and could discuss the political, social, and economic history of their country's, past and present.
After graduation from Bates, Dave plans to attend a business school for specialized training in international trade.
If you wish to write about an interesting summer, or anything of interest, see the Feature Editor.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner] Specials 7 Days a Weekj DINING COCKTAIL | ROOM LOUNGE { Tel.4-5491 I Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS \ FOUR BATES COLLEGE, OCTOBER 3, 1962 Editorials DO NOT ATTACK CUBA Amidst the cacophony of voices advocating an attack on Cuba, a few reasonable ones may be heard proffering sound advice.
President Kennedy and Senator J William Fullbright , chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, have urged caution upon those who blindly wish to go into Cuba and blow the top off.
Kennedy and Fullbright are undoubtedly aware that it is morally unjustifiable for this country to invade Cuba.
It would take a great deal of ethical word twisting to justify an invasion, although this country has done it before.
Before the critics of this editorial bemoan its ""ethical idealism,"" we may say that an invasion is also legally unjustifiable and politically impractical.
That the Monroe Doctrine became technically void, however, once we extended our influence to include the European and Asian areas is too often ignored by the proponents of this antedeluvian policy.
An attack on Cuba might be politically expedient within the context of the U S., it would not be expedient in the world context.
Americans desire the world to view this country as a benelovent giant always willing to aid the underdog, especially when the aid may be given by an American corporation.
Our image is tarnished enough; let's not give our Latin American and other neighbors any more reasons to distrust us.
The most practical reason for not attacking Cuba is that of national safety.
If this country begins to play war games it could well precipitate a nuclear war.
And in spite of ""Life"" and ""Time's"" most optimistic predictions, the majority of Americans would end up quite dead.
ENCOURAGE ""DOES"" It has been brought to the attention of the ""Student"" editorial staff that the girls of the Bates campus are not taking advantage of the social activities offered them.
Specifically, the Chase Hall ""stag"" dance of last Saturday evening was indicated.
The answer to this puzzling phenomenon lies in the definition of ""stag"" itself.
According to Webster, the word means 1) adult male of birds or animals 2) young unbroken stallion 3) man at a social gathering unaccompanied by a woman.
Freshman girls may venture out alone but upperclassmen will unobtrusively hibernate if dateless.
Thus, if the Chase Hall Dance Committee wishes these rituals to be successful, may I humbly offer a suggestion.
It is my opinion that a larger attendance would be evident, while we girls will not be forced to bury our pride and be seen ""stag"" on Saturday nights.
Entered as second-class matter at the Lewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879.
Phillips in his Freshman address, the Chase Hall Dance Committee is charged with the responsibility of providing, on Saturday evenings, some form of social outlet for the students of the college.
Traditionally this has been a Saturday night dance, a rather dull, drab affair, taking on the atmosphere of a wake in the vigil light of Chase Hall.
We wish to take this opportunity to report that such is ho longer the case.
Obviously the new and virile enthusiasm of the Class of 1966 has delightfully infected the campus with the germ of sociability, a germ manifested in one degree in the Bates Twist Craze.
This germ found its way to the hallowed precincts of Chase Hall on the last two Saturday evenings and the old place really shook as Bates men and women co-educated to the fullest extent of the opportunity.
We feel the season would improve even more if the hordes of Bates men, who form our stag line, were complimented by an equally large and enthusiastic covey of delightful Bates women.
Remember Chase Hall is the only place on campus where wholesale co-education in the non-academic tradition is actually legal and encouraged.
Very truly yours, Chase Hall Dance Committee Air Waves By DAVE OLSON '65 Beginning its sixth year of broadcasting and service to the Bates Auburn Lewiston community, WRJR extends a sincere welcome to all of its listeners and future listeners.
First on the list of improvements for this year has been the fine operation of the converters, the ingenious device which allows WRJR-FM to be heard on the standard AM dial anywhere on the Bates campus.
New this year will be the feature sports department headed by Paul Holt.
The station has also acquired its own meteorologist in the person of Norm Bowie.
Norm will conduct the evening weather forecasts at 6:35 and again at 10:05, immeditely following the news programs of Herb Mosher and his staff.
For interested newcomers, upperclassmen and freshmen alike, a training program will begin soon to enable prospective WRJR staff members to fulfill the necessary requirements for broadcasting.
Persons interested in such a program should contact Bruce Cooper or Lorn Harvey for details, or drop into the station during broadcasting hours, 6:3012:00, Sunday thru Friday, for further information.
There are many positions open in programming, technical work, and in public relations.
We hope to have many interested newcomers on our staff in the near future.
Crater's Edge By JAMES KIERNAN '63 This summer I would sit at my usual table at the cafe Marquis De Ville, drink coffee and inspect the American tourists who were passing through Oaxaca.
All the tourists I spoke to either had read, were reading or were about to read this classic.
The conversation I liked almost as much as the trading of facts about their individual struggles with dysentery, was the way they compared themselves favorably with some character or characters in this book.
I wasn't quite sure what this character was like and curiosity almost led me to borrow a volume.
However, I was saved the trouble of reading it, for it was about then that I met what I suppose is an ugly American.
I was sitting at my favorite table when a painter, who I had become friendly with, approached me.
The hot, sweaty people he would have to encounter offended his acute sense of cleanliness.
It's a shame, I thought, that so many Americans come to Mexico and just drink.
With only the promise of a dull morning at the library, I decided to accept this invitation and comply with this small request of a fellow American.
He was an American business man, originally from Texas, who had spent twenty years, I should guess profitably, in the Foreign Service.
He was a big man, who lounged back in his chair, staring out at the Zocalo.
Glancing back over my shoulder quickly, I wondered what he was planning to do to the quiet and indefensible square.
Grabbing the half-frightened girl by the forearm, he began in a friendly, but loud and Big Daddy-type voice, to explain just what he wanted.
She was my favorite waitress; she always reminded me of a Raggedy Ann doll.
I began to add a few words in Spanish to the barrage of clear Texas shout.
After he was sufficiently certain that she understood what he had said, he let her go and turned to me.
Why, I've just finished a report, for Time and Life — 40 pages . . . wrote it yesterday.
If we don't do something, Castro's gonna use that place for a training ground.
It was that kind of calm which I suppose happens during a hurricane, just before the tidal wave.
Mexicans were fighting; come two o'clock and they went and took a siesta.
Why, boy . . . give me forty drunk Texans with shotguns and we'll take Cuba.
Alexander Pope's best-known line, ""For fools rush in where angels fear to tread,"" was aimed at critics; William Butler Yeats wondered what the scholars — ""Old, learned, respectable bald heads"" — would say if they happened to meet the libertine poet Catullus whose works they had annotated.
After Hours There is good reason to believe that this academic cold war is drawing to a close, but, like all civil wars, it has left deep scars on its participants, embittering almost every English Department in the United States.
The cause of the Scholar-Critic War was simple enough, and the whole conflict seems unavoidable in retrospect.
It all began soon after World War I, when contemporary literature became a subject of study in the universities, at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Scholars Study Contemporaries Eventually, however, the British and American literary past was reduced to some sort of order, and the increasing number of Ph.D. candidates in English began to grow restive, for two reasons.
First of all, much of the work now remaining to be done seemed like gleaning among the stubble after a great harvest had been reaped.
A graduate student who worshiped Shakespeare felt less than happy at being advised to work on some minor, unharvested Elizabethan like Anthony Munday or Barnabe Rich.
Henry James was barely cold in his grave; Bernard Shaw was still at the height of his powers; Yeats, Joyce, Pound and Eliot were producing work that not only challenged the critic by its novelty and disturbing power but also invited scholarly investigation by its breadth of cultural reference.
Lawrence was posing moral problems unparalleled in fiction since the death of Dostoevsky; Gertrude Stein and a group of younger expatriates in Paris were promising surprising new developments in American letters.
At length the dam broke, and the ""contemporary men"" inundated the English faculties.
Having exercised his primary function of judgment, the critic can proceed to analyze and interpret the work he admires, in the hope of aiding others to see its excellence.
The hostility between the two groups is not merely a matter of the established men resenting the newcomers and the newcomers resenting that resentment.
Many of the Ancients have sincere doubts about the validity of literary criticism as an academic discipline and / or contemporary literature as a fit subject for academic study.
For their part, the Moderns feel that some of their opponents do not care for literature in a humanistic way at all and might have been better occupied in collecting and classifying scientific data as biologists or physicists.
Critics Become Students In spite of these misgivings, the war seems to be on the wane.
Many of the hotheads among the Moderns have grown cooler with increasing age.
The twentieth century is now more than sixty years of age, and the new is rapidly becoming the old.
Joyce has been dead for more than twenty years, Lawrence for more than thirty; Hemingway and Faulkner aave just passed on to join them, vlore and more, the critic who yearns to say something about these writers and their contempories must transform himself into a scholar.
A modernist who has never had to cope with manuscripts before may suddenly find himself up to his neck in problems which the medievalists have faced throughout their careers; if he doesn't try to profit by their experience, he's a numskull.
Until a few months ago, when the Modern Library Ulysses was reset, an uncertain amount of American Joyce criticism was still being based on an extremely unreliable text, inadvertently copied from a pirated edition.
The scholar in contemporary literature needs to study modern printing techniques with some of the care that modern Shakespeare scholars have lavished on the printing practices of the Elizabethans.
Controversy Continues It would be premature to say that the civil war in the English Departments is entirely over.
Professor Clarence Gohdes, Chairman of the Board of Editors of American Literature, refuted this cosy notion from the moment he began to speak.
Despite the relation Lowry seems to have with other great writers, there is no doubt that he is completely original.
His success in portraying with intense feeling and scrutiny the last days of the tragic figure of a mescal-drinking retired consulate in Mexico whose life in a foreign land is fated by his own reflections and the Mexican landscape which seems to have a mind of its own, makes his novel one of the most significant literary achievements in the 20th century.
The reason that Lowry is not more noted today is that he didn't have a chance to write another novel.
One does not rate the honor of being called a ""giant"" with only two major works to your credit, unless you happen to be Homer.
After reading the first hundred pages you may wonder why this reviewer is so excited about it — but when you come to those words in Spanish at the end of the novel that deliver the final soul-shattering impact — you should understand why.
I stood up quickly, almost knocking over the Raggedy Ann doll, with the three four minute eggs.
I had acquired his speed; and would have said anything to make my exit.
I was certain he then was more interested in protein than playing with dolls.
When I did venture back, I found that the Texan had left on the morning flight, the day after our conversation.
It was a hasty departure from such a beautiful city, but I guess there was nothing he could do to turn the Zocalo into money.
The distinction between scholar and critic has always been a misleading one in any case.
Furthermore, although he wrote his Poetics about seventy-five years after the. great age of Greek tragedy had ended, he showed no prejudice against the literature produced by his contemporaries.
In addition to our own All-Maine center, Red Vandersea, All-New England center and line backer, Dick McPherson, will be traveling northward with the Northeastern squad.
Not to take anything away from McPherson, but to add to Vandersea's repute, McPherson plays only defense, while the Garnet co-captain plays both ways and often times for 50 minutes or more each game.
Sent in as the back and lineman of Saturday's game were Tom Carr and Red Vandersea.
The team of the week is usually announced on Wednesday, too late for The Student as it goes to press on Tuesday.
Sometimes, however, the selections are announced on Tuesday as was this week's, and on the basis of the press's nomination of Howie Vandersea, our Garnet co-captain was selected to the first E.C.A.C. team of the week.
This year as there are many seniors on the squad, Coach Hatch has instituted a practice where the seniors, after having watched the films of the previous Saturday's tilt, vote on who among them should receive the ball.
This week the seniors selected senior tackle Phil Tamis as the recipient of the ball.
With all the plaudits our linemen are receiving, one can only reflect back to their line coach, Verne Ullom, who is certainly the reason behind this year's fine line.
It seems incongruous to be mentioning track at this time of the year but the A.A.U. annually holds fall meets throughout the country.
Last week five Bates thinclads participated in such a meet in Brunswick.
Co-captain Bill LaVallee copped two firsts and a second, while Mike Gregus and Jon Ford garnered one first each, and Jon Olson and Dave Johnson picked up second places.
Mike, unfortunately, will be hanging up his spikes under doctor's orders and his absence will be felt by both the winter and spring track squads, as well as the cross country team.
Perhaps Mike's most outstanding performance as a Garnet runner came in last year's state meet where he finished third in a fine effort.
Ford breezed to a win last week in the 440, beating out teammate Dave Johnson, who later in the day finished second in the high jump.
Some bard in an era long gone by is quoted as saying discretion is the better part of valor.
His words were undoubtedly prompted by such action as was displayed at the half of last Saturday's game.
The entire incident, which was the subject of a condemnatory editorial on the part of a local sportsWriter, could have been avoided if the overly-zealous freshman had not ventured into the lion's den with his taunting banner.
Each week The Student sportswriters select the Garnet athlete, who in their opinion, came forth with the most outstanding performance during the previous week.
To reiterate, it is an opinion of those watching the game, not of those participating or those on the sidelines.
On some weeks making such a selection is easy and there is no controversy, while on others such is not the case.
I would like to make the selection of the Bobcat of the Week a student body-wide affair but have found no manner of doing so.
Freshman fullback Tom Carr heads around end in Saturday's contest as he picks up six yards in the second quarter.
For his offensive and defensive performances, Carr was selected as the Back of the Game by the press.
The Pomfret, Connecticut, flash compiled most of this yardage in the first half which saw a powerful Bates offense score three touchdowns inside of 15 minutes.
The first Bates TD was scored by Planchon on a neat 21 yard gallop that saw him break off right tackle and then cut back to the left to easily outdistance the Norwich secondary.
John Curtiss' try for the conversion was blocked after a high snap from center which forced Curtiss to try a hurried drop-kick.
This first Bates TD was set up by a fine pass interception by freshman halfback John Yuskis, who picked off a Norwich aerial on the Bobcat 25 yard line.
Norwich was forced to punt early in the second quarter by the strong Bobcat defense and senior quarterback Bill Davis started Bates up the field on their second scoring drive.
This touchdown was set up by another Planchon run that saw the junior halfback take the ball on the Bates 46 on the halfback draw play and gallop 28 yards before being hauled down.
Davis-Castolene Scoring Play The next play from scrimmage saw standout 'Cat end Paul Castolene feint his defender out of position and then cut for the left corner of the end zone where he hauled in a Bill Davis pass to make the score 12-0 Bates.
The two-point conversion try worked as Bates faked a kick and Davis again hit Castolene in the same spot to put the 'Cats ahead by 14.
The Cadets of Norwich were soon forced to punt and again the Bobcats were off on another scoring drive, starting on the Norwich 36-yard line.
The Bobcat rush for the two -point conversion was stopped short and the half ended with the score 20-0 in favor of the Garnet.
Grant Farquhar came through with a key defensive play for Bates late in the second period when he intercepted a Cadet pass in the end zone to put a stop to a serious Cadet scoring threat.
Norwich, true to predictions, proved to be a second-half team as they parlayed the passing arm of quarterback Burt Marsh and Bobcat fumbles and violations during the second half into two touchdowns.
Cades Score On Sneak A Bates fumble was recovered by standout Norwich guard, Phil Cacciola, on the 'Cat 27 yard line.
The Cadets then drove over for the score with Marsh sneaking Freshman John Yuskis reaches high in the air to intercept a Norwich pass early in the game.
The interception set up the Garnet's second score. over from the two-yard line.
The Cadets added two more points as Marsh passed to end Brad Cleary for the conversion.
Two personal foul penalties aided the Cadets in this 90 yard march to their second and last touchdown.
With the Cadets on the 'Cat 20 yard line, Marsh received an injury to his passing arm and was forced to leave the game.
Marsh's substitute entered the game and on the first pay lofted a lefthanded jump-pass into the end zone where two Norwich receivers and one Bates defender were waiting.
The attempt to rush the ball over for the conversion was stopped short by the stout 'Cat line.
With' just over two minutes left in the game, Al Pettingill intercepted a Bates aerial and returned it to the 'Cat 40.
The Cadets attempted four passes on the next series of downs and only completed one.
Linebacker John Schatz came through for Bates when he knocked down a fourth down pass and the Bobcats took the ball over on downs and ran out the clock for their first victory of the '62 season against a lone defeat.
Standouts for Bales on offensive were Planchon, Carr and Davis, while Howie Vandersea, the whole Bales defensive line.
Quarterback Burl Marsh, end Brad Cleary and halfback Brad Nolan were the big guns for the Cadets.
Planchon 38 run (kick failed) Bates: Castolene 18 pass from Davis (Castolene pass from Da* vis) Bates: Carr 22 run Norwich: Marsh 2 run (Cleary pass from Marsh) Norwich: Weller 20 pass from Nugent BATES COLLEGE, OCTOBER 3, 1962 SEVEN Student photographer Steve Talbot catches some of the football players' dads enjoying their pregame meal at which they heard Coach Hatch speak.
Scotland Native Assumes Soccer Coaching Position By WILL GARDINER This year, soccer has reached varsity status at Bates.
In the past years there have been various adults who have acted as advisors to the squad.
Although this is the first time Mr Somerville has coached a soccer team, he has a wealth of knowledge about the sport.
In 1923, Mr Somerville came* to this country from Scotland, where soccer is the biggest sport.
When he lived in Scotland he played a lot of soccer, and he played for several years in a soccer league in the greater Lewiston area.
Periodically, Mr Som gram was started in this state less than ten years ago and now there are varsity squads at Colby, Bowdoin, Bates, and Nasson.
He feels that in the future, soccer has an advantage over its rival sport, football, because of the erville goes back to Scotland to fact that 14 is inexpensive to outfit a soccer team.
Many schools may drop football as a sport because of the expense involved, and then they will have soccer teams soley.
Because of the strong finish the Bates team had last season, as shown by the games with Bowdoin and Colby, Mr Somerville feels the team should have a successful season this year. visit his relatives and to watch the soccer matches.
Almost every day, he took his sister's car, packed a lunch, and then went to watch a soccer match in the nearby area.
He is retired, his former employer being the Central Maine Power Company.
Mr Somerville has one son who is the assistant principal at the high school in Gardiner, Maine.
He compares it some ways to our national sports of baseball and football.
For example, he tells of the tremendous stadiums and the huge crowds of people that come to the soccer matches.
Below them are the junior teams, which are comparable to the farm teams in American baseball in that that is where the professional teams get their material.
Mr Somerville also notes that some of the top professional players get salpries that would make Yogi Berra and Stan Musial envious.
He cites the many high schools that have soccer in their athletic program.
He uses the Maine schools as an example of the progress soccer has made as a college sport.
Lloyd Lux, Director of* Athletics for Men since 1949, is certainly one of the staunchest advocates and greatest benefactors of the Intramural Program at Bates.
This familiar figure has been ""sort of a jack-of-all trades"" in athletics and probably most of the students are ignorant of his varied background.
He began his coaching career at a high school in suburban Philadelphia Dr.
Lloyd Lux where he was head coach of football and assistant coach of basketball.
Deciding to further his education he did work for his Master's Degree at Springfield College.
At the time time he gained more coaching experience at Wilbraham Academy as head baseball coach and assistant football coach.
Lux returned nearer home to teach Mathematics at Moorestown while serving as head baseball coach, and assistant swimming and football coach.
He began the swimming program at Moorestown High School; now one of the strongest in New Jersey.
His duties also included varsity basketball and the freshman football team.
He found some time to be head of the basketball and baseball program at the Jacksonville Naval Air Station.
He gained his first real taste of the intramural system, serving as the supervisor of Columbia's vast program.
In 1949 he came to Bates College in his present role of Director of Physical Education for Men.
Lux's greatest ambition at the moment is to improve the intramural program.
He feels that a club system would enhance the idea of competition and would be a self-perpetuating system.
This type of program has been highly successful at other schools and would tend to place the competition on an equal basis.
He feels strongly that the student body on a voluntary basis should try this club plan for a period of two years.
Lux feels that sports are not overly emphasized or deemphasized at Bates.
Scheduling is always a problem and Bates has a much smaller male enrollment than most of the schools that it plays.
Lux took pride in the fact that the athletes miss less class time than any other school in New England and that the athletic teams do very well considering the limited amount of manpower and number of men on the coaching staff.
Lux has served as the golf and tennis coach as well as the mentor of the now defunct junior varsity baseball team.
His son spent the last three years at Andover where he played football and lacrosse.
Now he is a freshman at Yale and one of the candidates for the freshman football team.
Soccer, Cross Country Squads Prepare For Season Openers During the past week hopeful candidates for varsity roles in the 1962 editions of the Bates soccer and cross country fortunes have been toiling on Garcelon Field.
Under the shadow of the mammoth fall spectacular, football, other Garnet stalwarts are fighting for starting roles and varsity status on the squads of the other two fall sports here at Bates.
Coach James Somerville's soccer club, enjoying the fruits of the first year of official varsity status, looms as an improved ball club under the leadership of Cocaptains Lee Nute and goalie Don Mawhinney.
Lee Nute and Bob Lanz rate high in Coach Somerville's plans for a winning season.
The vigorous conditioning schedule, highlighted by an hour long daily scrimmage, also features wind sprints to build that all important speed and endurance, plus calisthenics and distance running.
After opening at Nasson on October 13, the Bobcat Booters face such soccer powerhouses as Brandeis, Nichols, Colby and Bowdoin.
Coach Somerville's much-counted-on veterans face a tough schedule and the first cuts on the squad will be made this week in an effort to trim the 'Cats to a working unit in readiness for their first game.
Large Squad While the confines of Garcelon Field are limited to the football and soccer warriors, the roads, fields and paths of the campus are the avenues of Coach Walt Slovenski's cross country chargers.
Eighteen strong, the largest cross country squad ever to don the white, cross-striped garnet running jerseys of Bates, the varsity candidates are the best conditioned, highest spirited group Coach Slovenski has ever had.
Co-captains Eric Silverberg and Bill Dunham are pleased with many veteran runners in Ed Belden, Finn Wilhelmsen, Pete Heyel, Ed Margulus, Karl Wolf and Pete Parsons, but watch out, varsity, for two frosh, Marsh Snow and Ken Trufant, both brothers of former Bates runners.
Increasing campus interest in this ordeal of endurance, of man against himself, has prompted Coach Slovenski to lay out an entire new route for his fall runners.
Starting and finishing on the end of the athletic field near the tennis courts, the runners will travel a campus route including such forbidden spots as the path around Prexy's Puddle and even the lower slopes of Mt.
Remember, sports fans, the fighting Bobcat can be seen on the soccer field and the cross country course as well as on the gridiron.
FOOTBALL QUOTE ""The type of girl who lets out little squeals of excitement during the play of the game is a terrible headache.
Usually her squeals come at the wrong time and she remains blankly silent when something really good happens."" — Tudson P Philips B E D A R D ' S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston.
The Boston squad has split in its first two games, winning the opener 28-0 over Rhode Island and losing Saturday to Bridgeport 7-6.
Saturday's loss, however, was understandable as star quarterback Gerry Varnum, who is rated by many as the best back in the Boston area, was sidelined with a sprained ankle and broken blood vessels in the foot.
The Huskies last year posted a 4-4 record and preseason predictions listed them as doing as W I U (31^ IT KMf* tVt** U»» well or better this season.
Coach Zabliski is particularly blessed at center as he has AllNew England center Dick McPherson returning.
In the backfield the Red and Black boasts of a brother combination in Jack and Tom Kelley of North Quincy, Mass.
Varnum Injured Filling in for the injured Varnum is quarterback Ed Mullins, 5' 8"" from Maynard, Mass.
Mullins accounted for the Huskies' lone score last Saturday as his aerial to Schettino clicked for Six points.
Victor presently is the third string fullback but is used as a kicker in field goal situations.
Last Saturday, Victor attempted a game-winning, 57-yard field goal with 47 seconds remaining in the game but the kick, although accurate, fell ten yards short.
GRID QUOTES ""To watch a football game is to be in a prolonged neurotic doubt as to what you're seeing.
I don't wonder the spectators take to drink."" — Jacques Barzun ""Linemen, with the exception of ends, have lower status than backfield men.
Many players believe that backfields are consciously and unconsciously recruited from higher social strata than linemen."" — David Riesman ""The only qualifications for a lineman are to be big and dumb.
To be a back, you only have to be dumb."" — Knute Rockne BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Bobcat of the Week honors this time go, unquestionably, to junior halfback Paul Planchon.
The All-Maine pick last year was playing at less than full strength as he had been sidelined the week before with the flu.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, OCTOBER 10, 1962 By Subscription Alumni Assn.
Previews Back To Bates Activities Representatives of campus organizations meet with Alumni Secretary Hank Stred to plan Homecoming Weekend.
By LINDA BROWNING '64 On Friday, October 19, Bates Alumni will return to the campus for a weekend of greeting old friends, renewing acquaintances, and chatting over college days.
Each event, from the pre-rally round-up Friday, to the Thorncrag open house Sunday, has been planned so that friends will have many hours to talk with one another.
For this Back-to-Bates week-* end, the Alumni Association has been working with students who are key members of campus organizations.
Paul Sadlier '64, representing the Chase Hall Dance Committee, is in charge of Friday evening's open house in Chase Hall.
Holly Milius '63 and Les Jones '63, co-captains of the cheerleading squad, will lead the crowd in cheering the Bobcats on to victory over Middlebury's Panthers at Saturday's game.
Immediately following the game, Kathy Pease '64 will greet Bates students and alumni during the Women's Athletic Association coffee hour.
The Back-to-Bates dance, under the direction of the Chase Hall Dance Committee, will begin at 8:30 Saturday evening in the Alumni Gymnasium.
Peter Gomes '65 and other members of the Christian Association have planned Sunday's Chapel Service.
From 2:00 until 5:00 that afternoon, the Outing Club, headed by Neale Schuman '63, invites all to visit Thorncrag Cabin to socialize over cider and donuts.
Cope Opens Chapel Services In Speech On Trivia And Truth The Reverend Robert L Cope, guest speaker, addressed Bates students in the first religious service of the school year, on Wednesday, October 3, at nine o'clock, in the Chapel.
Reverend Cope was invited to Bates through the combined facilities of the Billings Fund, the Student Religious Liberals and the Bates Christian Association.
His speech dealt with a serious problem in a world which takes life too much for granted.
He advised the gathering to slow down its hurried pace, to stop and savor every moment of the wonderful era in which it lives.
He reminded the students that life is too precious and short to waste, for just at the moment we discover the true meaning and purpose of life, like a Roman Candle, it sputters, and quickly dies.
Cope commented on the richness and promise of our age of scientific advancement.
The Single Culture"" Tomorrow night, October 11, at 8:00 in the chapel, Bates* College will play host to Sean O'Faolain, Irish writer, critic, and Phi Beta Kappa Visiting Scholar for 1962-63.
His twoday visit to the Bates campus is being sponsored jointly by the Bates College Campus Lecture Series and the Bates chapter of Phi Beta Kappa.
He will consider some of the dangerous implications in Sir Charles Snow's thesis and some unobserved elements in the artist and the scientist which makes a bridge between them of sympathy, common aims, shared hazards, and similar techniques.
Professor Robert Berkelman's English Composition class will be O'Faolain's next audience at 8:00 Friday morning.
In 1954 he gave the Christian Gauss lectures on contemporary literature at Princeton, which were later published in his book, The Vanishing Hero.
In spite of his extensive travel both in Europe and the United States, O'Faolain's roots are deep in Ireland.
The Irish Revolution, in which he took part, is reflected in most of his work.
O'Faolain is perhaps most renowned for his short stories and for his novel, A Nest of Simple Folk.
Making the awards were Bates President Charles F Phillips and Professor Brooks Quimby, chairman of the College's speech department.
Among other, goals for our students, we seek to stimulate the inquiring mind; to create the desire to probe literature, art. and music; to develop skills and interests in research, writing, public speaking, and drama; and to instill an understanding and appreciation of the natural sciences.
Those receiving honor awards today have given evidence that they are achieving these goals,"" Dr.
General Scholarship Awards to the highest ranking man and woman in last year's junior, sophomore, and freshman classes were awarded to David H Hosford '63; duplicate awards to Nancy L NOTICE Seniors and their parents are invited to attend Back to Bates Coffee and Tea immediately following the BaiesMiddlebury Football Game on October 20, 1962, in the Chase Hall Ballroom.
Levin '63 and Judith A Trask '63; to Norman E Bowie '64 and Jane McGrath '64; to Dennis D Keith '65 and Laura S Deming '65.
The Lelia M Foster Award, awarded at each Commencement to the young man and woman of the preceding entering class, who have shown character and ideals the most likely to benefit society, was presented to Dennis D Keith '65 and Laura S Demirig '65.
The Alice Jane Dinsmore Award to the woman in the sophomore or freshman class who, in the judgment of the English department, excels in creative work in either prose or poetry, was presented to Susan J Ingham '65.
The Albion Morse Stevens Award to the man and woman in the freshman class who have done the best work in a foreign language, presented to Yoko Hirasawa '65, for progress in French; and Irwin H Flashman '65, in Spanish.
Given annually to the secondary school whose top three students attending Bates College attain the highest combined general average during the academic year, the President's Award this year is based on the point average of 3. by three Farmington High School graduates, with 4. the maximum possible.
For the 1961-62 year, 81 secondary schools were eligible for the Award.
Winning the Award for Farmington High School were Laura Deming '62, Eunice Janson '64, and Marion Schanz '63.
Second place in the ranking of combined point averages went to Manchester High School, Manchester, Connecticut with 3.59.
Representing Manchester High School were Dennis Keith '65, Alan Williams '64, and Linda Olmstead '65.
Third place in the ranking went to Pittsfield High School, Pittsfield, Massachusetts with a 3. average.
Winding up the variety of new material will be ""Self Encounter"", a program dealing with existential philosophy, and ""Festival of the Arts"", which will present such famous plays as A Doll's House and Hamlet, to name just two.
Quite a lot, as one can readily see by merely scanning a list of new programs to be offered during this 1962-1963 season.
A special highlight this year will be the showing of two college credit courses, one in American Government and the other dealing with the American Economy.
Along with these courses, six other new shows will be seen on Monday nights.
A new scientific program, ""Challenge,"" will deal with radiation and its problems.
Thursday brings three more Calendar Wednesday, October 10 Vespers, Chapel; 9-10 Thursday.
Sean O'Faolain, Chapel; 8 Friday, October 12 Haze Day Debibbing Night, Women's Locker Building; 6-9m.
October 13 Football at W.P.I., 2 Cross Country at W.P.I., 2:30 Soccer at Nasson, 2:15m.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main Team Practices For Wednesday Oxford Debate The Bates debating squad will make its initial appearance in the Chapel on Wednesday, October 24.
During the past week the debaters have been engaged in a series of practice debates designed to sharpen their prowess for the coming season.
Fifteen upperclassmen are returning to the squad; and six freshmen are trying out for it.
Carol Johnson, Linda Lash, Max Steinheimer, Richard Rosenblatt, George Strait, and Nancy Vail.
Ronald Snell '65, Peter d'Errico '65, David Harrison '64, Jeffrey Rouault '65, Norman Bowie '64, Morris Lelyveld '64, Robert Boyd '64, Kenneth Woodbury '63, John Strassburger '64, Norman Gillespie '64, Norman Davis '65, Thomas Hall '64, Howard Blum '63, and Robert Ahem '64.
Mavrinac Talks On Governments And Individuals ""Democracy is so ideal that people don't really want it,"" declared Dr.
This conviction, together with the belief that the law must be an expression of a community composed of rational human beings, form two of the basic precepts of democracy.
He is never allowed to feel that his answer to a particular question Ritz Theatre One Week ""MARCO POLO"" with Rory Calhoun and ""NO PLACE LIKE HOMICIDE"" Sidney James Shirley Eaton Matinee 40c Evening 65c Smith Speaks To Stu-G On Summer Conferences On Wednesday night, October 3, the Student Government Board met in the Women's Union, at which time Susan H Smith '65 reported on her trip to two conferences held in Ohio during the past summer.
Briefly, she outlined the main events of the National Student Association Coordinators Conference, and of the NSA Annual Policy Making Conference.
Miss Smith expressed her wish to run a regular colmn in The STUDENT acquainting Bates students with NSA and with the vast opportunities and assistance that are available to colleges through this national and international organization.
As a result of the two conferences, Miss Smith returned to Bates with many ideas for improvement on campus and with the desire to make Bates an active worker in the over-all NSA plan.
Janice Bauld '63 and June Gustafson '63 then led a discussion regarding a proposed series in which students and professors would gather informally in the basement of the Women's Union to discuss topics of the professor's choice.
They expressed a desire to see more students volunteer to serve on the committee that is presently engaged in investigating the possibilities of launching such a series during the second semester.
President Bette Anne Little '63 informed the board that Debibbing for freshman women would take place on October 12 at 7:00 in the Women's Gymnasium Building.
She also asked board members to inform all sophomore women that the Intergovernment Committee had an opening.
Those interested should see Bette Anne Little, Nancy Nichols, Susan H Smith, or Carol Kinney.
Avery's Peak will be the goal of Bates Outing Club mountain climbers on Sunday, October 14, announced George Hunter '63 and Judy Bradshaw '63, directors of hikes and trips.
Bigelow, is located in Dead River Plantation in Somerset County, Maine.
The mountain gets its name from Major Timothy Bigelow, who climbed the mountain under the order of Benedict Arnold during the march from Maine to Quebec.
The procedure which George and the other EMPIRE NOW PLAYING J STANLEY KRAMER'S UDGMENT {^Nuremberg Tracy Widmark Schell Lancaster Dietrich Garland Shown Twice Daily Mat., Eve.:30 Adm.
Kir/ij Edward {*\ IloMri&onl 2 uveetm in another Joint C^jdCharteae leaders will follow is typical of almost any climb.
After the buses drop students off at an area near the foot of the mountain, students will begin the hike through the surrounding woods.
As for foot apparel, hiking boots are preferable, although sneakers are permitted.
Sweatshirts, lumberman's jackets or ponchos are good for outerwear, with dungarees as the best type of pants.
One should keep in mind the obstacles to be met, when deciding what to wear.
Unlike the Mount Washington climb, which was restricted to upperclassmen, the Mount Avery climb is for anyone who would like to go.
A lecture before each play telling something about the background and setting of the play; 3.
Admission and eligibility to participate in a minimum of four workshops produced by Robinson Players and/or the Acting Class.
These workshops will include work from the classic theater to the modern avant-garde or theater of the absurd writers.
Everyone is reminded that those who pur chase tickets first get the best re served seats.
The Players intend to extend their scope this year by bringing to the student audience examples of the theater, past and present, through its workshop program and monthly meetings.
Members will present skits and other entertainment in the next meeting on November 6.
Any member who would like to help or participate in this meeting should see Judy Mosman '63.
Students are admitted to Robinson Players meetings by membership card only.
Doug Macko, vice-president; Holly Thompson, secretary; Judy Bryden, treasurer.
Chase, Abby Pamer; Hacker, Candy Richardson; Wilson, Jay Wells; Frye, Karin Mueller; Mitchell, Joyce Mantyla; Whittier, Rosie Staddie; Milliken, Lyn Melander; Page, Louise St.
Laurent and Sally O Smythe; Roger Bill, Herman Lilja and Ralph Day; East Parker, Jim Brown; West Parker, Dick Rozene; Smith North, Steve Quattropani; Smith Middle, Ted Davis; Smith South, Pete Pequignot; John Bertram, Jim Fine.
Newt Clark, president of the class of 1965, opened the first meeting of the sophomore council Tuesday night, October 2, by issuing a general invitation to the class to attend the class meetings.
They will be held the first Tuesday of the month at 6:15 in Libbey Forum.
Any dorm representative who misses two meetings during the year will be dropped from the council, and a new member elected from that dorm to fill his place.
The council next discussed plans for the pep rally which was held last Friday night, October 5.
Preliminary plains for the sophomore Christmas dance were A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Augusta, Maine B E D A R D ' S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston.
Maine Pine land Seeks Volunteers To Aid Patients By DAN CORNWALL '63 The Bates Christian Association was recently contacted by the Pineland Hospital and Training Center in Pownal, Maine in regard to a need for volunteer work.
They have requested help in their program with the mentally retarded and handicapped children.
In an effort to find out what their exact needs were, I, as a CA member, visited the hospital last Friday.
Upon touring the institute I found that the fields in which help is needed are unlimited.
Premedical students can be of value in such fields as physical therapy, x-ray, and the bio-chem. laboratories.
Psychology majors can find a place to apply their knowledge in such things as giving tests or just working with children.
Elizabeth H Nevin, I learned that students from Colby come down once a week to work.
Most students return year after year because of the experience and enjoyment they get from helping these children.
Pineland offers you a chance to help others and yourself at the same time.
It is a job which must be kept up on a weekly or monthly basis in order to be of any value to you or to Pineland.
They cannot use people who are willing to come on a haphazard basis, for the children become depressed when volunteers who are expected do not show up.
There are many problems such as transportation and working hours which must be solved.
I will hold a meeting in behalf of the CA of any who are interested in 8 Libbey at 7m., Thursday, October 11.
BATES COEDS FROM: LADY BENOIT v During your summer vacation we've been real busy and have opened a new store — LADY BENOIT You'll love the lines: Pendleton, Villager, Petti, Mr Thomson and many others.
Come in, browse around, meet your friends. — It's your store and we welcome you any time.
LADY BENOIT TYSs* opened the gathering by briefly outlining t h e administrative framework at Bates.
He reminded the assembled group that the campus is organized on a highly centralized basis, with the problems going from the bottom of the structure to the top.
The legal source from which students get their authority is the Charter of the College.
Business powers are placed in the hands of the Board of Trustees and on-campus activities are left to faculty dis cretion.
As the faculty is respon sible for student activities under Mavrinac Talks will determine the course of his whole life.
Therefore, if the ma jority's decision is not in his favor, he is not driven to violence by the belief that his whole life will be ruined.
It is the function of great leaders to understand the basic conflicts of the people, and to put these conflicts into relatively harmless terms for the voter.
In this manner, all fundamental issues must be decided, not by the government, but by the individual.
Only the individual himself can decide whether it is right or wrong to love one's neighbor; and only he can take the unpleasant responsibility for such decisions.
By forcing the people to decide for themselves, Mavrinac concluded, the democratic government develops the individual human being and his beliefs.
Following the President's statement, Dean Boyce reviewed the Student-Faculty Activities Committee with the group.
He explained that the purpose of this body is to formulate the policies under which campus activities are run.
As many students must frequently apply for blue slips, the procedure to be followed in obtaining them was then discussed.
Blue slips were devised so that organizations and private groups could reserve space and equipment for meetings, parties, and informal get-togethers.
Boyce reminded the students present of the importance of submitting their blue slip requests at least one week in advance of the date of the event; he also stressed that no advance publicity be given an event before the approved Blue Slip had been received.
Dean Healy then spoke about the Faculty Advisor System on the Bates campus.
He said that extracurricular activities were important as both an enjoyable and a valuable educational experience.
It is a requirement of the College that all organizations have advisors.
It is important that any advisor be kept informed of what his group is undertaking.
President Phillips closed the meeting by expressing the hope that those present would keep in mind that all people who come to the campus as speakers and visitors are our guests; the impression they take away with them of Bates is an image which the students have created.
Barb Tuttle '63 and Bill Young '64, Cora Jean Snow '63 and Lee Smith '62, Bonnie Logie '63 and Dick Carlson '62, Elaine Woodford '63 and Richard Tracy, Genie Wise '63 and ""Swifty"" Hathaway '62.
Maine's Educational TV station, sponsored jointly by Bates, Bowdoin, and Colby, is planning to supplant many of its old programs with new presentations.
Friday, October 12 Haze Day Debibbing Night, Women's Locker Building; 6-9 Saturday.
Ronald Snell '65, Peter d'Errico '65, David Harrison '64, Jeffrey Rouault '65, Norman Bowie '64, Morris Lelyveld '64, Robert Boyd '64, Kenneth Woodbury '63, John Strassburger '64, Norman Gillespie '64, Norman Davis '65, Thomas Hall '64, Howard Blum '63, and Robert Ahern '64.
President Bette Anne Little '63 informed the board that Debibbing for freshman women would take place on October 12 at 7:00m. in the Women's Gymnasium Building.
The procedure which George and the other EMPIRE NOW PLAYING ■ STANLEY KRAMER'S Judgment ^Nuremberg Tracy Widmark Schell Lancaster Dietrich Garland Shown Twice Daily Mat., Eve.:30 Adm.
I KM* I liXltiXtrtll't'l • UoufiUm \H<obinson\ 2 tt'cc/iH in atiotlicr ikttvn < !,<l< t S <l, iHH< ClNEI MEIROI leaders will follow is typical of almost any climb.
Any member who would like to help or participate in this meeting should see Judy Mosman 'G3.
Clark Opens First Council Meeting Of Sophomore Officers Newt Clark, president of the class of 1965, opened the first meeting of the sophomore council Tuesday night, October 2, by issuing a general invitation to the class to attend the class meetings.
Preliminary pla'ns for the sophomore Christmas dance were A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
B E D A R D ' S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston, Maine Pineland Seeks Volunteers To Aid Patients By DAN CORNWALL '63 The Bates Christian Association was recently contacted by the Pineland Hospital and Training Center in Pownal, Maine in regard to a need for volunteer work.
I will hold a meeting in behalf of the CA of any who are interested in 8 Libbey at 7, Thursday, October 11.
Business powers are placed in the hands of the Board of Trustees and on-eampus activities are left to faculty discretion.
THE 4< HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES FOUR BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 10, 1962 Editorials Somewhere, perhaps on the shallow banks of Lake Andrews, or more likely in the shadows of the Gray Athletic Building, or maybe even under the Stanton Elm, a phantom has been lurking.
Pride in one's college and the concomitant spirit has noteably been absent from this campus for these last few years.
Now in the growing glory of a successful season in football the shadow of school spirit is emerging and taking shape.
And yet, perhaps as we raise our voices in criticism this coming year, we might also look within ourselves for the faint outlines of pride and concern for this college.
Ours has been a heritage of complaint directed against the institutions of this school.
It is time that we look to ourselves for the heritage of pride and school spirit which we have not had.
Our years here should not be spent in adding to the apathy that has prevailed.
Rather we can take pride in Bates College only to the extent that we have confidence in ourselves as citizens of a college community which means something to us.
As we bask and enjoy the success of our football team, let us realize that it is not upon the accomplishments of our teams that school spirit can be sustained.
For such sustenance is totally external and dependent upon our conquering of others.
In your attitude, not as a class, a team, or any group, but as an individual, lies the extent to which school spirit shall emerge, take shape and prevail here at Bates.
White discussed the littered disorder which reigned over the once peaceful Walden after it had been opened to the public.
Indeed, Maine highways are noted for the quantities of beer bottles and cans strewn by the wayside.
The mess of gumwrappers, paper scraps, and whatnot is unnecessary, unbecoming, and frankly, embarrassing.
Such litter is unnecessary because the college provides an adequate number of wastebaskets.
It is embarrassing because some students do care what impressions others receive of Bates.
We have a beautiful campus and we must all help to keep it looking clean.
Yet every gym class I am required to do something beyond my physical capability.
I am required to play games I cannot understand, do not enjoy, and cannot participate in with even the slightest physical dexterity or prowess.
And I am not alone in wanting to do something about improving my present physical state.
But, gentlemen, I do not think that the continually changing five week units are going to improve me.
This year I am floundering around on the football field — and while my attempts serve as amusement for my classmates and my coach, I feel that I am getting nothing of benefit from the activity.
Rather I want a remedial gym class to take the place of my present class.
Of course, one might argue that could improve myself on my own, but I honestly think that I am too far gone physically to do much on my own without supervision.
I would like to toughen up and become able to perform in a regular gym class with some confidence.
And I think that the athletic department is failing to give people like myself a sane physical education program.
I acknowledge the value of the athletic program and do not mean to detract from its place in the Bates curriculum, but I do urge the department to recognize the fact that there are those Bates students incapable of performing adequately in the standardized program and who would like an opportunity to improve themselves.
In this matter I am Sincerely yours, Malcolm Mills '65 Five Time Grand Prize Film At Little Theater By BARBARA MORRIS '63 I ter frolic and dream in a fragile No cast of thousands will thunmicrocos, which is constantly der across \ the Little Theater screen this Saturday evening.
Rather, the simple and poignant Indian film ""Pather Panchali"" will renew far-away memories of childhood delights, fantasies, and sorrows.
Pather Panchali (""Song of the Road"") is the first film of a Hindu trilogy sensitively and profoundly written, directed, and produced by Satyajit Ray.
Ray, formerly a commercial artist, has used non-professionals, instead of stars, to capture the mist-filled joys and experiences of young, rural Brahmin children.
Apu and his beloved older siscontrasted to and endangered by their rude, impoverished environment.
Daily their witness their poetic father and work-worn mother struggle joylessly in a never-ending effort to protect the family from the enveloping arms of poverty and starvation.
However, in spite of the decaying society in which Apu lives, Ray has been able to mirror and balance life's laughters and sorrows.
Besides lyrical realism, this film is also enriched by artistic and detailed photography, which enhances the universal appeal of the movie.
It's no wonder that ""Pather Panchali"" has been an award winner from Calcutta to the Cannes' World Film Festival.
Circulation, Merry Webber '65, Betsey Tarr '65, Ellie Spare '65, Jan Soltis '65.
Entered as second-class matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879.
Having, in the time since I arrived at Bates, made considerable use of the recently renovated library, it seemed to me fitting to thank those whose labors made the new facilities possible there.
Many people were involved in last year's library research project, contributing their time and ability so that the student body might have more useful study facilities.
At least one person devoted so much time at the expense of her school work that she was unable to return this year.
Others also gave hours of spare time and supported the project with their interest and concern.
In response to the level at which the campaign was conducted, to the worthiness of its aims, and to its superior content, our ponderously conservative administration deigned to recognize its work.
In the short time I've been here at Bates College, I have come to appreciate the library study rooms.
I'm glad the upperclassmen fought for the extended hours of these study areas.
At the library every student is concentrating which makes it all the easier to accomplish something.
As Rousseau observed in his idea of the ""Social Contract,"" citizens give up their individual liberties in return for the protection of the state.
In other words, the one purpose, the only purpose, of a state is to protect its citizens.
If the United States were to permit an intolerable situation to develop in Cuba because of the doctrine expounded upon by the STUDENT, then that government would be failing in its raison d'etre.
Keeping in mind the fact that the first function of a government is simply to exist, any government which deludes itself into thinking that such a situation can be ignored because it does not conform with its wishful thinking would have to be considered incredibly naive.
When morality conflicts with reality and necessity, then morality must go.
One need only look at the success of the Soviet Union in this area to determine the extent to which Machiavellian politics influence the power struggle.
Yet, as the STUDENT itself points out, it is the image of the United States which is tarnished.
This is because foreign governments, with foreign policies determined as they are by Machiavellian politics, see the United States as a giant power too weakkneed and hesitant to protect its own interests.
And let us not be intimidated by ridiculous fears of a nuclear war over Cuba.
The Soviet Union is no more ready to precipitate a nuclear holocost over Cuba than we were over Hungary.
Indeed, as the Soviets are also ruled by Machiavelli, such an action by the United States might conceivably help deter a future war.
In conclusion, I feel it quite conceivable, given a significant military build-up in Cuba, that an invasion would not only not be ""legally unjustifiable"" and ""politically impractical,"" but, quite to the contrary, morally and politically unavoidable.
Sincerely, Robert Boyd '64 HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER 73 Lisbon St.
The mighty trio did manage one championship tilt which was captured by the slenderest of the trio.
Perhaps his speed afoot annexed him the title, but it would seem rather that it was the lack of conditioning on the part of his opponents.
Bobcat Harrier Co-captain Bill Dunham annexed the leaf catching championship on the lawn of Smith,, Sunday as he ran down a total of 10 gale-driven leaves.
A few leaves remain so perhaps there will be a rematch, but one rather doubts that the championship will be relinquished.
The expected dual between Garnet Co-captain Red Vandersea and Northeastern's Dick McPherson never materialized as Vandersea left McPherson wallowing in the mud of Garcelon field.
Even more to his credit is the fact that the Northbridge, Mass. resident was selected as the E.C.A.C. lineman of the week for the second consecutive week, this time at the guard position.
The Garnet leader totalled 61 points under Coach Hatch's scoring system.
In addition to many tackles and assists Howie was in on, the Smith South proctor intercepted two Huskie passes and galloped 55 yards with one of them for the first score of his college career.
The spirit shown by the Bobcat fans who stood in the rain for 30 minutes to welcome the Garnet gridders to the Den culminated a fine afternoon on the Bates campus.
With spontaneous spirit like that showing the Garnet warriors that the student body is behind them 101%, perhaps a State championship is in the making.
Although class schedules in many cases make it prohibitive, it would be a worthwhile three hour trip to Worcester to see the Hatchmen take on the Engineers.
The Tech squad has always been a thorn in the Bobcats' side and the team will be seeking revenge for the pasting the Engineers gave us last year.
Continue north on route 9 until you hit the lights at the top of the hill behind Lake Quinsigamond.
Go straight at those lights and you will come into a rotary at the bottom of the hill.
In case you get lost in Worcester, ask for route 12 or Park Avenue, the road which runs alongside Alumni Field.
Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS COLLEGE PHARMACY, Inc.
Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 Freshman John Yuskis picks up a Bates first down as Dave Stockwell , Tom Carr and Paul Planchon look on.
The pouring rain hampered the respected Bates passing attack considerably and forced the 'Cats to play defensive football, taking no chances and punting on the third down.
A nifty 45 yard pass play from quarterback Ed Mullins to Brian Hayes was the key play in this drive.
Once the Huskies got inside the Bobcat 10 the 'Cats' defensive forward wall stiffened and Paul Planchon knocked down a fourth down pass to turn the ball over to Bates.
Planchon later boomed a third down punt from deep in his own territory to the Huskie 5-yard line shortly before the end of the period.
The first Bobcat score came with less than 5 minutes gone in the second period.
The Huskies were on the Bates 45 and appeared to have their offense in high gear.
At this point, 'Cat cocaptain Howie Vandersea picked off a John Kennedy pass from his linebacker position and stepped out on a fine 55 yard touchdown run.
Northeastern took the kickoff and once more began to march up the field.
Again Paul Planchon came through for the 'Cats as he intercepted a pass on his own end zone with 2V 2 minutes remaining in the half.
A 19-yard pass from Kennedy to end Frank Schettino breaking over the middle accounted for this tally.
At this point the one point separating the two teams looked like it would be the deciding factor as the rain was coming down harder and the field had been turned into a quagmire.
Carr Scores With 8 minutes remaining in the game, Northeastern was forced into a punting situation near their own forty.
Victor was off and he just managed to get his hands on the ball before he dropped it.
On the second play from scrimmake, quarterback Bill Davis launched an aerial to John Yuskas who caught the ball, then fumbled it when hit by two defenders.
Paul Planchon picked up the ball and avdanced it to the one-yard line before being hauled down.
Twice Davis called upon fullback Tom Carr to buck the line and on his second attempt he slammed into the end zone.
Curtiss' conversion attempt was good and the score was 14-8 in the 'Cats' favor.
After the Bates' kickoff the Huskies were unable to advance the ball for a first down and were forced to punt.
The strong Huskie forward wall held the 'Cat offense and it looked like the boys from Boston would get another try for the equalizing points.
Paul Planchon was roughed on his punt though and the Bobcats were able to run three more plays before punting.
Graham Scores The Bates defense accounted for the third 'Cat TD on the next series of plays when Kennedy was chased back to his own ten and then fumbled.
The ball squirted into the end zone where reserve 'Cat guard Bill Graham fell on it for the score.
Curtiss' kick was wide and the score was 20-8 in favor of Bates with less than a minute left in the game.
Northeastern fumbled the following kickoff and the 'Cats ran out the clock for their second win of the year against a lone defeat.
Standouts for Bates were Tamis, Vandersea, and Ritter in the line and Davis and Planchon in the backfield.
Mullins, Kennedy, Webb, and Schettino were the guns for the Huskie offense while Bill McPherson p*layed a good defensive game.
Harrier Squad Wins First Meet The Bobcat distance runners dedicated Coach Slovenski's new cross country course by smashing a weak Colby club by a 19 to 42 count here at Bates Monday afternoon.
The Garnet romp was paced by co-captain Eric Silverberg, who led the pack across the finish line while setting a new course record in the time of 24:36 for the four and a quarter mile course.
Show Promise By placing four men in the first five positions and four in the second five, the Garnet runners showed promise of a fine season this fall.
Frosh standout Mike T r u f a n t followed Silverberg across the finish line as Roger Jeans nailed down the third spot for the White Mules from Waterville.
Sophomore Mike Gregus, who finally got the OK of the medicos, was fourth and co-captain Bill Dunham rounded out the first five finishers.
Mabee of Colby, Wilhelmson, Richardson, Parsons and Heyel, all of Bates, rounded out the first ten in the preceding order.
Colby In Poor Condiiion Coach Slovenski was enthusiastic following the victory against the Colby aggregation, but was quick to point out that this was a weak Colby team that seemed to be in poor condition in comparison to his Bobcats.
He is looking forward to an improvement in the pack running, when runners of the same teams run close together. as a group, in the Bates meet Saturday at Worcester.
The Bobcat coach was more than pleased to have Mike Gregus back with a full bill of health.
As a matter of understanding to the fan, the lowest score wins a cross country meet.
The runner receives the number of points coinciding with his finishing position in totaling the team score. m SIX BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER10, 1962 Cats Favored Over Worcester Tech The 'Cats journey to Worcester, Mass., Saturday where they will face the Worcester Tech Engineers.
The Engineers sport a 1-1 record, winning the opener 21-0 over Central Connecticut State and losing last Saturday to Middlebury 27-0.
Twelve lettermen give Coach Robert W Pritchard little to cheer about as his search for a signal caller has not found much success.
Each year the Worcester team comes up with a strong line and this year is no exception.
And that it reached the U S. via Telstar, the world's first private enterprise communications satellite.
Since that summer night, the Bell System's Telstar has relayed electronic signals of many types -television broadcasts, telephone calls, news photographs, and others. , But there's one Telstar reflection you might have missed.
It is the reflection of Telstar's success that glowed brightly on the faces of all who shared in the project.
Their engineering, administrative and operations skills created Telstar and are bringing its benefits down out of the clouds to your living room.
These Bell System people, through their talented, dedicated efforts, make your phone service still better, more economical, and more useful.
Only two offensive backs have returned, Ron Gemma, who played regular right half back last season, and Mike Littizzio, a reserve who saw some action last season.
Another leterman, Denny Gallant, will be the likely starter at one halfback slot, as he played strictly defense last year and does have some game experience.
Backfield coach Charles McNulty has experimented in the first two games to fill the two remaining positions.
Tech's backfield, although inexperienced, boasts speed as Gemma, Littizzio and Gallant are all former trackmen.
Gemma romped for two touchdowns in the Engineer's tilt with Central Connecticut.
The Engineers are blessed with two fine ends, and if Coach McNulty can find a quarterback that can throw to them, Tech opponents will be in for a long afternoon.
Both these boys are exceptional pass receivers and are tough on defense.
I 0 Middlebury 27 Wesleyan 15 Bowdoin 6 Maine 9 Vermont 6 BOBCAT OF THE WEEK "" Once again the selection of a Bobcat of the Week was an easy task as senior letterman Howie Vandersea led the Bobcats to an upset win over a highly rated Northeastern squad.
For his superb linebacking performance and his offensive show at his new position, the sportswriters again named Red as the lineman of the game and undoubtedly the Garnet leader will again be named the first team E.C.A.C. team of the week and possibly to the AllEast team.
For his efforts the senior members of the Garnet squad, presented Howie with the game ball.
The lowly frosh accepted their fate with differing amounts of the proverbial grain of salt.
Ribald speeches and mockery, howI ever, soon dispelled all ideas of ill nature; freshmen carried on the dignified proceedings in the best of spirits.
The affair began in the early hours of the morning when the first costumed and somewhat reluctant frosh men appeared.
Tinkerbelles, cowboys, knights, assorted strippers, street gangs, and ""Rebs"" from the 01* South all flew, sallied forth, rode, or slunk as inconspicuously as possible out of their dorms into the realm of snickering upperclassmen.
After the frosh had seen the other hapless men of '66 in equally unpretentious garb, their apprehension evaporated.
Then the female set came forth in their curiously detailed and colorful apparel.
Milliken ""Alices"", Whit ""Rabbits"", Page ""Hiawathas"", and Wilson Cyranos under the pseudonym of ""Pinocchios"" delivered orations from the time-honored steps of Hathorn.
Great trains of haze-dazed students of dubious origin wound their way about the campus, now hopping, now Conga-ing, now twisting to the heights of Mount David.
With students sampling and rating the girls' kisses, asking their measurements, and making polls of other pertinent data, he would surely have returned to his office to re-read some of his own surveys.
Perhaps Coleridge might have I been a bit disappointed in the representation of one of his famous figures by some of the Page girls, and Barrie certainly would have blenched had he seen the J B. versions of Tinkerbell floating about.
Haze Day was sometimes foolish, often riotous, yet here memories are formed and past ones renewed.
Certainly next year's activities are being plotted by a vengeful freshman class.
I Girls Perform In Debibbing Skits Last Friday night marked the transition of freshman girls from bibbed babies into Bates young women.
At the traditional ceremony held in the Women's Gymnasium, the freshman girls, although tired from the various activities of Haze Day, summoned energy enough to throw their bibs joyfully into the air — renouncing forever their domination by the ""mighty sophomores"" Andrea Buck and Jan Soltis welcomed the audience and in troduced the freshman skits.
Other skits were ""Bunny Bugs Me"" by Hacker, ""The Hunt by the Mitchell House Flintstones"" by Mitchell, ""Fight for a Tail,"" by Page III, ""Bambi's Blooper"" by Chase, ""I Can Get It for You Cheap — $23.98"" by Page IV, ""Snow Wilson and the Seven Pinocchios"" by Wilson, and ""Twelve Sixty-two"" by Frye House.
Hinman, retired to consider the choice of the winners, and Emily Blowen led group singing.
Narrator of this skit was a shy litttegirl named Hermione, who stole everyone's heart.
Mitchell House received second prize, while Page I and II and Frye House tied for third place.
Betty Ann Little, president of Stu-G, then spoke to the freshmen, welcoming them to the ""Batesy Family,"" and leading the traditional Alma Mater, accompanied by Yoko Hirasawa.
But the mystery of debibbing night was not yet over, for at ten o'clock the freshmen apprehensively returned to their dorms, ready to view the ""ravages"" inflicted on their rooms by the sophomores.
Homecoming Activities Start This Friday Night A football rally, the BatesMiddlebury football game, and a traditional homecoming dance will highlight the Back-To-Bates weekend for 1962.
The schedule of activities, which begins Friday night and will last until Sunday afternoon, is listed below.
During the Counseling Conference on Saturday morning, Dean Lindholm will lead a discussion on what to expect from college and how the admissions program selects students.
Friday, October 19 7:10 — Pre-Rally Round-Up 7:30 — Back-To-Bates Football Rally, Alumni Gymnasium 8:30 — Open House, Chase Hall, Time to dance, Refreshments will be served Saturday.
October 20 10:00 — Admissions Counseling Conference, Skelton Lounge in Chase Hall 10:00 — Reunion Classes Organization Meeting — New Little Theater 11:00-1:00 — Tour of Carnegie Science Building and New Addition 1:30 — Bates vs.
Middlebury, Garcelon Field 4:00 — Alumni Coffee Hour, Women's Athletic Association 8:30 — Back-To-Bates Dance, Alumni Gymnasium, Music provided by Lloyd Rafnell and his orchestra Sunday.
The editorial board of the GARNET is now accepting material for the Winter edition of your campus literary magazine.
Interesting scientific essays will be considered for publication as well as imaginative sketches.
Student Senate Constitution To Undergo Further Consideration The Student Senate Constitution, along with the Constitution of the Men's and Women's Proctor Councils, is on its long trek toward implementation.
At that time the arduous task of discussion, debate, and decision was just beginning.
This year the discussions continue, as members of Stu-C, Stu-G, their advisors, and representatives of the administration meet to iron out trie details of the Constitution.
When this stage is completed, the plan will be sent to the Extra Curricular Activities Committee for appraisal.
This group can then submit the Constitution to the faculty either with or without approval.
If the faculty, after reviewing the proposed Constitution, considers it workable, it will be presented to the student body for ratification.
Those concerned are generally agreed to the principle of better government inherent in the Student Senate.
At 8:15 in the Lewiston High School Auditorium, the year's first performance of the Concert and Lecture Series will begin.
The Ballet consists of Roberto Ximenez, Manolo Vargas, fiemendo singers, guitarists and a company of dancers.
The two leaders, Ximenez and Vargas, are Latin Americans; but they have both become expert in the Spanish dance art form.
The Spanish dance is a remarkably controlled art, making the greatest demands on its performers.
This group is especially known for its unusual arrangements and productions.
Bates students are reminded that admission is via their I.D. cards at the Auditorium's right entrance.
Attendance is urged both for those students who have borrowed in previous years and those who may wish to borrow or obtain information for the first time in the current academic year.
Jackman Comments On His Year Of Study Abroad Doctor Sidney Jackman, at a recent chapel service, pontificated on the ""amateurism and eccentricity"" of British education.
Jackman spent a year at Clair College, Cambridge, writing and mixing with the English students, whom he said had a great social life with the faculty.
Jackman said that a large number of them came from private institutions, but were infused with spirit and not burdened down by tradition.
English students are not required to attend lectures which tend to be highly specialized.
Instead they wear long black gowns, presumably to hide their unshapen bodies.
Jackman said that the library has found no better way to arrange its books than according to size and date of acquisition.
And he stated that library hours were worse than Coram's and that undergraduate students were not allowed to remove books from the library proper without permission.
Jackman closed his highly imaginative talk by waving goodbye, his traditional closing for an informal lecture.
Psychology Club Hears Talk On Causes, Treatment Of Alcoholism On October 9, 1962 the Psychology Club had the first meeting of what should be an interesting year of programs.
Mr Rowland Hastings of the Alcohol Counseling Service in Lewiston was the guest speaker.
Mr Hastings, who graduated from Bowdoin and did study in the treating of alcoholics at Yale, discussed alcoholics and alcoholism in the community.
Mr Hastings stressed that alcoholism is a disease or behavior disorder that causes increasing problems in all areas of the alcoholic's life.
There are ""alcoholics"" on the street who have never taken a drink, according to Mr Hastings.
The causes are to be found in the psychological structurings' of the potential alcoholic.
Persons between 17 and 23 years of age are the most susceptible to this disease.
There are five counselling centers in Maine with one located in Lewiston.
In order for treatment of the alcoholics to be successful, the alcoholic's spouse and family must cooperate with his treatment as well as often be treated themselves.
Alcoholics Anonymous also runs groups for nonalcoholic spouses and for teenage children of alcoholics.
A A. has been successful in 50% of its cases as compared to 2% rate of success by psychiatrists.
Mr Hastings told the club that he felt himself particularly qualified to discuss alcoholism because he was himself a former alcoholic.
Following the talk, as at all meetings, a question and answer period was held.
The psychology club believes it has an interesting and varied program this year.
Tickets Available Community Concert tickets must be obtained for these outof-town concerts.
These will be available during daytime hours from Miss Foster in the Library.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main Debate Training For High Schools Set For Oct.
On Saturday, October 27th, there will be a discussion contest and debate clinic for the New Hampshire high schools enrolled in the Bates Interscholastic Debating League at Portsmouth High School.
There will be panel discussions, led by Morris Lelyveld '64, Norman Gillespie '64, Robert Ahern '64, Keith Bowdoin '64, and Thomas Hall '64, on what the foreign trade policy of the United States should be.
Professor Quimby will speak on the topic, ""How to Debate,"" and this shall be followed by an exhibition debate.
Morris Lelyveld and Norman Gillespie will assert the affirmative, while Robert Ahern and Thomas Hall will take the negative.
Democracy contains within itself the power of selfdefeat, and political power, wherever it reposes, is to be exercised subject to limitations.
Any constitution, in order to embody this principle, must meet three definite requirements.
It must define the members of government, regulate the relationships of men to each other, and determine the mode in which men will exercise sovereign power.
See the Guidance and Placement Office for a bulletin t>f information and an application blank.
THE FEDERAL SERVICE ENTRANCE EXAMINATION will be offered on November 17, January 12, February 9, March 16, April 20, and May 11.
The Management Intern portion will be given in November, January, and February only.
Inquire at the Guidance and Placement Office for full information and application.
THE AMERICAN NATIONAL RED CROSS needs qualified personnel to serve at military installations and in military hospitals, both in this country and overseas.
Qualifications for spestood that out-of-town guests must wait in the foyers until local ticket holders have been seated.
Tues.— •THAT TOUCH OF MINK' Gary Grant Doris Day ""LAWLESS BREED"" Rock Hudson cific jobs, position descriptions, and information about overseas assignments will be sent on request.
TEACHERS FOR WEST AFRICA PROGRAM at Elizabethtown College, Pennsylvania will select a limited number of applicants for teaching posts in secondary schools of Ghana and Nigeria.
The Guidance and Placement Office has further information and application blanks.
NEW YORK DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL SERVICE, represented by Mr Charles G Wolz, will set up a stand in Chase Hall on Thursday, October 16.
As long as it effectively limits the power of government, as long as it recognizes the princple ""not under man, but under God and the Law,"" it may be a constitution.
This is the duty of Constitutionalism; it provides a legal limit to arbitrary power, and, at the same time, permits a complete response of the government to the governed.
The principal of Judicial Review serves as a link between Democracy and Constitutionalism.
The Court, through its interpretations of the constitution, can judge whether or not governmental action is within the limits imposed upon it by the constitution.
By adapting its interpretations to meet the needs of a constantly changing government and people, the Court ensures the growth and development of the democracy.
What remains to be done is to carefully examine the wording of the Constitution, to change and strengthen it where needed, in order to build a stable, workable, and sure foundation for the structure which is to follow.
Augusta, Maine BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 17, 1962 THREE GRADUA STUDY Faculty Reports On Graduate Study In 1959 a Faculty Committee on Graduate Study was established in order to advise the Dean of the Faculty concerning students to be endorsed by the college for non-departmental grants and to encourage more Bates students to undertake graduate study in applied as well as academic areas.
The Committee's advisory function has been carried out by sifting the academic, extracurricular, and other qualifications of students wishing to be endorsed by the college for the various competitive grants.
Each candidate's objective and plans for attainment constitute an important influence on the Committee's judgments, just as this aspect has considerable weight in the decisions of the selection committees of the various foundations.
Encourage Graduate Study The Committee's second function, to encourage more students to enter graduate study, is doubt less the more important effort but results come more gradually.
Forty-seven percent of the men in the Class of 1961 actually did graduate work as against 43% in the Class of 1959.
The library has also established a separate collection of relevant books among which ""A Guide to Graduate Study"" by Ness and ""Fellowships in the Arts and Sciences,"" both published by the Association of American Colleges, are most valuable to a prospective student.
The Committee's effort to make known available financial assistHEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET ~ JEWELER 73 Lisbon St.
Lewision ance was an important step but of interest only to those students who had already decided to enter graduate school and were in need of financial help.
In order to encourage more students to undertake graduate work the Committee has been pointing out the purpose and importance of this not only to the individual but to society due to the greater development of talents in whatever the chosen field might be.
This has been promoted through assembly talks, Phi Beta Kappa sponsored meetings and the effort of individual faculty members.
In order that Bates graduates may be in strong competitive positions within their respective fields it is becoming increasingly necessary that they obtain specialized or technical training which generally entails graduate study for advanced degrees.
This is true not only for academic careers but in applied areas where specialization and tech nology are advancing so rapidly.
Students Need Personal Advice The Guidance and Placement Office is primarily in position to help students who do not plan graduate study and are seeking employment in business or secondary school teaching.
But more than half of our seniors now hope to go on to some area of graduate study requiring detailed and personalized advice from the experience of some faculty member.
A knowledge of individual students and the variety of experience required for sound advice is clearly beyond the resources of any small committee or administrative group.
Therefore, the Committee is providing each department with data concerning the undergraduate record plus what is known about the career plans of each of its senior majors.
There seems to be some hesitancy to become committed, as though a change in circumstances or new evidence would not permit a sensible change in plans.
An early act should be to introduce the idea of graduate study to one's family and to discuss its purposes and importance with those whose encouragement will help even if financial support is known to be unavailable.
Another positive step is to read materials available in the library such as ""A Guide to Graduate Study"" by Ness.
Then seek advice from whatever faculty member one would enjoy discussing the matter with.
If a faculty member feels unable to advise, he will undoubtedly send a student to someone else he believes able to suggest appropriate undergraduate courses to take and graduate schools to apply to.
Students sometimes, and quite understandably, put the cart before the horse by trying to settle the matter of financial support first.
But no one is interested in supporting a prospective graduate student lacking a clear objective and a reasonably well thought out plan concerning how he expects to attain his objective.
However, those interested in graduate study in a regular academic discipline in pursuit of either a master's or a doctor's degree ought to seek advice from faculty members of the appropriate undergraduate department because their recommendation is usually required by graduate schools.
Students interested in graduate study in non-academic, or applied areas, should seek advice from the following faculty members who are interested, informed, or will be glad to help secure the kind of advice needed.
Any notices received by the college concerning available grants or financial aid in applied fields will be sent to the appropriate adviser to be field for student use.
Lawrance Library Science Miss Foster The Arts, Architecture, Decoration, etc.
Mr Walsh Social Work Guidance and Placement Education (including MAT and similar programs) Guidance and Placement Foreign Study (other than in the languages Prof.
Jackman Seniors seeking employment following graduation should register with the Guidance and Placement Office for either business or teaching positions as soon as possible.
Those who are still undecided about a career might find it helpful to discuss the problem with Prof.
Wiliams by making an appointment with him through the Guidance and Placement Office in Chase Hall.
Students who are late in registering or deciding what they would like to do following graduation frequently miss good employment opportunities.
Crater's Edge *±j B E D A R D ' S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewision, Maine HOURS Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday SMITT 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-8:00 7:30-6:00 Y'S Barber Shop By JAMES KIERNAN '63 It has often been said that the best way to learn is to teach, and in my particular case this hackneyed phrase proved itself true.
By teaching English to Indian boys in a small district school in the Sierras De Oaxaca, my Spanish improved one hundred fold.
But the language I learned in those two weeks was only a small segment of my education at Guelatao.
This small village was the birth place of Benito Juarez, the great president of Mexico.
A full blooded Indian, born in poverty and obscurity, he led his country through one of its most trying periods.
A contemporary of Lincoln, he is often compared with the American president.
I had come to Guelatao to learn about this man, but it was my interest in the people of this village which held me there.
The Indian boys who live at this school are taught the fourth, fifth, and sixth academic grades and a craft trade.
Since there are few who are left back, one can only conclude that these boys have to scrape out three years of schooling during their young lives spent working in their fathers' fields.
After the sixth year, Mexican students are permitted to enter a university.
However, there is only one in about three hundred who ever gets that chance.
Most of the rural Indians of Mexico are reared to a system which keeps them in the position of poor laborers and therefore, the lower strata of society.
Many Mexicans profess that it is not the system and that the Indians are stupid and that Juarez was a freakish exception.
I have acted as counselor for adolescent boys for the last five years and I had never found a group as intelligent and eager to learn as the Zopotecs of Guelatao.
They learned and retained more English in two weeks than I did Spanish.
Many were able to carry on ungrammatical and simple conversations with me before I left that village.
There are several obstacles in the way of these intelligent and interested boys learning English, but the most pressing is the lack of text books.
To have studied another language is one step toward the university; one step toward becoming another Juarez.
You will do a great service to Mexico, to our country, and especially to our fellow students in Mexico by giving them your old Spanish texts and dictionaries.
THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICEof A^L TYPES FOUR BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 17, 1962 Editorials Support WRJR WRJR is the only major campus organization which is not supported by the student activity fee.
Whereas other organizations can rely on a definite income, WRJR must go out each year and solicit funds to keep operating.
Recently, by means of hard work and mature leadership, the WRJR staff improved its equipment and expanded its service.
Undoubtedly the majority of the students do not listen to WRJR at any one time; but at some time or another most students do listen.
Consider seriously the importance of a campus radio station operated by students.
Graduate Study The faculty has now set the stage for an increased graduate study program ; the studentry now must act.
Professor Williams and other faculty members who prepared the graduate study report should be praised for the thoroughness of their efforts.
The students, however, must themselves initiate action which will take them upon this path.
While one often thinks of graduate study in terms of preparation for advanced college teaching or research, there are a greater number of students, who are qualified to do graduate study in applied areas as well.
It is usually this student who either fails to seriously consider further study or procrastinates until late in the spring term.
But graduate study in applied areas is just as significant as that in the academic.
There is no reason why at least 65 % of the present senior class should not go on to graduate study, and this includes women.
It is not too early for juniors to consider their future; it is not too late for seniors to begin.
Hazing Once again our friendly, coeducational college welcomes ' its freshmen.
The first week-end the upperclassmen were back, freshman girls returned from an outing to find their rooms in cleverly arranged disorder.
The activities ""to promote dorm spirit and to help in getting acquainted"" had We wonder, in passing, how blindfolded students enjoined to silence become better acquainted.
The issue involves a more significant aspect than the achievements of hazing.
Even if hazing freshmen can make them feel a part of the college, proud to be Bates men and women, responsive to their privileges and duties, hazing remains an unnecessary, embarassing and dangerous affair.
Supposedly, becoming an upperclassmen provides ability to discern what is best for all freshmen.
She must leave the library before books on the reserve shelf are given out; she returns to her dorm in time for noisy hours.
Little studying can be accomplished by eleven; little sleep is allowed until after twelve.
Others in the dorm who wish to study or sleep must wait until after the haze ""parties"" to do S °Students come to Bates to acquire a sound academic education.
The studentry becomes increasingly aware of the value of learning and eager in its pursuit.
Hazing discourages thoughts of the academic thrill; it disrupts all classes studying in the dorms — on Haze Day it penetrates the library.
Between the levels of academic capability and social civilization stretches a great distance.
Welcoming new-comers through a series of essentially barbaric rites and customs admits the failure of our education.
Some freshman girls had a sugar solution poured over their heads; others were annointed with detergent.
Surely college students are sufficiently mature to extend hospitality in an adult manner.
Organized group activities such as outings, work trips and open houses can achieve what hazing claims to, without falling to its level or incurring its risks.
Including a freshman in conversation during a meal, greeting him on campus, inviting him along for a study break — all these go a long way toward introducing a freshman to the college community.
Countenancing hazing marks a regression to an immature stage in human development.
Student Body Presidents From: Sue Smith, NSA Coordinator Re: Letter to James Meredith, (% Univ. of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi) Dear Mr Meredith.
Very sincerely yours, Student Government Bates College Lewiston, Maine We urge students to write to James Meredith in expression of their sympathy and support.
When one is daily risking his very life for the cause of equal rights in education, words of en couragement from fellow students should be of great moral encouragement.
Rumor has it that the Outing Club is looking for people who enjoy a view from the top of any of nine different mountains in Maine and New Hampshire.
The Hikes and Trips directorship of the Outing Club is in charge of scheduling and supervising mountain climbs, ski trips, and canoe trips for the college.
Washington in New Hampshire is the first campus-wide activity sponsored by OC in the fall.
This is followed by two more autumn climbs to such mountains as Tumbledown, Avery, Saddleback, Baldpate, Carter Dome, Baldface, Chocorua, and Old Speck.
These are rotated on a four year basis, so within the usual period of college residence, it is possible to climb all eight mountains.
In the spring, the final mountain climb of the year is once again held on Mt.
The ascent is made only to Tuckerman Ravine because of the severe weather conditions encountered at higher altitudes.
A recently opened ski development in Auburn has made it possible to ski during the week at Lost Valley.
The Outing Club owns six fiber glass canoes which are stored at Cobboscontee Stream, about 20 miles from Lewiston.
Canoe trips are held in the spring and fall and can be run by any member of the student body.
Anyone interested should contact either George Hunter or Judith Bradshaw about scheduling a trip.
Washington climb, which is closed to freshmen, the trips are opened to the entire campus.
This is a wonderful thing to say, and a great undertaking on the part of all educational insti tutions.
However, in the light of the Fall Honors Day program, I must question the value of cer tain stimuli which Bates uses.
It would seem that pursuit of an education should be motivated and stimulated by a sincere de sire on the part of the student to learn; to try to understand the many philosophies, theories, concepts, and the men behind them as well.
Perhaps the greatest thing Bates (or for that matter, any college) has to offer, is the excitement of learning how to learn; how to use the library, how to talk to professors, how to read and understand what you have read, and finally, to become aware of the mind.
The Fall Honors program was a pointed example of the stress Bates puts on false stimulation If we were stimulated by this program, we were stimulated for the wrong reasons.
We are not approaching education with the correct attitude if we do so with awards, grades, and cuts as our goal.
Many students agree that at Bates too much pressure is exert ed to get cuts, dean's list, and awards.
With these as goals, it is too easy to lose a great deal of what a course offers by ""grinding"", memorization, and writing just what the professor wants, to get a good grade.
The only way a college or university can genuinely stimulate its students is by offering rich courses, good professors, good libraries, and intelligent fellow students.
It may take the student a long time to appreciate and learn to use what a college offers, but ultimately this, and his own desire will be the only stimulation of value.
The editorial is narrow-minded and filled with half-truths in an endeavor to swing the reader to its specific viewpoint.
We are positive that the United States' intervention in Cuba is at the very least as justified as were the Soviets in theirs.
But we must preserve our image on the international scene, so we look for justification.
The editorial typifies the type of material we hear all too frequently from Washington, constant delay and discussion over relatively insignificant, underlying phases of the issue, discussion which will undoubtedly go on until it is too late to do anything when and if we do decide to.
Some sort of eventual compromise with the Soviet Union would probably be the end result.
Hitler took country after country when the European Powers had no firm foreign policy.
Neville Chamberlain found that out at Munich when he virtually gave away Czechoslovakia to the Nazis.
As Hitler could not be stopped except with strong national policy, neither can the tide of International Communism.
Jon D Olsen '64 i si 9 BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 17, 1962 FIVE By DAVE OLSEN '65 Today marks the opening of the annual WRJR-FM fund drive.
Each year the campus radio station finds it necessary to conduct such a drive in order to maintain the fine broadcasting quality of the recent past.
Since WRJR does not receive support from the Student Activities Fee, it is almost totally dependent on student contributions We ask you to dig deep during* the next ten days and support your Bates College radio station.
Your contributions will spell the future success of WRJR, and if funds are sufficient, will allow such extras as away coverage of basketball games.
Last week saw the installation of this year's library display, depicting WRJR past and present.
Other big events in lower Pettigrew include a modernized control room, many new record albums, and, as you may have noticed, much better news coverage due to the work of news directors Richard Dow and Herb Mosher, and their staff.
A steak dinner will be given to everyone in the dorm winning the WRJR Fund Drive competition.
This is the ONLY way your station can raise the funds necessary to operate for the coming year.
Representatives will contact you in the dormitories and in the Rand and Commons dinner lines.
Dorm -scores are on a percentage basis, so the smallest dorm has an equal chance with the largest.
In polling other college radio stations of comparable size to WRJR, it was found that none had an operating budget of less than $1,500 per year.
Somewhere in tins process we find that there are men who have arrived at different kinds of knowledge.
For convenience, if for nothing else, this difference has been set under two headings, science and the humanities.
This statement tends to give one the impression that existentialism is an organized school of thought that is peculiar to the 20th century, and that the term ""existentialism"" is a neat category with clearcut boundaries.
Only one philosopher, JeanPaul Sartre, has openly called himself an ""existentialist"", and then proceeds to explain what he means by the term.
However, there is more to existential philosophy than Sartre, and William Barrett's study, Irrational Man, serves as an excellent introduction into the sources, influence, and significance of present-day existential writings.
Barrett begins his book by naming writers and philosophers who are either directly or indirectly associated with existential thinking, and also how they are related to each other.
One of the introductory chapters, ""The Testimony of Modern Art,"" is particularly interesting because of its examination of the nature and basis of modern painting and sculpture, and how these art forms reflect the problems dealt with by existential writers.
After tracing back the sources of existentialism in the Western tradition (Hebraic, Hellenistic, and Christian), Barrett chooses four major philosophers who are associated with existentialism — Kierkegaard, Neitzsche, Heidegger, and Sartre, and discusses their thought at length.
Although it goes without saying that any talk about a philosopher is hardly a substitute for his actual writings, Barrett's analysis is nonetheless a valuable introduction for those who are unfamiliar with the respective philosophies, and is also a stimulating study for those who already have a background of reading.
Irrational Man is a lucidly written book that is rich with ideas and insights.
Any college student should find reading it well worthwhile and rewarding. press thought differently in any important sense; we are only using different vocabularies that fundamentally and in the last analysis mean the same thing.
Of course, we do realize that there is a breach between these two headings, science and the humanities.
At odd moments these two groups hesitate and stare at each other across a chasm.
Thinking the same thoughts, they shrug and turn away, for they can't understand each other.
We all realize that such a chasm can be carried too far, for they have many, many things in common.
Thus we can see riding down the middle of the chasm amidst tremendous dust and clatter, the man of culture who extends to each side the gritty hand of common goods.
Let us not forget that even though these three are holding hands that they are still separate.
From a careful analysis of this one discovers that science and the humanities are doing different things.
It would be folly to say that the scientists weren't doing science and the humanists, humanities.
This distinction leads to a consideration of the differences between the two in general.
It is well established that today it is very difficult to tell whether a person is a scientist or a humanist by the clothes he wears.
Generally speaking, they are birds of a feather who haven't been able to flock together.
I think we can all agree that the real issue here is not what separates these two groups but is the thing that joins them together.
The two groups are not threatening each other in the west but are together facing a greater and a graver threat.
First, it is the middle of national hat week, an event that seemingly has no significance to the Bates studentry.
Each year RJR gives excellent coverage to away basketball games, events which studies and class schedules necessite missing in many instances.
They tape the games and rush them back to the campus to be played late in the evening of the game.
Though this is done by necessity, it makes it convenient for fans who can get their studying done earlier in the night.
It has been called to my attention that Chuck Lasher. the number one golfer on the Garnet squad, had quite a summer.
Chucking Charlie came in second in the District Four championships in his homestate Connecticut.
The course was Charlie's home course, on which earlier in the summer he had fired a blazing 65 to set a course record.
It's old, it is not about Bates nor written by a Bates student, but on the other hand it is not left-wing and is not reprinted from The Nation.
He said he dreamt the night before the fight that he would knock Doyle out and that Doyle would die in the ring.
Everything went that way except that Doyle, who was carried out of the ring, died in a hospital some hours later.
Now that Eddie Arcaro has retired, the best jockeys in the business are Willie Shoemaker and Bill Hartack.
Willie is easy-going, affable, hard to get quotes from, reasonably uncomplicated.
Bill Hartack is hardnosed, a loner, very quotable and very complicated.
In the June issue of Sport Magazine, Hartack speaks out about as frankly as any athlete has ever spoken out in public.
Leo Durocher in Florida talking to a writer about a new $150,000 house he is building in the canyons outside of Los Angeles, near Frank Sinatra's home.
Durocher described the house, as only Leo can, in glowing superlatives, and the writer whistled appreciatively.
By AL MARDEN Sports Editor Tearing Worcester Tech's line to shreds in the second half, the Bobcats came from behind to whip the Engineers, 20-7 Saturday afternoon before 3,000 spectators at Alumni Field in Worcester.
The three tallies for the Saugus frosh gave him a four game total of 42 points and first place among New England scorers.
It was the third victory in a row for Carr & Co. and the Hatchmen's third victory in four games this season.
Worcester scored in the first half when, with 12 seconds left in the half, quarterback Mike Oliver galloped 27 yards to paydirt as he found his receivers covered and elected to run.
Guard Bill Zinno kicked the extra point to give Tech a 7-0 lead at halftime.
Highlighting the drive to the 10 was a fake kick run around end by Paul Planchon on a fourth and one situation.
Planchon galloped 20 yards to the 16 aided by a crushing block by Howie Vandersea who cleared two Engineer defenders out of Planchon's path.
Cair kicked off into the endzone and the Garnet defense held the Worcester team for no gain in fourth downs.
Following Dick Ryczek's booming kick to the Bates 15, the Garnet started to move.
A first play end run by John Yuskis accounted for 29 yards and a first down on the 44.
Following a 15 yard gain via the penalty route, Tom Carr, seemingly stopped for no gain, broke through the line and rumbled 38 yards to the one foot line before being brought down from behind by speedster Mike Littizzio.
On the next play Carr leaped over a pile of Bates and Tech linemen for the Garnet score.
With less than a minute gone of the final stanza the 'Cats scored again.
Taking over on their own 12 in 14 plays the Hatchmen scored, Carr driving over from the 2.
Highlight of this second scoring drive was a 27 yard draw play by Carr.
Carr Scores Third Immediately after the kickoff the 'Cats were on the move once again.
The Garnet defense held for four downs and Planchon returned Ryczek's kick to the Bates 46.
The Pomfret, Conn., junior picked up 17 yards on a first down play on a nefty run as he bowled over three Tech defenders.
Planchon and Carr picked up another first down with 7 yard carries, bringing the ball to the Tech 23.
A Planchon off tackle run picked up 3 yards and Davis garnered the first down on a keeper play.
Planchon again carried for a first down as he went around left end to the 2.
Carr carried the bacon into the endzone and the visitors led 20-7 with 8:45 remaining in the game.
The remainder of the game saw Coach Hatch clear his bench giving reserves game experience.
Playing outstanding games for the 'Cats were Bob Williams, Red Vandersea, Dave Stockwell and Tex Ritter, while the entire backfield starred for the Hatchmen.
Davis now boasts an outstanding 32 of 50 pass completion record for an excellent .640 percentage.
Bob Williams, senior tackle, played an excellent game on offense as he opened up several holes for the Garnet backs.
Willie also played a good game on defense, making several key tacTom Carr kles.
Carr now has scored 42 points over the season and leads New England scorers with this total.
Students who wish io have guests sit with them, may purchase tickets at the Athletic Office at $2.50 each.
Bates students follow the same procedure as for nonreserved seat games.
Tickets for this game go on sale at the Bates Athletic office beginning on Monday prior to the game and end at noon on Friday.
Upon presentation of ID cards, students may purchase student tickets for 1.00.
Reservations for guests to be seated with students may be purchased for $2.50 at the Bates Athletic Office only.
STate 2 3771 BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 17, 1962 The New Cross Country Course 1 SEVEN Raphael Leads Booters To Win; Veterans Face Nichols Today By WILL GARDINER Soccer has finally become a varsity sport at Bates College.
A A. sanction means for away games, the team will travel in a bus rather than have the players drive their own cars.
The squad has been given new equipment, and new nets have been put in the goals.
There will be a game-captain for each match and next year co-captains will be elected Last year's team won 2, lost 4,* and tied 1.
However, the record Hatch Picks Two Present Players On AU-Stas Team By AL WILLIAMS Coach Bob Hatch, a familiar sight on the sidelines of Bates home football games, is trying to build small college football as well as lead the Garnet football team to a winning season.
In a recent interview Hatch had nothing but praise for the spirit and morale of the Bates eleven this year.
Played In North-South Game Bob Hatch began his athletic career in Melrose High School, Melrose, Massachusetts where he was a four-year letterman in football, basketball, and baseball.
Returning to BU in 1946 he played three years of varsity football and baseball.
The 'Cats turned in an excellent performance when they beat Nichols, a team with a 23-2 record for the last four years.
At this point in the season the booters began to show a great deal of improvement.
Then, in the last game of the season, they tied Colby 2-2, thereby knocking that team out of the N.C.A.A. small college tournament.
It should be noted that the team played most of the season with injuries to key personnel such as Dave Ruthforth Lee Knute, and Steve Barron.
Veteran Squad Back Last year's team was a young team as shown by the fact that only five players were lost because of graduation.
These were center-halfback Dave Rushforth, wing Dave Kramer, and fullbacks Dave Lougee, Jim Nye and Carl Peterson.
Such players as Lee Nuce, Bob Lanz, Dick Danowsky, Raphael Dnemelukwe, Lloyd Bunton, and Steve Barron give the line some fine shooters and hustlers.
Lee Nute, who missed most of last year because of a foot injury, is returning at left inside.
Hustling Bob Lanz, whose five goals made him top scorer on last year's team, is playing right inside.
At the wings are Nigerian student Raphael ""Boom-Boom"" Onemelukwe and Lloyd Bunton.
BoomBoom is noted because of the fancy ball handling and hard shooting that he adds to the team.
Another big man in the front line is Steve Barron, who scored three goals last year, before he had an unfortunate accident.
Also included among the forward line are Jim Kiernan, Ron Green, Gary Lea, John Malcolm, and the Trasier twins.
Returning at halfback are sophomore George Beebe, senior George Hunter, and sophomore Bob Kramer.
Jim is a very talented soccer player in that he can play two positions, halfback and goalie.
Frosh Starts At Fullback The addition of Bob Thompson more than compensates for the loss of the three graduating fullbacks.
Don has good hands, can react quickly, and can throw the ball past the midfield stripe with ease.
Backing Don up is freshman Bob Miller, ill in all, this looks like a strong soccer team.
The Bates soccer team won its first game of the season last Saturday, beating the Nasson Lions.
Although this was Nasson's homecoming game and the Lions were fired up to a fever pitch, the Bobcats easily subdued their opponents by a score of 8-0. , Nute Starts Scoring In the first period there was no scoring.
The several shots at they were either blown off course or deflected off the post.
Dick Danosky scored the second goal during a mad scramble in front of the Nasson goalie, Bob Lanz, then scored two unassisted goals in a row.
Lee Knute and Raphael again combined to score two more goals, with Raphael hitting the mark on each of them.
The final tally showed Nute, Lanz, and Onemelukwe had two goals apiece while Kramer and Danosky scored one apiece.
Halfbacks George Beebe, Jim Onemelukwe, and Bob Kramer did very well at keeping the ball in Nasson territory.
If the ball did get near the Bates goal, it was very capably handled by the fullbacks Bob Thompson and Todd Lloyd.
As a result, goalie Don Mawhinney only had to handle the ball five times.
Coach Hatch was also selected to play in a baseball All-Star game in Detroit in 1948.
During his senior year at BU he served as an instructor in Physical Education and coached the university's golf and tennis teams.
He graduated in 1949 with a B S. degree in physical education and a minor in history.
Bob Hatch began his career at Bates the same year as freshman football, basketball, and baseball mentor.
In 1951 he moved up to head baseball coach until the advent of Chick Leahey.
Hatch picked his All-Star football team made up of his greats at Bates in the last 12 years.
Two starters on this year's team, Red Vandersea and Paul Castolene are listed on the starting select eleven.
However, the televising of pro-football games has both improved the popularity of the sport and has served as an aid to coaches who don't have direct access to new formations and plays.
Hatch felt that with our limited student enrollment it is impossible to year after year play powerhouses like Maine and Tufts.
He hoped that in the future Bates could schedule opponents such as Bowdoin, Colby, Middlebury, W.P.I., Union, RPI. and Wesleyan with approximately the same number of students as Bates.
He still favored a six-team loop where each team would play the others twice in an eight-week period.
This would necessitate two mid-week games but Hatch feels that this wouldn't place any more of a load on the players than a mid-week scrimmage and the amount of class time lost would equal that lost by other squads.
The meet was run on Worcester's 4^ mile course, a course which included several formidable hills.
Eric Silverberg, described as very confident and up"" for the race, finished in first place for Bates in a fine time of 2 1:29, finishing considerably ahead of the W.P.I, second place winner.
Coach Slovenski termed Eric's time as ""excellent for the course"", adding, however, that the time of the fifth place runner must, improve considerably in order to be a potent factor in some of the tough meets coming up.
The overall pack time, though, was a definite improvement over last week's win against Colby, said Slovenski.
Hoffman of W.P.I, finished second to Silverberg, followed by promising freshman Ken Trufant, and co-capt.
Other Bobcat finishers were Mike Gregus and Finn Wilhelmson in seventh and eighth places respectively.
Face Maine Wednesday Coach Slovenski was satisfied with his team's effort but indicated that some tough workouts were in line in preparation for next Wednesday's meet with Maine.
Further closing of the time gap between the first and fifth place finishers appears to be the main objective in the coming workouts.
EIGHT BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 17, 1962 Highly Rated Middlebury Squad Face Hatchmen On Homecoming In the years past, the BatesMiddlebury football games have developed into rea> scraps and the upcoming clash between these two rivals on Garcelon Field next Saturday should run true to form.
This year was called a ""rebuilding"" year by Middlebury coach ""Duke"" Nelson, who had only eleven lettermen returning.
That same year his Panther squad put together the first of three consecutive 5-1 records.
Already the ""rebuilt"" Panthers have won two games while only losing one.
Both Wesleyan and Worcester Tech fell to the Panthers 14-0 and 27-0 respectively.
Last week in a battle of defenses Williams beat Middlebury by a score of 10-0.
Until the Williams game, Middlebury had one of best defensive records of the country's small college football teams.
Bates will have its hands full trying to penetrate this strong Panther line.
PLAYER TO WATCH Craig Stewart TBae Imtamw&l Sceiae By DON DELMORE Potent Guards Coach Nelson has six men available to fill in his guard slots.
Therefore, either Roy Crocker, Don Elmore, Dave Hutchinson or Pete Kullberg will fill these two positions.
Senior co-captain Craig Stewart has been moved from halfback to quarterback where he has become a key cog in the Panther offense.
It was Holmes who scored the touchdown that tied Bates last year on a 27 yard run.
Holmes, like The Intramural Touch Football program began last week with games being played in each of the three leagues.
There were Stewart, is a exceptional broken field runner and is a constant threat to go all the way.
The other halfback slot can be filled by anyone of a number of talented sophomoes who have proved themselves capable in the preceeding three games.
He is the man who Bates has to stop if they want to stop the Middlebury offense.
Everything points to another great Middlebury-Bates game this Saturday.
Take a couple of pax vobiscum next time you il mumi^^ come to the Coliseum.
W I, h DUAL FILTER Tareyton mww it nwr mulAl* nam* A t Co. four contests in both the ""A"" and ""C"" Leagues and two in the ""B"" League.
Games on Friday, October 5, were rained out and these will not be rescheduled.
East Potent In the ""A"" League, East Parker appears to be the team to beat as they jumped to a quick 2-0 record by defeating J.B. 12-6 and Smith Middle 12-0.
The capable hands of Pete ""The Brow"" Glanz intercepted Middle aerials for a TD as did Al Harvie in the shutout against Smith Middle.
In other ""A"" League action, Smith South downed Smith Middle 6-0 as ""Long"" Tom Freeman tallied the lone score of the day, and J.B. shutout Smith Middle, 12-0.
Bob Blagg and Jeff Hillier tallied in J.B.'s first win of the young season.
Owl Scores ""B"" League action saw Smith North down the boys from the ""Home of Champions"" (Smith South) by a 6-2 verdict.
Chuck Bailey scored the lone touchdown of the day, but hard-charging lineman Pete ""The Owl"" Koch chalked up a safety to make the score read 6-2.
The only other ""B"" League contest saw Roger Bill trounce Smith North 18-0.
Freshman Al Cruichshank led the winners in scoring two touchdowns and Sam Shewell added one for the boys from Rho Beta Phi.
In the ""C"" League, West Parker and J.B. both have 2-0 records after one week's play.
Parker ran over Smith North 40-0 and then defeated Roger Bill by forfeit.
Jim Dodds was 'outstanding as he scored four touchdowns for West in the thumping of North.
Savello scored twice and Matzkin tallied once and added a safety in leading J.B. to the victory over Roger Bill.
Robert Ahem '64 and Howard Blum '63 will represent Bates and oppose William Madel and John McDonnell of Oxford.
Following the debate the audience will have opportunity to cross-examine the contestants.
George Goldat will serve as faculty advisor this year and Jim Linnell is the chairman.
The Art Association was created out of a need for art on campus with the hope of interesting other students in this kind of activity.
The main interest of the members is not to study art in the normal classroom sense of the word, but to practice it.
Their philosophy is that one learns to paint by painting, and this idea is no less true for sculpting, weaving, ceramics, or any other of the group's activities.
In harmony with the campus trend toward change and growth this year is the Association's proposed expansion of facilities.
In the past the activities of the whole group have been hampered by a definite shortage of necessary equipment.
To remedy this problem, the members are trying to raise the sum of two hundred and fifty dollars for the purchase of new equipment and supplies, the largest item on the list being a kiln for ceramics and sculpting.
Though the initial cost of such facilities seems high, it should be pointed out that good equipment if treated well will last for years and should serve many a student.
During the academic year, the Art Association will present a number of exhibits, some indoors and some outdoors.
On display will be samples of the various types of art pursued by the Association's members, including paintings done in both oil and watercolor.
Everything on display will be the original work of students and faculty of the Customarily, judges award no decision in interactional debates.
Madel and McDonnell have been debating in colleges on the eastern seaboard.
The Committee on International Debating of the Speech Association of America and the Institute of International Education are sponsoring their trip.
William Madel was born in 1938 and was educated at Uppingham School prior to his enrollment in Keble College.
John McDonnell was born in 1940 and attended the City of London School before entering Balliol College.
American debating is characterized by an adherence to facts and figures.
In contrast, British debaters direct their arguments to the audience and use wit and digressions.
Many American debate tournaments are conducted in empty rooms, ""a 'vicious procedure' which some British schools are beginning to adopt,"" according to Professor Quimby, the Bates debate coach.
In 1921 the Bates debate team travelled to England and participated with Oxford in the world's first international debate.
Since then, Bates has taken part in over a hundred international debates.
Since 1950, individual college teams have been replaced by national teams in international debating.
Charles Radcliffe of Bates was part of the first national debate team in 1950.
Baltimore Symphony Will Perform Sunday The Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, Peter Adler conducting, will present a matinee performance on Sunday, October 28, 1962.
The program, which is part of the Lewiston-Auburn Community Concert Association, will begin at two o'clock in the Lewiston High School Auditorium.
In its relatively short history it has become one of the top major orchestras in the country.
One hundred forty concerts are performed during a season by the 86 members.
The Baltimore Symphony emphasizes educational programs, reaching 100,000 children in a season.
During the concert season the orchestra presents fifteen pairs of mid week concerts with distinguished guest soloists and conductors playing the more serious traditional and contemporary music.
It is hoped that the show will stimulate new interest in art and perhaps encourage a few new members to join the group.
Everyone on campus is invited to attend this first exhibit At present the Art Association has thirty members.
General invitations have not yet been extended this year, but, in the words of Dr.
Goldat, ""Anyone who is interested in art is more than welcome to join us.
Since 1949 he has been the music director of the NBC Television Opera Theatre, and he is also a guest conductor with the Cleveland and Detroit Symphony Orchestras.
Miss Starr is a graduate of the Curtis Institute of Music of Philadelphia.
Robert Ahem '64 Howard Blum '63 Carnegie Contains Finest Telescope In Northern NE By GRANVILLE BOWIE '66 Bates College owns the best telescope north of Boston, according to many experts.
Perched atop the new Carnegie Science Hall in a revolving dome, it commands an excellent view of the heavens.
Karl Woodcock, Professor of Astronomy, stresses the fact that the present location is ideal, and that there are no obstructions, as was the case when the telescope was mounted in a small building where Page Hall now stands.
The telescope was hand made by Mr Roscoe Stephens, of Kennebunk, Maine.
The final result of his work is a twelve-inch reflecting telescope with a one hundred-inch focal length.
It took Stephens two years to grind the mirror, which is the heart of the telescope.
Woodcock said experts claim it is ""an unusually fine mirror,"" considering that there is a certain amount of luck involved in grinding a mirror of this type.
Although the college paid a small fee for the telescope, it was mostly a gift of Stephens.
With a one-inch eyepiece, an object is magnified one hundred times, and with a one-half-inch eyepiece, it is magnified two hundred times.
The observatory is primarily for the use of the astronomy classes; however, Dr.
Woodcock states that there are plans to use it in physics classes in connection with the study of optics.
There can be no heat in the observatory because the density of the warmer air would distort » 3fDr.
Abraham Speaks To Chapel, Citizenship Lab Last week's Friday chapel speaker and visiting Lecturer in Government was Dr.
In Chapel he chose to discuss the United States Supreme Court in the light of political process.
After a brief introduction con-* mm . , sr . .. commit suicide,"" he said, ""but it cerning the theory of separation of powers, Dr.
Abraham sited the struggle that has existed between the three major branches of government.
However, since the power of judicial review was established in the Supreme Court case Marbury vs.
Madison the Supreme Court has invoked this power to strike down as few as 89 provisions in 82 pieces of legislation out of a possible 65,000 pieces of legislation passed by the United States Congress.
Abraham concluded that the personality of the Supreme Court Justice is as much a factor in the court's struggle for dominance as is its power of judicial review.
Interprets Powers The Supreme Court Justice has the unique position of being able to interpret his powers as broadly or as narrowly as he chooses.
When the Chief Justice is passive and lacks vigor, supremacy passes to the President or to Congress.
No matter how powerful the court seems the men on it are human to the extent that a judge can be human.
These men and their decisions are often over simplified when in actuality they attempt in the confines of con stitutional law to arrive at deci sions, taking into regard the max imum of human understanding.
Abraham concluded by emphasizing that the guardianship of our liberties should not. and in fact in the realm of preservation could not be transferred to another branch of the government.
The logic of constitutiona law, the basis of Supreme Court interpretation, cannot be transferred into the realm of politics and still be safeguarded as it is today under the watchful eye of the United States Supreme Court.
Professor Abraham went on to point out that the branch of government directly concerned with answering this vital question is the Court System, and the Supreme Court in particular.
The Supreme Court is a supreme arbi trator, settling the argument between the individual and society and reserving the power to say ""no"" to the government by declaring a law unconstitutional.
This body must act as the conscience of the Nation, above public opinion.
Often, as Professor Abraham put it, ""The fact that a law is stupid or idiotic or undemocratic makes no difference.
Still, interpretations of the constitution have changed through the years.
In fact, this very change in its interpretation is what has made our constitution a living, growing, elastic document.
According to its interpretation of the Constitution, the Supreme Court must decide what limitar tions to put on individual liberty for the sake of society in general.
For the surest way to keep democratic ideals strong is to pit them against the strongest argument one can find — including Communism.
If we must resort to repression to protect democracy, we are losing faith in democracy.
THE ANDOVER TEACHING FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM at Phillips Academy, in Andover, Massachusetts, offers a varied preparation for teaching, combining a year of Andover internship and a year of graduate study adapted to each person's needs and interests as revealed by his experience as a beginning teacher.
The United Church Board for World Ministries is seeking men and women who are interested in finding effective ways to express their world-mindedness.
Those who are members of a Protestant Christian church and believe in its world mission are invited to interview Mr Loy L Long, Personnel Secretary of the Board, when he is here on February 13, 1963.
See Professor Kendall, Room 303, Pettigrew if you are interested in MAT programs.
On Wednesday, October 31, Captain Mary O Goodsell, WAC will meet with women interested in officer training and service in the Women's Army Corps.
On Friday, November 2, Mr George W Marshfield, representing the American Friends Service Committee, will interview men and women interested in career and summer opportunities in Social Service.
Interested students should sign up immediately at the Guidance and Placement Office.
Rob Players Name Final Cast For French Comedy There are circles in the cycle of action of Jean Anouilh's Ring Round The Moon, the first major Robinson Players presentation of the 1962-3 season.
Ring Round The Moon is an adaptation by Christopher Frye of L'invatation au Chateau, one of Anouilh's Pieces Brilliantes.
This is not the first time that the Robinson Players have presented one of Jean Anouilh's plays.
In previous years the Players presented Anouilh's Antigone, a play quite different from that of Ring Round The Moon.
An event to remember is the preplay lecture to be given a week before the play.
Caron of the French Department, will present a background for this French comedy.
Niehaus Thomas Hobbes NOTICE Those students who wish to cast an absentee ballot in the coming election can find all available information in the library.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main the image.
Woodcock remarked, however, that this is the case in even the biggest observatories around the world.
Another little-known feature of the Carnegie Science Hall is the twenty foot planetarium dome.
It is possible here to simulate the rising and setting of the sun through the use of controlled blue and yellow lights.
With the purchase of a special projector, it will be possible to show the motion of the planets and to study the movement of galaxies.
The catch is that the projector will cost $15,000, and at the moment there are no serious prospects of raising the money.
Woodcock stated that we probably wouldn't get a projector until Thanksgiving.
He also said that although the projector would not get a lot of use, it would be good publicity for the college.
Maine 35"" BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 24, 1962 THREE Senorita Garcelon Favors The Bates Junior Year Abroad Plan By PEGGY PARTRIDGE '65 — Buenas iardes, Senorita Garcelon. — Buenas tardes, Margarita. — Como esta usted? — Regular, gracias.
This greeting may seem like* unintelligible garble to many students, but it happens to be only one of three modern languages spoken fluently by Bates' instructor, Senorita Barbara Garcelon.
Although Senorita Garcelon may be new to many of us, Bates is by no means new to her, as she has been teaching Spanish, French and German here on and off since 1958.
A native of Lewistoh, Senorita Garcelon acquired an interest in languages at a very young age when her father, a surgeon, took her family to Vienna for two years.
Here, at a pre-school age she received her first experience in speaking German.
After returning to Lewiston, Senorita Garcelon decided to take up the study of French in grade school.
She used to go to the Dominican convent to receive oral practice by speaking with the nuns.
Senorita Garcelon received her formal education at Wellesley College,, and studied in Munich her junior year.
It was during this period that she had the opportunity to visit Spain and other European countries.
Equipped with her master's degree from Radcliffe, Senorita Garcelon first appeared on the Bates campus in 1958, teaching French, Spanish and German.
However, she returned to take ( Herr Buschmann's place during the second semester while he left for a sabbatical.
Unfortunately, Bates had to do without Senorita Garcelon during 1961, as she again returned to Radcliffe to do course work for her doctorate, the subject of which she has broadened from German to comparative literature.
As is evidenced by her experience and work in the field of linguistics, Senorita Garcelon's life has revolved about the study of language since childhood.
I feel that languages are essential to promote understanding of other people and that they should be a neces sary part of education.
The study of languages should be emphasized more in the primary and, secondary schools.
Lewiston | I Orders to Take Out — Critic Applauds Lusty Rythm Of Spanish Dancers By MALCOLN MILLS Despite technical flaws and some artistic imperfections, those attending the October 17th presentation of the Ballet Espagnol were treated with a highly exciting night of artistry.
While the purpose of the modern dance is mainly response to. music, the Spanish ballet expresses passion of rawest origin, but there is nothing brutal about the living life and lust of these dances, for the strictness of form tempers all of these emotions into art.
The complete unity of hands, body, intellect, and emotion, is the epitome of the Spanish dance, and several timefe Dean Healy Comments On His New Hours And Habits By DIANNE JOHNSON '65 As a successor to retiring Dean of Faculty, Rayborn Zerby, President Phillips announced last June the appointment of Dr.
In commenting on his new of fice, Dean Healy said in a recent interview, ""I don't feel that I have changed professions, although I have changed office hours and habits.
Most students have an idea of what the title, Dean of Faculty, implies, yet many are unaware of all that this position entails.
Men' dents In a sens e, the position is clapped and their bodies whirled 1 a clearin g house of committee rePhone 2-3522 HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET in perfect timing.
Dark-eyed women with raven hair and voicelike hands found a universal rhythm and established for their audience something beyond time — beyond Lewiston, even.
Starts Slowly The program started slowly with the Escuela Bolera which consisted of four dances which introduced the company, but the maestro, Roberto Ximenez, saved his appearance until the second number, Suite Iberica, where the classical forms were especially stressed.
I did not feel, however, that either of the first two numbers were entirely successful.
I think that the problems with the highly inefficient lighting crew, and the ignorance of the audience to the dancing art somewhat stifled them at first.
But soon the lusty rhythm they created began to live separately from them and both the audience and the dancers swirled panting away from Lewiston, Maine, and their own petty little existences into crudely distilled passion.
Beating heels that made the head split with exhileration and masses of brilliantly colored clothing swished and crackled until the hall turned into a Dionysian festival where every tension and frustration was released to the fury of the castenets.
To find such an evening of alarming diversion in Lewiston was unexpected and satisfying.
In regard to his specific duties, Dean Healy spoke of them as numerous.
For one, the Dean of Faculty is encharged with the Chapel-Assembly Program.
He is ex-officio, a member of all committees, and officially, the chairman of the Educational Guidance and Curriculum Committee.
Furthermore, at Bates, the Dean of Faculty assumes the role of an administrative officer, and, as a result, the position involves a large amount of paper work.
In addition, even though the Zerby Tour is still under the direction of its founder, Dean Emeritus Zerby, the office still has charge of the Junior Year Abroad Program.
Dean Healy was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where he attended the local public schools.
If you wish to be miserable, think about yourself; about what you want, what you like, what respect people ought to pay you; and then to you nothing will be pure.
You will spoil everything you touch; you will make misery for yourself out of everything good; you will be as wretched as you choose. — Charles Kingsley ATTENTION, STUDENTS! — MONIER'S TEXACO STATION — Corner of Main and Russell Streets, offers these specials to you Lube.
Before coming to Bates, he served as an instructor at Minnesota, and also spent five years, from 1951 to 1957, at M.I.T. where he taught courses similar to our Cultural Heritage program at Bates.
Since coming to Bates in 1957, Dean Healy was a member of the Cultural Heritage department.
Because of his new duties as Dean of Faculty, however, he no longer teaches Cultural Heritage.
However, as he has always enjoyed teaching, he hopes to continue doing so, and this semester Dean Healy is conducting one course covering the history of eighteenth century Europe.
Although unable to answer some questions put to him, due to the newness of his post, Dean Healy spoke frankly about Bates.
Graduate Fellowships For Ministry Available The Rockefeller Brotheis Theological Fellowship Program offers male citizens under thirty years of age a ""trial year"" fellowship during which the Fellow seeks to determine whether the ministry should be his lifetime vocation.
About 60 fellowships are awarded to those who are not now planning to attend graduate theological school, but who would be willing, if awarded a fellowship, to attend such a school for one year in order to consider the ordained ministry.
Fellows may apply to any Protestant Seminary which is a fully accredited member of the American Association of Theological Schools.
The stipend provides for room, board, tuition, fees, and $600 for books and miscellaneous personal expenses.
Any men interested in the possibility of such a program should contact Prof.
Miller, who is glad to advise students interested in the ministry or related vocations.
Nominations must be received in Princeton not later than November 20th.
Aside from freshman week and a short period before Christmas, few of these trinkets are sold.
This window area and trinket cases waste space which could be given to book displays.
The number of books would triple if the counters were taken out and the whole store made an open book rack.
A few years ago the Irish in Boston could either enter politics or become cops (this is an exaggeration, but it contains more than a kernel of truth); they have now elected a President.
The Negroes are justifiably tired of the statement that they'll get their rights as soon as the courts can convince the many narrow-minded Americans to relinquish their privileged status.
They want equality now, not under an abstract law, but in the supermarket, on the beaches, in the bars.
They'll scoff at those who advocate moderation and token integration; they'll laugh bitterly at those who plead gradual social change; they'll sigh at those who send telegrams but no physical or monetary support.
Force does not necessarily imply violence; it does, however, imply stronger economic, sit-in and marching methods.
The Negro will seize his rights with or without the idealistic Americans who support him in spirit, as long as the spirit doesn't enter their lives.
JUNIOR YEAR ABROAD In his convocation address, President Phillips noted the increase in the number of students participating in the Junior Year Abroad program.
There are in fact, some 29 Sophomores presently planning to go abroad for their Junior Year Dean Healy will hold a meeting soon for interested Freshmen to answer questions and give information about the program.
We hope that this, plus the short series we are running by a Senior who went to Britain last year, will whet the appetites of Freshmen with a hunger for new and different educational experiences in other parts of the world.
We encourage Freshmen to think seriously about the possibilities of this program.
There is no better way to learn a foreign language than to go to the country in which it is spoken.
There is no better way to learn about British Culture than by going to Britain, no better way to learn of the muses that inspired Joyce, Dylan, and Yeats than by going to Ireland.
Bates is offering its students an opportunity to travel, to learn how others live and how they think, and to enter into worlds which are foreign to us and our New England provincial ways.
With careful planning together with professors, students may earn up to a full year's credit for a year's work in one's major.
T , The Editor-in-Chief writes all unsigned editorials, initials refer only to the editorial immediately preceding them.
SUPPORT WRJRI Without your money, the station must cease operations. ^ates EDITORIAL STAFF John R Wilson '63 Editor-in-Chief Marilyn Fuller *64 Assistant Editor Managing Editor Judith Trask *63 Assistant Managing Editor News Editor Feature Editor Sports Editor Barbara Reid '63 Norman Gillespie '64 Peter Reich '65 Alan Marden '63 Stephen Barron '64 Business Manager Dianne Johnson '65 Exchange Editor Edward Rucci '63 Photography Edito r t> ZhZZZa ™ on i,| V nt Chase Hall Bates College, during the college year.
In the past two weeks, letters have appeared in ""The Student"" either in favor of or attempting to provide justifications for an invasion of Cuba.
Concerned with one menace, they have both unwittingly pointed up a greater menace — the abandonment of moralty in a quest for national power.
As American citizens, we are committed to a number of ideals, among them freedom, the political equality of all men, and the right of the people of each nation to choose their own form of government.
Many would also claim that we are, in a way, also governed by a Christian ethical system.
As this is a debatable point, however, I shall not consider this aspect of the problem.
I do not very strongly doubt that Mr Boyd and Mr Foster are somehow aware of these American ideals, but I do doubt that they have any understanding ot tfhe implications of these ideals The freedom of man is not only an end, it is also a means, and a regulation of means.
However threatened we may feel by Cuba, we must remember that it is a sovereign nation, no matter how distasteful that thought may be.
We must also bear in mind that the Western Hemisphere is not the sole domain of the United States to go blundering around in as it wishes, regardless of the thoughts of the other inhabitants.
While we may encourage a democratic revolution in Cuba (and this I heartily advocate), we may not forcefully impress our will upon that of the Cuban people.
America is not only a political power, it is also an avowed upholder of certain standards of morality and human dignity; it is, or should be, committed to the cause of human freedom.
To answer this, we will have to ask ourselves what our reasons are for invading Cuba.
I'm sure that Mr Boyd does not feel that our existence is threatened by Cuba.
This seems to indicate that Mr Boyd feels that any nuclear weapons that might be in Cuba, or in the possession of its allies, would only be used in offensive, and not defensive, military action.
Quemoy, Matsu, or Rob Players To Present Extraordinary Crime Film On Saturday, October 18, the Robinson Players will present The Asphalt Jungle, one of the finest crime films ever to come out of Hollywood.
It is the story of a jewel robbery planned and executed with the precision of a military operation.
The film maintains an extraordinary tautness as it depicts the careful preparations for the crime and reaches an agonizing climax of suspense as the safecrackers methodically complete their job while police sirens wail in the streets.
Although the conclusion of the film conforms to Hollywood's usual ""crime doesn't pay"" formula, the fate of the criminals, especially the ""master-mind,"" lies not in the cops but in themselves.
The Asphalt Jungle is the first of a long line of films about the techniques of professional thieves.
It was imitated in the French film, Rififi, and parodied in the Italian, Big Deal on Madonna Street Not the least of the film's distinctions is the small role played by Marilyn Monroe in one of her first appearances on the screen.
As you might infer the book is symbolic in nature — from beginning to end, and the symbolism Golding employs is quite clear and consistent, usually dark and frighteningly comprehensible.
The fact that this book is in its seventeenth printing attests to its overwhelming popularity, particularly among college students.
Golding employs the ideas of Freud throughout; the concept of Id, Ego, and Superego, sexual symbolism, and the ease with which ""the thin veneer of civilization"" can wear away and expose primordial animalism and anarchy which are the prime forces that emerge from a colony of pre-pubertal boys marooned on a microcosmic tropical island.
When efforts are made to develop a civilized system of gov ernment on this island by Ralph (the society-builder who ""makes sense"") and Piggy (Ralph's in tellectual adviser), they are con fronted by Jack (the irrational Id — anarchic and base, unconscious desire-fulfiller), and are eventually overthrown by him and his brutish gang of wild-eyed boys without the bonds of ethics and values.
After all, no one is willing to start a nuclear war over some petty little valuable bases.
Unless, of course, we expect the Russians to be either more sane or more moral than we are and refrain from starting wars, especially nuclear ones.
I've failed to mention world opinion, etc., because we know what the effect on that would be, and, after all, that is an ""impractical, unnecessary"" consideration.
In conclusion, if Mr Boyd and Mr Foster still feel that an invasion of Cuba is necessary because Cuba poses a threat to us, then I would like to ask them if they see any considerations that would limit the necessity of removing what is felt to be a threat.
For a moment or two the forest and all ihe other dimly appreciated places echoed with the parody of laughter.
Golding has presented again the problem that has ever plagued the mind of civilized man.
The Greeks called it the Furies; Freud called it the Id; the ""existentialists"" call it a number of things — basically ""the irrational""; now Golding's ""beast"" has perhaps shed new light on a dark problem.
One interpretive answer is suggested by a powerful incident in chapter eight, where Jack and the other ""hunters"" kill a pig.
The whole killing is directly analagous to sexual intercourse, and afterwards, any elements of rationality and civilization in Jack are now completely purged.
Perhaps Golding is saying that the misuse of the most powerful force in Nature, the sex drive, and its estential need for fulfillment, is a basis for the things that we do which we can't understand.
Consciously dealing with the unconscious is a difficult, perhaps impossible thing to do.
Only after exploring every means available will we be able to admit submission to the ""Furies"", who "". . . keep with hard hearts unmoved constant watch on human sin ""—Aeschylus, The Eumenides.
POETRY There will be a meeting of the United Nations of Poetry this Sunday.
This was the question uppermost in my mind in March, 1961 when I learned that this city in the North of England would be my junior year home.
I didn't have long to wait; for aboard the Empress of England in September, I was forewarned by English passengers about that notorious Manchester weather — rain, rain, rain and at times thick fog.
I found that the Mancunians (as Manchester citizens are affectionaly called) live up to their reputation of being among the friendliest of the English.
I was fortunate to observe' three different aspects of English life at close hand.
First term found me in the comfortable and pleasant home of a university lecturer, his wife, and three daughters.
Each morning ten year old Joanna would gently wake me with a steaming cup of tea.
I was summoned to breakfast on the stroke of eight-fifteen by the ringing of a gong and was often invited to afternoon tea in the drawing room.
This family with their exaggerated class consciousness, formal ways, and concern with correct manners were per haps typical of the educated upper middle class.
But, it must be stressed that the above would not be your curriculum — at least not your educational one.
But seriously for a moment, I'd like to enlighten the underclassmen of the opportunies that can be enjoyed.
Not being a language major myself, yet having the desire to go to Europe, I investigated the possibilities.
England appeared too damp and dreary; it smacked a wee mite of the climate of Maine.
However, in Aixen-Provence there exists the Institute for American Universities.
The Institute is organized like an American college and offers many of the courses one would expect to take his junior year.
There are courses in European literature in translation which I found to be superb.
Courses are given in international relations and organization, European history, art, education, sociolog, geography, and many others.
In my history course we took field trips each Saturday to many areas of Provence rich in antiquity.
Courses are given by American and European professors in English and there is intensive concentration on French language instruction.
So by the end of the year you should be able to have a fairly good command of the language.
Also there are courses at the regular university which one can follow for credit when your facility in the language is adequate.
Your expenses of tuition, room and board, books and transportation to Europe will come to several hundreds of dollars less than what it is costing you to come to Bates.
I went to 14 countries in Europe and the Near East and these added on another $800.
It's quite possible to spend a month traveling all over Italy, for example, and spend only $60.
This program I attended has many interesting facets which I would be gad to djscuss with inyone interested.
It is mainly for those wishing to be on the Continent, who aren't fluent in a language and would like to learn it there plus travel and study a different culture with many different attitudes toward life.
Murray's warmth, kindness, and generosity made up for what might have been considered drab surroundings.
She had neither telephone nor refrigerator, and kept her milk and butter in the cold pantry.
Murray's greatest pleasures was to sit and admire the roaring coal fire, her only source of heat.
I doubt she would part with that coal fire if central heating were given her free of charge.
Murray never ceased to be amazed that I went to sleep under five blankets in addition to the three hot water bottles she placed in my bed each night.
Five Tea Breaks A Day Having made many friends in Ashburne Hall, it proved an easy adjustment when in third term I moved into this women's residence hall.
Ashburne was an ideal vantage point from which to view the study and leisure habits of girls from all corners of the British Isles and the world.
Since each girl received a daily supply of milk and bread, there were often five tea breaks a day.
Over tea and ""biscuits"", my friends plied me with questions ranging from America's policy on nuclear disarmament to the number of maids in an American family.
In addition to being exposed to an educational system, the methods and goals of which often differ from our own, I gained insight into the different ways of every-day living which exist between us and the English.
Bates Combines Summei Work, Language Study In Overseas Plan By RICHARD DOW '64 Fly now, pay never.
It could happen to you next summer if you are a Bates man interested in working in Europe.
Through the gift of an anonymous donor, Bates College will pay part or all of the fare to Europe for men proficient in the language of the country in which they will work.
The program itself is not new, having been in existence for three years.
At present, only men are given financial assistance through this gift, because it was donated in the hope of encouraging men to become more proficient in foreign languages.
Wright stressed the point that this program is not limited to language majors.
Due to the success of Bates students who have worked in Europe in the past three years, it is now much easier to secure employment.
This employment is to last seven or eight weeks and varies in remuneration with the type of job and its location.
Regardless of earnings, however, every man will acquire a wealth of experience and increase his knowledge of the language spoken in the country he visits.
Interested men should inquire about these opportunities as soon as possible with Dr.
It would be much to the benefit of the students and the college to stimulate an active interest in this program.
Harrison got his job through the IAESTE. or the International Association for the Exchange of Students for Technical Experience, one of many organizations whose purpose is to help students find employment and in some cases, transportation to Europe.
Alfred Wright has extensive material, and the feature department recently received information from the American Student Information Service.
Student Visits Germany Under Bates' Program By DAVID HARRISON '64 It is possible for a qualified Bates student to spend a summer in Europe with minimal expenditures.
The program applies to any European country; having studied German for two years, I visited Germany.
For two months I was a factory worker at Bayer Leuerkusen, a giant chemical factory near Cologne.
My fellow workers were friendly and interesting, espe-. cially since many were former Nazi soldiers or East Zone refugees.
During my last month I stopped work and toured Germany, using money earned there and haved from living expenses.
On a motorcycle that cost about $60, I motored nearly two thousand miles through middle and south Germany, visiting The Black Forest, Lake Constance, the Alps, Eifel, large cities like Munich, Cologne, and Bonn, and literally dozens of small cities and towns with cobblestone streets, ancient houses, city walls and magnificent old Cathedrals.
Throughout Germany, I was impressed by the hospitality of the people and the general atmosphere of prosperity and uneasy optimism.
I spent a week in Berlin on a student bus trip and visited the Communist sector.
Here in the East zone lies Germany's greatest problem, and also one of ours.
This whole summer was made possible through a Bates fund, which will help a student travel to Europe under two conditions.
He must be a male student with some language proficiency and he must have lined up a job for the summer in the country he visits.
Several programs exist to find jobs, ranging from private or ""Batesy"" connections, to IAESTE, a giant exchange program which finds jobs (usually in Science* or Engineering) almost anywhere for qualified people.
It involves some paperwork and special language practice that is time consuming, so if you are interested, talk to Dr.
The faculty grants the studentry a vacation on the day of the Maine game for one purpose — to see that game That students should hire a bus to head southward is a reflection upon their school spirit.
For the students who care enough of the school and the fine team which represents the school a word of warning.
Friday is the last day that you can purchase tickets at the reduced rate of a dollar at the Athletic Office.
Your dollar ticket must be accompanied by an I.D. card at the visiting students' gate at Orono.
As all upperclassmen know the 'Cats in three years have not yet won a series game.
This year for the first time in the past four years the Hatchmen are clear favorites to annex the title.
It also means, however, that Bowdoin, Colby and Maine want to knock us off, not only because we are favorites, but because between them they have won only one game all season.
Coach Hatch has repeatedly mentioned the spirit and leadership of this year's Garnet squad.
A glaring contrast to the Bobcat gridsters, and all Garnet teams, was afforded following last Wednesday's Nichols soccer game.
A person following the Nichols players after the game saw the following.
As soon as the final whistle was blown several players lit up cigarettes.
The Nichols squad emerged from the locker room wearing their traveling uniforms of sweaters and open shirts.
Finally, even before the campus was left behind, the players, traveling in private cars, had their elbows bent in the characteristic pose of a veteran of Lou's.
Faculty members and eol.ege libraries oivO eligible, when subicribing themselves.
P-CN DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 Norris Hayden ] Laundry t Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS THE BLUE GOOSE GRILL 69 SABATTUS STREET Starring Paul Planchon goes high in the air to snare a Bill Davis aerial on the 15 yard line from where he dashed into the end zone for the score.
By AL WILLIAMS The Bates Bobcats led by Paul Planchon's running, kicking and pass receiving defeated a good Middlebury team 12-6 before a large Homecoming crowd for their fourth win in a row.
The junior halfback scored the winning touchdown on a 23 yard pass play in the fourth quarter, set up the first score with a booming kick that died on the Middlebury one yard line, and iced the game with a 27 yard end sweep late in the fourth quarter.
Fullback Paul Fava gained most of the yardage through the middle, finally scoring from inches out on a fourth down play, despite the efforts of the right side of the Bates line.
Planch Booms One Bates didn't seem to click until the second quarter when a Planchon punt rolled dead on the Middlebury one and the Blue's offense was stopped.
The Panthers punted to their own forty yard line and the Bates offense went into high gear.
After a five yard penalty, Bill Davis dodged his way to the 25 for a first down.
Planchon picked up 8 yards to the 17 and Tom Carr gained another first down on the Middlebury 12.
On second down David moved the pigskin to the 1 foot line and fullback Tom Carr bucked over for his eighth touchdown of the season.
Middlebury threatened late in the second quarter on the Bobcat twelve yard line.
Dave Stockwell singlehandedly stopped this threat with a tackle of quarterback Craig Stewart on the thirty yard line.
After a series of downs Jim Callahan fell on a Middlebury fumble near the mid-field stripe.
Fullback Tom Carr, previously held in check, carried half the Middlebury line with him to the Mid 28.
Then Davis hit Planchon with a pass and Paul dodged the last two Middlebury defenders to paydirt.
Penalties and yards lost 5-23 2-10 Late in the fourth quarter Mid tried to get an offensive attack going from the Bates 46.
Stewart, the best part of the Panthei ground game, picked up a first down on the 34.
Spearheaded by Red Vandersea, the right side of the line stiffened and two plays later Stewart fumbled and Tom Carr fell on the ball to kill Middlebury's last threat.
Planchon's 27 yard dash from punt formation drove the last nail into the Panther's coffin.
Pete Kullberg and Paul Fava led the defensive charge for Middlebury holding Carr in check and throwing Davis for losses.
Dave Holmes was another thorn in the Garnet's side as he intercepted two passes and picked up eighty yards in 18 carries.
Hallowell, Me. ami ** ■Hft '*""■*. '* ■ f Paul Planchon For the second time this year Paul Planchon has been selected as Bobcat of the Week.
Planchon also had his toe in % the outcome of the game as he boomed a kickquick to the one yard line which set up the first Garnet score.
Hard pressing Paul for Bobcat of the Week honors were teammate Paul Castolene, who played his most outstanding defensive game and soccer player Bob Lanz who notched four scores against Nichols.
BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 24, 1962 SEVEN Four Former Garnet Players, Local Coacji On Scouting Staff their jobs are vitally important David Higgins, comprise the sco *y RUSS HENDERSON The pregame rally this week /as unique in one very special way.
It shined the sports spotlight on two men, J Donalc Barrios and David Harkins, who in fulfilling their roles for the Bates College Athletic D< artment are mostly unheralded and unrecognized though rhese men along with two others, Arthur Belliveau and ing staff of the Bates College football squad.
Working in nil teams of two, usually accompanld by one oi the assistant coaches, Walt Slovenski or Chick Leahey, they quietly but One may ask why are scouts so* important to a football team and the answer is multifold.
Imagine the situation of a team that knew absolutely nothing about the team they are to oppose.
These are just a few of the major points a scout has to observe during his afternoon at the football game.
Considering his job in full he has a twenty-four page report that has to be filled out in minute detail.
He has to miss nothing for a single mistake may be the difference between victory and defeat.
He Coach Hatch on the Sunday folfudges the physical condition of lowing the game is divided into h e opponent, gives his sugges the ions on their passing game and d e _ deas on which moves by Bates two sections, offensive and one covering the other the fensive parts of the game.
In revould hurt or confuse this opporting the offensive strategy everything is covered.
In covering the Dpponent a scout defense of an is again diaately and classified to height,,ig ramm j n g their set pos iti 0 ns.
He weight, speed and effectiveness.) is care ful to show any adjustA team's exact formations are me nts they make in a passing diagramed along with their mostjj s i tuat i on or w hen a team needs effective plays. [ short yardage or is pressed close Keys Noted I to their own goal line.
A lineman who pulls out of th line to lead a ball carrier on his run is an example of a key.
Sometimes a player will tip his intention of doing a certain thing by some action or movement and a scout has to be observant to catch these particular mannerisms.
A football scout has a big job in the stands on these crisp autumn afternoons.
He is a big part of a team's effort and a partner a coach is lost without.
At Bates the scouts are paid on a per game basis with their traveling expenses added.
Rally Speakers On Staff The two scouts we all had an opportunity to hear at the rally Friday night.
Lewision in Worcester, Mass., now makes his home with his wife and two children in Auburn.
He attended Cushing Academy where he was a three-letterman, starring in football, baseball, and basketball.
On his matriculation to Bates, with the class of 1953, Don resumed his roles in three sports, this time for the Garnet.
Barrios is a football and basketball official for the Maine Athletic Association and officiates many college contests in the state.
Dave Harkins was born here in Lewiston where he now lives with his wife and three children.
He starred here at Bates as a varsity football and baseball player until his graduation in 1953.
EL Coach Arthur Belliveau is the senior member of the Garnet scouting staff, graduating from Bates in 1941.
Belliveau returned to the local scene .'ollowing his war service and is now head football coach at Edward Little High School.
He is a member of the State Athletic Officials Association and the Coach es Association.
He is married and of his three children, his oldest daugh ter entered Bates this year with the class of 1966.
The newest member of the scouting department of Bates is David Higgins of Falmouth, Maine.
Mr Higgins, born here in Lewiston, graduated from Bates in 1955 after four years of football and baseball experience.
Married and three times a father, this is Dave's initial campaign as a Bobcat scout.
Approximately 30 girls are practicing for their field hockey contest November 17 against Maine and Colby.
The Black Bears regained the winning touch by trouncing a previously unbeaten Vermont squad in theii third game.
The Black Bears almost spoiled the party, but a last period U of Conn, pass gave the Nutmeg staters a hard fought 14 to 6 victory.
New Season The saying goes here in the Maine woods that when the college powers of the Pine Tree State meet on the gridiron the performances of the past mean nothing and all caution is thrown to the wind in the quest of State Series victory.
The Black Bears of Orono are an improving threat and their long history of winning makes them the key team in the state of Maine.
The Bears feature an outstanding senior fullback in Bill Chard who also holds down an end slot on defense.
The brother duo of Tom and Ray Austin as alternating quarterbacks makes Maine a team that can move via the airways with surprising effectiveness.
Earle Cooper and Dave Brown are junior halfbacks who are learning fast after playing great Dave Cloutier.
Veteran Line The core of the Maine forward wall is a tough, veteran-studded cast with co-captains Alton ""Bump"" Hadley at right guard and John Roberts at the right side tackle.
Junior letterman Phil Soule is the Black Bear pivotman flanked by classmate left guard Roger Bouchard of Auburn, both returning starters from last year's undefeated Yankee Conference and State Series champion Maine football team.
Lewiston EIGHT BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 24, 1962 Lanz's Four Goals Paces Cat Booters Past Nichols; Bears Drop Squad 4-1 Last Wednesday, the Bates soccer team entertained JNichols College at Garcelon Field.
The Bates team followed up its 8-0 win over Nasson by beating Nichols 6-2.
The Bobcats went into the lead within three minutes of play on a goal by Lee Nute.
Then Lanz started spraying the Nichols goal with shots, four of which went in.
Dick Danosky also scored one goal and set up Lanz for two of his goals.
The defense did a good job of containing Nichols' attack so that only one goal was scored on Don Mawhinney.
On Saturday, Bates went to s Brunswick to play at Bowdoin's Homecoming.
This game was very different from the first two games of the season in that Bates was unable to get its scoring attack going and its defense was lax.
In the first period Bates drew first blood when center forward Dick Danosky scored the first goal of the game.
It was a good first period, and going into the second period it looked like it was going to be an even contest.
However, in the middle of the second period, the Bates defense became lax and the Bowdoin front line put strong pressure on Bates' goalie Don Mawhinney.
During this period, Bob Lanz made several good shots at the Bowdoin goal, but all of them were caught.
Although this was the Bowdoin goalie's first game, he played very well.
With ten seconds left in the game, Bowdoin scored its last goal and the final score was 4-1.
Bates now has a two and one record, having beaten Nasson and Nichols, and having lost to Bowdoin.
The Garnet harriers take on the highly-rated Maine hill and dalers at 3:00 today on the new cross country course shown in last week's Student.
The squad has been working hard the past week, putting in extra sessions both on Saturday and Sunday, in preparation for today's meet.
Support from the student body will be greatly appreciated and could play a part in the outcome of i the meet.
There were two coiests won by forfeit, one played to a draw, and what may biconsidered a minor upset, in looking over the results in fe three leagues.
As we enter the third week of the intramral season, East Parker and J B. appear to be the powers f the strong ""A"" league, a loaded West Parker teams and ssquad representing Roger Bill are the major threats in the""B"" division, and J B. and West Parker continue to dominte the ""C"" league play.
In the ""A"" league last John Bertram jumped into the championship picture and <ow must be considered a co-favrite in this division by virtue a an upset victory over East Paicer 12-6.
These same two teams, net a week before with East wining by a similar 12-6 verdict.
Since that summer night, the Bell System's Telstar has relayed electronic signals of many types -television broadcasts, telephone calls, news photographs, and others.
It is the reflection of Telstar's success that glowed brightly on the faces of all who shared in the project Their engineering, administrative and operations skills created Telstar and are bringing its benefits down out of the clouds to your living room.
Bell Telephone Companies Pete Graves and Ron Vance went in for touchdowns in leading J.B. to the victory.
Graves made a terrific catch in tallying the first touchdown and Vance skirted end for what proved to be the margin of victory.
Steve Egbert was outstanding for East as he chalked up their lone score of the day.
J.B. also defeated Smith South 12-6 to wind up their week of successful play.
Bud Spector scored for Smith after Kibe churned to the one after taking a Peqinoit pass at midfield in this closely contested battle.
East Pdrker came back strongly after their upset at the hands of J.B. to down Smith Middle 206.
Pete Swanson starred as he scored fourteen of Parker's points on two touchdowns and a safety, and ""Steady"" Steve Egbert again added another tally.
Ted ""Pinstripe"" Foster scored for Middle to present the possible shutout.
The busy East Parker squad also defeated Smith South 14-0 to end their week's campaigning.
Pete Swanson and ""The Brow"" scored the touchdowns and Steve Egbert added a safety in leading their dorm to the victory.
The only other ""A"" league contest of the week resulted in a forfeit victory for Smith South over Smith Middle.
Cowboys Undefeated ""B"" league action saw undefeated West Parker move closei to their division championship with two victories, a close 8-6 decision over Smith North, and a 30-6 dribbing of Smith South.
Pete Oberndorf scored the touchdown and Earl added a safety in edging Smith North.
Bill Shannon tallied for the losers, but Park er's safety proved to be the margin of victory.
West continued their winning ways by the four touchdown victory over Smith South.
Roger Bill defeated Smith Middle by forfeit in the third ""B"" league game of the week as they also remained undefeated.
Tom Henderson caught a aerial for the West Parker touch down, and Oakes of J.B. brough an intercepted pass all the way back to account for their six points.
LXXXIX BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, OCTOBER 31, 1962 By Subscription Robinson Players Describe Activities On Backstage 'Baubles, Bangles, and Beads,""* — the flapper era comes to life in the Rob Players production of Jean Anouilh's comedy, Ring Round the Moon.
In accordance with the styles of the twenties, dresses are characterized by straight lines and long waistlines while skirts are of the ""knee-tickling"" variety.
Dangling beads sparkle against luxurious furs and feathers Cloche hats covering escaping ringlets and spit curls complete the illusion.
To assure authenticity in cos turning, the Players have con suited their library of Theater Arts Monthly magazines.
Advertisements of French designers of the twenties have been obtained from these publications.
From these models the costume committee is now designing a number of the play's costumes.
People in the community have also donated authentic clothes of the era for use in the production.
While activity continues to revolve around the new play, the regular monthly meeting of the entire drama group has been planned for November 6 at 7:00 This month's program includes Professor John Tagliabue of the English department presenting a poetry reading.
John Strassburger '64 will offer a pantomime on Age demonstrating techniques learned in acting class.
Musical entertainment for the evening will be provided by Charles Love '66, singing folksongs, and Deborah Perkins '64 performing a comedy number.
Also, in the comical vein, Malcolm Mills '65 will deliver an improvisation of two Columbia and Barnard grads at a coffee house in Greenwich Village.
The program concludes with a choral reading on ""Bates Life,"" a parody on Stephen Vincent Benet's John Brown's Body.
Another facet of the Players' abilities is determined in the workshop plays.
The first of these, Dark Lady of the Sonnets, by George Bernard Shaw, is set for December.
The action conveys us to a midsummer night at the end of the sixteenth century; the scene is the palace of Whitehall overlooking the Thames.
Two mysterious ladies (Abigail Palmer '65 and Kathy Lysaght '66) complete the scene.
Nils Holt and Chris Chambers are wprking on the set and background music.
Bates, represented by Robert* Ahern '64 and Howard Blum '63 took the affirmative and stressed the fact that the policy of the United States demands that ""we stop the spread of communism and that we prevent the installation of offensive weapons in Cuba.
This objective can be achieved, they stated, through economic controls.
The Bates position was generally that we can not let the threat presented by Russian control of Cuba, go without challenge.
Madel and McDonnell of Oxford, rather than adhering to the limited interpretation presented by the affirmative, understood United States action in Cuba as indicative of general United States policy.
They presented their arguments in the form of a direct denunciation of U S. methods against Castro.
They stated that the United States created the problem in the first place by officially giving Castro the ""cold shoulder"" at the outset of his regime, thus driving him to seek the economic and military aid of Russia.
McDonnell called the present U S. action ""a violation of international law"" and ""piracy on the high seas,"" which are cries ominously reminiscent of those issued towards England preceeding the War of 1812.
Of Poetry Holds Meeting The United Nations of Poetry held its first meeting last Sunday night.
With Honorary President Professor Tagliabue conducting the organized confusion, the program proved to be most interesting.
Talking about the world situation and some of the functions of the United Nations, Walsh observed that out of a world population of about three billion, over half go to bed hungry every night.
The United Nations is trying to alleviate this suffering, but lacks support from countries that could well afford to contribute much more to aid underprivileged peoples.
Some economic aid is now being supplied through the United Nations, but the U N. is racing against a deadline which becomes increasingly more oppressive.
Future meetings, however, will probably be held at the Jewish Community Center on College Street.
The first item on the program was a short puppet play written by Professor Tagliabue, entitled A Halloween Puppet Play, and was performed by seven students.
Three of the students manipulated the puppets, while the other four read the parts.
After the puppet play, Professor Tagliabue read some of his own poems, with a special tribute to the late cummings.
He was assisted by John David, an admirer of the precedentsetting poet.
He pointed out that the consequences of poverty in new countries could be serious to the free world.
Speaking of the present situation in Cuba, Walsh said that he believed America had no choice but to react the way she did.
He went on to express hope that U Thant's proposal of a cooling-off period would help to solve the Cuban problem.
In conclusion he stated that the United ' Nations will not fail if every country which has a problem pertaining to world peace consults the United Nations instead of trying to solve it by war.
The area to be covered was vast and the speakers digressed at times to topics which, while related to present events merely confused the original issue of whether or not the U S. should tolerate the Russian build up in Cuba.
His remarks were presented with emotion and he stressed a deep concern over what the result of the U S. action would be.
Madel's rebuttal speech was enthusiastically received with a well-deserved ovation.
This was the point which caused the misunderstanding between the teams through most of the evening.
In his closing remarks, Blum pointed out that the United States, after seventeen years of ""backing up,"" has finally taken a stand and we can not change our course.
He said that we must take a stand now, for to take one later would more likely result in war.
He noted that due to the distance of the blockade from Soviet bases, Russia might defend her shipping with nuclear weapons.
Ahern delivered the final rebuttal and stated that the opposition had failed to disprove the facts and arguments presented by the Bates team.
Bates Names Candidates For Graduate Fellowship ""Carolyn Berg, David Hosford, and John R Wilson will represent Bates in nationwide competition for the Woodrow Wilson Fellowship,"" Dean Healy announced recently.
The size of the college determines the number of candidates for Woodrow Wilson Fellowships; the Danforth Foundation selects recipients from two candidates nominated by each college.
Dean Healy, together with a faculty committee nominates candidates according to instructions from the national foundations.
Both fellowships require that the candidate intend to teach at the college level.
Bates College has nominated winners of both fellowships in the past and hopes to do so again.
Students who wish to enter college teaching should investigate opportunities for fellowships and inter-departmental work.
Give To UNICEF At Dinner Today Celebrate Halloween by giving lo the United Nations Children's fund.
Tonight there will be a CA member sitting by the entrance of both Rand and Commons to collect your contributions.
Here is a chance for each Bates student to support the activities of the UN, the organization in which the hope of the world now rests.
Join with millions who are giving to UNICEF tonight. m >t2 TWO BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 31, 1962 Fullbright Winner Talks On ""Turn Toward Peace' Robert Pickus, former OSS man in Asia, and representative of the ""Turn Toward Peace"" organizations throughout the country, was Monday's Chapel speaker as well as guest of the Campus Organization for Peace Education at 4 o'clock Monday afternoon.
Pickus, formerly a Fullbright scholar in the Middle and Far East, is known to those studying the problems of peace as one of the more creative and effective men in the peace movement.
Mr Pickus and his colleagues have in the past and will continue in the future to bring to light information that can have a profound effect on our attitudes concerning peace and international understanding.
Bowdoin Movies The Brunswick Film Society began its 1962-63 season on Thursday, October 25, with the presentation of Hiroshima, Mon Amour.
Season tickets for the remainder of the season are on sale, and may be obtained by mailing a self-addressed, stamped envelope with $3.00 enclosed, to Mrs.
The Seventh Seal, Sweden, Ingmar Bergman, Wednesday, November 14; The Ghost Goes West, England, 1936, Rene Clair, Thursday, December 13; The Love Game, France, 1960, Thursday, January 17; Gate of Hell, Japan, 1954, Wednesday, February 13; My Little Chickadee, United States, Thursday, March 14; The World of Apu, India, Wednesday, April 17; Casablanca, United States, 1942, Wednesday, May 8.
Notice Oxford-Bates The complications presented by recent events broadened the field to such an extent that the debators found it difficult to arrive at common issues to debate.
Both teams showed much preparation and the presentation of their arguments was well executed.
The men from Oxford showed a marked deviation from the traditional style in English debating, which is usually characteriezd by humor throughout the course of the debate.
On this point the gentlemen of Oxford should be commended for taking an appropriate attitude toward a most serious problem.
Residents of Hampden County, Massachusetts, are eligible for the Walter S Barr Fellowships made available by the Trustees of the Horace Smith Fund.
The grants are for the scholastic year 1963-64 in the total amount of $5000.00 for advanced study or research.
As a rule, the fellowship awards will be not less than $1000.00; they will be made for one year, with the expectation that they will be continued if it seems warranted.
Candidates who look forward to careers of definite social usefulness are preferred; these careers might be in politics, in scientific research, in teaching, in the ministry and in other learned professions.
The fellowships will be awarded on the basis of the scholastic records of the candidates, of financial resources available to them and of all other pertinent information.
Preference will be given to those who have not had previous professional experience, particularly those now in junior classes.
Application forms are available in the Guidance and Placement Office and must be submitted by January 15, 1963.
The New England Mutual Life Insurance Company offers a summer seminar program which combines a practical job with weekly seminars to introduce you to the life insurance industry.
The company is looking for men with general administrative or mathematical ability interested in a career in life insurance.
All interested students should sign up immediately at the Guidance and Placement Office.
He first read in the original dialect, and then translated into English.
These meetings, held once a month, usually consist of poetry readings and a short play.
Next month's offering will be a production of The Lesson, by Eugene Ionesco.
By PETER J GOMES '65 As the academic period rears once again its ugly but necessary head on the campus, and the Bates studentry is forced to enjoy the stifling calm of the sneaker-ridden gymnasium, the Bates C.A. offers an antidote to the pressures and anxieties of the times in its programs of weekly Wednesday evening vespers.
The C.A. conducts vespers every week the college is in session, providing a quiet hour of personal and private communion for students who desire to escape from the noise of the dorm, the hush of the libe, or the confusion of the campus in general for one half hour each week.
The service consists of organ music, and three short readings designed to assist the worshipper in his quest.
Here the act of worship is as simple or complex as the worshipper himself wishes it to be.
Vespers was designed and initiated by Bates students some years ago to fill a need and provide an atmosphere in which the religious sympathies of the students could be expressed in the manner the student desired them to be expressed, an atmosphere which was not provided by any of the ordained services of the college in the chapel.
This is still the primary function and purpose of the Wednesday evening services.
From time to time, all of us need to remove ourselves from the pressure of ""academic continuity"" and ""Denism"", and seek a bit of spiritual refreshment, not of the pulpit style, but of the personal form, not of the ritualistic, but of the simple, not of the pomp, but of peace.
Wednesday evening vespers' sole reason for existence is to offer this refreshment.
Someone once said in a gracious invitation to a similar service nearly two thousand years ago, ""Come when you can, leave only when you must Professor Singh Speaks To Social Science Conference Bates College was host for the Maine Conference of Social Scientists on Thursday, October 25, 1962.
The program for the delegates to the conference was managed by Professors Thumm and Williams.
This conference is an annual affair held at one of the colleges in the state.
The delegates are teachers and professors, economists and professional authorities on political science from the entire state of Maine.
Political science determines political events by using precedent and law as bases.
Anne Bancrofl Patty Duke fliiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiniiii^ The first afternoon meeting, held from 3:00 to 4:00 consisted of a welcome to Bates by the Dean of Faculty, George R Healy.
Augusta, Main 3 BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 31, 1962 THREE Politically Minded French Students Demonstrate Concern For Algeria By DAVID COMPTON '63 Perhaps some of you have recently read that France is now on the brink of another crisis.
Parliament had succeeded in pink-slipping the premier, and now the attack is turning on De Gaulle himself, who threatens, if he does not get the support he wants in the upcoming referendum, to resign the Presidency, leaving France in the state from which he rescued it in 1958.
We had hoped, for a time, that France had finally found herself a stable government.
Until the spring of this year De Gaulle had been bragging that the Fifth Republic had had only one premier, contrasted with the dozen or so under the Fourth Republic.
Nowhere is this or any state of affairs, better reflected than in the French student, especially the student in Paris.
When American students get together, talk usually turns to what one did last Saturday night, the World Series, or the English test next week.
Sometimes it may seem to the foreigner in France that the life of the French student centers around politics.
That is what he talks about when he gets together for a pot with some of his friends at the end of a class.
Almost any day one may see the cafes along the Boul Mich crowded with students busily tearing apart the government and pasting it back together again over a demi.
The French student is usually quite well defined in his likes and dislikes.
He likes to talk, he likes American music and American slang and American pinball machines.
At a rather early age his political likes and dislikes are also well defined, in his thoughts.
It gives one rather a shock to see a student standing on a street corner selling a com munist student newspaper.
But you can get used to almost anyScholar dollars travel farther with SHERATON HOTELS STUDENTFACULTY DISCOUNTS Save on the going prices of going places at Sheraton Hotels.
Special save-money rates on singles and greater savings per person when you share a room with one, two or three friends.
These groups often have as much political influence as a lobby would here.
Several times, coming out of the Student restaurant, I was given handbills, sponsored by one party or another.
They called for a manifestation of all students at a specified locale, at a specified time, for a specified purpose.
Usually the time was after classes before dinner, the locale was the Place de la Bastille, and the reason was the Algerian crisis.
The students weren't too happy about what was going on in Algeria, and how the problem was being handled by De Gaulle.
Unfortunately, a manifestation in Paris usually results in something like a semi-controlled riot.
I went out to watch it, and was severely criticized for that sottise afterwards.
Students, workers, and shop owners were massed by the thousands on the Boulevard Beaumarchais, one of the large streets leading to the Place de la Bastille.
Another group was assembled at Boulevard Richard Lenoir, and was trying to join the others.
The Paris police had cordoned off all of the streets leading to the Place and were trying to keep the groups apart.
But there are too many side streets in that area, and after a few abortive attempts, the entire group managed to assemble on the Boulevard.
It was a long time before they broke up, but not before smashing a lot of windows and a police wagon which was left on the street.
I learned soon after that it was HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER 73 Lisbon St.
Lewiston better not to involve oneself in these student demonstrations.
He is, for example, willing to interest himself to a far greater extent in things which concern his country than is the American student.
I found that one of the best ways to meet students was simply to enter a cafe and start playing a pinball machine.
Pretty soon, you'd have a coaching staff clustered around you, from one interested student to half a dozen.
Sometimes he studies, but he'd rather do his reading during the day and just before exams.
He prefers to gather with his copains around the small fairs which one finds in all seasons scattered all over Paris.
But he has learned to accustom himself to many things which we Americans would find annoying at least and terrifying at worst, with the result that he is far less apathetic than the average American student.
He has lived through gov ernments which change every two weeks or so; he lives in city which was recently shaken every day by bombings.
He has learned to live through the greves de transport, or transportation strikes which occur almost every week.
Not finding any of his friends in the cafes, he may simply go down into the subway.
They exit cursing the street cleaning department for its negligence."" — from A Cool Million.
The job is a circulation stunt and the whole staff considers it a joke.
He welcomes the job, for it might lead to a gossip column, and anyway he's tired of being a leg man.
He too considers the job a joke, but after several months at it, the joke begins to escape him.
He sees that the majority of the letters are profoundly humble pleas for moral and spiritual advice, that they are inarticulate ex pressions of genuine suffering.
He also discovers that his correspondents take him seriously For the first time in his life, he is forced to examine the values by which he lives.
This examination shows him that he is the victim of the joke and not its perpetrator."" — from Miss Lonelyhearts.
Nathaniel West wrote during the confused and disillusioned time of the late twenties and early thirties.
His condensed, im passioned style, a style that grasps the deepest of feelings and, with simple honesty, expresses these feelings unceremoniously, makes clear to the reader that the Great Depression was not wholly economic.
The book is satirical, and does have a number of ironic laughs It is a satire of the Depression, of the prejudices and suspicion that grew out of fear, and is a condemnation that is delivered with the false smile of satiric irony.
The satire ceases to have humor, but becomes so ruthlessly savage it hammers rather than pin-pricks.
West's obsession with the inherent tragedy that is painfully revealed in a ""sick joke"" (the result of selfishness and insensitivity) reaches its most vivid and complete expression in his best work, Miss Lonelyhearts.
The theme of this novel is stated by ""Miss Lonelyhearts"" himself in making dates, because the girl can't get away between stops.
If he is a little short of cash, he simply brings his guitar with him and sings in the corridors for a few francs.
When he's chased out by the officials, he boards the train and rides to another stop.
He can't stand the responsibility of his position, and he strikes out in anger at the suffering before him.
Here, instead of pity and fear as in tragic catharsis, there is pity and rage.
The accidental suffering of the frog was a result of his own doing, but he refuses to acknowledge the fact that it suffered because of what he did, as if the frog had no right to ""blame"" him.
The tragedy of the people he replies to in his column are like the frog; they suffer and he can only answer them with unfeeling, stereotyped advice.
He feels anger because he knows he can't help them, and one of the main reasons that he can't is because of his own suffering.
The replies he writes in his column become a distorted reality for him, and he finds it all but impossible to have any true and positive feeling for others, especially in his ""love"" relationships with women.
Only once does he come close to a guiltless experience — that when he and his girl friend Betty go off into a dream-escape into the country.
But he can't forget what lies back at the city, and he realizes that he can't ignore or push out of his mind the reality of those letters of suffering.
No more does he treat the pleas with superficiality; but when he finally achieves his Christ-like love, he, like the ""hero"" of A Cool Million, Lemuel Pitkin, is killed.
Although dreams were once powerful, they have been made puerile by the movies, radio and newspapers.
A trinket shop rather than a bookstore, suffering from a surplus of beer mugs and a paucity of paperbacks, it succeeds only as a textbook supply house.
Jacobs, sympathizes with the efforts of -those who in the past have attempted to reorganize the store.
Proposals have been proffered to the administration, but have not borne fruit.
Presently the Student Governments are organizing a committee to examine the situation and suggest improvements; with student and faculty support this committee may succeed.
The bookstore should be so reorganized as to eliminate the glass counters and the useless window between the store and the Den.
The sweatshirts and other paraphernalia, as was suggested in last week's editorial, could easily be kept in stock and displayed upon request.
Removing the glass counters and extending the textbook shelves would liberate the entire store.
If all the wall space were designed with bookstore owned shelves (thus eliminating the need to carry one company's books in certain racks) the cluttered center aisle could be cleared and rearranged.
The course books, now kept hidden behind the counter, should be available on display to those not taking the courses.
There are hundreds of interesting and stimulating paperbacks which the store does not carry.
How many students realize that downtown Lewiston offers a paperback store which makes the Bates store look like a kindergarten library.
Rows and rows of books, displayed open-faced, from mysteries to Plato, line the aisles of this Lewiston store, p The bookstore is inadequate.
The increase of paperbacks has priced books within the realm of most students' finances.
No convincing arguments have been advanced against the suggested changes in the past.
Perhaps the powers that be need only witness student and faculty interest before acting.
Faculty Advisor David A Nelson Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, duringthe college year.
Entered as second-class matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar.i, 1879.
A member of the Associated Collegiate Press. f Letters To The Editor The Editor Bates Student I would like to offer the following comment on the recent editorial and letters to the editor concerning Cuba.
Robert Burns felt it would be the greatest of gifts to see ourselves as others see us.
With respect to the views on American relations with Cuba, as recently expressed by Mr Boyd and Mr Foster in this column, the problem may be the inability of others to see us as we see ourselves.
Knowing ourselves as we do we wonder why other countries do not realize our attempts to beg, bribe or bully their support against an enemy they profess to consider more ours than theirs are motivated by our concern for their freedom.
Even within our own country there are individuals suffering from this same blindness.
This inability to see that by eliminating concepts of morality and justice from the conduct of international affairs we have at last experienced the evolution of Democracy to a workable stage by elimination of the traditionally accepted weakness of the system.
It must be obvious that we cannot defend freedom against the Godless forces of Communism if we continually lose the initiative in every encounter by the hesitation and uncertainty which enmeshes those who, for one reason or another, feel obliged to confound action with questions of value.
There is no greater mistake than the assumption that acceptance of a moral code is a prelude to easy decision.
The man or nation of morality or principle is one for which every decision is a knifeedge walk.
In a way it is a triumph for ""the American Way"" to arrive at such a simple solution to a complex problem.
There is an excitement almost akin to artistic creation or scientific discovery to have arrived at such an elegant solution and find it applies not only to our own country but to other countries as well.
We can not claim to have discovered this solution for we have been claiming for years that the Russians discovered it first.
Also if we wish to adopt this strengthened position we must first give up the luxury of abusing our opposition for assuming the same posture; While the position presented by Mr Boyd and Mr Foster seems a fair rendition of current American attitude toward international affairs their presentation does suffer from this ""cake-eating"" fallacy.
In accord with the realism they favor, their argument should be followed to the end.
Some might argue that the end is less desirable than it might be, but the warmth derived from knowing you are ""really right"" is so comforting we would be silly to be diverted from our objectives by such quibbling after ends and means, values, legality and morality.
I submit to you an answer to the editorial recently published in the Student concerning hazing.
My opinions are, of course, my own, but I do feel quite confident that they reflect those of most of the other freshmen on the women's side of campus If the opinion expressed that ""becoming an upperclassman provides ability to discern what is best for the freshmen"" is accurate, then I'm afraid I have grossly misinterpreted the function of hazing, and, similarly, I have missed its sole intent, that of being dictated to.
Unfortunately, the sophomores I was in contact with during hazing had but one thought in mind, namely that of getting to know more about me as an individual; my sense of humor, philosophy on such profound subjects as men, college, free love, and my reactions to handling blindfolded numerous dissected elements from a cow.
I benefitted greatly in being able to demonstrate my personality to the upperclassmen in our dorm in a period of three weeks, whereas normally it might have taken a full year before my many idiosyncrasies were understood and tolerated by all.
I am truly sorry that three of my classmates were admitted to the infirmary after undergoing the ordeals of hazing, but I'm uncertain as to whether it was the hazing activities that induced it, or other factors.
If hazing on the women's side reached such manifest proportions of physical harm, I have yet to hear of it.
The upperclassmen's bad taste is definitely among the minority, and, similarly, the freshmen who received bodily harm (as I am led to believe) are few compared to the many who were spared the sadistic tortures of the sophomores.
I feel that the friends one finds and the acquaintances one makes during the course of hazing more than makes up for the few interrupted evenings and one day of haphazard concentration during classes.
I'm for it, all the way, and if we frosh as next year's sophomores can do as good a job for our freshmen as our upperclassmen have done for us, they will benefit from hazing as much as I have.
Freshman Orientation oyer the years has been a very cofrtroversial subject and we feel that a To All Bales Students: After much blood, sweat, and tears, most of which could have been avoided, the 19621963 WRJR Fund Drive has drawn to a close.
As you may know, operation of a radio station for one year is an expensive proposition.
We set a goal of $1,000 this year; our minimum to remain broadcasting was $600.
Friday, the official end of the' Fund Drive, WRJR had obtained less than the $600.
It is only thanks to two concerned students that we were able to reach our minimum amount.
I am sorry to report at this time it looks like WRJR will have to curtail some of its more expensive activities for the coming year.
We sincerely hope, though, we shall be able to maintain the high quality you are used to.
On behalf of the Executive Board and staff of WRJR, I would like to sincerely thank all those who helped to keep your campus radio station on the air for the next year.
A special congratulations to the winning dorm — Mitchell House — for their tremendous effort; also, to Bob Borland who won the free record album.
Any contributions anytime in the future will be most appreciated, for WRJR is still far from being completely financially well off.
Sincerely, Robert L Livingston '63 Station Manager small minority have expressed at various times a view not held by the great majority.
Few will deny that bibs and beanies are a very essential part of maintaining the friendly atmosphere of Bates.
We feel that every part of Freshman Orientation laid out by the Student Governments has a definite purpose and meaning.
For example, the time between ten and eleven each night when the girls have to be in their rooms is a time for each Frosh to get to know her roommate better.
Also, being into bed by eleven requires them to organize their study habits and > provides a good night's sleep.
There are only four times during the three week period that are exception to this rule.
We also feel, where all the classes are urged to participate in the Orientation parties, that they go a long way to create dorm spirit.
The parties give the girls a chance to show their originality and ability in the quick preparation of skits.
The overwhelming majority of Bates women regard these first weeks as some of the most memorable of their college careers.
Orientation is a way for the upperclassmen to show the Frosh that college is not all studying — a social as well as an academic experience.
A bearded lecturer-poet drawing lazily on his pipe, legs outstretched, was waiting expectantly for the first idea to be tossed out by one of the eight students who hoped that the sheer intensity of their stares would inspire them with fresh ideas.
The tutorial, that peculiar product of English education, had its roots at Oxford and Cambridge.
While ""Oxbridge"" still maintains a ratio of about two students per tutor, the tutorial Manchester style has from four to twenty students.
The discussions can be heated and stimulating or boring and a ""fag"" as my English iriends would often refer to them.
The value of a tutorial for the individual student depends on the popularity of the topic under discussion, the tutor's ability to inspire interest in it, and the student's own preparation.
Large lectures result in formality and I found them to be a handicap in making contacts with both students and lecturers.
I'm sure that one of my tutors did not know the names of the ten students gathered around him.
Of course I speak on the basis of only ttuo tutors and my limited experience in one department of one university.
In addition to the tutorial, there are many other differences which distinguish a Manchester university education from our own.
Readers, senior lecturers, lecturers, assistant lecturerers make up the rest of the staff.
De-centralization is the norm with students applying for admission to the department of their choice rather than to the university as a whole.
Exams are given at the most twice a year; quizzes, daily check-ups, and other such aids are non-existent.
Anxiety drives them to sedatives, therapy, and unseemingly panting after the diploma that wins white-collar status.
I found that the Manchester university student was rather nonchalant about his education.
He was unrushed, relaxed, and more passive than his American counterpart.
There was not as much concern for the grade — for that sought after A, but more often found C The English students are relatively undisturbed by the stifling competitive atmosphere of the race for the highest grade which is becoming a prize source of motivation in our own universities.
Although I have enumerated a few of the latter that do exist at Manchester, I'm sure that for me the benefits outweighed the disadvantages.
Discussing English literature, with English tutors, and English students in tutorial enabled me to gain the English point of view.
The most important contribution that the tutorial system can make is to stress individual thought and expression of ideas.
Many of them know more about American history and government than I do.
The French student, more than the American, seems to know what he's doing and where he's going.
It seems to me that the American student could use a little of this same attitude.
Chute Explains Research Under Grant; Mentions Peace Movement Activities By ROBERT BORLAND '66 After many years of study and instruction in various sections of the country from Maine to California, Dr.
He was born in J^aples, Maine and attended the university of Maine where he majored in zoology.
He is presently head of the division of biology, geology, and mathematics at Bates College.
To determine the effect of host hibernation and reduced host body temperature upon natural and experimental infections with animal parasites.
To determine the seasonal variation of incidence of infection with animal parasites in hibernating mammals.
To investigate the physiological and biochemical basis for the adaptation of hibernators to their hosts.
Chute lives with his wife and two children in Turner, a small town north of Auburn, where he plans to do some duck hunting and sailing.
An avid poet for some twenty years, he has composed a great number of works.
Many of his poems are being published and some of his compositions can be seen in Bitter Root which is a new literary journal.
There he headed a faculty group which took part in the famous Washington Demonstration.
Nancy Marshall '65 and John Olson '65; Cilia Bonney '65 and Doug Finley '65.
Lloyd Lux sparked a drive to make Physical Education courses academically respectable in the early fifties and sixties, the Physical Education Department sparked a drive for a new set of facilities with equal zeal in the early twenties.
Many visitors to our campus notice the facilities bordering Franklin Street because they are there, and the underclassmen notice them because they cannot escape the P E. requirements.
However, the Cage has a history perhaps unique among the buildings on the college campus.
In 1922, a special issue of the Bates Alumni Bulletin carried the completed plans for the complex to replace the old Gymnasium, which was then located just behind Hathorn Hall on the area that is now a plateau.
It was evident even then that such a building could not be started without a substantial amount of money.
Its sides were each one and one-half times the altitude of Mount David and the floor space would accomodate five Roger Williams Halls.
Luckily, William Bingham II of Bethel, Maine, came to the rescue and at the 61st Commencement in 1925 pledged $150,000 to build what was to be called the Clifton Daggett Gray Gymnasium Building.
On a windy wintry morning in Demember, 1925, the cornerstone for the new building was laid.
All through the winter the area opposite JB looked like something out of the Crimean War, as a small army of men accompanied by seventeen dump carts, each drawn by two horses, labored to get the new plant ready.
With amazing speed the project neared completion so that by the following June, at Commencement, visitors could be shown through the newest of the Bates buildings.
Indeed, the previous graduates were well on their way to completing their campaign to raise one million dollars for the new complex.
The company also included a thirtypiece student orchestra, directed by Professor Crafts, now Professor Emeritus of Music.
The building has seen great moments in Bates indoor track history, it has been host to rallies and field events, served as training areas for countless numbers of Phys Ed classes, and provided indoor P E. areas unmatched in a college of Bates' size.
Also, at a time when the Little Theater was years in the future, the cage provided some of the most succe'ssful musical entertainment ever staged at Bates in connection with the now-dear Mayoralty campaigns.
Bates Theater historians point with pride to such successes as ""Brigadoon"", 1956; and ""Carousel"" and ""Finian's Rainbow,"" in 1958, all of which drew praise from metropolitan critics.
As the cage starts on its thirty-sixth year of service to Bates athletes, Dr.
Lux again announces that much use will be made of the building, especially for indoor winter track and baseball practice.
In the original 1922 plans were provisions for a SWIMMING POOL to occupy the area now carpeted by grass behind the connecting corridor between the WLB and the cage.
Rows and rows of books, displayed open-faced, from mysteries to Plato, line the aisles of this Lewiston store.
Assistant Managing Editor Feature Editor _ Sports Editor Norman Gillespie '64 News Editor Stephen Barron '64 Business Manager Dianne Johnson '65 Exchange Editor Edward Rucci '63 Photography Editor NEWS STAFF Norman Gillespie '64, Editor; David Williams '65, Carole Murphy '63, Assistants; Peter d'Errico '65, Margery Zimmerman '64, Linda Browning '64, Martha Webb '63, Ralph Bartholomew '64, Malcolm Mills '65, Judy Harnden '66, Phyllis Schendel '66, Richard Rosenblatt '66, Allen Cummings '66.
Letters To The Editor The Editor Bates Student I would like to offer the following comment on the recent editorial and letters to the editor concerning Cuba.
While the position presented by Mr Boyd and Mr Foster seems a fair rendition of current American attitude toward international affairs their presentation does suffer from this ""cake-eating"" fallacy.
Freshman Orientation over the years has been a very cbfrtroversial subject and we feel that a small minority have expressed at various times a view not held by the great majority.
After much blood, sweat, and tears, most of which could have been avoided, the 19621963 WRJR Fund Drive has drawn to a close.
The discussions can be heated and stimulating or boring and a ""fag"" as my English friends would often refer to them.
I'm sure that one of my tutors did not know the names of the ten students gathered around him Of course I speak on the basis of only two tutors and my limited experience in one department of one university.
Readers, senior lecturers, lecturers, assistant lecturerers make up the rest of the staff, De-centralization is the norm with students applying for admission to the department of their choice rather than to the university as a whole.
He was born inJtfaples, Maine and attended the university of Maine where he majored in zoology.
Cage Nears Fourth Decade Of Service ♦Britain's fifteen universities, the shirtsleeve provincial schools that got their name from the red bricks with which most of them were built when they began as seedy local colleges in the 19th century.
Many visitors to our campus notice the facilities bordering Franklin Street because they are there, and the underclassmen notice i them because they cannot escape the P E. requirements.
A gusty winter wind did little to chill the enthusiasm as 4000 predominantly Maine fans roared their approval of the 20 to 0 Maine victory.
The Garnet Bobcat, after * electing to kick to Maine to open The Garnet Line By AL MARDEN The many who journeyed lo Orono Saturday witnessed a fine ball game and a good showing on the part of the Bobcat club, despite the final outcome.
The Hatchmen were defeated by a good club, whose record failed to indicate their potentialities.
A Student headline last week mentioned the Black Bears as an improving clubhand that they were.
The Orono club jelled in time for its second series, State Series, and are now solid favorites to retain the title they annexed last year.
Looking back at the game, and it is always easy to do this, the 'Cats played well with the exception of a few shoddy pass coverage situations in the secondary.
In addition, the line and secondary held the Black Bears when the homeclub had a first and goal situation inside their own five yard line.
Another indication of the superior play of the outweighed Bates line was the fact that Maine fullback Bill Chard was forced to go over the line on his score from one yard out, as the fired up Garnet forward wall gave him no hole through which to score.
The pathetic lack of an offense and shoddy secondary play accounted for the Hatchmen's second defeat in six games.
The visitor's attacking forces could, only muster a total gain of 92 yards as the famed spread, which had befuddled Maine the year before, failed.
Of the seven first downs gained by the Lewiston club, three came on first and five situations as the Westerman club was offside.
A reversal in form must be shown this coming Saturday as the Bowdoin club, winners of their initial Series tilt last week, are stingy defenders.
In addition, the secondary's pass defense must be sharpened up as Bowdoin has a fine qb-end combination in Harrington and Drigotas.
It will be a long week of practice sessions for the Hatchmen this week.
What must be worked on most is getting the squad up for the two coming tilts.
The burden for this task falls upon the coaching staff and team leaders.
If this year holds true to form the seven seniors on this year's squad will wind up their career never having won a State Series game.
A 6-2 record and possible share in the Series title is a lot more impressive than a 4-4 record.
It must show 500% better support than it did last Friday night when the worst (this seems to be a year for superlatives) rally in the four years I've attended Bates was put on.
Not only was this rally distinctive by its lack or absence of planning, but also by its lack of attendance.
In addition to the mass exodus on the part of many students, the remaining few on campus never made it over to the cage.
The team and participants in the rally outnumbered those in attendance.
Perhaps it was because of the lack of publicity for the affair, but certainly the sound of a bass drum marching through the campus is indicative of something more than a wandering minstrel.
It will be a challenge for those running it to make it worthwhile, and to get the apathetic studentry to attend.
THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES the first half, took over inside the Black Bear's fifty yard line as soph linebacker Steve Ritter recovered a Maine fumble.
The 'Cats, working out of Coach Hatch's spread formation, seemed bound for paydirt as Tom ""Boxcar"" Carr pounded the middle of the Maine line for good yardage.
With a first down inside the Maine forty, the Garnet offense bogged down when an illegal procedure penalty forced Bates to punt.
Bates stalled Maine's offense, but Black Bear quarterback Ray Austin's booming punt rolled dead on the Garnet four.
Deep in the shadow of their own goalpoasts, the Garnet offense was never able to open up its attack.
Line Helps The Black Bears were surging back as Paul Planchon's punt rolled out on the Bates 45 to open the second period.
Bill Chard, the sparkplug of the Maine ground assault all afternoon, was good for short yardage and a big fifteen yard personal foul penalty against Bates moved Maine to the Bates 3 yard line where the fired up Hatchmen again halted the Maine drive.
A wobbly boot gave Maine the ball again, this time on the Bates 37, and the Black Bears were knocking on Mr Touchdown's door for the third time.
Moving through the air and on fullback Chard's short rushes the Bears seemed to finally run out of steam on the Bates fifteen.
Faced with a fourth down, nine yards to go situation Maine quarterback Tom Austin found halfback Dave Brown all alone with his bullseye pass and the Black Bears had their first score.
The Garnet again kicked to Maine to open the second half and after holding the Black BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Bears, the Maine kicking game, so important in keeping Bates deep in its own territory, again gave the Garnet the ball in the shadow of their own goal posts.
Fullback Chard hurtled over the piled up Bates line just far enough before he was hurled back to give Maine touchdown number two 9:65 deep in the second half.
Maine Line Tough Key interceptions and the superior Maine kicking game For the first time this season stalled the 'Cats as they sought | Bobcat of the Week laurels have vainly to put together a sustained scoring drive in face of the hard charging Maine line.
Black Bear fullback Don Darrah stole a 'Cat aerial on the Bates 23 and on the first play form scrimmage, substitute quarterback Dave Lippard hit second team halfback Dick Shaw for the touchdown.
Roger Boucher's try for the extra point was no good after two previous successful ones and the Black Bear had downed the Bobcat 20 to 0 and was off and running in defense of its state series crown.
Penalties 6-50 3-25 Fumbles 5 1 Opponents recovered 1 3 been garnered by a soccer player, he being Bob Lanz.
The former Deerfield Prep school booter rifled two shots past the Brandeis goalie to pace the 'Cat squad to a mild upset over the Waltham, Mass., school.
Much speculation and comment came over the fact that Bob was not selected as 'Cat of the Week following his four goal output against Nichols.
The decision was based on the fact that Nichols is a weak team and in the light of the outstanding gridiron performance turned in by Paul Planchon.
The modest sophomore also disclaimed the fact that he is first in New England in scoring because of the schedule we play, saying that if Harvard played our, schedule Oharii would have eighty goals.
Aspirants to the squad have been practicing nightly in the Alumni Gymnasium in preparation for the upcoming season.
Although the score is heavily in favor of the Maine squad, it must be pointed out that this Maine team is considered to be one of the best in New England this year.
Ellis of Maine won, breaking the course record held by Eric Silverberg.
The only boys to finish for Bates were Silverberg in seventh and Mike Gregus in eighth.
This is clearly evident when it is observed that all of our runners bettered their times by an average of 30 seconds.
In first place was Wolf of U.N.H., whose time of 20:35 was only 14 seconds off the Franklin Park course record.
Following the second place U.N.H. runner Rencou was Bates' Silverberg, whose time of 20:35 was only 35 seconds off the winning pace.
In commenting about these two meets, Coach Slovenski was high in his praise for the Bates squad.
In regard to the losses to Maine and New Hampshire, Walt pointed out that the Bobcats generally have strong New England state universities included in their schedule, and these schools are consistently good in cross-country.
He was also happy with the number of students who turned out for the Maine meet, and reported that the new campus course worked out well for the onlooking spectators.
He also indicated that a good cheering section of Bates students would be helpful this Friday at 3:00, when the Garnet meets rival Bowdoin.
Coach Slovenski regards Bowdoin as a good team, that Bates will have its hands full.
The 'Cats drew first blood as Bob Lanz took a pinpoint pass from George Beebe and rifled a drive past the Colby goalie with only 12 seconds gone in the game.
The Garnet squad's play was characterized by good defensive work and capitalization on the few scoring opportunities allowed by the fancy passing Judges.
Bob Lanz added to his New* England scoring title by notching two goals, the winning goal com ing early in the first period, and the final score being added in the fourth frame by the hard shooting sophomore.
Senior Lee Nute added the second goal with a fine shot coming after Lanz's initial goal in the first period.
The defense minded Bobcat club yielded only a dozen shots at goalie Don Mawhinney, who handled all the Brandeis scoring threats with ease.
Playing outstanding defensive games for the Bates squad were fullbacks Bob Thompson and Todd Lloyd, and game captain George Beebe who kept the Garnet attack going with some excellent head-balls.
Lanz led the offensive forces with able assistance from wing Lloyd Bunten.
One difficulty experienced was that the Bates forces often failed to coordinate an attack.
The welldrilled Judges dominated play with their short passing attack but the Garnet defense kept the homeclub's offense show at midfield.
The Somervillemen seek revenge of a 4-1 loss inflicted by Bowdoin Friday as the Polar Bear booters invade Garcelon Field.
The Brunswick booters came storming back from a 1-0 Former Ail-American Has Copped Three State Titles By AL WILLIAMS Attitude and ability in that order are the keystones on which Walt Slovenski has built an impressive track record at Bates.
Walt's biggest thrills since coming to Bates were his first State Series Championship in 1957 (the first for Bates since 1912) and two thrilling home indoor victories over the strong Black Bears from Orono before a packed, cheering fieldhouse.
Walt started his athletic career Wali Slovenski at a small high school in Cherry Tree, Pennsylvania.
He was nicknamed ""Slivers"" by a coach who couldn't pronounce Slovenski.
After high school he went to Seton Hall Preparatory School where he gained national acclaim winning the national Prep school broad jump in Madison Square Garden.
All -American After one semester at Syracuse, Walt was called into the Navy.
After his sojourn with Uncle Sam, Slovenski returned to Syracuse where he gained athletic fame.
He became the first and only Orangeman to be chosen an Ail-American in baseball.
Despite the rewriting of the record book by Jimmy Brown, Slovenski's name still appears under total punt returns and pass interceptions.
Walt's record in track has been phenomenal, considering the male enrollment.
His record in dual tracks approaches ninety per cent and his teams have annexed the state series in 1957, 1958, and 1960.
In picking his all-time greats Walt stressed that his selections were based on attitude and contributions to the team as well as ability.
Bill Neuguth, captain of the 1958 team might well exemplify the use of track manpower at Bates.
Bill was ""discovered"" in gym class and after an awkward start became a star in the hurdles.
Secondly the officials at home meets tend to keep the track meet moving and this contributes to high spectator interest.
The fact that 10% of the student body are out for one form of track or another emphasizes the third point — utilization of the track potential at Bates.
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, the student interest is as high as in any other school in New England.
Winning season or not, there are always large turnouts in the cage and at home meets, according to the track mentor. deficit in the two clubs' initial outing to hand the Bates booters their first defeat.
IMPORTANT NOTICE There will be a brief meeting of all junior varsity and varsity track squad candidates today at 5:30m. in the Bates field house.
A The big thing nowadays for W.A.A. is the hockey Playday coming up November 17.
Teams from Colby and Maine will come here for the day; the games will be played on the field next to J.B., and all spectators will be welcome.
Miss Nell puts the squad through the usual drills of corners, drives, wings, tackles, and when there are enough people we play a game.
Because of age and a few other frailities, the senior women are beginning to fade.
Those still hanging on are Pokie Kestila, Sue Hermann, Les Jones, Nancy Mamrus, Ginny Erskine, and Judy Warren.
Judy Dietz, Penny Brown, Pris Clark, Bonnie Mesinger, Barb Remick, Sue Pitcher, Anne Cawley, and Pauline Spence.
STate 2-3771 4* EIGHT BATES STUDENT, OCTOBER 31, 1962 Once Winning Polar Bears Face Bobcats Here In Toss -Up Battle Saturday the Bobcats will clash on Garcelon field with an underrated Bowdoin College football team.
Some sports writers rate the Polar Bears as a dark horse candidate for the Maine State Series title.
Their four defeats came at the hands of Tufts, Wesleyan, Amherst and Williams, all formidable opponents.
Building Year This is a building year for head coach Nels Corey as he lost 12 lettermen through graduation.
Coach Corey has had to build a team from 13 returning lettermen and some promising underclassmeen.
The Polar Bear offense is built around the running of junior halfback Bob Hooke.
Hooke was a key reserve on last year's club for whom he averaged 3. yards per carry.
This year the Polar Bears depends a great deal on Hooke's performances.
A native of Beverly, Mass., Ryan is the steady type of ball player who gets the job done and makes no mistakes.
Bob Harrington of Danvers, Mass., will probably start at quarterback for the Polar Bears.
Defense Strong The strongest part of Bowdoin's game is defense, though, and it is their line play which has kept them in most of their ball games.
Co-captain Joe Hickey will hold down one tackle slot for the Polar Bears.
Hickey, a native of Longmeadow, Mass., started at center for the Polar Bears the past two years.
The SimitramOTal Seeini© By DON DELMORE The final two games in the Intramural Football regular season play resulted in forfeit wins for Roger Bill over Smith South in the ""B"" league, and again for Roger Williams over Smtih North in the ""C"" division. victories These two forfeit bring us to the post-season playoff period.
Dual niter makes the difference J DUAL FILTERl QTCytOTl it our miildlr name <B » r the team emerging victorious meeting the ""A"" division leader for the Intramural Championship.
A glimpse at the final standings showed teams in two of the three leagues finishing the season with identical records.
East Parker and J.B. were tied in the ""A"" league, and East Parker, West Parker, and J.B. all had similar records in the ""C"" league.
Loaded West Parker, the class of the ""B"" division, ran away from all opposition and held undisputed possession of first place.
All of East's touchdowns were the result of passes as they capitalized on J.B.'s weak pass defense.
East will next play West Parker for the ""C"" league championship and the right to meet West Parker's ""B"" champions.
Other playoff action resulted in J.B. defeating East Parker 24-0 to reign as ""A"" league champs.
J.B.'s fast and talented backfield of Jeff Hillier, Pete Graves, Bob Blagg, and Ron Vance proved to be too much for East as each member of the quartet scored a touchdown.
The one-sided score was somewhat of a surprise after these same two squads had split two games during the regular season by 12-6 verdicts.
The playoff squads will resume action this week after being ""snowed-out"" of the games last week.
East Parker will face West Parker on Monday to settle their ""C"" league dispute.
The winner of this contest will take on West Parker of the ""B"" division on Tuesday.
The ""A"" league champ, J.B., will play the winner of Tuesday afternoon's game on Wednesday.
It all adds up to an exciting week of Intramural football — this is the part of the season for which the squads wait as now the dorms are able to pile up their Intramural points.
Tune in at the same time next week for a summary of the colorful playoff action.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, NOVEMBER 7, 1962 By Subscription Sadies Chase Abners For Dogpatch Dance Faculty Will Discuss ""Tri mester"" System By JUDY MARDEN '66 On Tuesday, November 6, a five man committee will meet to consider a plan for using the Bates campus on a year-round basis.
The committee includes Chair-* Sadies lurk in Den to prey on Abners Get ready gals; look out guys, the Sadie Hawkins Dance is this Saturday.
All you Sadies, this is your big chance to grab, hook, catch, trap, ambush, or apprehend that beautiful hunk of man you've been eyeing recently.
Better get your bid in early, girls, the dance is going to be a regular Dogpatch Holiday.
The situation may be tense for Sadie, but it is nothing compared to the nervous excitement on the opposite side of campus.
Loud speakers, pools for the ""loser"", and liquid refreshment are just a part of the elaborate preparations made when the guys find the line for a change.
There might be quite a line of would-be newlyweds, but Sam will be there until the very end, 11:45.
Howie Davison will call the dances, and the Merrimanders and Frye House girls will provide extra entertainment.
Find your craziest costume, and tickle your ingenuity into making a cool ^corsage; get your courage up and come to the wildest dance of the year. man George R Healy, and Professors Brooks Quimby, Walter H Lawrance, James V Miller, and Garold W Thumm.
They propose to study a new college calendar from the academic point of view.
Although the most practical systems seem to be the ""Trimester"" — that is, dividing the year into three semesters with one coming during the summer; or the four-quarter plan, committee member Dr.
Garold Thumm stated that the decision will not necessarily be on either of these systems, or even on a twelve month plan.
This is not the first time that the idea of keeping Bates open on a year-round basis has been considered.
In the spring of 1961, a Faculty committee discussed the pros and cons of the Trimester system, and in 1962 they discussed the plan of dividing the year into four quarters.
The arrangement was also mentioned by President Phillips in his welcome to freshmen at the fir$t assembly of Freshman Week.
He stated that under such an arrangement one-third more students could be educated in the same amount of time as now, but the student-professor ratio would not be sacrificed.
The tremendous flood of students now graduating from high school who deserve and are qualified for acceptance to college demands serious consideration of a Art Association Presents Three Day Student Exhibit A three day exhibition is scheduled by the Bates Art Association beginning this Friday, November ninth.
An Art Association member will be present to answer any questions one may have.
On Friday afternoon, November ninth, the annual session of the Bates League Discussion Contest and Debate Clinic will be held here at Bates.
An address on the United States Foreign Trade Policy by Mr Joseph Salerno, the Regional Director of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers or America, will be presented in the Little Theater at three o'clock.
Members of the debating team and the argumentation course will act as moderators in the panel discussions.
At eight o'clock there will be an exhibition debate in the Little Theater.
Morris Lelyveld '64 and Norman Gillespie '64 will argue the affirmative against the negative team composed of Norman Davis '65 and Ronald Snell '65.
The program will be concluded by a brief critique on the debate by Professor Quimby.
On Saturday, October twentyseventh the debate team sponsored a similar program at Portsmouth High School for the New Hampshire high schools enrolled in the Bates Interscholastic Debating League. eludes the efforts of students, faculty, housemothers, and friends of the college.
Goldat and Mr Walsh are among the faculty members contributing to the show, and representing the housemothers, Mrs.
Tagliabue has also created a linoleum block print used for the invitations sent to friends in the area.
The Association has, in its short three year history, expanded both in numbers and in the types of art undertaken.
In this, the largest collection of Baskin's ever assembled, were modern representations of sculpture in wood and bronze, inkings, and block prints.
Future plans include more trips and also speakers to instruct in the vast field of art techniques.
Freshmen Campaign For Class Elections} Primaries On Friday The political scene at Bates will flourish during the next few days as the freshmen elect their initial slate of officers.
The positions of president, vice-president, secretary, and treasurer are open to the entire class with as many as eight students vying for a single position.
Freshmen who sought eligibility returned the necessary petitions to Dean Boyce yesterday.
These pesitions required the signatures of twenty-five frosh to secure entrance in this Friday's primary.
As a prelude to the elections the prospective candidates will be presented to the freshman class after Friday's chapel.
Each candidate will be allowed to state his qualifications in a short speech.
After this introduction, voting will commence in lower Chase Hall and continue until 5:00m.
Following the primary contest, the three top candidates for each office will be entered in a runoff to be held next Tuesday, November 13. twelve-month system.
The present college structure cannot handle such a great number of students, and the only solution to this problem seems to be either to build new colleges or to expand the old ones.
In order to keep Bates a small college, while also providing for the education of more students, the division of the year into four parts, of which each student would attend classes for three ""quarters"", seems most practical.
Under these systems the classes would remain small enough to facilitate individual attention to each student by the professor.
A system such as this would utilize the facilities of the college which now stand idle during the summer months.
The point has been raised, however, that the expensive buildings and equipment are less expensive to maintain when not in use.
The committee must, decide whether the increase in funds obtained by using the facilities all year round would offset the maintenance costs.
To the student, perhaps the most important factor in the year-round plan is that if he wished to take on a more concentrated schedule and attend college in the part of the year during which he would ordinarily be on vacation, he could speed up his graduation.
Problems would be created by the adoption of a twelve month plan that would have to be faced.
We do not have enough students to offer every course in every period, for example.
If students were not on campus fora certain course which they needed or wanted, this would present a difficulty.
Since intercollegiate sports are established on the theory that students will be in college from September to June, scheduled athletics would have to be considered to see if programs could be readjusted.
Also, those students who enjoy sports as extracurricular activities might find themselves off campus during the season of their favorite sport.
The committee will not report to the faculty for at least several months, if at all this year.
They have given no indication as yet on how soon their decision would go into effect, should they advocate a year-round program.
The arrangement, however, is being considered more seriously than ever before, and may very well eventually affect some students now at Bates.
One had only to recognize the demeanor and choice of language to realize that here were politicians — perhaps young of age, but old with indoctrination.
In his customary manner Jeffrey Rouault '65 ran through a denunciation of the timing of the recent Presidential action on Cuba.
He pointed to the President's ""mixing of personal policy and national policy"" or in clearer terms the use of the office of President to win elections.
David Williams '65 commented briefly that he didn't think that the way to win elections was to remain in Washington and proceeded to point out the reasons for joining a political club, especially the Young Democrats.
He spoke of his party as ""the party of the future"" and then listed their past presidents to prove it.
Many will consider the following comments unfair and unnecessarily harsh.
The consideration, however, is not whether what was said was funny, but whether it was meaningful.
The questions concerning the extent of presidential politics are a relevant point.
For Williams it can be said only that he did manage to bundle together a series of cliches, a few magic words, a personal attack and enough circumlocutions to speak for ten minutes.
As a parodist of contemporary Democrats, his initial comments were humorous.
However, with the realization that this was not parody, but discourse that the speaker conceived as meaningful — with this realization came the disillusionment.
All interested students should sign up at the Guidance and Placement Office.
All interested students should see Professor Kendall, Room 303, Pettigrew Hall.
During the summer of 1963, the United States Information Agency plans to offer trainee programs in both its Broadcasting Service t (more popularly known as The Voice of America) and its Television Service.
Applicants should be pursuing college courses in such fields as Communications, Government or Foreign Language.
Information about application procedure is available in the Guidance and Placement Office.
Tuesday, November 13 New England Cross Country Club Night, SEA Student Council Elections, 9:00 to 4:00 French Club Meeting, Women's Union Camp Spruce Hill in Tolland, Massachusetts is in need of men and women counselors for the season July 1 to August 26.
Throughout the year the Guidance and Placement Office will be receiving many letters concerning available camp positions for men and women.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main Freshmen Elect Stu-GAndWAA Represen ta ti ves Last week brought to a close a round of freshman elections on the women's side of campus.
Ruth Christenson, of Plainville, Connecticut was elected as the freshman representative to StuG, the Women's Student Government.
The installation of freshmen to the honor system through the Honor Code is scheduled for this Sunday, November 11.
Prior to this date, proctors will be discussing various aspects of the honor system with the freshmen and will be answering questions which women in the class of '66 may have regarding signing of the code.
Another women's organization on campus, the Women's Athletic Association, has recently selected freshman dorm representatives for the coming year.
Chase, Tenney Bennett; Mitchell, Sue Pitcher; Frye, Ann Cawley; Hacker, Jodi Lajaunie; Milliken, Barb Remick; Wilson, Nancy Munio; Whittier, Carol Brown; Page, Joan Folcik and Cilia Brown.
The women of the class of '66 elected Ann Cawley as their WAA Board representative.
The big event looming in the near future for the WAA is the hockey sports day to be held against Maine and Colby on November 17 on Bates' own field.
The girls have been practicing for four weeks now under the direction of Miss Nell and Ginny Erskine '63.
James Stewarl; ""SASKATCHEWAN "" Alan Ladd Class Of '66 To Conduct Primary Balloting Friday During this past week there have been about thirty freshmen petitioning for offices in their coming class elections.
It is quite possible that the Bates campus has not seen such interest and enthusiasm since the nearly-forgotten days of Mayoralty.
This Friday the Class of '66 will get a chance to demonstrate their overall class spirit during the primary balloting which will be run until 3 in Lower Chase Hall.
An important freshman class meeting after Friday's chapel will precede the day's elections.
Student Council Representative: Alan Cruickshank Robert DeGregorio William Hiss George Strait Elwood Trask Class Officers President: Marshall Snow Max Steinheimer Richard Verrill Douglas White Vice President: Allen Cummings Karen Hastie John Malcolm Peter Oakes David Russell Pauline Spence Secretary: Christine Carter Carole CooperClaudia Lamberti Marion Maynard Treasurer: Robert Borland William Dye Russell Reilly Alice Kaplan John Lewis Arthur Valliere Susan Wagg Dr.
Garold Thumm spoke to the Government class on the nature of federalism, November 1.
Thumm described the federal system as a form of government characterized by a balance of political power equally distributed between the states and the central body.
Disputes Arise It is almost inevitable that disputes arise between the state and federal government as to what powers belong to whom.
A federal system is characterized by the existence of a written constitution and a court system to settle these power disputes.
In his discussion of court decisions in the mum EMPIRE NOW PLAYING SUN. MON. TUES. niiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiniiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiN CHUCK WACON^ ""■. .-'^ Orrve^ -In— Restaurant •/ r — — , 1 Sabattus 84.
Yet many supposedly federal forms of government do not exhibit clear separations of power between the two levels of government.
Because student and faculty opinion will be a deciding factor in any changes in the bookstore, a poll will be taken in a future chapel program.
Basically, the questionnaire will ask if students feel there are too many articles such as sweatshirts, jewelry, and things other than books on display.
Secondly, students will be asked if they would be satisfied if such articles were displayed only at certain times of the year, such as Back-to-Bates week-end, the beginning and the end of the school year, and before vacations.
The items would be available at all times, although not constantly taking up so much space in displays.
Asks Suggestions The poll will further try to determine how many students would buy books were there a larger selection offered.
The questionnaire will also ask for suggestions including the types of books students would be interested in buying.
The student committee investigating the bookstore has been attempting to find out how many of the complaints against the bookstore are legitimate and the easiest and most efficient way of remedying the situation.
The members of the committee are especially interested in urging those changes which will accommodate student needs.
Because the committee realizes that any changes must come through the administration, it is operating along the same lines as the successful student committee on library hours of last year.
Faculty members will be asked to fill out forms expressing either approval or disapproval of the committee's activities, and to make any suggestions they may have.
The faculty poll will be used along with the student poll to support the committee's recommendations.
Although the committee realizes that the Bates bookstore could not be expected to be on the same level with those of larger colleges and universities, other schools may be contacted for information.
Recognize Limitations The committee does not intend to make any unreasonable requests.
The members are fully aware of the limitations of space in the bookstore and the fact that there is a demand for articles other than books.
However, they also note, as reflected in the questions on the poll soon to be taken, that the demand for such articles comes at certain times of the year, and that much of the space now devoted to display of such articles could be utilized for books.
In addition, they note that many students have expressed a desire to see more books on display.
In the era of the paperback, more space devoted to books in the bookstore is essential.
In addition, glass cases for such articles as are on display are outdated.
Simply because they would be removed would not mean that these articles were unavailable.
Once again, it must be stressed that anything accomplished by this committee must be done on the basis of student support.
Those who will be called upon to complete the poll can give that support.
Each student should give it careful thought and use this method of making his influence felt.
By JOHN WILSON HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET ' JEWELER 73 Lisbon St.
Lewiston | Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 BumnnnniuimiimnRinaftn imtumtnfflinnmiiuuwiimiamniHBmBaMiuiitaKl Al Marden '63 and Bud Spector '63 browse through paperbacks at Victor News.
By JENNIFER WINGATE '64 One hundred and fifty miles separate Lewiston from Boston, the nearest cultural center.
However, before students despair at the supposed dearth of cultural opportunities in the Lewiston area, they should really take a closer look.
Located on Ash Street directly across the street from the Lewiston Post Office is Victor News This unique store carries the largest selection of paperbacks in the state of Maine.
In the showroom on the second floor of Victor's there are well over 2,000 different paperbacks on display including books put out by thirty different publishers Mentor, Premier, Laurel, Doubleday, Anchor, Bantam, Washington Square Press, Pyramid and others.
Victor's also carries hard-covered books and Barnes and Noble College Outline Series.
All types of literature ranging from cheap thrillers and westerns to the classics are included.
Victor's has tried to combine these various types of literature to satisfy many different tastes, thus making it difficult to draw a comparison between this type of bookstore and ouir own bookstore.
Victor's has two thirty-footlong, five foot high open face racks covered on both sides with paperbacks.
In addition, there are seven rotating racks and one whole wall thirty feet long and eight feet high covered with books.
In the downstairs section there is a large assortment of newspapers and magazines ranging from True Confessions to Harpers and the Atlantic Monthly.
These are also arranged in an open rack, making it easy to poke around to see what you can find.
For those students who would like to keep abreast of new publications including the current best sellers.
Victor's has a printed list of current publications and a special rack for the latest books.
If Victor's doesn't have a book immediately available, it can be easily ordered.
If the -book can be obtained from a local distributor, it can be had within twenty-four hours.
This service can be of great help for students who would like inexpensive paperbacks for term projects as well as for their own enjoyment.
He says he is glad to order books for professors as well as for students if they will come and speak to him about their needs.
While Reynolds is particularly interested in talking with seniors who might qualify for Peace Corps projects which will be manned this June, all concerned students are advised to meet with him to discuss a possible Corps future.
The greatest need continues for teachers of all subjects and levels; the Peace Corps, however, provides service opportunities in nearly every skill area.
More than 4,000 Volunteers are already at work or in training for projects in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
Plans call for nearly 10,000 Volunteers to be in service in more than 40 countries by the end of next year.
A major emphasis (faring the next year will center on community development projects in Latin America.
Volunteers, who must be American citizens with no dependents under 18, receive two to three months of intensive training at an American college or university in the customs, history, culture, and language of the chosen country.
Refresher courses cover the skills that the Volunteers will use on the job.
Additional training is generally given at the Peace Corps' training camps in Puerto Rico.
Volunteers serve for two years and receive a living allowance to cover housing, food, clothing, and other expenses, plus a termination payment of $75 for each month of service.
Despite the dire pronouncements of many skeptics that the youthful Peace Corps Volunteers could never succeed as ambassadors of this country, the Corps has been remarkably successful.
With the exception of one or two incidents, the Volunteers have acted maturely and intelligently in assisting the less fortunate in underdeveloped countries.
Although most of the Volunteers have not the polish of many of our ""ambassadors"" they do inject a vigorous America into countries which hitherto had seen only rapacious American capitalism.
In considering any action, such as writing this letter, it would appear to many that I am expressing the opinion of the Women's Student Government Board; let me hasten to say that this letter is representative of only one point-of-view — mine.
The editorial which appeared was a well-written, organized and conclusive expression of an attitude at variance with that of the majority of women on campus.
As president of Stu-G, I, personally, feel orientation was successful this year.
In support of this judgment, witness the general attitude among freshman women at the conclusion of the orientation period.
The thought underlying the editorial pertained to the general accomplishment of purpose, not the specifics.
If one can accept the word orientation and all that it implies, rather than ""hazing"" and its connotations, one can see that the ""spirit and letter of the law"" account not only for the in elusion of all frosh but also the elimination of any individually demoralizing activity.
Consider a small dorm where one particular girl becomes the brunt of upperclass activity.
These pranks could conceivably continue all year with no provision for control.
There is no dis crimination at present dependent upon personality traits; all are included, made one of the group.
The actual acceptance of orientation is a matter of personal desire; orientation can be meaningful and helpful, or tiring and a chore, dependent upon the attitude of the individual girl.
Remick Remick Unites Teaching With His Duties As Pastor By PEGGY PARTRIDGE '65 Situated across the river from Brunswick, Maine is a small town of about 4,000 known as Topsham, probably most recognized for its race track.
But Topsham has more than a race track, it also has a church, the* United Baptist Church of Topsham.
In the past year a very strange change has taken place in the church; more people than ever have been flocking to its services, its budget has increased by $10,000, and there has been a decided increase of interest and participation on the part of young adults.
The driving force behind this new development is a new, young,' energetic pastor, the Rev.
With his enthusiastic outlook, Mr Remick had already assumed his position in Topsham last year, when he was asked to come to Bates.
Realizing the need for an additional philosophy professor at Bates to help relieve the burden of Professor Joseph D'Alfonso, Mr Remick consented to teach on the Bates campus three days each week.
Maine, Mr Remick received his first formal education at Eastern College in St.
Mr Remick became interested in philosophy during his high school years, motivated by participation in debates and the idea of what forms good argument, what is right and what is wrong.
It was also during these years that he received his first taste of William Henry James.
A study of theology at Eastern Baptist Seminary in Philadelphia formed the next step in Mr Remick's education.
While fulfilling In conclusion, I feel definitely that Freshman Orientation has specific purposes which have been realized this year.
If anyone can suggest an alternative plan which would better fulfill our purposes, please feel free to share them.
A question has been raised; no alternative plan of action has been suggested.
Until one is forthcoming, Women's Student Government must conclude that the program at present is worthwhile and beneficial.
Respectfully submitted, Betty Anne Little '63 this dual role, this superman somehow found time to teach Greek at the seminary and to work as an assistant pastor at the Drexel Hill Baptist Church in Drexel Hill, Pa.
Here he studied the philosophy of religion under the famed Paul Tillich and Nels Ferre.
Having completed two years of residence work on his Ph.D. at Columbia and Union, Mr Remick was confronted with the dilemma of whether to accept a teaching position in a graduate school or to go into the church.
Because of an aversion to a large church's similarity to a ""mass of organizational machinery,"" he decided to take a small church in his home state.
Explains Mr Remick, ""I feel that compassion is far more important than creeds, and love more determinative than law.
I also have the conviction that ritual is no substitute for righteousness.
I have been given a great deal in life, and my sole purpose is to be provided with the opportunities to give as much as I have been given.
For anyone who is at all interested in contemporary theatre, Martin Esslin's The Theatre of the Absurd is an invaluable and comprehensive source of analysis, interpretation, and background.
Outlining the book, Esslin first gives an introduction to the plays to be discussed, then goes on to present in detail the lives and works of four of the major exponents of ""The Theatre of the Absurd"", Beckett, Adamov, Ionesco, and Genet.
After mentioning several lesser figures, he traces back the ""Tradition of the Absurd"" to the Roman ""mimus"" theatre, and presents the writers who have been strong influences on present drama, including Shakespeare,, Joyce, and Kafka.
One of the many theses that Esslin pronounces is that this new and contra-traditional theatre is, in essence, classical.
The new playwrights are trying to get back to the fundamental problems of Aeschylus and Shakespeare, and express them in the light of 20th century life.
They had no culteral bias as to what a play should be like— and when they saw it, they understood just what Beckett was saying to them.
They are more surrealistic reflections than philosophical problem solving.
When Beckett was asked what is the meaning of Godot, he replied, If I knew I would have said so in the play."" to find myself so susceptible td mass hysteria.
Those first few moments I believed that I saw in President Kennedy's address a premeditated and well-timed political move.
Whether the blockade was needed or not seemed beyond my immediate question, and what I believed so apparent became unutterable when faced with the horror that the courageous pronouncement foreshadowed.
Last week Jeff Rouault and I agreed that the Kennedys had considered carefully the political value of timing this statement of policy at this juncture in the 1962 campaigns.
The Kennedy administration has for weeks, possibly for months, had the information on hand.
The President, who, days before was campaigning against Republicans, claimed that they had taken too firm a stand.
One of the points of the original announcement was that Lyndon and he would stop campaigning.
Now it would be one-sided and blind of me not to admit that some move had to be made, that this had to be a bipartisan venture and have the whole-hearted support of the American people.
I am also aware that while campaigning, the President couldn't tip his hand without making the situation more dangerous.
The actions and recent statements of the administration, however, have led me to retain my first opinion, that politics influenced, in part, the Kennedy Brinkmanship.
There might be some who will argue that it is not hazardous or wrong to extract the political value from such a situation.
Being rather pragmatic myself, I am unable to discern just what is wrong with such a policy. can only state that I experienced that same vague disgust with the Kennedy timing that I did with my own lack of emotional selfcontrol.
While I reacted this way, my boyhood companion reacted somewhat differently.
Amphion AR-13 Gene's Ark 29 October 1962 A Swingin' Month For Bomb Shelters JIMBO Just thought I would drop you a few lines while I still had the chance.
I have been completely plastered since J.F.K.'s (Jobs For Kinfolk) momentous speech Monday night.
Thai's all I need after spending four glorious years participating wholeheartedly in the midst of a continuous Chinese firedrill.
Now that we have apparently made our fat friend to the east and our bearded buddy to the south (as Ol' Jacky Babe would say) back down, it will only be a matter of lime before the situation calms down and the monotonous treadmill of the cold war continues for a few more precious months.
Most of the ships have left Norfolk and we will soon be bobbing on the ocean blue.
When it reaches the point when they send for the ""Amphion"" , we're in trouble.
Tons and tons of lousy machinery to repair anything, and one average size shell will send this old tub to the bottom before I can go from ""D"" deck to ""C"" deck.
Soon I leave this land of Miss Lonelyhearls and Jack Kerouac for the land of sun and glory.
Faculty members and college libraries also eligible, when subscribing themselves.
Dual Filtermakeajhedifference DUAL FnxERTareyton ■m 3v6wo-&y><*iy Jti&xxo n ourUdit name Cii»^ S 4 six BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 7, 1962 6 And 2 In '62 Cats Cop First Series Win Since '57 The Garnet Line By AL MARDEN 1 The following quotation comes from the column of the Sports Editor of The Colby Echo, the Colby school newspaer.
They've come up with a small-type freshman fullback , and the gentleman has tallied seven times in four games to lead all state scorers.
The Bobcats never have performed well against top competition, and look what we did to them last year.
The eight seniors on the squad remember the past three years when the same Garnet team that did so well against Maine would allow an inferior Mule club to run wild over us.
They remember the 47-0 whitewashing inflicted on them last year but a Colby club that was crying to use freshmen.
They did dress freshmen for the game although they tried to save face by not using them against the Hatchmen.
They remember well opposing players, in many cases of far lesser ability, taking them out play after play.
Finally, we have a team, you have two individuals, that is the difference, Mr Sports Editor.
Maybe you wrote them after having spent a long night in your fraternity moaning over your team's losses.
This Saturday will be another long night in your fraternity, unless you find cause to celebrate that the season is over.
It is also often said that our campus is one of the most beautiful in the country.
Those who watched last Friday's Bowdoin cross-country meet will attest to the above two statements.
I watched from my English class deep in the recesses of Pettigrew Hall.
Others watched from similar vantage points, while others followed the team around the course.
As the harriers made the circuit around Andrews pond their plodding images were echoed in the mirror-like surface of the pond.
First, that he moved the course where the meet could be viewed by more campus spectators; and secondly that he included a trip around the pond on the course so that such a sight was made possible.
Although the Bates booters covered themselves with glory by their fine showing against Bowdoin last Friday some of their members on the bench and some of their fans in the bleachers did not.
That an official should have to warn members of a varsity squad to ""keep their comments to themselves and that certain members of the crowd should take such an opportunity to make wisecracks at the official is certainly indicative of poor sportsmanship.
The soccer team has come a long way to gain their present status — such action was witnessed by the official could make it a short road back to club status.
Tom Carr was nominated to the E.C.A.C. team again on the basis of his outstanding offensive show Saturday.
Scatback John Yuskis rounds left end early in the game Saturday when numbers were still distinguishable.
Coming in to make the stop on the fleet halfback is Bowdoin's Bob Hooke.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK ATTENTION, STUDENTS! — MONIER'S TEXACO STATION — Corner of Main and Russell Streets, offers these specials to you Lube, $1 Oil and ALL other accessories 10% off SEE United States FOR ALL YOUR CAR PROBLEMS THE BLUE GOOSE GRILL 69 SABATTUS STREET Carr, Planchon Pace Bobcats, Line Outstanding; Tamis Stars By DICK LOVE Displaying a crushing ground attack the Bates College Bobcats came back in the second half Saturday to overcome a three-point deficit and defeat Bowdoin College 13-3.
Freshman fullback Tom Carr and halfback Paul Planchon were the big guns for Bates on a muddy Garcelon Field.
The first half was a battle of* the defenses as neither team could mount any kind of a sustained drive.
Bates was able to acquire the only first down of the half on a 19 yard scamper by Paul Planchon that put the ball on the Bowdoin 33.
A 'cat fumble at this point gave the ball to the Polar Bears though and the only serious scoring threat of the half was killed.
Milo Kicks 3 Poinier Bowdoin finally broke into the scoring column with only seconds to go in the first half.
After recovering the fumble the Polar Bears called time and brought in Jack Milo to kick a field goal.
Milo's kick just made it over the cross bar and the half ended with Bowdoin ahead 3-0.
Planchon's kick was bobbled by the Bowdoin received and John Yuskis recovered the fumble on the Bowdoin 23.
Here Bates made their only aerial of the game but Bill Davis' pass was just out of end Paul 'Castolene's reach.
With fourth down goal to go, Yuskis got the ball on a double reverse and sped into the end zone behind fine blocking.
John Curtiss' attempted conversion was blocked and Bates was in the lead 6-3.
Carr got the next first down, then Planchon carried to the ten then fumbled but Bill Davis alertly recovered to retain possession.
Carr finally punched over on a fourth down play for the second Bobcat score.
Bates looked like it might score again later in the period but Bowdoin recovered a 'Cat fumble to stop this drive on their own three.
Bates' superior depth was quite evident in the second half as the right side of the Bowdoinline was continually ripped open by the 'Cat offense.
Carr and Planchon were the offensive stars for Bates while the whole 'Cat line played a fine defensive game, yielding only 3 first downs.
Coach's Comment When asked to comment on the game, Coach Hatch was far from a loss of words in praising the team.
He said he was extremely pleased, not only for the win itself but because it was a victory over Bowdoin.
In recent years, Bates teams have been reasonably good compared to the Bowdoin teams they played but couldn't seem to win.
Phil Tamis and Tom Carr were singled out by Coach Hatch as the two standout performers of the game.
He has been our most consistent lineman,"" was his statement concerning the senior tackle.
THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES — • The second repeating Bobcat of the Week is Tom Carr who Saturday gained 78 yards on a wet, muddy field as he helped pace the Garnet gridsters to a 13-3 win over Bowdoin.
Carr upped his season scoring total to 54, 11 points behind the leading scorer in New England, Santelli of Amherst.
Repeatedly the Saugus, Mass. r freshman would appear stopped for no gain but would slide off the line of scrim'CAT DALERS SECOND IN NEW ENGLAND MEET The Walt Slovenski-coached Bobcat cross-country men powered their way to a second-place finish Monday in the meeting of the New England small college track titans at Boston's Franklin Park.
Finishing seven points behind Central Conn., the Garnet placed five men in the top twenty and two in the first six.
Eric Silverberg was the third-place finisher within breathing distance of Central Conn, runner Tom Keith, who set a new meet record in 20 min., 40 sec.
Mike Gregus was sixth, Bill Dunham eleventh, Pete Parsons sixteenth and Finn Wilhemsen eighteenth.
The first five schools in order of finish were Central Conn., Bates, Trinity, W.P.I., and Bowdoin.
Bowdoin scored two goals in the opening period of play, but Bates dominated in the final periods of the game.
The areas around the goals were very muddy and the goalies on both teams had trouble in keeping their footing.
Bowdoin scored once more in this period, and it looked like the Bears were going to have an easy time of it.
Steve Barron passed to George Beebe, who made an arcing shot at the goal.
Bob Lanz trapped the ball and slipped it by the Bowdoin goalie for Bates' only tally.
Bowdoin's field play was very weak, but the Bear fullbacks played well.
On several occasions they kicked the ball away from the Bowdoin goal, saving possible scores.
During this period, Bowdoin had a good chance to score on a close-up penalty shot.
At the very end of the game, the 'Cats had SEVEN Winless Colby Mules Visit Lewiston In Season Finale New England scoring leader Bob Lanz notches a muddy tenth goal despite the efforts of Bowdoin defensemen. several good shots at the Bowdoin goal, but none of them went Todd Lloyd, Lee Nute, George Beebe, and Raphael Onemelukwe turned in standout performances for Bates.
Bowdoin's fullbacks played well, and other blue blood players did very well heading the ball.
The Colby Mules will be looking for their first win of the 1962 season when they clash with the Bobcats Saturday at 1:30 on Garcelon Field.
It will be an important game for the Bobcats who still have a mathematical chance of tying Bowdoin and Maine for the State Series title.
John Simpson, the new head coach of Colby, hasn't had too much success building a team around twelve returning lettermen.
Smith Returns Colby is primarily an offensive PLAYER TO WATCH Trainer Enjoys Working With Youth; Maine Native By DICK LOVE There probably are very few people on the Bates campus who know who John Lee Murray is.
He is the man who ""repairs"" the athletes you see performing on Garcelon Field, the Alumni Gymanisum, or the Cage.
Personable Trainer ""Peaco"" is a very busy man and this scribe was forced to interview him as he taped the ankles of basketball and soccer players prior to a practice.
At ' this point I had a short wait while Mr Murray engaged in an animated description of a tiddlywink tournament he had seen on television the night before.
After he had pantomimed a few ""trick"" shots, Mr Murray COLLEGE PHARMACY, Inc.
He attended both Northeastern and B.U., spending a year in each institution.
The Maine native then went on to say he was in the sporting goods business for 16 years before leaving this field for greener pastures.
Replied To Ad Before coming to Bates, Mr Murra ywas employed by the Bath Iron Works as a production engineer for ten years.
Soon after retirement ""Peaco"" discovered that even though he is an ""old jachelor"", as he puts it, he could iot sit around inactive for days in end.
At this point he saw an advertisement in the local paper saying Bates was looking for a trainer.
Mr Murray likes to work with the younger generation so he applied for the job and was soon hired as the Bates trainer.
I C. come an expert at taping ankles and caring for the minor, and some major, injuries that athletes are bound to receive during a season.
The classy halfback led the state series in rushing in 1960-61 with an 8. yard average per carry but sat out last season.
Binky averaged 9. yards per carry against Bowdoin but was stopped cold by Maine's line last week.
Junior Dick Robbat apparently has won the starting quarterback position from senior letterman Bob Whitehouse.
Riss, not even listed on the Colby roster, will complete the startng lineup at left end.
The number to watch though in the Colby line-up is 29, Binky Smith, and if the Bates line can contain him they should emerge victorious Saturday.
The purpose of these workouts is to acquaint Coach Ullom with his players.
Lewiston HOURS Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-8:00 7:30-6:00 SMITTY'S Barber Shop ketball tends to limit both the team and the individual player,"" declared Coach Ullom.
Coach Ullom hopes that this type of offense will utilize more players on a regular basis and give the fans an exciting brand of basketball.
Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS £ ""6 EIGHT BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 7, 1962 JB Squad Annexes Crown The ""A"" league champions from John Bertram fought off a last quarter surge from a determined West Parker squad last week to win a close 14-6 decision for the Intramural Football League Championship.
The upset minded Parker ""B"" league champs failed to contain J.B.'s strong passing attack and thus came out on the short end of the low scoring game.
Don Palmer led the spirited West squad in tallying two touchdowns and quarterback Paul Sadlier brilliantly directed their attack against the Pandas.
Revoir was outstanding in the losing cause as he accounted for both of East's touchdowns.
The next step for West was to meet talented J B. for the championships.
Matching once-* beaten J B. and undefeated West Parker could only be the ingredients for a great game, the result being the hard-fought 14-6 victory for the ""A"" division champs.
Left end Pete Graves of J B. proved to be the difference as he tallied twice on long tosses, from quarterback Ron Vance.
Jeff Hillier and Graves were the main targets of Vance throughout the afternoon as their passing game was superb.
A safety also accounted for two more points for the winners as hard-charging linemen Bob Segersten and Pete Rae blocked a punt in the West Parker end zone which J B. recovered.
Halfback Pete Oberndorf, a chief reason for his dorm's very successful season, scored the lone touchdown for West in their heartbreaking loss.
Congratulations are in order to John Bertram for their great GrfUD * c7 mmm mm 6B^Msrte play throughout the campaign in bringing the Intramural Championship to their dorm.
Also a tip of the hat goes to West Parker's powerful ""B"" league entry, falling barely short n their attempt to record the biggest upset of the season.
Alan is a Staff Assistant for Data Communications Sales in Southern New England Telephone Company's New Haven Office.
He began his three years with the company as a Commercial Representative recommending communications services to businesses.
Later, he handled an assignment that taught him what he needed to know about computers.
Alan Dann and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
Eric Silverberg finished first in 23:35, considerably bettering his Maine time.
Following close behind in second and third places were teammates Gregus and Trufant, timed 23:47 and 23:55 respectively.
The only Bowdoin runner to finish in the top six was Babcock, placing fourth in 24:04.
After the next three Polar Bears was Parson of Bates in tenth, with the time of 24:47, only 77 seconds off the winning pace.
Coach Slovenski was highly enthusiastic about his team's efforts, pointing out that the Bobcats' performance mproves with each meet.
Both the time gap and the pack-running have performed progressvely better.
Walt continued by saying that the Bowdoin meet was expected to be close, that both were regarded highly.
The results being heavily in favor of the Bates squad emphasizes the fact that our competition hasn't allowed us to show the full worth of the team.
Our schedule includes several New England state universities and these schools are generally powerhouses in crosscountry.
This point is emphasized when it is observed that our sole losses to date were at the hands of Maine and New Hampshire.
Against all the other Yankee Conference teams last Saturday these two finished second and third respectively to the highly-talented Massachusetts contingent.
Walt applauds this squad as his best since crosscountry was formalized here seven years ago, a claim highly justified by its present record.
The press selected the freshman fullback as the E.C.A.C. back of the game as he led the Hatchmen to their first state series win since 1957.
He has been an instructor at the Puerto Rico training camps for Peace Corps Volunteers and is now involved with the Public Information division of this organization.
The Peace Corps, instituted by President Kennedy, Is a government sponsored organization with a two-fold purpose.
Its first objective is to help educate and increase the living standards of under-developed countries.
At present more than 4000 volunteers are working, or training for work, in many of the countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
There have been a few wellpublicized attempts to discredit the Peace Corps, but nevertheless, the organization has been highly successful, and plans are under way to increase the Volunteer staff to 10,000 members 1963.
The second objective of the Peace Corps is to instigate a feeling of good will between the Unitde States and the countries in which its members are working.
It is in this area that our country stands to gain something which all our foreign aid and economic handouts can never buy.
While many of the Peace Corps Volunteers may not have the polish of our Ambassadors, they do have something far more important — a sincere desire to work with and for the general population of a country.
Granted, experienced men are necessary to communicate on the official diplomatic level, but connection with the people is needed if we are to stimluate friendly relations between the United States and foreign countries.
Volunteers must live with the people they are working with in order to un derstand them and be accepted by them.
The affirmative team of John Strassburger '64, Howard Blum '63, and the negative team of Thomas Hall '64, Robert Ahem '64 comprised unit A Unit B was the affirmative team of Norman Bowie '64, Robert Boyd '64; and the negative team of Jeffrey Rouault '65, Kenneth Woodbury '63.
The affirmative team of Peter d'Errico '65, David Harrison '64; and the negative team of Norman Davis '65, Ronald Snell '65 were unit C Unit A emerged undefeated, while each team in units B and C was defeated once.
There will be classical music, folk music, and dance drama music. tered three units in the tourney and emerged with nine victories.
Four freshmen were awarded a certificate as the outstanding team at the Tufts Novice Debate Tournament last Saturday.
Max Steinheimer and Linda Lash argued the affirmative while Richard Rosenblatt and George Strait defended the negative position.
Harris Kleckman of Deering High School was the runner-up and Lester York of Cheverus High School in Portland received honorable mention.
Chute Expresses Objection To Limited Availability Of Labs Due to the Administration's current policy on the use of Carnegie Laboratory, biology students are finding it difficult to complete required lab work in the available time.
Formerly, keys were given to each lab assistant, who unofficially opened the building to other students; no keys have been issued this year.
Chute, head of the Biology Department, offered three main objections to the present situation.
First, needed sources of material in the biology library, from which books may be circulated for one night only, are inaccessible.
Second, the work assigned to each student, especially when an outside project is involved, requires more time than the regular lab periods provide.
Third, some students are preparing projects which demand periodic checks at definite intervals.
Honors candidates, who need more time than the four-hour weekly minimum expected of all Biology students in the more advanced courses, are particularly limited.
Since two nights a week are obviously inadequate, the Department and the students hope that the need for more time will be recognized and met.
Outing Club Rents Cabin At Sugarloaf For Students The Outing Club has rented a I contact Brad Wyman, Lee Polski lodge at Sugarloaf Mountain from the Abernacky Ski Club, with an option to buy at the end of the year.
Located near the top of the beginner's slope, the lodge will be open on Saturday nights, thus allowing students an uninterrupted weekend of skiing.
From Saturday noon until Sunday night trips, at a charge of fifty cents per night plus transportation and meals, will be sponsored during the winter.
The project, now on a trial basis, will continue only with student support; if interest develops, the lodge may become an OC cabin.
Jane Downing '65, who was instrumental in getting the lodge, asks all students who can help with transportation or cooking to lock, Bob Peek, or herself.
Beginning tomorrow night, three performances of Jean Anouilh's Ring Round the Moon will be presented in the Little Theater.
The curtain rises at 8:00 for this comedy on each of the next three nights.
It is a combination of the ""piece noire,"" a serious, pessimistic tragedy, and the ""piece rose,"" the theater of the never, never land.
Caron, in his preplay lecture on Monday, discussed the two themes which pervade Anouilh's plays, including Ring Round the Moon.
The first is money; disgust for the tyranny of money and love harassed by money.
The second is non-conventional purity; the effort of the protagonist to restore meaning to a world that has lost its existence.
The characters in the world of tissue paper and bright lights are archetypes of people found everywhere.
Mother is the person who is always claiming to want something for someone else, yet, underneath wants something for herself.
Frederic, the most sincere member of the cast, is always insecure, due to his supposition of his brother's superiority.
Messerschmann, the peasant who worked so hard to gain status, is only the unhappy millionaire.
It requires a deft, sophisticated touch, for it is a play which appeals to the mind rather than the emotions.
Baskin Exhibits Sculpture, Wood Cuts At Bowdoin Art Museum By JIM LINNELL '63 Leonard Baskin's vision, recently presented in the Walker Art Museum at Bowdoin, expresses the modes of men with precise interest.
He avoids careful delineation of the human figure, for it would restrict him to a particular expression in time of a single emotion.
He represents states of being which allow for no single physical manifestation in its expression.
Tne expression of a face, for example is primarily given by a sensitive and subtle exclusion of detail.
The figures appear rooted to a particular spot with only slight indications of any bodily movement.
But because of this physical immobility I am drawn to an inner activity, a tension.
In addition to Baskin's sculpture, the exhibit includes an ink drawing, ink wash, reliefs, and block prints of wood cuts.
Baskin's owl, which he calls the bird of si TWO BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 14, 1962 Women At '66 rn Honor Code In Chapel Sun.
In an impressive Chapel program, the freshmen women were formally welcomed into the Honor System last Sunday night.
The ceremony marked the culmination of almost two months of living under this code, and tne girls well realized the freedom and responsibility they were being offered.
Betty Anne Little, president of Student Government, opened the program by introducing the Stu-G Board and the advisors.
She then spoke briefly on the significance that the Honor System will have in the present and future lives of the girls.
The freshmen were not there because they had to sign the book, but because they were expressing a sincere desire to do so.
Over the years this system will become a part of their thinking and experience, and soon they will not be able to imagine living in any other way.
To the accompaniment of Peter Gomes' own special brand of organ music, the girls came forward, two by two, and signed the Code.
Following this they were welcomed as card-carrying members of the school.
The ceremony was concluded with the Alma Mater, and the women of '66 left that hallmark of the campus to take their places as Bates citizens.
The American Mind; Background and development of American thought and philosophy. 8:30m.
The Artist's View; George Peters, painter and lecturer, is host for the series from the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
Supreme Court decisions of recent history involving questions of constitutional interpretation.
Science Reporter; Interviews with leading scientists and engineers on significant topics related to science and technology.
Three weeks ago an organizational meeting was held in which the constitution was presented, amended, and approved by prospective club members.
Yesterday evening at 7:00, the first official meeting was held in Libbey Forum.
The meeting was devoted entirely to the election of club officers and two program committee members.
After commenting briefly on the recent national election, he went on to discuss party organization, first on the national, and then on the local level.
According to Nichols, the Republican party is not highly organized on the national level.
It is represented by one large committee composed both of a man and a woman representative from each state and the party chairman from states where the Republicans have been successful in winning many elections.
Due to the size of this committee, it is not an effective legislative body.
In contrast, the party activities of the local level are highly organized.
A state committee, which chooses national representatives, is composed • of a man and a woman from each county.
It is the duty of each of these committees to provide a Republican candidate to oppose each Democrat, to keep the voting population aware of this candidate, and to provide funds for the campaign.
Nichols chose the Maine Republican party as an example of how this organization works.
Up to this time, the Republicans had experienced difficulty in getting their share of Maine votes.
This difficulty could be atfessors, and guest speakers."" tributed either to apathy or to a genuine lack of vote-earning know-how on the part of state committee chairmen.
To counteract this condition the Maine Republican party adopted a workshop system.
Once a year, three separate work-shops are held for the chairmen of the county and city committees and for the candidate himself.
Lectures are given on topics of interest to each of these groups of men.
For example, the chairmen of. the city committees might learn how to organize voting districts for an election.
Incentives are provided for those men who might represent a solidly Democratic district.
Each district is required to turn in the number of votes predetermined by the state chairman.
A second incentive is the conference system, whereby the State chairman holds a conference with each chairman before an election.
In this manner, the state chairman can make certain that the particular county or city chairman is working to capacity.
Fellowships are offered again this year for advanced study and training in basic and applied science, including certain areas of the social sciences.
Selection will be based on academic records, recommendations regarding each applicant's ability to carry out the proposed program, and scores achieved in examinations designed to test scientific aptitude and achievement.
MODERN FOREIGN LANGUAGE FELLOWSHIPS Fellowships for the study of languages are awarded under the National Defense Education Act.
Program A supports the study of numerous languages of Africa, Asia, and Europe while Program B deals with the study of languages of Latin America.
Fellowships are awarded to students who are preparing for teaching the selected language at an institution of higher education in the United States or who plan employment in a professional or technical activity in which proficiency in the language is highly desirable.
Further information concerning these two programs is available in the Guidance and Placement Office.
VOLUNTARY SERVICES International Voluntary Services, a non-profit organization, recruits and sends abroad teams of young men and women who are willing to live in remote villages and work directly with the local people.
IVS, established in 1953, cooperates with the Peace Corps and complements that newly developing agency in situations where our special interest and competence are needed.
Those interested in such a program should consult the IVS pamphlet available in the Guidance and Placement Office.
UNITED STATES INFORMATION AGENCY The United States Information Agency is interested in receiving applications from qualified individuals who desire jobs either in the Foreign Service or in the Agency's Washington offices.
Persons considering this type of employment are urged to consult the Agency's pamphlets in the Guidance and Placement Office.
SALES AND SALES MANAGEMENT TRAINING Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company, Hartford, Connecticut, is seeking men with leadership qualities.
Career plans offered by the Company provide an initial training period before moving into full sales activity.
Details regarding these career plans and related information are available in the Guidance and Placement Office.
Eve.:30-8:30 Sabattos St Dally 11:00 AJML to 2:00 AJVL Calendar Wednesday, November 14 Student Council Meetings Vespers, 9-10 CA Meeting Thursday, November 15 Sports dinner Ring Round the Moon Friday.
Augusta, Maine BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 14, 1962 Crater's Edge By JIM KIERNAN '63 Amongst the intellectual existentialist movement there seems to be a misinterpretation of life.
The beatniks who run around with hair on their* faces are attempting to assert freedom into their existence.
However, by asserting freedom, they deny an existential conceptualization that man exists as a determined biological and chemical being without essence.
Freedom is essentially the stuff that makes life worth living — freedom to think, to live, to act.
We must destroy those decadent souls who propose to live for the abstraction called state.
Unless we do, we will be sucked into the depths of the quagmire of life.
The essence of true being is as a river flowing over the brink and into the sea.
It is neither like or really unlike the essence of the collective being.
However, the allegorical imperative cannot be used to understand this magnificence, nor can it, in truth, direct us to the many paths which lead to it.
It is either to attain or because we do belong that we are able to act.
The daily frustrations we meet then are the brink over which the river flows.
Finding the eternal question answered by our modern complex of mercantile interactions we may now pursue, as did the Greek philosophers in the fruitful years of their post-natal search.
Once on this road toward our individual College Bowl we are aware of light being emitted from the North Star of our pseudo-self.
Still our Jell-o bodies quiver with this coherent light through our nicotine-stained fingers.
Still there is the Madison Avenue peanut-vendor pushing us away from our destiny.
With a slow flow it overwhelms the last molecule of our pineal gland — Descartes' Butterfly — chair for the soul.
Actually, the touchstone of the whole problem lies within the undeniable yet inexcusable fact that we, in all our materialistic glory, sit back with a pusillaniHEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS mously contemptuous attitude, leaving the solution to others — those whom we superciliously dub ""eggheads"" or other equally uncomplimentary epithets.
Ironically, however, its solution is not one which lies beyond the reach of any one of us of slightly above average — in fact, of even average-intelligence.
Indeed, it involves quite simply a pensive and altogether serious look into a certain rather nebulously defined, yet, at the same time, quite clear-cut and definite area of reference.
Assuming that one has adopted as nearly a completely neutal attitude as possibe under the given, albeit prejudice-lending circumstances, that person has only to approach the matter with the unvacillating and Aristotelianoriented determination which invariably characterizes the truly enlightened man, to perceive that the inevitable solution is by no means hidden on some occultly inaccessible and foreboding summit.
Rather, the solution lies immediately at hand if only we can resist the urge to sit mundanely and resolutely by, while the tree of ultimate insight is egregiously uprooted and arrested just short of its long-awaited and longoverdue fructification.
Bates Receives Gainsborough Portrait Members American Gem Socieiy CASH CHARGE BUDGET ifWE Baskin torment, exacts a toll from man's mind like that the eagle requires of Prometheus.
I won't pursue the parallel further except to point out we eaoh may nurture our own bird of prey.
Observing his work isn't an easy experience; Baskin deals with men's crises.
Working primarily in black and white, Baskin presents stark faces of intensity.
On Exhibit 2-3' Everyday In Gallery A portrait of John Henderson by John Gainsborough (17271788) has been added to the Bates College Art Collection, Bates President Charles F Phillips announced today.
This version shows the actor looking to the viewer's right, holding a half-opened book in his left hand, while gesticulating with the right; he is wearing a dark blue coat trimmed with a red collar, white stock and fichu.
In accepting the painting, President Phillips commented that ""the Gainsborough and Nattier's Mme Adelaide, given by Mr and Mrs.
Schmutz several years ago, form the nucleus of an important collection being built up at the College.
The gallery will also be open before and during the intermission of each presentation of Ring Round the Moon, which the College's Robinson Players will present November 15, 16, and 17.
It is requested that those attending bring notebook, pen, and catalogue.
I suspect him to be one of the lesser treats residing in the Treat Gallery, Pettigrew Hall.
His none-too-fetching smile suits well the round and rosy cheeks which find themselves beneath a curled coiffure.
English artist of the 16th century, his other works declare that something be amiss in this, our newest Bates possession.
According to many of those who find it worthy to gather up the facts of a man's life, Thomas Gainsborough prefers very much more the painting of landscapes to the art of portraiture in which he so often indulged.
Then, what of the fact that he left Ipswich for Bath, the latter being a greater center of life and fashion and therefore a city which could assign more opportunities for portrait-fame to an artist newly establishing himself.
And the story goes that success soon came to him, so fast indeed that he was able to ^increase his price from five to eight and at last to forty guineas for a half-length and a hundred guineas for a full-length portrait.
Thus, I conclude that either John Henderson was willing to pay an extraordinary amount to be preserved, or Mr Gainsborough was under an extraordinary handicap, that of an empty pocket in his early days.
She sits highly bedecked in fanciest clothes, a black and feathersome hat upon her head.
Or for another instance, look to the ""Baillie Family,"" six in all — four children, Mother, Father.
A certain ""posedness"" being granted, I find an affection for the painting, for the humorous family who seem to assure everyone of a warm welcome.
Gainsborough's three ""Rustic Children,"" blending easily with the countryside about them, wishing they did not so much belong to it.
The portrait of ""Miss Elizabeth Singleton"" returns somecontinued on page five) ELER 73 Lisbon St.
We remind the studentry that Bates offers them constant opportunity to prove their intellectual zeal.
But many colleges erect new buildings frequently; most colleges work to improve their facilities — Bates has other grounds for excellence.
In another, more revealing competition, Bates will stand out among the list of winners.
In the final reckoning, when judges appraise the relation between effort expended and education achieved, Bates students must win.
Yale science majors living on the top floor of their science buildings cannot complain of inaccessible facilities next to Bates biology majors allowed into their building two evenings a week beyond class time.
Lest Bates offers an easy education, those doors to opportunity remain locked except during class time.
Study rooms in the library now stay open for fifteen hours a day on week-days.
These changes may be symptoms of a dangerous movement to lower Bates standards.
Down thte hall from the practice rooms the music department keeps a well-stocked closet locked.
Hundreds of records stand on the shelves; they are to be used only in conjunction with a music course.
Know that what you achieve you have won, for gaining an education at Bates poses a real challenge.
Entered as second-clas» matter at the Lewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879.
The longevity of any institution, be it religious, governmental, or educational, is largely dependent upon its traditions.
The Protestant churches rely heavily on traditional ritual while sending representatives to the Ecumenical Council.
In election years our orators deluge us with the ideals of the founding fathers while urging change and progress.
Here at Bates we revere Johnny Stanton while we consider the Tri-mester plan.
Tradition gives the mass of people something to cling to in times oi change.
Bates has a rich traditional background to rely upon if it decides to move ahead.
History shows that progress can be made on such a background without disruption of tradition, or that if such a disruption occurs those traditions which are lost are replaced with new and more effective ones.
Perhaps this inconsistency could be resolved by an order for Beethoven, Bach, and Brahm sweatshirts, but I think there is a better solution.
More progressive administration would encourage more dynamic student life.
Intellectual stimulation and hunger manifested in more judicious purchases in the book store can keep that place from becoming a trinket shop.
A more dynamic intellectual atmosphere can transform Coram library from a pile of tombs into a center of thought and inspiration.
The extension of library hours is a step in the right direction, in spite of the fact that administrative resistance to the extension was ironic in an institution dedicated to stimulation of thought.
Calls Coeducation Progress Our all too recently won right to co-educate during the evening marks progress, but this should be carried further to permit recreation rooms in the men's dorms, and provide for more spontaneous or planned activities in which men and women can participate together.
A more vivacious social life would boost morale and provide a greater opportunity for re-creation, not just recreation.
The administration of Bates College has too long been content with the ""tried and true""; one can watch Old Faithful for only so long.
The students of Bates College have too long been content to use tradition as an excuse for lethargy, rather than an opportunity .for progress.
The mere consideration of the Tri-mester plan is a step in the right direction.
Only when both the faculty and the student body begin to recognize and utilize our traditional heritage and work in unison to take full advantage of that, heritage can Bates College move forward with the assurance that its history merits.
Many Bates students are aware, I am sure, of my continuous complaints of the illiteracy and unintelligibility pf most student writing.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to congratulate you on this week's column, ""The Crater's Edge,"" which I have seen in advance of publication,as a shining example of writing which avoids the common failures of style and fallacies of thought.
This should set an example to all students for its development of subtle oxymorons and its anagogic reasoning.
All students would be well advised to analyze how it is constructed carefully with special attention to the question that it develops a single clear idea.
A great amount of campaigning was done on the basis of what the individual candidate could do or would do for our class.
However, not too much was said as to how this forward action might possibly take shape.
Upon these thoughts, a challenge goes out to the newly elected class officers to rise to the occasion, so to speak, in order that they shall not slip into the doldrums of honorary apathy which past officers have tumbled.
Also, to the members of our ambitious Class of 1966, take a little time to think over the class elections and what may or may not be the possible, or more likely, the probable results.
Recently, The Student published an editorial attacking hazing, Bates' traditional method of integrating its freshmen into college life.
The author labeled this tradition as ""an unnecessary, embarassing, and dangerous affair,"" claiming it discourages academic zeal, breeds resentment and heralds the failure of our educational system.
The author contended that hazing was merely an excuse for the upperclassmen to play the part of the all-knowing superior beings, whose sole function is to harass the freshmen.
With cherishable memories lingering in our minds of those first three weeks on campus, we feel qualified to proclaim that orientation indeed should remain an annual affair.
It was pointed out that we returned nights just in time for noisy hours.
Having to be in our rooms by 10:00, we had first use of bathroom facilities.
The author complained that upperclassmen couldn't sleep during hazing parties.
There were not more than four haze parties in the three weeks, each no longer than one hour.
Commend Sophomores We commend the sophomores for their superb work on redecorating our rooms.
The sophomores must have spent hours designing; a half hour and we'd wrecked their masterpieces.
One, a sophomore, had the flu and was there a week; one had a cough; the other just didn't feel well.
In conclusion, we girls would like to thank the sophomores, the upperclassmen, and all others concerned who made orientation so memorable for us.
We realize that the time and work involved was tedious for them but sheer fun for us.
Especially touching to all of us was the debibbing ceremony and the traditional festivities thereafter.
This sealed the night, creating an intangible bond between the freshmen and Bates College, one which could never adequatet BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 14, 1962 FIVE Dr.
Settling back as if only a pipe were needed to complete the scene, class begins.
Before the hour is over, this professor who talks like Jimmy Stewart and has the charm of Sherlock Holmes, has encouraged, examined, and attacked the arguments of his students as they discuss the justification of Clytemnestra, the tragedy of Agamemnon, and the philosophy of wisdom through suffering.
Niehaus comes to us from MIT where he taught the humanities course to undergraduates.
After seven years in an atmosphere determined by scientific research, where humanities are subordinate to science and technology, and where there is little communication between professor and student, Dr.
Niehaus spent four years in the navy, both as an enlisted man and a commissioned officer.
For the following three years he taught history and humanities as a teaching Fellow.
He returned to teach at MIT and in 1958 received his Ph.D. in history from Harvard.
Niehaus especially likes squash and at MIT he coached the freshman squash team.
Right now his pet project is the schooling of a four year -old thoroughbred mare which he nas just bought.
Lewiston Healy Explains College Policy In Selection Of Faculty Members By RICHARD DOW '64 The sabbatical program and process of securing faculty members present mysteries to all but a few Bates students.
The process of selecting a new faculty member, Dean Healy stated, begins when the administration is notified of a vacancy that will occur within a department.
Next, the Dean of the Faculty inquires of the department chairman if he can recommend anyone interested in the position.
Then follows a great deal of correspondence, in which graduate schools are contacted and a list of prospects drawn.
In some areas, Bates College receives unsolicited applications, and considers these as well.
Whenever possible, a personal interview is conducted with the applicant.
Members of the department in which the applicant By DAVE OLSON '65 Following a rather hectic fund drive, WRJR is now in the process of spending your wisely contributed money.
We will soon have, in our control room, a new turn table, a new microphone and many other items which will undoubtedly increase the quality of Bates College radio.
In the past, WRJR has broadcast news as it happened with live coverage of the President's vital speech to the nation, followed daily by up-to-the-minute comments by our news department.
A week ago the station brought its listeners nationwide coverage of the November 6th elections.
Any persons further interested in training for work on the air may see Bruce Cooper for . details.
We might close this week's column by again thanking the entire student body for helping to keep WRJR on the air for another year, especially MitcheiJ House, winners of the grand prize of a steak dinner, and the Student for its great help in publicizing the fund drive.
We might also thank the faculty and administration for their contributions and assistance. desires to teach meet with him to discuss the job, but the man is not tested in any manner to determine his knowledge of subject.
This can be determined by consulting the applicant's record as an undergraduate and as a graduate student.
Needless to say, the extensiveness of the personal interview varies with the level of the position desired.
Healy stated that instructors and assistant professors generally sign a one-year contract which is renewed annually.
Instructors are usually reappointed a maximum of four times, after which they are either promoted to a higher level or let go from the college.
If the results are satisfactory, these annual contracts are usually renewed without question.
After a man serves a maximum of seven years at Bates, he achieves tenure.
In the case of associate and full professors, the initial contracts usually run for three years, after which tenure is achieved upon reappointment.
Discusses Sabbatical When speaking on the sabbatical program, Dean Healy stated that there are two ways in which a faculty member can go on sabbatical leave.
Sabbatical is required of a faculty member in the seventh full year of teaching after he achieves tenure.
Special provision is made for anyone in the continuous employ of the college for ten years.
This avoids any case in which an inordinately long period of service would be required before a man is eligible.
Under this program, Bates College will give the man one semester off at full pay, or a year at half pay.
A statement of purpose is required on the sabbatical application, and a summary of achievements is required* on the man's return to Bates.
Should the college have a compelling need for a teacher's presence, it can ask the man to take his leave earlier or later than usual.
The sabbatical must eventually be taken, however, although this rule is not mechanically applied.
When asked if Bates provides any retirement benefits for its faculty members, Dr.
Healy replied that the college subscribes to the T.I.A.A., the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America.
This organization was set up in the early Twentieth Century by a large philanthropic foundation as a non-profit insurance program available only to teachers and administrators in private institutions.
Each faculty member contributes a percentage of his salary to the plan, and the college matches this amount for the person.
Seventy is the mandatory retirement age, Dean Healy stated, but it is possible to retire some years before that if one so desires.
Dean Healy concluded by commenting that the faculty is now nearly equally divided between M.A.'s and Ph.D.'s.
Healy's job to insure the continued high quality of the faculty in the years to come.
Perhaps we could sum it up by saying that at that point we could truly feel that we belonged to our new environment.
Hazing, this means to an end, and that end but the beginning of our college careers and our future lives, should not be discarded or frowned upon.
MiDiker Barb Remick Edwina Simone Susan Feanley Jean Littlefield Karen Iverson Susan Coltrell Eileen Sylvia Linda Paquet Roberta Mescavage Logie thing of the same dark eyes, eyes which reflect the haughtiness of their bearer in Gainborough's ""Young Men,"" and eyes which may be proved to be part of the ""Honorable Mrs.
C HOURS Monday 8:30-6:00 Tuesday 8:30-6:00 Wednesday Thursday 8:30-6:00 Friday 8:30-8:00 Saturday 7:30-6:00 SMITTY'S Barber Shop mm Bates College Sp.
Former Bates College Coach Dave Morey has been nominated to the Football Hall of Fame.
Inevitably injuries piled up, and Morey never entered the State Series with his team intact.
Morey's teams at Bates, Middlebury and Alabama Poly played extremes of football, though generally they might have been described as emphasizing defense.
The Bobcats with which he won State Series titles in 1929 and 1930 allowed Maine rivals only six points in two seasons.
When Bates held Yale to a scoreless tie in 1932 the mighty Eli eleven saw more different defensive formations in one game than it had faced in three years.
His 1923 Middlebury team tied Harvard 6-6 and time helped a desperate Harvard defense hold off a late Middlebury march that might have produced a winning touchdown.
This Middlebury eleven, too, had its hard core of defensive specialists.
But he was not irrevocably committed to the ""punt and pray"" offense, and when he had the boys who could run or throw the ball he produced an imaginative attack.
One of his Middlebury teams led the nation — in 1924, as we recall — for forward pass completions with an amazing 69 in 82 throws.
That Middlebury team gained almost two miles in nine games with a variety of offenses that included the straight T, the single wing and a short kick formation.
Morey, who never could be described as contained, at least during a football game, has worn out a couple of football benches since leaving Bates in 1939.
He coached nine years at Marblehead, Mass., High School, then moved to Lowell Textile Institute where he suffered one of the great disappointments of his life when football was replaced by soccer as a varsity sport.
However, he coached soccer there until 1958 and simultaneously coached the Curry College eleven at Milton, Mass.
Dave was on hand for the Bates-Middlebury football game last month, when he watched teams of colleges he formerly had coached and with which he enjoyed his most rewarding years.
He has coached 45 years since his graduation from Dartmouth, where he was an Ail-American halfback.
Commander Max A Eaton, who played football under Coach Morey, has been nominated for Sports Illustrated's Silver Anniversary All-American award.
Grant Farquar slides inio a Garcelon Field puddle after breaking up a White Mule touchdown pass.
At left the referee reaches for his flag as he detected Farquar for pass interference.
Binky stunned the die-hard Bates' rooters with a 92 yard run back of the opening kickoff.
Smith waited for his blocking to form in front of him and then raced down the left side, untouched by any player on the Bates team.
This is even a more remarkable feat considering the fact that the field was more suited to water polo than football.
With thirteen seconds elapsed* on the scoreboard clock, quarterback Dick Robbat passed to end Gary Ross for the first of the deciding points after touchdown, and Colby led 8-0.
After the ference play, the first of several costly penalties, gave Colby a first down on the Bobcats' one yard line and Cox scored three plays later.
Robbat skirted right end for another two points and Bates offense bogged down, Colj Colby led 16-0 with still 3:35 left by spearheaded by Dick Robbat again struck for another score.
On the next series of downs Binky Smith showed his versatility, lofting a pass to Cox who made a fine catch on the Garnet 37.
End Sweeps Colby, sending a man in moLET'S TWIST — Guard Dave Siockwell slips in the mud of Garcelon Field Saturday as he attempts to breakup a Colby pass.
Colby end Ross hugs the rain-soaked ball after grabbing a Robbat aerial. tion then ate up large chunks of yardage.
Bob Whitehouse gained eight yards to the 29 and Dave Cox bulled his way to the twenty-five.
The Bates team battling a pouring rain as well as the score came back to dominate the second quarter.
Fullback Tom Carr picked up twelve yards from the Garnet 35 to ignite the drive.
After Carr picked up another four yards, a Davis-Castolene pass clicked to the Mules' 35.
Carr carried for four up the middle and Planchon gained the first down on about the twenty-five yard line.
Two plays later Bill Davis bounced off two tacklers to nearly the fifteen.
After the sturdy Bates fullback carried the pigskin to the four, Planchon squirted into the end zone.
Late in the second half a run by freshman John Yuskis to the Colby 46 and a fifteen yard penalty started another scoring drive.
With Planchon and Carr doing most of the gaining the Bobcats penetrated to the 9 yaid line with less than a minute to go in the half.
On the final play of the first half as Bates ran the play without a huddle the durable fullback scored.
The fake attempt for the extra point failed and Bates trailed at the half.
Mud Bowl Neither team was really able to get their offense moving in the second half.
Colby had two glorious chances inside the Bates twenty but were stopped each time.
On two crucial fourth down plays Carr was stopped by the middle of the Colby line to kill any Garnet chances.
The elusive halfback nearly turned the corner in the second quarter of the game, but was finally driven out of bounds.
He said that Colby played a good game and the rain didn't help Bates' chances in the second half.
Hatch praised the attitude of the team and the leadership of Co-Captains Bill Davis and Howie Vandersea in posting the first winning season since 1957.
Nightly in the gymnasium, the 1962-63 version of the Bates College basketball team can be found preparing for the coming season.
Much of the long practice sessions are devoted to running and conditioning to prepare the team for the fast-breaking and pressing type of game they are expected to play much of the time.
These drills are designed to develop the speed and reaction of each player.
On offense the drills emphasize both the zone offense employed much of last year and a faster paced free-lance offense.
Defensively, the drills try and develop a switching type of man to man defense.
On Fridays, the team holds complete intra-squad scrimmages in the hope that the week's labors will produce the necessary elements of a successful club.
BATES STODENT, NOVEMBER 14, 1962 SEVEN Co -Captains Conclude Careers; Praise Coaches, Fellow Players By RUSS HENDERSON Co-Capt.
Howie Vandersea, a tower of strength for three years in the Garnet forward wall, and Co-Capt.
Bill Davis, key backfleld performer for four years, have, along with six other senior gridsters, relegated to memory the thoughts of autumn days and King Footbail.
Vandersea, a native of* , Whitinsville, Mass., and a product of Northbridge High School, entered Bates in the fall of 1959.
At Northbridge High, Howie was captain of the 1959 football team that compiled an 8-1 record and won the Central Mass.
Red also starred on the baseball diamond and the basketball court for Northbridge High.
Three Time All-Maine At Bates, Howie has become a legend on the gridiron in three short years.
He has been a unanimous All-State football selection for three years and has been placed on the All-East small college squad twice this year along with his choice for last year's All-New England team.
Howie also has been a varsity performer in baseball, basketball and track.
He was an All-Maine first baseman for the Bates baseballers and his long ball power and steady fielding assured this distinction.
Expressing his great thrill at a winning season, Red empha sized the spirit and drive of the Bobcat eleven and a great competitive surge among the players as the difference between victory and defeat.
Red was high in his praise of the Bates coaching staff, saying, ""Coach Hatch's good moves and sound judgment have made him the most respected coach I have ever played under Our line was a great improvement and Coach Ullom was in strumental in this respect.
Professional ball is an opportunity that would be a great challenge and if it presented itself , Howie would like a shot at making the grade.
With his individual efforts in this year's Northeastern game and the Maine game of his sophomore year as monuments to nis football prowess, Red is looking Bill Davis Howie Vandersea forward to a successful baseball season with Capt.
Ron Taylor, his teammate this past summer in the Cape Cod summer league.
Thesf were Howie Vandersea's words concerning Co-Captain and quarterback Bill Davis.
Played In Orange Bowl Bill, a native of Gloucester, Mass., was a member of the undefeated Gloucester High School State Class B champs that went to Florida's Orange Bowl for the North-South High School Championship.
Bill was the captain of his high school football team and also a member of the baseball team.
He was selected the Most Valuable Player on the football team and won the Tom McCann Memorial Trophy symbolic of this.
Bill entered Cushing Academy in the fall of 1958 and was again selected the Most Valuable Player on the football team.
Bill and his Cushing teammate, Phil Tamis, both chose Bates and entered with the class of 1963.
As a frosh Bill was a starter and during his four years of varsity ball he was to become the first man in Bates history to play all four backfleld positions.
As a four-year starter, Bill has had the opportunity to play against some of the real great players Bates teams have faced.
He ranks two Tufts fullbacks, Dunk MacDonald and Ron Deveaux, and two Maine halfbacks, Wayne Champion and Dave Cloutier as four of the real top ones.
Worcester Tech tackle Dave Piesinki was Bill's choice as the top opposing lineman he has ever faced.
Paul Castolene, Paul Planchon, Jack Fynn and Howie Vandersea were Bill's tops as Betes stars. . , President Of Sociology Club In addition to calling the signals for the Garnet football team Bill also plays for Coach Leahey's state champion baseball squad.
Bill was thrilled with the winning season but looks back on tne Northeastern game as the season's high point and, in addition, looks back on his touchdown pass to Paul Castolene, to tie Middlebury last year, as his biggest individual thrill.
Bill is interested in pursuing a career in social work and looks forward to graduate school as a step in that direction.
Coach Robert Hatch will surely miss these two great football players when autumn brings the smash of helmet against helmet into season again next year, and his own words can speak of the qualities of these young men.
Maybe it is a mistake to compare players past and present but there were none better than these two men.
A football captain is not a mere token of popularity for when football men choose a captain they pick a leader and these two men were leaders in the finest sense of the word.
The Bobcats began the season with victories over Nasson and Nichols, the scores being 8-0 and 6-2.
They lost a close game to Bowdoin 2-1, but, in the final week of the season they beat two strong clubs, Clark and Colby.
The squad's final record stood at five and three, the best record ever compiled by a Bates College soccer team.
Nute Serves Twice Last Tuesday, the squad traveled to Worcester, Mass., to play Clark.
The Bobcats followed their usual pattern of play, as they fell behind in the early periods, but came on strong in the final ones to beat Clark 5-4.
Raphael Onyemelukwee and Lee Nute both had two goals while Bob Lanz had one.
In the closing periods of this game, Bates showed some of its best teamwork and passing of the year.
The Colby game was the most exciting one seen at Garcelon Field this year.
Bates got off to a fast start when Bob Lanz bulled his way through the M u i e defense to score the first goal of the game.
In the second period the Bates defense let down and the very capable Colby line scored three goals.
Lee Nute put the Bobcats right back into the game, when he booted one out of a melee in front of the Bowdoin goal.
Raphael Onyemelukwee centered the ball in front of the Bowdoin goal, where Steve Barron sent the ball skimming towards the left corner of tne Bowdoin goal there, standing five yards from the face of the goal, was Lloyd, who slipped the ball in.
Lanz Scores Tie Breaker The tie breaking goal came with one minute and thirty seconds showing on the clock.
A Colby fullback, while attempting to kick the ball away from his goal, ricocheted the ball off the goal post.
The ball bounced back into a crowd of players directly in front of the goal.
Bob Lanz trapped the ball and boomed it into the goal for the final tally of the game.
This was the first time Colby has been defeated by a Maine team in a number of years.
In the last match of their soccer careers, seniors Lee Nute, Don Mewhinney, Raphael Onyemelukwee, and Pete Aranski played very well.
Lee scored the goal that put Bates back into the game, and Raphael helped to set up the tying goal.
Don made several key stops in the last two periods, and Pete hustled on defense.
Former Bobcat Lineman Chosen For Silver Squad sistant at M.I.T. from 1944-1945, Ensign Eaton received the M.S. degree in Meteorology, From 1954-1957 he was Project Officer at the International Institute of Meteorology, Stockholm, Sweden, and assigned to the American Embassy there.
Commander Eaton was Head of the Technical Readiness Branch of the Office of Naval Weather Service, 1957-1959, and Meteorological Officer on the Staff of Admiral George Anderson, Commander of the Sixth Fleet, 1959-1961.
He is currently Officer in Charge of the United States Weather Facility, Miami, Fla., responsible for forecasts to the operating forces and directing hurricane aircraft reconnaissance and issuing hurricane warnings.
Chairman of the Miami Chapter of the American Meteorological Society and author of numerous articles in Navy publications, Commander Eaton still finds time for athletics, and is currently sponsoring the Fleet Weather Facility softball team in the Babcock Park League, Hialeah.
Navy Weather Facility in Miami, Fla., has been nominated by Bates for the 1962 Sports Illustrated Silver Anniversary All-American Awards.
The candidates are judged for outstanding accomplishment in the 25 years following their varsity grid careers.
As an undergraduate Commander Eaton played football for four years, lettering in his sophomore, junior and senior years.
During his Bates career he participated in the intramural sports program; served the Varsity Club as its secietary; and was an active member of the Jordan Ramsdell Scientific Society.
After four years in the Massachusetts school system as a teacher, coach, and principal, Max Eaton was commissioned an Ensign in the United States Naval Reserves in 1942 and received training in meteorology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Bates lost to a strong team, though finishing on top of M.I.T. and Tufts.
Eric Silverberg finished just one second behind the winner, and Co-Capt.
Bill Dunham's days of crosscountry competition at Bates have come to a close.
Bill has been highly regarded by both his coach and teammates as a talented and conscientious competitor.
His absence, and that of the other seniors to graduate, Ed Belden and Ed Margulies will be sorely missed on the team.
Before coming to Bates, Bill ran on the Kents Hill Prep crosscountry team for three years, and was captain his senior year.
Here Bill has majored in history and intends to study law at Cornell next year.
At Cornell he plans to continue in sports by competing in cross-country A.A.V. ski racing meets.
Bill pointed out that distance runners don't really get into their prime until after 20, theirs being a sport to continue with after college.
Praises Team On commenting about his best season here, Bill was high in his Bill Dunham praise for the team and its fine efforts.
As regards to the record of 10-4, he supported his coach in saying that our record could have been better if we played teams of our own size.
He was also disappointed with losing the Easterns to Connecticut State by seven points, adding that a few variables either way could have made a substantial difference.
Bill applauded his teammates for their fine team efforts, indicating that Co-Capt.
Bill predicted that next year's team will be even better, with our first four men, Eric Silverberg, Mike Gregus, Ken Trufant, and Finn Wilhelmson returning.
He also predicted good seasons for Pete Parsons, Karl Wolff, Basil Richardson and Marshall Snow, a freshman hurt early in the season.
With further regard to the future, Bill added that our recent good seasons might draw some high school hopefuls to Bates, thus supplementing our already fine team and forming a crosscountry powerhouse among the small colleges.
Bill also indicated the dualistic value of crossHockey Player Explains Game; Field Day On Sat.
Our Bates field hockey team is striving this year to improve their basic ground skills in order to be more able to offset the ""brute"" power of Maine and Colby, who we face Saturday -in a Field Day here.
In years past, we have never had a chance against their stength (particularly that of Maine) but with new plays and an emphasis on precicountry; not only is it a fine varsity sport but it also prepares the distance runners for the winter season.
There is a group called the ""club"" runners, composed of middle-distance men who worked out with the team.
Bill concluded with remarking as to how much he has enjoyed running here.
He finds a great deal of pleasure in being in good shape, in competing with an outstanding team, and learning the values of self-discipline.
Says Gay Blade, ""Anyone on terra firma will agree Tareyton is a firma, fina cigarette-packed with tobacco bono.
Field hockey, in its original form, was played by many men and even today, in many parts of Europe, men still play.
The game is very similar to soccer as both games have teams with five forwards, three halfbacks, two fullbacks and a goalie.
Natually the purpose in both games is to score goals — in soccer with the head or the foot; in field hockey with a hip-length stick.
Off sides — Forward line gets ahead of the ball without having at least three opponents between them and the goal after crossing 25-yd. line.
Turning — In picking up a ball, a player can only turn to the right when he reverses its direction.
Sticks — The stick can only come as high as the player's waist — either in front or in back.
Dangerous Hitting — The ball may not be hit off the ground high enough to be the occasion of possible injury.
Obstruction — When tackling (taking ball away from an opponent), the person may not get between the ball and opponent possessing the ball.
Free Hit — Opponent has a free hit to his forward line from the place where the foul was committed.
Roll In — Opponent kneels at the side of the field and rolls ball (not more than one foot in air) to his forwards.
Long and Short Corner — These penalties are used for fouls occurring in area of cage (striking circle), and they happen for various types of fouls.
From that rather superficial synopsis, one can see that hockey, like most sports, is rather intricate and requires strength, speed, intelligence, co-ordination and team interdependence.
As a result, the hockey team hopes that you will support them at their games with Colby and Maine Saturday as you have supported the teams of other sports.
It is well to give when asked, out it is better to give unasked, through understanding; And to the open-handed the search for one who shall receive is joy greater than giving.
Born in 1902 in Russia, the son Bates Initiates Action Over Water Rates of an itinerate teacher of Hebrew, Lerner came to the United States at the age of five and grew up in New Haven, Connecticut.
He earned an A.B. in economics at Yale, and a Ph.D. from Robert Brookings Graduate School in Washington, D C. in 1927.
During the '30s, Lerner was a quasi-Marxist (teaching at Harvard, Sarah Lawrence, Williams) and thought the U S. ripe for Fascism.
When the country survived, Lerner re-evaluated his adopted country, and five years ago he finished his vibrant 1036page paean, America As a Civilization.
Some of his previous books include Ideas Are Weapons, Ideas for the Ice Age, and Actions and Passions.
Peace Corps Requires Desire Plus Training Bates College has filed a complaint with the Maine Public* Utilities Commission concerning water rates established by the city of Lewiston.
In so doing, it discriminates between classes of consumers and between members of the various classes.
Water meters have been installed in all buildings on campus, obtensibly as part of a program to be put into effect for all non-profit institutions , throughout the city.
The president and the trustees of Bates assumed that all such institutions were to be taxed equally.
However, while the College's water rates have risen substantially, other schools, churches, and hospitals are paying reduced or merely token rates.
President Phillips said the city has stated that it has a threeyear program to meter all nonprofit institutions.
After an abortive meeting with the Lewiston Board of Finance and a formal protest to the mayor, who has not given a satisfactory answer, the attorneys for Bates filed a complaint to the Maine Public Utilities Commission, which has the right to regulate rates for non-competitive activities.
During the past several months we have tried in every way to avoid this step.
However, when we were finally faced with a written notification that our water service would be disconnected by the city, we had no alternative.
As we wrote Mayor Girard last August, what we object to is that the College has been singled out currently to pay a higher rate while other nonprofit organizations are still paying the lower rate.
In appealing to the Public Utilities Commmission, Bates is not complaining about the increased water rates, but about the unfair application of this increase by the City of Lewiston.
The Commission is expected to conduct an investigation and rule on the dispute.
Thomas Reynolds, who is stationed in Puerto Rico, was completing a two week tour at various colleges in the Northeast.
The purpose of the tour was to interest and recruit people to fill some 6000 spaces which have opened due to the expansion of the Corps to 10,000 members.
The film had pictures of the training program as it is set up in Puerto Rico, and of language laboratories at foreign universities.
There were also shots of the volunteers in the countries to which they have been assigned; Dave Garroway narrated the film; Sargent Shriver was interviewed, and a Presidential Press Conference was shown.
He brought out the fact that Liberal Arts graduates are needed as well as those who are trained in a specialized field.
Volunteers also have to learn the language, laws, and customs of the countries in which they are working.
He particularly stressed that the Peace Corps is capable of training volunteers to do a job, but they cannot provide the genuine desire to help that every volunteer must have.
Reynolds also mentioned that the Peace Corps has the advantage of being a very flexible organization, its rules changing as the Corps grows and changes.
At the end of the program he passed out Peace Corps publications and cards to be returned indicating an interest in joining the Peace Corps.
All are invited to bring their instruments and songbooks and join in the fun.
Debating Team Wins Sixteen Of Twenty Contests At Vermont In competition with forty-four other colleges, the Bates Debating Team compiled a record of sixteen wins and four losses last weekend.
Professor Quimby accompanied the squad which left early Friday morning and returned late Saturday night.
The affirmative teams, Howard Blum '63 and John Strassberger '64; and Norman Bowie and Robert Boyd '64; and the negative teams, Robert Ahern '64 and Tom Hall '64; and Kenneth Woodbury '63 and Jeffrey Rouault '65, each won four debates and lost one.
The non-communist nations should establish an Economic Community,"" squads came from as far west as Chicago and as far south as North Carolina.
Among the teams Bates defeated were Harvard, Dartmouth, Middlebury, MIT, Brooklyn, St.
Although no official announcement of the winning team or best speakers was given, the individual speaker rankings and the composite score of the Bates teams placed Bates near, if not at, the top of the competition.
Remick To Conduct Special Vesper Services The Christian Association announces a Thanksgiving Vespers Program tomorrow at 4:30 in the Chapel.
This service, onehalf hour in length, will consist of quiet organ music and reading appropriate to the character of Thanksgiving.
Also, this Sunday, November 25, the first in a series of Sunday afternoon Vesper services will be held in the chapel commencing at 4:30 This service, also lasting one-half hour, will consist of quiet organ music and a brief meditation by the Rev.
Mr Remick is minister of the Baptist Church in Topsham, Maine and a new instructor in philosophy at Bates.
This service is on a trial basis and will be continued only with student support.
Both services are informal in attire and conduct, as well as nondenominational in character.
OC Plans Skiing, Skating And Dance For Carnival ""Alpine Holidays,"" the theme of the 1963 Winter Carnival beginning January 24 and ending January 27, will emphasize outdoor activities.
Paul Ketchum '64, and newly elected Karen ""Bambi"" Brown '65, directors for this year's Carnival, have already begun plans for the intersemester weekend.
The Friday ski trip this year is to Madison, New Hampshire, where there will also be ice-skating facilities.
Sunday afternoon is tentatively reserved for snow games at Lost Valley in Auburn.
Opening night, Thursday, features an ice show followed by the traditional crowning of the Carnival Queen.
From Lake Andrews all will proceed to the Alumni gymnasium for refreshments and a square dance.
Friday evening the Outing Club is arranging to have the King's Pine Ski Lodge in Madison, New Hampshire for dinner and dancing.
Buses will bring those still on campus to the Lodge for the evening, and will transport all back that night.
Saturday morning will be the hockey game, followed by entertainment in the afternoon, and the formal dance in the evening.
The Carnival Committee asTWO BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 21, 1962 Taylor Attacks Quality Of Required Chapel Programs By KENT TAYLOR '64 In this week's duel, the weapons, boredom, the Bates College Apathetics took on the Podium Drones in what proved to be one of the most gruelling and time consuming contests thus far waged in the confines of Chapel Arena.
The Drones have had a distinct advantage in the past, having the length of the game at their convenience; yet, we must admit that the Apathetics manage in every contest to put up a good fight.
These matches, staged by the Bates College Curriculum Committee twice and sometimes three times a week, have increased in intensity, if not in number, so that the Bates Apathetics are in tip-top condition.
The contest is held in a large room, each team facing the other; one team stands; the other sits.
The contest is opened by an umpire who presents the challenger to the Apathetics.
The object of the game is to eliminate any final response from the opposing team at the end of a given interval of time, usually twenty-five minutes.
Although comers have tried, in admirable fashion, to induce in the opponents that quality we call sleep, which by its own nature eliminates loud verbal and physical response (hand clapping), the Apathetics have shown time and again that ordinarily insipid speakers cannot conquer them, and they return the Drones efforts each time with a hearty round of applause.
Bates College's chapel program operates on the assumption that the average student has no desire to acquire knowledge but that he is mainly here because every parent thinks that his child should have a college education.
If college is to give us an appreciation of Sunday school sermons and core course nuggets, fine; we got the sermons before we came here and we get the nuggets in class.
Bates must accept the fact that most students are here because they want to get an education, to this end present chapel speakers in line with this desire.
No objection to a compulsory attendance would be raised if the present sessions were worth our time and attention.
Guidance CAREER OPPORTUNITIES MEN Beckman Instruments, Inc., in California has several new openings for technically trained men interested in a sales or marketing career in the instruments business.
They are specifically interested in identifying potential candidates with undergraduate training in chemistry or physics.
Those candidates who are selected will receive training at the home office in Fullerton, California, following which they will be assigned to a regional office where their duties will* involve coordination with dealer representatives in contacting leading scientists throughout a variety of industries.
A descriptive brochure is available in the Placement Office, and any senior interested should send a resum^ and cover letter to Mr Roy S Holm, Corporate Employment Manager, Beckman Instruments, Inc., 2500 Harbor Boulevard, Fullerton, California.
INTERVIEWS ON CAMPUS On Tuesday, November 27, Mr Roger Twyman from the United States Civil Service wiU interview men and women interested in management and specialized training opportunities in federal government agencies.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main E Muskie Urges Strong Central Government Senator Edmund S Muskie CDMaine) addressed the student body in Chapel Friday, concerning the U S. form of government as a panacea.
Thirteen small countries emerged under the Articles of Confederation, which aimed at restricting the central government.
The function of the men at Philadelphia, then, was to find a way to make a democratic government work.
At the end of the summer, Hamilton and Jefferson, who held two divergent philosophies, could look at their work with a sense of accord.
From a nation of four million we have risen to a nation of two hundred million.
We have reached an industrial peak in the world and established political, social and economic influence throughout the East and West.
As society changes in the future, the system will also have to change in order to survive.
We must find food, water, shelter, and transportation with a strong central government.
After defining democratic government as that form of government in which ""the people participate, in some manner or other, in the formation of public policy,"" Dr.
Thumm discussed the various powers of the executive in such a government.
Thumm considered the federative powers of the President — Chief of State, Chief Diplomat, and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.
When he examined the President's power of enforcement, the lecturer noted the trend toward centralization.
Democracy is caught between the need for increased executive powers and the necessity for individual participation.
Legislature, and with the power of veto, the President can influence legislation in the exercise of his legislative powers.
As this transfer of power from the legislature to the executive continues, however, legislation is increasingly replaced by promulgation.
Further, the role of the executive seems to preclude the possibility of individual participation in government.
In time of national disaster, it has become the ""duty"" of the President to intervene.
The problem of increasing executive power and keeping this power under the control of the people confronts the U S. today.
Those interested in working on these committees are encouraged to see those in charge.
Sabattns 8L NOTICE The United Nations of Poetry will present a reading of Eugene Ionesco's ""The Lesson"" on Sunday, November 25 al 8:00m. in the Jewish Community Center.
Augusta, Maine / BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 21, 1962 THREE Andrews Dams Marsh; Alumni Fund Finances Prexy's Skating Rink By RICHARD DERBY '66 As far back as anyone at Bates cares to remember, much of the area between Page Hall and Smith Hall was sunken, marshy land fed by subterranean springs.
About the time of the First World War, Bates College had a young business manager by the name of Delbert Andrews, class of 1910.
Andrews was a skating fan, and after years of watching this marshy bog going unused, he decided to put it to work.
This little pond eventually became known among the students as Lake Andrews.
A year or two later Delbert Andrews left Bates and soon after the water drained off.
Then suddenly five or six years ago when Bates decided to expand and build three new buildings around this soggy plot, it became the object of critical attention once again.
If the swamp were filled in no one could guarantee that the water would not then back up into the basements of houses surrounding the campus.
The Alumni Fund helped finance the dredging and Prexy's Skating Rink was back in business.
Occasionally the Puddle has been the object of pranks and practical jokes.
Critics Review ""Ring ff By CHRIS CHAMBERS '63 Ring Round The Moon, as rendered by Anouilh and Fry with additional scraps of dialogue inserted by Director Lavinia Schaeffer, is an entertaining evening at the theater, if a little fuzzy round the edges.
Members of the company who are billed as less than ""leads"" actually contribute the most to the evening — they deliver high comedy capably and consistently.
Special applause goes to Ned Brooks, whose Butler is starched to the hilt and who convulses his audience upon virtually every appearance.
Holly Milius presents superb and well-sustained characterization which ranks with her best theater efforts on campus.
Actor Lloyd seldom loses a chance to make the most of his minor role, with results that lift the entire play.
Lloyd and Wendell dance their way through an Act Two scene that is one of the high points of the evening's hilarity.
Malcolm Mills is not to be outdone, as he sustains a note of broad humor in his pathos, as he effectively portrays Messerschmann, the wealthy melancholy financier.
Romainville, played as the peripatetic arts patron by comedian Skip Butler, and Capulet, charmingly interpreted by sit on the shore and watch a boat or a bathtub riding the waves.
Lewiston j Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET 73 Lisbon St.
Lead Actor Nils Holt achieves the dubious distinction of creating the only characters that are quite colorless and almost as motionless.
He consistently loses chances4o make more of Frederic, who comes out a sort of delicate candy-caned elf.
And Hugo, the debonair Master of Revels, in the hands of actor Holt becomes a slightly faded and nervous magician who fears he's about to run out of rabbits.
Though Anouilh is able to keep a constant distinction between the two men, in the Little Theater the first keeps merging into the second.
The result is a mirrorlike character with about as much theatrical backbone as a sponge.
Encounters Social Strategist Thankfully, however, things do not stand still for long.
As Holt bumbles along, he encounters Madame Desmortes, who is a far better social strategist with far less perspiration.
Abby Palmer's portrayal has the calm, sure, and relaxed touch of the professional.
Of the same stature is Judy Mosman, who projects her Isabelle with symaphy and sureness as she arrives, becomes disillusioned, and finally achieves happiness at the madcap party.
Norman West, and it is displayed on a platform scheme intricately designed by Nils Holt.
One is bothered as much by shadows on the set and cyclorama almost as much as the actors are bothered by the orchestra, which they have to fight at times in order to get their lines out.
It is to be hoped that with the caliber of some of the talent available to her, Director Schaeffer would in the future plan to do more justice to it.
This is possible by omitting absurd and amateurish blocking devices that continue, as always, to be much too obviously forced on the script rather than growing out of it naturally.
It is also possible by choosing to spend two months' time on a play that can be more than a high-school vehicle.
Or one that does not* give the aftertaste of being much ado about nothing.
But in some of you that longing is a torrent rushing with might to the sea, carrying the secrets of the hillsides and the songs of the forest.
And in others it is a flat stream that loses itself in angles and bends and lingers before it reaches the shore.
The Prophet ATTENTION, STUDENTS! — MONIER'S TEXACO STATION — Corner of Main and Russell Streets, offers these specials to you Lube, $1 Oil and ALL other accessories 10% off SEE United States FOR ALL YOUR CAR PROBLEMS By JIM KIERNAN '63 Last Thursday night the Little Theater abounded with ""Rosy Figments"" and marvelous creations.
A string of unique characters bound the fragments of Jean Anouilh into a delightful bundle that reeled, sometimes ""bumpily"", around the moon.
The cast of Ring Round The Moon fulfilled my every expectation — Anouilh did not.
True, there was something of pathos in the dress tearing and money eating scenes, but the disjointed equilibrium was still felt.
He says that the nouveau-riche are cruel and climbing and that Diana Messerschmann is no different than her father.
Mr Anoulih did not achieve the desired combination and the ring was not quite smooth.
The most exciting beams were the many wonderful characters, the many creations of genius, that brightened up the stage.
Joshua crumbled delightfully, and Skip Butler as a patron of the arts was great.
She and the two mentioned above, not only created exceptional characters, they were damn funny.
When she and Holly took possession of the stage, when they came madly together, this nutty pahbrightened up the moony set.
Judy Mosman, a petite combination of wit, beauty and vivacity gave her usual fine performance.
Madame Desmortes was strongly and rather excellently portrayed by Abigail Palmer.
Tod Lloyd, Phyllis Porton, and Malcolm Mills also gave wonderful performances.
Last Thursday night it boomed over the footlights carrying the pleas and plots of the two characters, the two different brothers to our pleased ears.
Discord reigns in the triangular dispute between the students, the faculty, and the administration over the use of Carnegie science building.
The channels of communication between the three groups are clogged with a mire of misinformation, mistrust, and mishandling.
That the three groups undoubtedly have valid arguments may not be denied; the method of presenting suggestions, however, for and against an extension of hours in the science building may be questioned.
Perhaps it is time for all interested factions to stop bickering and confer.
Emotionally, shouting is more satisfying than a rational compromise; but the latter is far more effective.
Over thirty seniors now major in biology; include the underclasses and the figure rises to ninety; include physics and geology, and the figure becomes substantial.
Quantitavely, a significant portion of the studentry needs the use of the Carnegie library and labs.
The building, however, is only open two nights a week; Coram library opens six nights a week.
Many science majors find senior thesis work impossible or extremely difficult under present conditions.
Experiments often have to be checked every twelve hours, for example; with the building so often locked the difficulties become obvious.
The library and one or two labs would ordinarily be sufficient, thus obviating the danger of leaving all the equipment unlocked.
The cost of increasing the number of open evenings in Carnegie may not be disregarded, but seriously, how much does electricity and heat cost.
And more significantly, is education determined in quantitative terms, by the ledger system of education.
We suggest that the student is the most significant element in the school.
The salary of the faculty and administration is paid either by the students, or by those who, we hope, desire, not only new buildings and green lawns, but superior education.
That the emphasis is on the quality of the student is not always obvious.
Because the science building is there, because students need it, because locked doors frustrate learning and creativity Carnegie should be unlocked.
This chained Prometheus serves well as a picture in the bulletin; it should serve the students as well.
Entered as second-clasff matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 18T9.
My family, Gail, and I would like to thank each and every one of .you for the compassion which you have so graciously expressed.
Your contributions, your kind words, and your silent concern shall always be sincerely appreciated.
I fail to see anything constructive (and I will be laughed at for saying it) in such an article unless the purpose was to attack pseudo-intellectualism.
Superiority is something manifested by those people who are too concerned about themselves to admit values of greater importance.
A truly intellectual person is admired by all because he recognizes his insignificance.
Sincerely, Jim Corey '63 Peter Sellers Heads Cast In Thanksgiving Day Movie Peter Sellers in ""I'm Alright, Jack/' Tonight Thanksgiving even at 7 and 9 , the Rob Players will present the film, ""I'm Alright, Jack"" starring British actor Peter Sellers.
Produced by John Boulting of Lion International Pictures, the movie itself takes a swing at British labor unions, represented as ridiculously bureaucratic, and the management, represented as stupid and conniving.
Sellers plays the role of a shabby union shop steward named Kite, for which he won the British Film Academy's Actor of the Year Award.
The story concerns a wealthy innocent named Stanley Windrush who, incognito, is given a job in his uncle's factory.
Inadvertently he shows a time-study expert how one man can easily do the work of several, forcing the union-leader Kite to strike the management again.
When expelled from the union, Windrush's conscience sends him to work alone, behavior which precipitates national publicity and sympathy.
Tired of union walkouts, the English see in Windrush a hero, the last defender of individualism.
At this point, however, his kinship to the management is exposed, and Kite and the management are forced secretly and shamelessly to join and save face.
The film is, indeed, a satire on target; it attempts to balance the shortcomings and merits of both sides.
Bernard Shaw once wrote that trade unionism would be the capitalism of the working class.
Here is, without question, a comedy about the new conflict between two kinds of capitalists.
The myth, like the dream, offers a story occurring in space and 'time, a story which expresses, in symbolic language, religious and philosophical ideas, experiences of the soul in which the real significance of the myth lies.
They are not respected as a powerful form of expression as they once were.
The Bible is full of myths; most, if not all the Greek tragedies are based on myths.
It is necessary that myths and dreams be interpreted correctly if they are to have any coherent meaning, and it is because of misinterpretation that we have so many arguments as to what crucial works such as the Bible say.
It Was his inspiration that Friday night the four of us sat about and frantically composed.
I instructed my roommates to write a paragraph sounding intellectual, using big words, oddly coherent but saying little.
We took the four paragraphs, shuffled them, then arranged them in the order in which they were published.
Our good friend, Mr Walsh, gladly consented to write a letter which was placed in the Student to give a firm foundation for our edifice of rubbish.
For the past few days we have listened to comments and it is painfully evident that many students at Bates are willing to accept authority blindly; that so many base the acceptance of something they don't understand on the mere word of one individual.
Some have commented that they thought it good, although they didn't really understand it.
A few suspected it was nonsense to begin with; and some, honestly admitting no comprehension whatsoever, asked me to explain' it.
There were those who, with a wink, said that they liked Walsh's comment, as if they had enjoyed the book because they read the introduction.
There were others who claimd that they got a lot out of it — of course, they interpreted it their own way, they said.
One of my roommates claims that with its strange coherency, it is truly a modern expression, constructed with the same principles with which a running Pollock is painted.
This is very possibly true, but the article was not created with this in mind.
It was written to show you, my fellow students — to show you, my flattering friends — to show you, our dear faculty members — how we, all of us, you and I, trust too much our academic authorities.
It was written to show that students are so used to accepting what is worded compoundly and phrased complexly as brilliant and as fact, that they are unable to contest Kiernan.
I do not ask for doubting Thomases, but still, no one has dared to put their hands in the five holes of the Crater's Edge.
As Freud maintains in his theory that the dream is an exBATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 21, 1962 FIVE Hickories Club Sponsors Ski Tog Fashion Show Friday Attention all skiers and snow bunnies.
The show, organized by Nancy Conway and Al Pollock, consists entirely of ski and after-ski clothes.
Joyce Mantyla as commentator, will describe the outfits, modeled Prexy Meets Parents, Alumni On West Trip President and Mrs.
During the past week they met with Bates alumni and parents of Bates students in Chicago; Ann Arbor, Michigan; Cleveland; Buffalo; Rochester; Syracuse; and Albany.
Phillips reviewed campus developments of the past year and outlined plans for the year just ahead.
On their way to Chicago, the Bates President and his wife attended the State of Maine dinner in Boston, held in connection With the annual meeting of the New England Council, of which Dr.
Phillips is board chairman. by Ginny Erskine, Carol Kinney, Martha Lindholm, Joanna Starr, Minda Hamelsky, and Sally Utz.
Ski-In, from Auburn, has provided both the costumes and a display of skiing equipment.
There will be a wide variety of gear with prices ranging from ""budgeted"" to ""budget-less"", furnishing a good opportunity to order equipment for yourself or for Christmas presents.
According to rumor it's going to be a long, hard winter, so be sure to come, and learn how to keep warm and have fun in the latest style.
LIBRARY HOURS Thanksgiving Day Upstairs reading area will be open 8 to 1 1 as usual.
On Monday, November 26, Bates students will be asked what they think of the College bookstore.
The purpose of the Chapel poll is to present a clear picture of the needs of the student body regarding the store.
At the same time, the Committee has asked the faculty to contribute their opinions and suggestions concerning the evaluations.
Student opinion is thus an important factor in enabling the College to maintain and improve its present high standards of education.
This is how the Merrimanders, our well known women's singing sextet acquired its name.
In 1957, six girls at a casual get-together decided that they would enjoy singing and harmonizing together.
Introduced first as the ""Salamanders"", the girls made their debut at a Chase Hall dance.
The ""Merri's"", sponsored by Professor Smith and the music department, are an active campus organization.
The frosh received a preview in their first assembly when Deansman Jim Curtis '63, and Debbie Peterson, a senior Merrimander, vocalized together to teach the ""newcomers"" Batesy songs.
Not limited to the campus, the group has performed for several church organizations and civic associations in the Lewiston-Auburn area.
Their repertoire now includes popular tunes and old favorites, each with a novelty twist of its own.
The ""Merri's"" are comprised of two seniors, one junior, and three sophomores.
The seniors, Debbie Peterson and Bette Anne Barber, are first soprano and middle soprano, respectively.
Bette Anne plans to go to graduate school as a background for social work.
Best represented is the sophomore class with Carol Bishop, middle alto, Karen Cunningham, second alto, and Kathy Farnhan, second soprano.
Carol, from Chesire, Conn., and Kathy, coming from Mendham, N J., both plan careers in biology.
Karen, studying psychology, could easily be called a ""rebel"" since she comes to Bates from Gaithersburg, Md.
The Merrimanders sponsored with the Deansmen a Close Harmony Concert last spring in which they asked other groups like themselves to gather and sing.
The songs recorded in recent years by the Merrimanders are familiar to all Bates students.
Saturday, November 17, will find the Merrimanders at the United Baptist Church in Lewiston.
They will perform from 6Will 26 Chapel whether a majority of students would prefer having more books and less sweatshirts and jewelry in the book store.
The poll wil\ ask if the student body would be satisfied with having these items taken out of the display cases (except for certain times of the year), and stored behind the counter.
It should be noted, however, that the sweatshirts, pins, and the like could be purchased at any time even when not on display.
Finally, the poll provides an opportunity for the student to make any of his own suggestions pertaining to the improvement of the bookstore facilities.
Providing the students feel the bookstore could be improved, we hope to be as effective in our results as the Library Committee was last year.
This poll will be an indication of student opinion; without the cooperation of the student body, the Committee can do nothing.
Only with its support can the objectives of the Committee be fulfilled."" 6:30m. at ""Harvest Time"", a dinner sponsored by the senior high fellowship to raise funds to support its 1962-63 program.
Special Bates tickets cost $1.00 and may be purchased from Bette Anne Barber.
After Hours clusively irrational production, and Jung maintains that the dream is an exclusively rational production — Fromm maintains that dreams can be the expression both of the irrational and the rational functionings of the mind.
This chapter, however, has more value in the discussion of Freud and Jung than in the discussion of Fromm's own theory, which is quite weak and undeveloped.
His criticism of Freud and Jung being ""one-sided and dogmatic"" results in a nice little dogma of his own.
It is here that Fromm is himself, and not a feeble synthesis of Freud and Jung.
He uses quotes excellently (even though many of them are from books he wrote himself), and displays much creative insight.
His other important works include Escape from Freedom, Man for Himself, and Psychoanalysis and Religion.
Hallowell, Me. no six BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 21, 1962 Banquet Climaxes 1962 Fall Season Tamis, Davis Named Award Winners The Garnet Line By AL MARDEN ONE DOWN — TWO TO GO Thursday's award banquet marked the closing of a very successful fall sports campaign.
Many hands went into the making of the successes of the football, cross-country and soccer awards.
Others, however, have received little credit until their mention in Coach Hatch's comments the other night.
Coach Hatch was especially high in his praise for Dining Hall Director Wayne Steele who in addition to providing the proper nourishment for the Garnet athletes, also made it possible for the football squad to practice late and still come in off the field to a hot meal.
Anyone who journeyed to a Bobcat away game witnessed how fine a job Mr Ahern did by comparing him with other announcers.
Doctor Horsman and sidekick trainer kept the Garnet gladiators in fine shape throughout their campaigns.
Miss Erskine is the first girl ever to be chosen as the outstanding contributor to Bates College athletics for the week.
Ginny was outstanding in her duty as co-ordinator representing the Women's Athletic Association in the organization and operation of the field day activities that were held here at Bates, Saturday.
Miss Erskine, the fullback of the Bates field hockey team, was a stellar performer on the field as well.
She was the key to an inspiring defensive effort by the Batesettes as she repeatedly prevented Ginny Erskine the stronger Maine and Colby teams from scoring.
The outstanding work of Miss Erskine, a senior Rand girl from Wellesley, Mass., made her selection entirely in keeping with the spirit and desire that has typified the Bates athlete in victory and defeat.
Miss Kathy Pease, a junior from Bloomfield, Conn., who was also an outstanding contributor to the Garnet cause.
By AL MARDEN Sports Editor Twenty-seven letters and ten senior award jackets were presented at the annual Fall Sports Banquet last Thursday in the Bates Commons.
Paul Planchon, Lloyd Bunten, and Eric Silverberg were elected captains of next year's fall squads and Bill Davis and Phil Tamis were recipients of the Allen Goddard Achievement Awards at the annual steak dinner and awards banquet.
Victor News PAPERBACKS LARGEST SELECTION OF PAPERBACKS IN THE STATE Barnes & Noble College Outline Series SCHOOL SUPPLIES Toastmaster for this season's* affair was David Higgins '55, who in addition to being a former Bates gridder, scouts for Coach Hatch during the fall campaign.
Higgins opened the award presentations by introducing William ""Chick"" Leahey who filled in for Harrier Coach Walter Slovenski in presenting the crosscountry awards.
After delivering several typical Slovenski jokes in a typical Slovenskian manner, Leahey summed up the harrier's outstanding record as he said, ""this has been the most successful season since the inauguration of cross-country on this campus.
Letters were presented to Edgar Belden '63, Michael Gregus '65, Peter Parson '65, Basil Richardson '65, Kenneth Trufant '65, Finn Wilhelmson '64, William Dunham '63, and Captain-elect Eric Silverberg.
Team Of Firsts Toastmaster Higgins mentioned the 1962 Bates soccer team had many firsts this year.
It was the first time that the Garnet hooters were an official intercollegiate team.
It was the first time that awards were given to soccer players and they were the first team in the state to beat Colby.
Soccer Coach James Somerville summed up the booters' first inter-collegiate season saying, ""It was a very good season for the first year.
Coach Somerville presented letter awards to Robert Thompson '66, George Beebe '65, Richard Danosky '65, Robert Kramer '65, Robert Lanz '65, Steve Barron '64, Todd Lloyd '64, Peter Aransky '63, George Hunter '63, Colin Loader '63, Donald Mawhinney '63, Raphael Onyemelukwe '63, Lee Nute '63, and Captain-elect Lloyd Bunten.
Head Football Coach Robert W Hatch preluded his remarks about the team with acknowledgment of . persons other than the team and coaching staff who had a part in the successful grid season.
Before the season started I characterized this group as one that wanted to do well.
CAPTAINS-ELECT — Elected as captains for next year's fall sports teams at Thursday's banquet were Paul Planchon, football; Eric Silverberg, cross-country; and Lloyd Bunten, soccer.
ALLEN GODDARD AWARD WINNERS — Prepschool teammates Bill Davis and Phil Tamis pose with Football Coach Robert W Hatch after being named recipients of the Allen Goddard Achievement Awards.
Team Of Body In presenting letters, Coach Hatch emphasized that this is the largest group of letterwinners ever at Bates.
Football letter awards were presented to Thomas Carr '66, Charles Lockhart '66, Jeffrey Lewis '66, John Yuskis '66, James Brown '65, James Callahan '65, Grant Farquhar '65, John Lanza '65, William MacNevin '65, Steven Ritter '65, John Donovan '64, William Graham '64, John Shatz '64, David Stockwell '64, Daniel Stockwell '64, and Captain-elect Paul Planchon '64.
Hatch individually congratulated the senior letter winners and spent time to praise each one to those in attendance.
Seniors earning letter awards were Paul Castolene, John Curtiss, Webster Harrison, Phillip Tamis, Edward Rucci, Robert Williams, and co-captains Howard Vandersea and William Davis.
It is presented to those who have achieved the most in a particular season.
As has been the custom in previous years, the Bates Student Sports Staff at this time announces its selections for all-state grid honors.
These selections are based only on the three State Series games, and while some of the players selected or not selected may cause controversy, we believe they have best displa yed their talents over the course of State Series play.
Five members of the Student Sports Staff were on the selection committee, Al Marden, Russ Henderson, Dick Love, Al Williams, and Nick Basbanes.
Two points were awarded for first votes and one for a second team vote.
Bates placed five men, Maine* three, Colby two, and Bowdoin one on the first team, considered by the selectors one of the strongest in recent years.
In most cases, selectors attached as much value to defensive excellence as to offensive ability.
Third Year For Red It is the second appearance on the all-Maine team for four of the men, Bonalewicz, Vandersea, Smith and Planchon, and the third year that Howie Vandersea has been selected by the Student Sportswriters.
Vandersea was picked as a center the two previous years and Smith was a halfback on the All-State team two years ago.
Paul Castolene was an unani mous choice as a repeater to this year's squad at one end, while Bowdoin junior Frank Drigotas received three first team votes Drigotas was the leading pass receiver in the state as the for mer Red Eddie caught three passesfor 59 yards and a touchdown.
Castolene caught the most passes of any Maine receiver throughout the season as the Garnet end nabbed 14 passes over the rainy season.
Phil Tamis was another unanimous choice by the Student selectors and he is joined at the tackle position on the first squad by Colby's Dick Bonalewicz.
Tamis was a key performer in the Garnet's success story this fall as he excelled all year in the Bobcat line, both on defense and offense.
The rugged Bonalewicz, like Tamis, was tough to move on defense and was twice selected to E.C.A.C. teams.
Vandersea started the season at center, where he had been selected to two previous All-Maine teams, but was switched to guard where his speed and size could be utilized on offense.
His linebacking play made the Garnet co-captain an unanimous selection.
At the other guard slot Coeds' Field Day Success; Colby Hockey Title Champ GARNET DRIVE — Bates girls move on offense as Penny Brown moves into position for Sue Herman's pass in front of Colby goal.
Roberts , Hickey , Whitehouse , Harrington , Haddock (Bowdoin C), Haley , Stanzilis , Dukes , Cooper , Clark , Cox . *repeater Robertson, Robert Maine 1963 6 Ross, Gary Colby 1965 4 Severson, Daniel Maine 1964 4 Smith, Ernest Maine 1965 3 Ford, Robert Bowdoin 1963 5 Boucher, Roger Maine 1964 4 Ritter, Steven Bates 1965 4 Davis, William Bates 1963 5 Brown, David Maine 1964 5 Yuskis, John Bates 1966 2 Chard, William Maine 1963 6 Bump Hadley of Maine was :hosen on the basis of his defensive play in series play.
Hadley received three first team votes to place him slightly ahead of Bowdoin's Bob Ford.
Unanimous Choice Center Phil Soule of the Black Bears was the fourth unanimous choice of the Student Sportswriters.
Soule led the Bears to a series championship with his hard defensive linebacking play.
Maine's quarterback Tom Austin was instrumental in bringing he Bears their second consecutive Series title.
The Black Bear signal caller connected on seven of 25 passes thrown in series play for 62 yards and a Maine touchdown.
Frosh fullback Tom Carr edged out Maine's Bill Chard for first team honors.
Carr's ten touchdowns over the season was tops among Maine ball carriers.
Colby's Binky Smith was the final unanimous choice of the Student selectors.
Smith was second in the state in rushing with a 72-yard total and was second in scoring with three touchdowns.
The other halfback slot is held down by Paul Planchon who led all Maine carriers in rushing average with a seasonal 5. yard per carry average.
Planchon also was second in punting for the season with a 33. yard average.
The girls of Colby College carried away the honors by squeezing by Maine 1-0 and Bates 3-1.
The host Bobkittens, featuring a vastly improved squad over past years, were on the short end of a 1-0 count against the state university and a 3-1 score against Colby.
The playday activity, beginning at ten in the morning and extending throughout the afternoon, was a well organized, spirited experience for both visitors and host.
Before breaking for lunch at the Men's Commons, all three teams had played a half of the three field hockey games scheduled for the day.
The Bates girls, featuring a rugged defense built around Kathy Pease and Ginny Erskine, shut out Colby and allowed Maine only one goal during the first half games of the morning.
The girls of Maine and Colby battled to a scoreless deadlock in the morning half of their encounter.
With the half time results standing at Colby 0 Bates 0, Maine 1 Bates 0, and Colby 0 Maine 0, the girls moved to Commons for lunch.
First Garnet Score Colby wasted little time, after returning from lunch, to go to work on the scoreboard.
They scored three times while the Garnet girls were held to one score, unique though, in the fact that it was the fir§t time Bates has ever scored against the larger Maine . schools in field hockey.
In the second half of the Maine Bates game the Garnet girls displayed a fighting defense and held the young women of Maine scoreless.
Again it was the efforts of Kathy Pease, Ginny Erskine, Pokey Kestila, and Les Jones that sparked the Garnet efforts.
Colby Wins Title The second half of the MaineColby game was also a scoreless deadlock as the soggy field and cold weather gained the upperhand.
The final results gave the coeds of Colby the overall title with wins of 3-1 over Bates and 1-0 over Maine.
Maine, seeded first as a result of their abundance of talent and reliance on Physical Education majors, was second with a 1 win, 1 loss record as they defeated Bates 1-0 and lost to Colby, 1-0.
Miss Janet Nell, coach of the Bates Hockeyettes, was full of praise for the efforts of the team in their games with the larger Maine colleges.
Following the competition on the playing fields, the girls were treated to a tea, organized by the Women's Athletic Association under Louise McCabe and coordinated by Ginny Erskine.
Dual Filter makes the difference DUAL FILTER Pndmci of J&dm*>u*<m3i&u*>&y>aty3&u*o Tareyton, «w> it our middlt name"" e » ' ^ Banquet a back.
As described by Hatch, the award is ""not a trophy for a star, yet a star is not prevented from winning it.
The Allen Goddard Trophies, this year were presented to William Davis and Phillip Tamis,. teammates at Cushing Academy as well as at Bates.
Tamis became the second lineman on the present squad to win the Goddard Trophy, as Vandersea had won it in his sophomore year.
Following a whimsical interlude when Team Physician Donald Horsman presented a ""J&J award"" to senior tackle Bob Williams, Athletic Director Lloyd Lux handed out the Senior Honor Awards.
Seniors winning such awards were Edgar Belden, William Dunham, Frank VanLaethen, Robert Williams, Phillip Tamis, Edward Rucci, Webster Harrison, John Curtiss, Paul Castolene, Howie Vandersea, and William Davis.
Throughout the world, many students live in deplorable housing and eat inadequate and poorly prepared food while attending school.
Numbering about one million, the student population, which has more than doubled in the past ten years, has many acute needs.
Almost all the institutions of higher learning are located in the crowded cities and towns and offer very limited accommodations, especially food.
Coming for the most part from indigent families, the students must spend their limited budgets on food from catering houses where the diet is neither well balanced nor prepared under hygienic conditions, but is costly nevertheless.
To improve the nutritional state of students within given financial limitations, several WUS committees in India have decided to establish cooperative cafeterias.
Run by staff and students, these cafeterias will strive to provide good food at the lowest possible prices.
The employment of students will help to reduce administrative costs while allowing students to participate in the project.
Nagpur is one of the universities which is badly in need of such a co-operative cafeteria.
A sizable percentage of Nagpur's 15,000 students reside in private lodgings and have to depend for their food on a number of public restaurants, many of which thrive only on student bills.
The cost of starting this project will be about half of the drive's goal which is $1000.
The money that Bates students provide will help give the Indian students at Nagpur a beginning, and through their own initiative and work student conditions will be improved.
Worthy '42, Violates Ban;En ters Red China By PEGGY PARTRIDGE '65 and CASIMIR KOLASKI '64 Last September, the United States government imprisoned a Bates graduate, William Worthy '42, foreign correspondent for the Baltimore AfroAmerican, for illegally entering this country.
The U S. accused Worthy of violating the McCarran Immigration and Nationality Act by illegally re-entering this country from Cuba in October of 1961.
While at Bates, Worthy was,. ~ active in the Christian Associa1 tion, interested in non-violence activities, and a conscientious objector.
In his essay, ""Defense ditions there for the A/ro-Amerthe courts, Worthy was awardIn 1956 Worthy went to Com] ed some of the highest honors in munist China to report on conhis profession, which further attests to his competence as journalist.
A At Bates College On Tuesday, November 20, a joint meeting of Intergovernment Committee, Stu-C and Stu-G, was held in Skelton Lounge.
The purpose of the meeting was to come to a decision regarding Bates' membership in the National Student Association.
Prior to this meeting, Intergovernment had reviewed Bates' two-year-long affiliation with NSA, recommended that this affiliation be terminated, and referred the proposal to the two governments for action.
Following this, Stu-C members voted to support the Intergovernment proposal to disaffiliate.
Stu-G members, however, decided not to uphold the proposal, and voted to postpone definite action on the matter of NSA and to continue the college's affiliation with the national organization for the remainder of this year.
This brought any united action to a standstill and necessitated the joint meeting.
Stu-C, in agreement with Intergovernment, believes that NSA has shown little ability to be of use in meeting the problems of Bates.
The material distributed by NSA, when not entirely inapplicable to Bates' problems, has been insufficient to be of any real help.
The high cost of membership in the organization is therefore unwarranted, and affiliation seems to be not only unnecessary, but burdensome.
Bates has never given the organization an opportunity to do what it can.
By enlarging the committee of the campus NSA coordinator and making it more efficient, the full benefits of the organization could be realized.
For this reason, Stu-G felt that membership in NSA should be continued for the remainder of the year, under an enlarged campus coordinating committee.
NSA could be evaluated in light of what was done in their trial period.
Apart from the extraordinary act which Worthy has ""violated"" there are other aspects of this case which deserve consideration.
He appealed the denial, but in 1959 the Supreme Court handed down a decision dismissing the appeal.
There were two Look correspondents covering conditions in China at the same time as Worthy who did not lose their passports.
While the passport case was in Maine Educator To Explain Team Student Teaching CANTERBURY CLUB There will be a supper meeting of the Canterbury Club at 5 o'clock Friday evening at 9 Arch Street.
Under team teaching, scnool personnel are grouped, with two or more teachers co-operatively planning and carrying out an instructional program for a group of pupils larger than that usually found in a classroom.
This plan is characterized by flexible grouping of pupils with all the pupils brought together for mass lectures and demonstrations and then split into small discussion groups.
Whenever possible, the elimination of grade level designations allows grouping students of similar interests, abilities, or motivations.
Each teaching team will consist of a varying number of instructors, depending upon the situation.
A Team Leader, who takes charge of the group, is an experienced and especially competent teacher.
The remaining part of the team consists of beginning graduate students.
Graduates and seniors from universities and state teachers colleges receive training in the teaching field as members of these teams.
They are selected on the basis of their predicted competence for teaching.
The executive members of the Bates Student Education Association, the campus organization for students planning teaching careers, attended the fall conference of all Maine college chapters of the S.E.A. held in Augusta.
The purpose of this annual conference is to check the progress of each chapter in the various programs planned for the college year as well as to discuss and exchange ideas which might be helpful in making the S.E.A. groups more beneficial to their members and to the teaching profession.
Pappanikou, acting Assistant Superintendent of the Pineland Training Center in Pownal.
Pappanikou lectured about the problems that confront the classroom teacher.
He explained the difficulties that occur in teaching a group of pupils with widely varying mental intelligence, relating also the complicated situations which give rise to the emotionally disabled child.
The speaker pointed out that the teacher, in dealing with these situations, must be an educator, a psychologist and sociologist.
He concluded his remarks by discussing some current trends that are underway in primary and secondary education for dealing specifically * with the exceptional child. studies; he also won Freedom of Information Awards from the Boston Press Club and the Capital Press Club.
In July of 1961 Worthy sailed on a ship bound for Mexico, but instead, disembarked at Havana, Cuba, which was on the rapidlygrowing list of nations closed to United States citizens.
From Cuba, he filed on-the-spot news reports and scooped all other news agents by reporting the flight to Cuba of Robert Williams, Stu-G Considers Banquet; Rules The Student Government Board held a short meeting at 7:00m. on Tuesday, November 29.
Diane Gallo '64, banquet chairman, called for the reports of the various committee chairmen.
Menu and seating, Nancy Nichols '64, Janet Soltis '65; entertainment, Marion Day '64; programs and decorations, Nancy Day '64; invitations, Joyce Killay '64.
Bette Anne Little, president of Stu-G, reported Intergovernment activities to the board.
All those interested in serving on the committee are requested to see Suzi H Smith '65.
A motion was passed to have the dormitories opened from 11 m. to 11m. on Thanksgiving Day.
It had previously been voted to extend hours for freshman women from 10 to 11m. on Thanksgiving eve and night.
The Board then adjourned to Chase Hall, where the Student Council and Student Government Board met to discuss the possible withdrawal of Bates from the National Student Association.
All these will be available for you this coming Saturday night, December 1st.
That's right, the sophomore class invites one and all to the last semi-formal dance of the year — Aurora Frost — at 8:00m. in the Chase Hall Ballroom.
The snowy-wonderland ""of the winter scene invades the ballroom bringing with it all the crystal clearness of the great outdoors.
Superimposed upon this tableau will be the music of the Polar Bear Three.
This combo, originating from Bowdoin's Theta Delta House, includes in its repertoire everything from the slow and sentimental to the rollicking rhythms of the twist.
Later in the evening entertainment will be offered by the Deansmen and Merrimanders.
Following their individual numbers, the two groups will combine their efforts in a medley of their favorite tunes.
Aurora Frost is a must for all Bates students Debate Squad Plans For Dec.
Bates won 16 of the 20 debates in the Vermont debate tourney last November 16th and 17th.
This was the best showing for any school that participated in that number of debates.
Four of the debaters who participated in the Vermont tourney will participate in a debate contest at Tufts on Friday and Saturday, November 30th and December 1st.
Robert Ahern '64 and Howard Blum '63 will compose one team and John Strassburger '64 and Thomas Hall '64 will make up the other team.
The teams will alternately debate the negative and affirmative positions.
Grant Lewis '63, the former captain of the Bates debate team, will serve in Professor Quimby's place as a critic judge.
A critic judge evaluates the speakers and determines the winner in a debate between two schools with which he is not associated.
On Monday, December 3rd, four novice debaters will participate in a contest with Edward Little High School on the trade block topic.
Priscilla Clark '66 and Carl Johnson '66 will compose the affirmative team.
The negative team will consist of Norman Davis '65 and Ronald Snell '65.
European Study Available With Scholarship Program Scholarship applications for European history, with all classundergraduate study in Europe es taught in German. during the academic year 196364 are being accepted by the Institute of European Studies.
Intended for superior centers in Vienna, Paris, and j students, the program encomFreiburg, West Germany.
Each program embraces formal classes, lectures, seminars and field-study, and is designed to fulfill usual course requirements at its academic level.
The programs in Vienna and Paris are open to college sophomores and juniors, while the Freiburg program is limited to juniors.
Completed applications must be submitted no later than February 15, 1963.
Forms and descriptive literature are available from the Institute of European Studies, 35 E Wacker Drive, Chicago 1.
The application deadline for those programs is December 10, with sailings scheduled for early February.
Preference is given to students who have a speaking knowledge of the French language, previous camp counselling experience, and the ability to teach one or more ac tivities.
Those who serve in the camps in France are required to make and pay for their travel arrangements.
However, they receive free board and room and remuneration of $35 to $50 per month.
This is an excellent opportunity for those interested in French culture and in learning to speak the French language fluently.
Additional information is available in the Guidance and Placement Office.
JORDAN MARSH COMPANY RETAILING The Jordan Marsh Company in Boston will not be sending a recruiting representative to Bates this year, but interested students are urged to arrange for interviews at the Boston store.
Executive Training Program brochures are available in the Guidance and Placement Office, and the person to contact is Mr James I White, Director of Training and Executive Development, Jordan Marsh Company, Boston, Massachusets.
INTERVIEWS ON CAMPUS On Wednesday, November 28, Mr Harold Smith '61 from the Chicago Theological Seminary will interview men and women interested in graduate study and career opportunities in religious service.
Department of Justice (Immigration and Naturalization Service) will meet with men interested in federal service career opportunities.
On Wednesday, December 5, there will be a group meeting at 4:00m. of women interested in the Harvard-Radcliffe Graduate EMPIRE NOW PLAYING ^Sandha,3obR) DEE * DAW MiEliNEPRESLE^JoHNLUND — CESWIRPMERP-SrEFWW PW01S Mai.
X Unnerul-lntMiuUonil Pietun Eve.:30-8:30 Bergman Directs Film At Theater Saturday Night By NORMAN GILLESPIE '64 Smiles of a Summer Night, the Ingmar Bergman film at the Little Theater this Saturday night, won the Cannes Film Festival grand prix as the best comedy of 1956.
With interlocking triangles, including a prominent Swedish lawyer, his young wife, his grown son, his ex-mistress, and the upstairs maid, the story quickly becomes complicated.
Director Bergman makes it plain that he intended to produce the best French picture ever made in Sweden.
His settings are in exquisitely bad fin de siecle style; his landscapes redound with swans and willows.
This Swedish sermon on contemporary sensuality will be screened at 7 and 9 Calendar Wednesday.
December 4 Rob Players Meeting, 7-9 Sabatuu 8L Ooea Dailv 11:00 A.M. to 2:00 School program in business administration.
Interested students should sign up' at the Guidance and Placement Office.
Wright was once again able to observe from the student's point of view.
Wright has been able to make some interesting comparisons between a thriving, throbbing, big-city university, and a small, friendly, co-ed, etc.
Wright notes that the students at Chicago seem more open to new ideas and have a keener sense of social concern — particularly in the field of race relations.
Bates students come primarily from small New England towns, and have a more conservative background.
Wright also feels that Bates students are more optimistic and have a little more ""good will"" toward each other.
The Chicago students seem more interested in abstract ideas than Bates students, and handle them with more facility, Dr.
Wright — and the girls especially bear a lesser burden of rules than their Bates counterparts.
The library at Chicago is open at night attended only by student assistants, but the stacks are always closed, except by pass, to prevent outsiders from wandering ' off with the books.
With all their fine social conHEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER 73 Lisbon St.
Wright felt a lack of warmth in many of the Chicago students — almost to the point of rudeness.
Wright, are quite concerned with being individuals, and seem to conform in their individualism.
A great number of men in the student body wear some sort of accessory whiskers, and sloppy dress is the rule rather than the exception.
Like too many city universities, the Chicago campus is run down and ragged — the grass is trampled and littered, and the administration seems indifferent.
The liberal elements (which make up most of the student body at Chicago) express themselves in many ways.
The student newspaper, The Maroon, is printed several times a week, and does not limit itself to campus affairs, but takes definite stands on controversial national and world issues.
Wright also found that the professors at Chicago are often less conscientious than the professors at Bates, and too often leave their classes in the lurch for several days at a time to attend conferences.
Wright also noted an impersonality and lack of warmth not present to such an extent at Bates.
Wright will teach a course in Asian governments, and is planning to continue his studies next year in India under a Fulbright grant.
By JENNIFER WINGATE ""Beds are to be made and rooms straightened by 10 except on Sunday and during exams.
This rule is part of the dormitory regulations governing the appearance of women's rooms.
The house-mothers enforce this regulation by checking each girl's room every day, as part of their duties.
These are two rules whose place and value in the context of higher education I question.
The mere existence of a rule which attempts to legislate neatness is a regression toward the conditions of a girls' boarding school.
What I would like to examine first, however, are the effects produced by the manner in which the rule is enforced.
Students are accepted with a certain understanding that they are mature and can accept responsibility.
If they are not mature, then the college should enable them to develop maturity.
Guidance is necessary, but to give the individual the responsibility of seeking guidance and solving his or her own problems is a better way to allow the person to grow.
Forcing students to accept certain modes of behavior will only lead to rebellion or quiet submission, followed by the death of individualism and constructive behavior.
Cluttered rooms ar beds left unmade indicate very little about a person except that he is not concerned at the moment about his living quarters.
Making a bed or hanging up clothes doesn't indicate superior intelligence.
Thirdly, rules (unless necessary) infringe upon the rights of the individual.
However, a person is perfectly entitled to live as he desires as long as he is not imposing on another.
It does not seem to be of permanent value, since no rule Africa Focuses On Family's Importance By DAVID DHLIWAYO '64 It is my intention to bring Southern Rhodesia face to face with Bates College so that the two may come to know and understand each other.
The African people of Southern Rhodesia consciously and unconsciously take pride in their culture and sincerely hope that they are not alone in this respect of their heritage.
In our culture the family is a very important institution without which the individual cannot function.
The family has the obvious duty to perpetuate the human race and, in a special way, means a great deal to our society.
The father and mother disseminate the culture of the society to all the members of the family by word and deed.
In many respects they have the final word, After Hows Q2J By JOHN HOLT '64 Rather than writing a review for this week, I feel a need to become pompous and subjective, and discuss a point made by Esslin in The Theatre of the Absurd.
It is often said of a writer that he is ""ahead of his time,"" and that he can only be appreciated after his death when the world has had a chance to catch up with him.
The writer is, among other things, a person who reflects in his writings the things that he sees in the world about him.
Of course the writer must live in the present; he tannot five in the future.
Therefore, rather than say the writer is ahead of his time, say that his readers are behind in time, for it is less difficult to understand what has gone before rather than understand what is going on in the ""now."" can truly command respect.
Such inspections as are found on the women's side of campus are uncalled for and illogical.
It is the old Puritan form of publicly enforced righteousness that does not belong in a liberal college. , and their advice on any aspect of life, if not taken, is at least considered with profound respect.
By this token, the parents shoulder such a great responsibility that at times they find it both expedient and necessary to delegate responsibility to the eldest son.
The oldest son received responsibility on the tacit understanding that he has not only a duty but also a human necessity to keep the name of the family alive.
The foundation on which this task is based is one of love and hope for a successful life.
Such occasions are not only colorful but also endeared by the love expressed in the white wedding dress and crown.
The whole spectacle is viewed with the enthusiasm of a college graduating senior.
Success is viewed in terms of the family and every member has to be aware at all times of the presence and existence of other members of the family.
This is a team and operates with the force and vigor of a Bates football team enthusiastically cheered by the student body under the leadership of the cheerleaders.
On some occasions, however, non-cooperative elements develop among the family members.
It is our firm belief that happiness emanates from good family relationships based on cooperation and confidence.
Many careless observers and pressing journalists may contend that our family scene is so close and tight that it destroys individual initiative and worth.
In essence individuals are free to maneuver outside the realms of family counsel.
We believe that this function is necessary and safe when individuals are old enough to stand on their own feet, that is, upon reaching maturity.
People are usually considered to be mature in their late twenties and this is the time when they are expcted to marry.
At this stage individuals are expected to have had enough experience to the extent that they adapt themselves to a marriedlife situation with the least amount of tension.
In this light, individuals are expected to develop attitudes that have a tendency toward family orientation.
The restrictions and censorship of news imposed by the White House during the Cuban crisis and the West German Government's suppression of ""Der Spiegel"" create mistrust and portend the loss of freedom of the press.
During our welltimed power play against Cuba the administration parceled information to reporters piecemeal; the news became a propaganda weapon, subject to the whims of the administration and the pentagon.
The West German Government, reflecting the Gestapo activities of the Hitler regime, recently raided the editorial office of ""Der Spiegel,"" a frequent critic of the Bonn Government, and obtained the arrest in Spain of Conrad Ahlers, one of ""Der Spiegel's"" journalists.
Absent from this minor power play were any of the post-Hitler freedoms proclaimed so loudly but adhered to so infrequently.
Fortunately the West German people awoke and yelled loud enough that Adenauer made scapegoats of some of the officials involved in the suppression of the magazine.
The communist threat offers a flexible excuse for the suppression of freedoms by the United States and German Governments.
The secret war now, being waged in South Vietnam exposes the power of Diem's puppet Government to rigidly suppress the news.
Diem allows few reporters access to the shifting war fronts; he imposes censorship on what little information our correspondents glean.
The Government's prosecution of William Worthy '42 (see story on page one) quickly transfers the problem from South Vietnam to this campus.
Because Red China exists not, because Cuba exists not, because the administrations dislike criticism, William Worthy suffers.
This country supports dictators in Spain, in South Vietnam, in South America; yet we refuse to support the right of free citizens to leave and reenter this country at will.
Faculty Advisor David A Nelson Published weekly at Chase Hall, Batea College, during the college year.
Entered as second-clasK matter at the Lewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879.
Your fine editorials of the past two weeks concerning the hours of the Carnegie Science Building move me to disclose an incident which shows the kind of opposition we are up against.
On Friday, November 16, Natalie Shober, Ed Margulies and I, representing the senior biology majors, went to the Bursar's Office with the sole intention of asking Mr Ross the reasons why the building could not remain open.
First, we wanted to be able to formulate correspondence reasons as to why the building should be open, and second, because the professors in our department informed us that even they were not given clear reasons.
As soon as we asked this question of Mr Ross, he took what seemed to us to be a belligerent, arrogant, and rude attitude.
He told us that he did not want to ""get in the middle of this"" and to take it up with our department.
When we answered that we knew how the department felt, and that they could not give us clear reasons, he became quite loud and said, among other things, that the chemistry majors do not try to tell him how to run their building, and that putting an article in the newspaper and sending students over would not get us anywhere.
In short, we finally left his office because we realized that talking to this man was like hitting our heads against a wall.
What disturbed us so much was not merely the fact that Mr Ross had adopted this rude, arrogant attitude, but the fact that a man like this is on the administration of a college that apparently has a very respected name in educational circles.
This is a man who showed us that he is ready to ignore the needs of the student if it interferes with the efficiency of his office; a man who seems to feel that the opinion of a student or of the student body should always be taken with a grain of salt; a man who, it appears to me, feels that the needs of the student are no more than monkey wrenches in the machine of his routine.
I wonder what the men in these educational circles would think of Bates if they found out that this is a place where the student must fight the administration for an education; a place where the goal of the education of the student is secondary to the goal of an efficient and solvent fiscal policy.
Sincerely, Richard Nurnberg '63 Worthy former president of the Monroe, North Carolina NAACP, who sought asylum there.
Along with this increase in space has come the addition of new equipment and new building facilities.
The Physics Department now has six booths in which sound and light can be controlled to a great extent.
It is now possible to cut out all outside noise and limit sound to that produced by the experiment.
Likewise, light can now be regulated according to the conditions desired.
Research rooms, which are particularly useful to seniors working on their theses, are now available.
The new physics lecture room has facilities for the reproduction of stereophonic sound which is regulated from a projection booth at the back of the room.
Here it is possible to produce various sound effects under controlled conditions.
A number of new oscilloscopes have been purchased for the Physics Department along with other various pieces of small equipment.
Professor Bailey stated that these newly acquired items have permitted the department to step-up their program by a full year.
The physics department has two elaborate pieces of equipment which were built last year by seniors.
They are a mass spectrograph, constructed by Ed Bailey, and an analog computor, constructed by Al Wulff.
The mass spectrograph is used to measure the mass of atoms and to analyze given materials by breaking them down into simpler quantities.
The analog computer is used by the Physics Department under the direction of Professor G Ernest Lexen.
Professor Lexen stated that anything in the form of a differential equation can be solved by this device.
The machine . is applicative largely in the fields of physics and engineering, and in dealing with practical problems. achievements of the Cuban government, notably in the area of race relations.
He reported that our government suppressed the action of certain United States officials who obstructed the flow of food and medical supplies from United States to Cuban hospitals.
On October 10, 1961, he flew from Havana to Miami where he was detained by authorities for six hours.
They found no grounds on which to arrest him, however, and passed him through customs after finding^"" his vaccination and birth certificates to be in order.
Six months later he became the first person to ever be indcited under this section of the McCarron Act, and was sentenced to twelve months in the custody of the Attorney General, three in a ""jail-type, institution"" and nine on probation.
The United States has been lenient in allowing admittance of innumerable Batista thugs and crooks into the country.
Yet it has no room for a distinguished and dedicated reporter who has exercised his constitutional rights has no room for a distinguished and dedicated reporter who has exercised his constitutional rights to return to his native land.
It certainly appears that he has the absolute right to travel in any area of the world for the purpose of reporting events which he and his employer consider to be newsworthy.
The government's recent imprisonment of Worthy violates the principles of human freedom and dignity.
BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 28, 1962 FIVE Garnet Quintet Open Against St A's Bobcats Initiate Season Monday; Boast New Offense, Fine Shooters By DON DELMORE The Bates varsity basketball squad promises to provide plenty of excitement this year for the student spectators.
Head coach Verne Ullom thus far has selected sixteen varsity ballplayers and has brought to Bates an exciting new offensive, featuring an attack relying on the fast break.
Ullom believes that this style of offensive play will best suit the Bobcats, a team lacking height but gifted with an abundance of speed.
For well over a month the* ' — The Garnet Line By AL MARDEN Intramural Manager Monty Woolson recently announced the final point standings for the fall intramural program.
As may or may not be general information, teams receive points in accordance with their final standings in their respective leagues, and in addition receive points for members of their dorm who compete in the interschool program.
It is in this scoring system that the greatest fault with the present intramural program may be found.
A look at the standings at the close of the fall program reflects the inadequaces of the present program.
Touch football scoring, as all intramural scoring, is based on the following system.
The A league winner receives 50 points, the B league winner, 40, and the C league winner, 30.
This total is divided by the number of teams in the league and the result of this division is the last place finisher's total.
For example, in this fall's A league there were four teams, JB, who finished first and received 50 points, East Parker, Smith South, and Smith Middle.
Middle received 12 1 /, points on the basis of the division of JB's 50 points by the number of teams in the league.
The figure received by the last place finisher is then doubled, tripled and quadtripled to get the totals for the remaining teams in the league.
On the basis of this system utilized in each league the touch football totals were derived.
Three points are given to the dorm for each of its fall sports lettermen, two points for each of its fall sport varsity performers, and should there be a junior varsity performer the dorm would receive one point for each of its JV performers.
Middle's total of 47 fall awards points was contributed by 19 members of its dorm, or almost 50 per cent of the dorm.
JB's total of 57 fall awards points was contributed by 24 members of its dorm, or a little more than 25 per cent of the dorm.
There has been a movement in the past to reorganize the present intramural system and institute a club system which would solve this problem of unequal resources for intramural teams.
At a Men's Assembly two years ago this plan was defeated by a wide margin.
There are many arguments against this plan and I, myself, do not favor it.
Practice sessions consist of the necessary drills, a great deal of running, and usually end with a scrimmage, the length of which is determined by Coach Ullom.
Ullom plans to rely on a platooning system rather than individual substitution.
By this is meant that the fifteen squad members will be divided into three teams and substitution will usually be made with an entire unit instead of replacing possibly only one of the guards or forwards.
If this system proves to be successful in the pre-season scrimmage it should especially favor the r,unning game the Bobcats intend to employ.
There is no first, second, or third teams as such, for the players are being shuffled around in an attempt to give each squad a strong combination with a balanced attack.
When asked to comment on the prospects of the platoon style for the upcoming season, Coach Ullom commented, ""Right now it is hard to tell how this thing will take shape.
The varsity is presently carrying sixteen squad members and the final division of junior varsity and varsity will not be definite until the final scrimmage with Gorham.
Co-captain Thorn Freeman and Pete Glanz, both seniors, and sophomore Carl ""Ingo"" Johannesen will be appearing as centers.
Seniors John Lawler, Paul Castolene, and Dick Love, junior Will Gardiner, and sophomores Doug Macko and Fred Stevens have been designated as forwards.
Senior co-captain Mike True, junior Ted Beal, and sophomores Seth ""The Turtle"" Cummings, Don Beaudry, Bob Lanz, Ted Kryznowek, and Dave Heckman will be seeing action as guards.
This squad consists of a combination of a little experience and a lot of desire.
Whatever the ""Bobcats"" or ""Greyhounds"" or ""Bloodhounds"" may be lacking in size, they make up for in speed and hustle.
Besides concentrating on the fundamentals of the fast break, Coach Ullom has also been devoting much time to the teaching of multiple defenses.
He feels a mixture of various zone defenses along with the conventional manto-man should prove to be successful in upsetting future opponents of Bates.
When asked to comment on Monday's opening game, Coach Ullom paused and then stated, ""They have their entire squad returning from a very successful season last year.
The task of a defensive lineman is not blocking and tackling any opponent.
The lineman must consider numerous variables, such as the playing conditions, score, yardline the player is on, time remaining, the down and many others.
It is raining steadily; the score is tied; the ball is on the 50 yd. line; there are 6 minutes remaining in the first half and it is 3rd down with 7 to go for a first down.
First, I receive the signal from the defensive quarterback and I assume my position.
During this short waiting period I can feel where I was stepped on and hit in the last play.
I alert myself to three possibilities of play, trap, draw and pass, which have been drilled into my thick skull during hours of strenuous practice.
Pass — this is the perfect situation for a screen pass and I relay my idea to my teammates, both beside me and on the opposite side of the line.
As they approach the line of scrimmage, I immediately look for the man against whom I have been playing.
The offensive quarterback yells ""Ready"""" I think again — trap, draw, pass.
I am hit hard, but I slip by his block and look to the inside for a trap.
He drops back and I recall my earlier thoughts concerning a screen pass.
Because they are my teammates, I do not feel the same pain that the opposing halfback feels as indicated by his grunt.
DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner j Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 SIX BATES STUDENT, NOVEMBER 28, 1962 Stu-G Downs WAA'ers In Fierce Volleyball Tilt; Playday Planned By GINNY ERSKINE The girls' volleyball season got off to a roaring start last Monday with the traditional Stu G vs.
The contest goes on every year; in recent years Stu-G has beaten W.A.A., and this year was no exception.
Although the W.A.A. girls looked more competent athletically, StuG succeeded in overwhelming them in 2 out of 3 games.
Inter-dorm volleyball games started last week, with Whittier beating Page II and Wilson beating Mitchell in overtime.
Teams consist of from 6 to 8 girls, depending on how many from a dorm play.
These games are good practice for girls who want to play on the Bates team going to the Playday with Maine, Colby, and Westbrook.
Hinman has been training a few girls for officiating the volleyball games.
In the past, some students have tried for local ratings for officiating professionally.
Getting such a rating entails taking both a written test and being judged on ability to officiate during an actual game.
W.A.A. will sponsor skiing lessons for any interested freshman girls, with Miss Nell as instructor.
At this time the possibility of organized overnight trips looks doubtful, but nothing has been definitely decided.
Northeastern, 6:00 Jan. at K of C Jan. at BAA's Feb. at Milrose AA Feb.
Feb. at Maine Th<B Itatbramwal Some By NICK BASBANES In the first week of action, the intramural volleyball league got off to a fast start with several teams emerging as prospective contenders for their respective division leads.
It is still too early to choose a team as ""the"" team to beat, but the results to date have turned up some interesting facts.
Rebels Strong In the A league, Smith South has jumped off to an early league lead by being the only team presently undefeated with two wins.
Their second contest was decided against Off-Campus in three games also, 15-8, 8-15, 1512.
Following in a tie for second are J.B. and Roger Bill, both sporting records of one win and no losses.
The J.B. decision was THE BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES SALUTE JOHN O'NEILL John O'Neill became an Accounting Manager in New England Telephone's Providence office after only 20 months with the company.
No easy task, this job called for him to manage 66 people, including 6 supervisors.
John handled this assignment with his customary thoroughness, and was promoted to a similar but more demanding position in the Accounts, Reports and Results Section.
Two method changes he introduced there Were adopted throughout the company and led to his promotion to Senior Staff Accountant in the Chief Statistician's Department.
John O'Neill and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES TELEPHONE WIAN-OF-THE-MiW decided by a forfeit by Off-Campus, and Roger Bill downed East Parker.
J.B. does have one loss, but not to its credit, as they lost to a strong non-league team comprised of faculty members.
The majority of the activity lies in the lively B-league where both Roger Bill and West Parker have records of two wins and no losses.
Roger Bill downed J.B. and South by coming back with two straight wins after losing the opener in both contests.
Middle also holds a 1-1 record, both contests being decided by forfeit.
The C league shows a minimum of activity, with only two games being played out of a scheduled four.
West Parker defeated Smith North by the odd scores of 15-7, 7-15, 15-7.
This annual Christmas Concert will be given in the chapel both at 3:30 and 7:30 under the direction of Professor D Robert Smith.
Featured in the performance will be guest soloist Freda Gray Mass6 who will sing the contralto arias.
A resident of Maine, she has sung with the Boston Symphony Orchestra at Tanglewood.
This fall she has also made appearances at Toronto, Ontario and Providence, Rhode Island, where she performed in the ""Messiah"" last Sunday.
Taken entirely from the Biblical text, it begins with the prophecy of the birth, the birth itself, the cricifixion, the resurrection, and man's own hope for eternal life.
Though a German, Handel lived most of his life in London writing Italian opera.
Due to a change in public taste, he turned to writing oratorios in English.
Beginning in 1750, it was given annually for nine benefit concerts for the Foundling Hospital, Handel's special charity.
Now, for over two centuries the ""Messiah"" continues to be one of the most popular oratorios.
The oratorio differs from the Italian opera in its use of the English language, the importance given to the chorus, and the concert performance as opposed to the staging and acting in an opera.
The solos of the ""Messiah"" are in Italian style and make great demands on the singers.
Many rapid notes, long phrases, and great dramatic power are typical requirements.
The solos come in pairs, the first part being the recitative which resembles spoken song and advances the plot, the second part being the aria in which is exhibited the virtuosity of the soloist.
In preparation for this production, the sixty-one members of Choral Society have been rehearsing twice weekly since the beginning of the semester.
The program, lasting approximately one and a half hours, is open to all, free of charge.
Strongly bound by many tons of steel, covered by three feet of earth, this ""future storage area"" could serve as a fallout shelter and a temple to the folly of man.
It has two lavatories and a shower, provision for a large water storage tank, and pipe lines, possibly to be connected to an artesian well sunk between Hathorn and Hedge.
More than one entrance exists, however; one door appears to lead out onto Andrews Road three feet overhead.
The blueprints describe a ""fallout shelter ventilating duct"" system designed to provide the ""area"" with large quantities of filtered air.
The thick walls, right-angled entrances, storage tanks, showers and lavatories, and air ducts suggest a ''storage area"" unlike any other at Bates.
The arrow poinis io the site of the ""future storage area."" three feet underground.
A sense of civic duty has prompted these professors to discuss publicly the many factors and implications behind the two great conflicting systems.
D'Alfonso has offered lectures on the philosophy of each structure; Dr.
Thumm is handling dents are welcome. the respective political theories; Dr.
A fee of three dollars is charged for each class, held in Room 110, Hathorn, on Tuesday evenings between 7:30 and 9:30.
Twelve people, some coming from such distances as Augusta and Livermore Falls, are presently enrolled, and Bates stufirmative members of the team Bates debators participated in the Tufts Invitational Debate Tourney last weekend.
The two Bates teams, Robert Ahem '64 and Howard Blum '63, John Strassburger '64 and Tom Hall '64 competed against teams representing 29 colleges.
The Tufts Tourney is characterized by teams that switch sides, debating both the negative and the affirma*tive.
At the end of their debates, the two Bates teams had won six and lost six.
The af are Peter d'Errico '65 and David Harrison '64, while the negative members are Norman Gillespie '64 and Robert Bovd '64.
J Weston Walsh, noted debate authority and an editor and publisher in Portland, will accompany this team.
Four members of the novice debate squad will participate in a tourney at St.
Brooks Quimby will accompany this team, of which Linda Lash '66 and Max Steinhemer '66 comprise the affirmative, and George Strait '66 and Richmond Rosenblatt '66 the negative.
Carl Johnson '66 and Priscilla Clark '66 constituted the affirmative; and the negative were Norman Davis '65 and Ronald Snell '65.
Republican Club Elects Officers On Thursday, November 28, the Bates College Republican Club elected a new slate of officers for the coming year.
Bradford F Anderson '66 replaces former president James Kiernaji; Kenneth Petke '66 is vice-president; Granville Bowie '66, treasurer; Pat Donaghy '65, secretary; and Allen Kerr '66, director of public relations.
Anticipating a more dynamic existence through increased membership and accelerated activities, the club's main efforts will be directed towards mass communication and a full slate of distinctive speakers.
The object of WUS is to initiate improvements at the Universities through co-operative systems, which would raise standards and provide part-time employment for the students.
The $1000, which is the goal for Bates, would be used for a co-op cafeteria at Nagpur, the success of which would aid in influencing other Asian institutions to adopt similar co-op systems.
The majority of the Indian students, reflecting the educational revolution in which education is being extended to the lower classes, are from the country; and many are the first from their districts to continue their education.
Their understandably naive acceptance of the city conditions allows independent concerns to take advantage of them in matters such as food, lodging, and school supplies.
A hundred students may be found ""eking out nutrition"" in a building comparable to a typical American home.
Disease is common, forcing many to leave their studies and making health the major problem among the students.
The organization is working to dispel the causes of disease and sickness, in order not to spend money on students who later may be forced to abandon their careers.
Since 1948 the number of college students in India has almost quadrupled to the present one million.
The ratio of students per person remains at a nadir extreme, however, of about 1:400, compared to the United States' ratio of 1:32.
These Indian students, it must be understood, represent India's future leaders, and the success of their education is of the greatest importance.
India is in a crucial stage, and its survival depends upon the current student bodies, which in turn depend upon monetary support from others.
Mr Denise stressed the importance of the cafeteria at Nagpur, concluding with an appeal for donations.
The Christian Association, which is sponsoring the drive, will accept pledges on Friday, December 7, and all contributions will be appreciated.
Personal Library Award Available To Seniors For the second year, the $1,000 Amy Loveman National Award is being offered to a college senior who has collected an outstanding, personal library.
Chairmen of Campus Library Award Committees, after selecting a local winner, are asked to submit nominations of senior students for the national award.
For the purposes of the Amy Loveman Award, a collection of not less than 35 books will be considered.
Collections of any type (excluding textbooks) are eligible whether centered in a subject or avocation, a single author or group of authors, or general collection.
Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers FOR THE ENTIRE FAMILY SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main Guidance THE STANDARD OIL COMPANY Although the Standard Oil Company will not be sending any recruiting officers to Bates this year, they are extremely interested in anyone who wishes to apply.
Interested students are urged to pick up brochures and application blanks in the Guidance and Placement Office.
The Professional Placement Offices in both states are ready to interview and refer applicants to the hundreds of job openings now on file.
Additional information and necessary addresses are available in the Guidance and Placement Office for those interested in counselling.
BANK STREET COLLEGE OF EDUCATION Bank Street College in New Grad Schools Offer Scholarship Grants Students Begin Summer Plans A directory listing summer jobs throughout the United States for college students is now available.
Students can begin their summer plans during the Christmas holiday vacation.
The.63 ""Summer Employment Directory"" gives the names and addresses of 1,485 organizations which want to employ college students.
It also gives positions open, salaries, and suggestions on how to apply.
The many types of jobs in the directory are found at summer camps, resorts, various departments of the government, business and industry.
National parks, ranches, and summer theaters listed, also need college students.
Students wishing summer work apply directly to the employers, who are included in the directory at their own request.
Copies of the new ""Summer Employment Directory"" may be obtained by sending $3 to National Directory Service, Dept.
Traineeships are to be awarded for two years to superior students interested in vocational rehabilitation careers.
The grants are ordinarily for 21 months and include travel to and from Hawaii and Asia, tuition, books, food and lodging.
Asian field study grants are also available; during field study, the student goes to a country in Asia for first-hand acquaintance with York City offers a Master's degree in education, based on the four-year liberal arts degree.
John J Navin, Jr., will interview men and women interested in officer training programs.
The last date for filing applications for the Massachusetts Civil Service Examinations is Monday, December 17.
Daily 11:09 AJVL to l:M AJL the particular culture and language in which he is specializing.
The awards are for persons preparing for careers in editorial journalism, mass communications research, advertising and media research, and broadcasting and film.
In addition to these grants, the department also appoints some research assistants.
The fields of study are production, educational broadcasting, journalism, and library science.
K The white crisp paper protected by two soft clean sheets of pink, , clutched in one sweaty hand, carried by a boy with a hollow stomach is flattened and straightened on the top of a desk and then is made secure by a weighty cluster of pens and pencils.
After rearranging the many objects of his pockets, placing the excess of writing implements upon the floor as missiles ready to be launched and rolled up the sleeves of his twice worn shirt, he folds back the first pink sheet, poises his pen and waits.
Passing foolish comments, jiggling his leg, he waits and then accepts the rough white sheet and listens to the sudden hush and the last nervous cries and exclamations that fill the slate walled room.
He looks at it, reads it; reads each question and as he bites his nails, reads them again.
So for fifty minutes, and always a little more, what should pour, dribbles; things vaguely remembered, things described at length that could easily have been assumed, things half-said come to the white pages wounding them with lines of unrhythmic scratches in blue.
M Lerner In The Chapel NOTICE Sudents, Faculty, and Administration are encouraged to submit poetry for STUDENT publication in a poetry column.
GEORGE GOLDAT On Tuesday evening last, the friends and scholars of Bates College were treated to a chef d'oeuvre in the realm of what is sometimes designated general, political thought.
The particu larists, among whom I include myself, were in something of a froth.
M Lerner saw or looked forward to a world of possibilities for America, ""a world through the gates of possibilities"" was his expression.
But for the time being, we were advised to make available an ""access to the possibilities"" that made this nation great.
Today, we are without a genuine ""ethos"" and this is, in large part, what we must uncover or discover in order to fulfill the dreams of the Founding Fathers of our country.
We need the vision of another America in which ""access to the possibilities"" are made manifestly real.
Gives Critique I hope the reader will forgive me for not reporting all the points made in M Lerner's talk, but a time-space problem confronts us and I would like to go on to my own critique here and now.
Lewiston j I Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET America behind an America behind the hill.
This when played to some sentimental tune should give us pause to rest on our accesses.
Next, second I think it is, we should have some over-view in this age of over-kill.
If that is true, it becomes apparent that Aristotle, as a quite characteristic Greek, although of transcending intellectual ability, stood as the inheritor of the age of fear and the archetype of the age ol knowledge.
His function was to explain and rationalize the whole known world and man's relation to it.
His achievement was to sum up the ethos of a whole civilization more completely than anyone since him has been able to do.
God was for Aristotle not the supreme mystery, but the ""Unmoved Mover,"" the center of an orderly universe rotating about him — as Whitehead has said, so orderly as to be dramatic.
He was thus, like the other Greeks, still operating in the shadow of fear, for only a people fearful of the irrational in them would thus make a fetish of order.
Y e t Aristotle was moving away from fear toward knowledge, which is a way of conquering fear.
His knowledge was chiefly of the external world, the beginnings of science without which the human being is fear-dominated.
But while he ransacked all the storehouses of knowledge open to him at the time, the Faustian impulse was not yet in him.
Knowledge was for him a way of accommodating oneself to the world rather than a way of conquering it, as it was within the scientists of the seventeenth century.
In the turbulent times in which Aristotle wrote, the Greeks were caught between the assertion of will and the submission to law — or, as Aristotle expresses it in his Metaphysics, between matter and form.
Hence Aristotle's method is wholly dialectical — the method that is characteristic of any age, like our own, which finds itself caught in so basic a dilemma.
Aristotle's rigorous analysis by the method of division and differentiation is increasingly suited to the temper of such an age, which seeks to find amidst the welter of change some firm ground on which it can stand.
Third, and possibly last, we can develop an elan which will sustain an access to such wonderful possibilities.
The 61an itself will, of course, have to be possible, but this should not be particularly difficult if we maintain a general view.
This view merely entails a commitment to the purely formal character of intelligence and thereby opens up for us a possible world.
This, mes amis, is the program — at least in its general outlines — so do not despair, you may yet find such a world possible.
I seek not a possible world, but a real one and I see not an age of over-kill but one of under-live.
In a refreshingly original and creative manner, he sets himself to the problem of coming to grips with the crisis that is confronting modern man, and does so in an informal way of Spanish wit.
The perspective of history must, he says, be viewed within a structure, a unified structure, in which sections of the historical process merge and blend with one another, yet remain distinct.
He uses the idea of the generation, that there is an essential change of life in history about every fifteen years.
In order to understand the present, we must understand the past, and the most crucial understanding must be that of the middle ages, where all our problems started.
But we haven't yet completely rejected the ideas of those who fought with Galileo, and it is this mixture of foundations that is causing all the confusion.
And a historical crisis is when . . . ""the world, the system of convictions belonging to a previous generation, gives way to a vital state in which man remains without these convictions, and therefore without a world."" mess.
We are as our friend Jean-Baptiste insistedat the bridge, and the water is indeed cold, very, very cold.
Lewiston HOURS Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-8:00 7:30-6:00 SMITTY'S Barber Shop THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES FOUR BATES STUDENT, DECEMBER 5, 1962 Editorials • THE ART OF FALLOUT SHELTER BUILDING The ""sine qua non"" of fallout shelter building is secrecy.
Who knows but that those snobs at Bowdoin or Colby might wish to emulate Bates.
Only the perverted mind might reason that it's sensible to construct a shelter in a maintenance building since it is maintenance equipment that will be first needed when and if anyone survives an attack.
A maintenance building ideally serves as a fallout shelter provided that the term ""shelter"" is deleted from all of the blueprints save one.
One has only to label the shelter area ""future storage area"" to silence inquiring minds.
For, after all, a fallout shelter is just that, although Sarcophagus might be more appropriate.
Disguising the shelter requires work, but may be accomplished with a certain amount of ingenuity.
Ah, of course, you suggest that the trucks parking in the building might strike the walls; thus they must be reenforced.
Don't mention, however, that trucks could get nowhere near certain of the walls.
Shelter entrances must be so constructed to prevent the radiation from entering, but still enable the shelterees to get in.
Thus, all entrances to the ""future storage area"" must be thickly walled and at right angles.
For the Bates ""future storage area"" has, not only thick walls and strange entrances, but a generator and a shower.
It undoubtedly is not significant to mention that the ""future storage area"" could not hold a thousand beings.
But perhaps it is not meant for much storage, only the administration, the faculty, and the high qpr's.
Construct an artesian well between Hathorn and Hedge, large storage tanks, and the water problem is solved.
Convince the world that your fallout shelter is a maintenance building, and the battle is won.
Entered as second -clasf,' matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879.
I am writing this letter in reference to the one of Richard Nurnburg which appeared in the Student last week.
I do not intend to defend or contradict in any way Mr Ross, the Administration and/or faculty on the incident reported.
Rather, I would like to present what have been some of my contacts with them.
Last winter I went to see Mr Ross about the skating show to be presented Opening Night of Carnival.
He arranged for practice rooms, suggested ways to keep the ice on the pond at its best, and helped in other ways to make the show a success.
Since last April I have been one of the student representatives to the Faculty-Student Extracurricular Activities Committee of which Mr Ross is also a member.
I have found the members of this committee, including Mr Ross, when discussing a proposed project, such as the new OC ski cabin at Sugarloaf, a constitution for a new organization, or a revision of an old constitution for an established organization, for examples, have many good ideas and offer needed constructive criticism.
These are examples of the contacts I have had with Mr Ross and the others of the Administration and Faculty.
I believe that the members of the Administration and Faculty are sincerely and mainly concerned with the student.
I present these examples of my experiences in the hope that more students may get to really know some of these people and see how much they have to offer to us.
It is unfortunate for the College that the Bates Rules-Makers don't appreciate the psychology of rule-making.
No one thing creates more friction between the administration and the students than the students being held to a conglomeration of regulations and petty legislation.
The article in The Student of November 28, concerning neatness in the women's dorms prompted this letter.
If their virgin eyes and ears received no damage in the dens of iniquity that the men inhabit, there is no women's dormitory in the world that could cause them -the slightest agitation.
But more important than the question of any one rule is the attitude of the student body as a whole toward all the rules of the school.
When students are faced with a hodge-podge of pointless rules (freshwomen in their dorms by ten, compulsory chapel, closed science building, separate dining — I won't even mention Thanksgiving vacation), the rules which purport to be of real significance Prof.
Edwin Baumgartner By DAVE OLSON '65 During the past week, the organization of WRJR has undergone a streamlining process.
Program Director Lorn Harvey has appointed three new people to serve as Assistant Program Directors, each of whom is responsible for the programming on two nights of the week.
Bobbi Reid '63, Ron Green '64, and Dick Dow '64 will be helping tremendously to improve the already fine quality of Bates College Radio.
Sieve Adams '65, in his new capacity as News Director, will be placing increased emphasis upon campus news, rather than on world issues.
Further aid is forthcoming in the Public Relations Department, as Marty Ryan '65 and Carol Stone '65 pool their talents to publicize WRJR programming.
Information will be aired by the WRJR news department twice nightly until the particular event publicized occurs.
And don't forget to note the time and date of WRJR's annual presentation of Handel's Messiah.
The Christmas season will be in full swing and WRJR this year as in the past, will be helping to bring the true spirit of Christmas closer to the Bates campus. are swept up and carried away in the wave of resulting skepticism.
When a good rule (assuming one exists) is accompanied by a squad of useless ones, the automatic catagorizer of the student mind places the whole bunch in its mental circular file.
The administration might well find that it would be taken more seriously and placed in a position of greater respect if for once it took the initiative to kill some of the sacred cows of the college.
Edwin Baumgartner of the mathmematics department, is waiting to be solved by some sharp Bates student.
They're just for fun, but still involve the basic principles of math."" explained Prof.
In the mathematics seminar conducted by Baumgartner and Sampson, they attempt to integrate their realistic approach with math as a whole.
In their weekly meetings in which students and professors discuss various aspects of mathematics, the students are given suggested reading lists.
After about a year, however, he changed his major to mathematics, finding it more interesting.
He earned his master's degree from Syracuse and served as a graduate assistant there until June of 1962.
At Syracuse, he noted the engineering students, some of whom were taking nineteen and twenty credit hours of courses.
From what he has seen thus far at Bates, Baumgartner feels that even with a lighter work load, the students at Bates are willing to put their extra time to good use.
Baumgartner, Bates has a man who is interested in both his work and the students he meets.
Let's hope that since he has already made it from one corner of the board to Bates, he doesn't try to figure out the solution for returning to the same space.
NOTICE In lieu of Chapel next Wednesday, all students will report to their advisors to register for the Spring Semester.
NOTICE On Saturday, December 8, the Men's Commons will be closed in the evening.
All students will eat at Rand Hall for the evening meal and announcement of the schedule will be made in both Rand and the Commons prior to that date.
Chase Hall will be closed for the evening beginning at 5:30 and the Bobcat Den will be open and available from the Chase Hall entrance nearest Roger WilBATES STUDENT, DECEMBER 5, 1962 . t '3 FIVE Tracksters Open At Tufts Saturday The Garnet Line By AL MARDEN Those fifty or so Bales roofers in attendance at the St.
Anselm's Bates game Monday night were treated to one of the most exciting basketball contests of the past three seasons, and saw the finest performance by any Garnet five over the past three seasons.
It was an outstanding effort by the Garnet hoopsters, who tonight will be opening state series play as they take on the Colby Mules in Alumni Gymnasium.
The Mules are rated as the team to beat for the series title, but pre-season prognasticators knew little about Coach Ullom's Bobcats, Greyhounds, and Bloodhounds.
Ullom has installed a new free lance type of offense which in addition to being made to order for this year's varsity squad, is certainly a crowd-pleasing type of offense.
In addition, Ullom has instilled a spirit in his underlings which resulted in such a fine performance Monday night.
Let's all turn out for the opening game tonight and yell like — H-E-double hockey sticks.
Rumor is that ""Whip"" Kiernan has imported a new device for leading cheers.
C I Am A Bobcat Back The goal of a back on any one play varies according to the situation.
It is to pick up yardage on a long gainer, to pick up a first down, to set the ball in position for the next play, or to stop the clock by running out of bounds.
From the many practice sessions the back has learned where to run and upon whom he can depend for a block.
If he isn't carrying the ball, he may block, fake, or run a pass pattern.
The men on the opposing team have their assignments which are designed to break up the play.
As the back approaches his position, he checks the defense to see how the hole will open up.
But in football as in all sports, things don't always take place as planned.
On the snap of the ball, the defensive lineman may knife in so the tackle must block other than planned.
The back blasts through the hole with his head low to avoid having a line bucker reach over and take his off.
The advantage is with the ball carrier because he can cut, fake and cut, double fake and cut, hit head on and dance, or hit and spin.
At all times the straight arm is useful, and when combined with varying speeds the back can make his own breaks.
In the last analysis, what is needed is a block, a little finesse, and most important of all — desire.
This Saturday, the Bates Bobcats journey to Medford, Mass., for their opening meet against the Tufts Jumbos.
It should be a good meet as Tufts pits its power in the weights against the running strength of Bates.
Last year the powerful Bates* combine swept through its schedule losing only to Northeastern.
Also several good weight men and most of last year's great relay team have left via the graduation route.
LaVallee Leads Squad Captain Bill LaVallee has been a standout performer for four years.
Bill runs the high and low hurdles and is called by many the best hurdler in the state.
Bates can also be proud of the fact that it also has the second best hurdler in the state in the person of Al Harvie.
Seniors John Curtiss and Joe Tamburino give Bates more power in the weight department than it has had in recent years.
Sophomore Bob Kramer is our best in the pole vault and freshman William Davis looks good throwing the discus.
Potentially, junior Paul Williams is one of the best men ever to don a Bates uniform but injuries always seem to keep him from realizing this potential.
Williams runs the 45 yd. dash and the relay, in addition to broad jumping.
High jumpers Tom Bowditch and Dave Johnson are back again for another season.
Gregus Improved Improving rapidly is sophomore Mike Gregus who is going to be depended upon in the mile while another sophomore, Tom McGinee looks like he is going to develop into a fine performer in the thousand yd. run.
In the two mile Finn Wilhelmson and Eric Silverberg are sure to do well again this year.
Summing up, this is another of the fine teams that Coach Walt Slovenski is getting used to producing.
BEDAHD'S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston, Maine Track Coach Walt Slovenski and Captain Bill LaVallee talk over plans for Saturday's opening meet with Tufts.
The many students making the trip were pleasantly surprised at their truly terrific performance.
The ""Bobcats,"" the starting team in Coach Ullom's platooning system, consisted of Co-captains Thorn Freeman and Mike True, Seth Cummings, Fred Stevens, and John Lawlor.
At this point Coach Ullom replaced his starters with the ""Greyhounds,"" a team of Paul Castolene, Will Gardiner, ""Ingo"" Johannesen, Don Beaudry, and Ted Krzynowek.
The rested ""Bobcats"" now came back until intermission at which point the St.
Cummings continued his incredible shooting and ran his string to six consecutive field goals.
The fierce rebounding of Freeman and Johannesen, and the great play of Cummings, who continued his amazing shooting and driving, kept the 'Cats in the game.
Sparked by Paul Castolene's tight defense on lightning quick Tony Greer, the ""Greyhounds"" held their own.
Hustling defense resulted in three jump balls, Cummings finally gaining possession with one second left.
Shooting the ball immediately he canned it from 25 feet but the ruling was that time had run out before the shot was in the air.
SEVEN DAYS A WEEK six BATES STUDENT, DECEMBER 5, 1962 H WAA Sportlights By DONNA WHITNEY Girls' volleyball is well underway as .the first week of games has now been completed.
As usual, Rand is in the lead with two wins and no losses, but Cheney, which has played only one game, and won it, won't let that stand for long.
The week started with two exciting matches between Milliken and Hacker, and Rand and Frye.
Milliken easily overtook Hacker in the first game, but had a little difficulty winning the second game.
Finally, after time had run out, Milliken won, the scores being 11-4, 9-7.
Lewiston culty beating Frye in their first game, but the Frye girls and all their spirit gave Rand a tough time in the second game.
On Tuesday afternoon, Mitchell finally succeeded in overcoming Page II, but Page put up a good fight as evidenced in the first game, 7-10, 13-8, 15-7.
Milliken tried hard against an overpowering Page I team on Friday, but Page seemed to get better and better as time wore on.
In other matches throughout the week, Page II defeated Chase 12-7, 14-7; Cheney defeated Wilson 12-8, 15-3; and Rand defeated Whit 11-8, 10-8.
It looks like there will be plenty of exciting games this week as each dorm tries to get out ahead.
As the teams now stand, it's anybody's guess as to which teams will succed this year.
Volleyball Standings Wins Losses 2 0 Rand Cheney Milliken Mitchell Page I Page II Whittier Wilson Chase Frye Hacker 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 W.A.A. skiing classes are being held this week in Rand for any interested girls.
Any upperclass girls who would like to wax their skiis may do so in Rand Balcony this week for 25 cents.
The board has organized a committee of the point system that is now being used to determine athletic awards.
The group, headed by Ginny Erskine, is planning on handing any recommendations over to the new board in the Spring.
If there are any ideas or suggestions, any board member would be glad to hear them.
The Imtmmuml Seem® By NICK BASBANES In this second week of intramural volleyball, some games were played, a few weren't, and there are several games, which to date, remain a mystery as to whether they were or were not contested.
As regards to the last category mentioned, it seems that those responsible for turning in the results of their contests have neglected to do so, leaving both the athletic department and myself at a loss as to just what did happen.
It will be humbly appreciated if someone associated with future playing clubs would kindly perform this simple task, making it easier for all of us concerned.
Despite this handicap I will nevertheless continue to present some idea of what resulted in the course of league games this past week.
BOB FISK Bob Fisk became an Accounting Manager in New England Telephone's Boston Office after less than three years with the company.
He needs a staff this large to handle the immense job of preparing monthly bills for southeast Boston.
Bob earned his latest promotion after outstanding performance on earlier assignments as a Supervisory Assistant and Directory Staff Assistant.
Bob Fisk and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES TELEPHONE MAN-OF-THE-WONTH league game, so Smith South isl still in first place with a 2 and 0| record, followed by J.B. and Roger Bill, each possessing records ofl one and no losses.
J.B. played two contests, dropping the first one| to a strong West Parker squad.
The efforts of J.B. weren't to be denied, however, in their subsequent meeting with Middle.
Getting some great play from Ron Stead, they effectively won by the margin of 2 to 1.
In the meeting between Roger I Bill and North, Roger Bill confusingly lost the first and won the last two games 15-3, 15-4.
Finally, the boys from West were again victorious, this time to the dismay of South, 15-8, 15-9.
In reference to the upcoming basketball league, I am reminded to report that all signups are due in by Thursday night, at which time there will be a meeting of the intramural league dorm representatives.
They are to discuss several important aspects concerning the league, and it is urged that members attend.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, DECEMBER 12, 1962 By Subscription American Historian Joins Faculty Next Semester Next semester Miss Barbara by Dr.
Muller who will be on Graymont from Packer Collegiate Institute, a junior college and preparatory school in Brooklyn, joins the Bates faculty as a visiting professor.
Miss Graymont's major fields of interest are American History, British History, and the British Empire.
She has done research as well on the American Indian, and has published the book, The American Indian in Today's Society.
Miss Graymont has completed all her residence requirements for her doctorate, with only her thesis and oral examinations remaining.
She is a member of the American Historical Association, and also a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Miss Graymont will fill the vacancy in the History Department made sabbatical next semester.
Muller will do research on several projects concerning nineteenth century American History.
Muller also has tentative plans for a trip to the Middlewest during the latter part of his leave of absence and says that he will not be in residence at any one place for any length of time during the semester.
Professor Berkelman, who will also be absent next semester, plans to leave with his wife on February 6 for the professor's twelfth trip abroad.
He intends to spend nearly two months in Greece, studying sculpture, architecture, and visiting places of literary significance.
Leaving Greece, the Berkelmans will visit the Greek islands; the Holy Land; Egypt; Istanbul, Turkey; Italy, and Southern France, the native land of Mrs.
After spending the month of July in Switzerland, the Berkelmans intend to return to the United States by ship in mid-August.
Professor Wilkins of the Mathematics Department has not made definite plans for his sabbatical at the present time.
In so doing, she explained what types of aid are made possible by such college funds.
Cooperative bookstores, dorms, and food services are operated in Calcutta.
The student often saves part of his meal purchased in the WUS Co-op Cafeteria to take home to share with his under-fed family.
An Asian Seminar sponsored by WUS and the YWCA, took place this past summer under the leadership of Dr.
Twenty-nine persons participated in the Seminar including WUS and YWCA personnel and college faculty members and administrators having special interest in the sponsoring organizations.
Congestion and delay are the most pressing problems facing the operation of the judiciary today.
Congress has increased the number of federal judgeships by 20%, yet the problem remains.
Judge Gignoux commented on some other possible solutions, including further increasing the number of judges, decreasing the size of the jury from twelve to five, and turning over more cases to the state courts.
He added, however, that there was the problem even in these solutions of obtaining qualified judges.
Too often, judges are appointed by those in political power, without regard for the qualifications of the appointees.
Judge Gignoux emphasized that ""the judges and lawyers alone are not responsible for the task of maintaining justice . . . only an informed public can insure true justice.
On the state level, courts are organized according to a district system.
The state superior courts have jurisdiction over cases of criminal and civil litigation involving either violation of state laws or suits between citizens of the same state.
Outlines Carnival Plans The 1 9 6 3 Winter Carnival, sponsored by the Bates Outing Club, is quickly taking shape.
The festivities open Thursday night with the traditional crowning of the Carnival Queen, followed by an ice show.
A square dance in the Alumni Gym and an open house in Chase Hall round out the evening.
Friday begins with an early start to the King Pine Ski Area, East Madison, New Hampshire.
Not only skiing but also skating, tobogganing, and other sports are available that evening.
Weary sportsmen can enjoy spontaneous recreation, probably including a songfest.
The fun continues on Saturday with a hockey game from 1-2:30, and entertainment from 3-5.
Singing groups from MIT, Springfield, Maine, and Harvard have already been engaged.
A buffet dinner in Commons preceeds the dance and an open house at the Women's Union will follow the dance.
Tickets may be bought from any member of O.C., and will be on sale later in both Rand and Commons.
From these women, Judith Mosman, Leslan Jones, Lee Nelson, Marcia Rodgers, Virginia Erskine, Eugenia Wise, and Deborah Peterson ; President Phillips will crown the Queen on the opening night of Carnival.
Judy Mosman, a Speech major from Natick, Massachusetts, is very active in Robinson Players, and has had parts in many of the plays they have produced.
She is on the Mirror staff, a member of the Hockey team, and co-captain of the Cheerleading Squad.
Marcia Rodgers, a Chemistry major from Glastonbury, Conn., is Secretary-Treasurer of the Lawrance Chemical Society.
Ginny Erskine, from Wellesley, Mass., is an English Major, on the Mirror staff, a member of the WAA Board, and on the Campus Relations Committee.
She is also very active in Field Hockey, and has the distinction of being the only girl ever chosen to be Bobcat of the Week.
Debbie Peterson, a math major from Newington, Conn., is a leading member of the Merrimanders, and also belongs to the Jordan Ramsdell Scientific Society.
Bring back pictures and scrapbooks from past years (summer and New Year's pictures included) for your yearbook.
Joyce Mantyla '65 organized the event, aided by Beth Bassett '66, Pam Young '65 and some student volunteers.
At approximately 4 Friday afternoon, the student drivers appeared like Pied Pipers leading groups of children into the Chase Hall Ballroom.
All thirty youngsters then participated in games and songs, until that gentleman of Christmas cheer, S Claus, made his appearance.
It has left its mark on the consciences of those who were involved in it.
It has perplexed many students, disturbed and divided the faculty and alienated some faculty members from the university president.
On September 21, at the end of the first week of classes, two pieces in The Colorado Daily gave the Althen controversy its genesis and its shape.
The first was an editorial, written by the editor himself, expressing the hope that the university's football team would lose all of its games in the coming season and thereby make it easier for bigtime football to be abandoned in Boulder.
The second, published as part of a weekly supplement, was a long, confused essay by Carl Mitcham, an angry young man studying philosophy, on Senator Barry Goldwater's book, The Conscience of a Conservative.
The football editorial provoked immediate protests from students, sports fans, alumni, newspaper writers and a Republican candidate for the Board of Regents.
Goldwater is the victim of forces outside himself — as were the men of Homer's Iliad — not because of fate, but because of the nature of violence.
Read for what he is — not as an abstraction or depersonalized politician — Barry Goldwater is a fool, a mountebank, a murder , no better than a common criminal.
Even with five apologies, however, Senator Goldwater would not be appeased.
Just when the affair appeared to be dying down and the university's critics appeared to be losing a good thing, the Senator came to their aid with a letter to the school president.
There was even talk in the state that Senator Goldwater had gone too far and that the university president had carried the field.
On the very day that Newton published his reply to Goldwater, a fifty-one-inch letter by Mitcham explaining his earlier article was published in the columns of The Colorado Daily.
Like his first effort, the letter was largely unheeded when it first appeared.
On October 17, the morning after the Faculty Senate meeting, Newton called the editor to his office and fired him.
Newton and his supporters at the university take the position that it is wrong to use a newspaper for personal abuse and name-calling, especially when the newspaper is supported by compulsory student fees, as is The Colorado Daily.
By committing this wrong, they say, Althen proved he was irresponsible and deserved to be fired.
He was also hurting the university by making it the target of public wrath.
But a number of students and faculty members view the Althen case in another light.
Although Althen would have been a better editor if he had not allowed name-calling to creep into his columns, his offense was a relatively minor one.
Newspapers all over the country have indulged in name-calling since the dawn of American journalism, and campus newspapers have been chronic offenders.
The campus itself testified to the triviality of Althen's offense by ignoring the Goldwater reference for four days and the Eisenhower reference for six.
A member of the Board of Publications, who voted to fire Althen, had earlier told a newspaperman that the ""old futzer"" phrase wasn't worth bothering about.
Newton fired Althen, the president's critics are convinced, not because the campus thought the editor had sinned, but because the newspapers and politicians outside the campus thought so.
The president left the verdict to an outside jury, instead of resting the case with the university and accepting the outcome of its procedures and rules.
The Althen firing — in the view of these students and faculty members — thus made a mockery of campus due process.
The Board of Publications, set up under the university rules to handle such cases, ruled on three separate occasions that Althen should not be fired.
The regents of the university failed to do the firing, and the faculty refused to recommend it.
The campus had rendered a verdict, but the outside world demanded a victim, and Newton threw Althen to the lions.
People outside the campus had made Gary Althen the symbol of all their suspicions about the university, and all their grievances against it.
They saw his behavior as proof that the university fostered radicalism and irresponsibility.
And they wanted Althen fired as much for the football editorial and another editorial, advocating Red China's admission to the UN. as for the name-calling.
Newton did not take official cognizance of these two editorials, but he bowed to the will of those who did.
He set out to halt ""irresponsibility,"" not to silence unpopular views — but the unpopular views have been muted in the process.
In addition, the Department of English has been able to offer a number of National Defense Education Act Fellowships.
Teaching Assistants do part-time work as teachers or laboratory instructors.
Virginia Polytechnic Institute offers graduate assistantships of $200 to $230 per month beginning September 1963.
For further information address the Director of Graduate Studies, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blackburg, Virginia.
This is a good opportunity for those preparing for careers in teaching, social work, or related services.
The Resort Office of the Connecticut State Employment Service invites college students to register for summer employment in camps and resorts throughout Connecticut.
Women interested in spending a summer near home as a camp counselor in a Girl Scout camp should call their nearby Girl Scout office or visit the local office of the State Employment Service for information on available openings.
NOTICE All students interested in the movie selections for next year should speak to John Sirassburger, Judy Outten, or David Hosford.
Datl* 11:00 A.M. to Iff A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Augusta, Maine BATES STUDENT ER 12, 1962 >7 THREE Maurice Has Traveled, Learned About People By ANDREA BUCK '65 Maurice Bickford is the head chef for Fiske Dining hall.
He is tall and reminds one of a sailor who has travelled far and seen many things.
He can tell a story with the ease and humor of Will Rogers and make it so convincing that his listeners can't tell whether it is fact or fiction.
Maurice, as everyone at Rand* calls him, was born in Lewiston At the age of fourteen, he obtained his first job as chef and has been at it ever since except for three years, which he spent in the service.
Combining work with pleasure, Maurice has travelled all over the world learning new recipes and cooking some of his own specialties.
He has worked in every state in the United States, Cuba, Mexico and Canada.
Maurice states that he has learned more about people and places from travelling than he would ever learn from books.
He really doesn't, although he likes to work with seafoods, especialy lobster newburg.
It is the first institutional cooking he's done since previously he always travelled the hotel circuit.
He worked as head chef at the DeWitt hotel before coming to Bates, and during the summers he's at the Cas cade Lodge in Scarborough, Maine.
It grows in strength and irresponsibility as we move closer to that wild night before the busses leave.
There are either two or three hour exams or papers due before the fifteenth, or else there is no work to be done at all.
We see this spirit in the menial, sometimes abortive, attempts to decorate our lives with Christmas trimmings.
The handmade decorations and artificial trees, cut down or stolen at night, and trimmed with whatever is available, fill our corners and our lives.
A native of Lewiston, Mr Bard studied at Pratt Institute and worked for ten years under Vivian Akers of Norway, Maine.
He is an accomplished musician on drums, specializing in progressive jazz and rock and roll.
Bart specializes in pointillism which he combines with a free style working mainly in oils although he does occasional water colors.
Bard believes his favorite compositions are landscapes which he feels best represent his love for Maine and New England.
Included in his collection at the studio are pointillistic landscapes, a Jan Vermeer reproduction of an ""Officer and Laughing Girl"" and semi-abstract representative paintings of outer space.
Lewiston I Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 ill MMMMMMM HtMl Illlll llllllllllllllllllllllllllf HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET ~ JEWELER ~ "" 73 Lisbon Si.
Bard be lieves Vermeer's architectonic designs of color, form, and light and poised quietness are admirable qualities which he feels are close to his artistic taste.
Bard stresses simplicity and color with the characteristic shimmering effect of pointillism which consists of painting in short strokes with different ones of one color.
However, he feels the world of nature can be brought most alive on a flat canvas with pointillism.
In several paintings of buildings found in Lewiston, Bard displays careful use of shading and with subdued tones suggesting desolation and loneliness, he humanizes his buildings.
Frames of his paintings on outer space were designed by him in steel reminding the viewer that steel rocketships have brought man into space.
Bates students and faculty are welcome to make arrangements with him or to visit his studio.
Classes are usually semi private, ranging from two to eight pupils, depending on what arrangements are made.
Wherever there is one person and a guitar there is a potential folksinger; wherever there are two people and a banjo there is a possible ""hootenanny"", the jam session of the folk cult.
This is 1962, the year of the purist, the professional, the amateur, you and me.
There is no one clear cut definition of folk music, for it is not a homogeneous group.
Yet all, express the emotions of the originator about some universal truth or some event, through fable or historical fact.
Most of the songs termed ""folk"" were created before the radio and the television brought the ""popular"" music blaring into each home.
As they moved across the face of an expanding country, they took their refrains with them as memories of earlier times.
Their children and their children's children listened and learned, adapting the lyrics to the events of their own lives.
With each generation the basic tune received new interpretations and new meanings.
A half remembered sequence of notes developed into a new strain; snatches of lyric were frantic feeling and their seesaw lives quicken with senseless quibbling and crazy acts of wonderful meaninglessness.
The men visit Lou's Place more frequently and the women take long hikes downtown to find the right decorations and to shop.
The women get their trees and arrange their Christmas parties — and what Christmas parties they are.
All of this, all this frantic activity makes up the Batesy Christmas season.
And when we know what Christmas is for us, we see that it is necessary.
It is a period of Christmas work and catching up; of being home for the first time since September; of seeing that girl or guy again; of being home and finding out who's married or pregnant; of displaying your growth; of conflict; and of deciding if you'll be coming back.
HOURS Monday 8:30-6:00 Tuesday 8:30-6:00 Wednesday Thursday 8:30-6:00 Friday 8:30-8:00 Saturday 7:30-6:00 SMITTY'S Barber Shop THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES k ■tZ FOUR BATES STUDENT, DECEMBER 12, 1962 Editorials The Bates Student refuses to become involved in personality conflicts.
We reserve the right to refuse copy which is blatantly personal and derogatory.
Specifically we shall either refuse to print or send back for revision letters which merely malign character.
Each officer and teacher on this campus exposes himself to both praise and condemnation by the very nature of his position.
The Student will print letters praising and attacking individuals fulfilling a function.
Personalities, however, secondary to the individual and his office, are immune.
The Student bares its pages to ideas, issues, offices, and individuals expounding and fulfilling them, but not personalities.
The two organizations reached this decision because only a third of the Bates students indicated that they would favor a wider selection of books in the space now occupied by the bookstore.
Without support of the student body it is not only useless, but pointless, for the Committee to ask for changes and improvements.
The situation involves problems, however, which are far more serious than lack of support.
When an adjective contradicts the definition and essence of a noun, it cannot be used to describe that noun.
Two such words are ""apathetic students,"" for a student cannot be apathetic, uncaring, uninterested.
Aside from this apathy, however, there is another problem which those students supporting the Committee must face, and one that is even more distressing.
They must fight for an education and for intellectual facilities; fight the student body, and the administration.
Instead of being educated, their desire to learn meets repression and resentment; if the administration seeks to emphasize the preciousness of a college education, they have succeeded, if the purpose of the majority of the student body is to ridicule and annihilate intellectual curiosity they have failed miserably.
Perhaps next year the students will have another opportunity to make themselves heard; perhaps they will by that time have realized the value of such an opportunity.
Letter To The Editor CAMPUS BOOKSTORE The Campus bookstore has added two new bookracks and has significantly increased its stock of books.
While everyone recognizes that it would be desirable to have a real bookstore, such as the ones shown elsewhere in the Echo by way of illustration, some of the books and academic supplies needed can be obtained at the bookstore now.
We urge students to familiarize themselves with the additional facilities.
Let's face facts; we probably aren't going to be here when the college finally does remedy the bookstore situation.
There has been some justifiable concern recently expressed by alumni and friends of the College about the policies of the Echo.
The concern seems to involve the question of whether the impressions people off campus may receive by reading the Echo correspond to reality.
Some people are concerned that those whose only present contact with Colby is through the newspaper are going to get the impression that the school is falling apart.
The Public Relations Department does an excellent job of ""selling"" Colby, and most people concerned with the College know that it is definitely moving forward.
It is perhaps unavoidable that progress isn't achieved at a more rapid pace, which is a reason for the impression the Echo often gives of selling the school short.
We believe that our compaints are indicative of the fact that Colby is getting better, and we would like to take this opportunity to express our confidence in Colby's future.
I tell you the story of a man I once knew Who, it seems, ate his fill until quite overgrew.
His appetite failed him after that devouration And as a result he died of starvation.
If you're fed to excess you will surely digress To a state scarcely worth all your trouble.
It is wrong to prolong a once tempting joy In the hopes that its goodness will double.
You can take just so much at one given time, And then you will cease to expand.
Go only so long and then take a rest, Don't cram it all in one session.
Recall please the state of that illfated man And assimilate just this one lesson.
Ninety-one days of steady duration Is too long a stretch of hard concentration.
Priscilla Clark '66 Singh Views America As Favored In The World By ELAINE KENSETH '65 « In the tiny village of Sahuri near Barauni Junction, on the north bank of the river Ganges, in the state of Bihar, three hundred miles northwest of Calcutta, lived an Indian farmer and his family.
Fifteen acres of land were theirs, on which they cultivated wheat, corn, rice, chilly, potatoes, gram, and tobacco.
When the youngest son went to college there was great excitement; not only was he the first one in the family but the first one in his village and district as well.
It was in this little village on the banks of the Ganges that Bhagwat Singh first knew that he wanted to come to America.
Our Visiting Professor on campus, Mr Singh comes to us with a long and intriguing history of how he has come to know the United States.
After two years of teaching he went into journalism, the opportunity to write giving him more chance for self-expression, self-fulfillment.
He worked for the Hindusthan Standard, an English daily, and contributed articles to many other monthly and weekly publications.
These were his political years in which he was concerned mostly with international affairs.
At the age of seventeen, when I participated in the national movement I was imprisoned by the British.
From second grade I wanted to know about George Washington and his land.
At the embassy he was involved with ""the whole idea of humanity"", international relations, culture, art, history, and current problems.
There he did special study of American Civilization and Culture in preparation for a book.
Mr Singh has already a manuscript being readied for the press — The History oj Carnegie Renovation Gives Geology Dept.
Facilities And Stature By GRANVILLE BOWIE With the addition to the Carnegie Science Building, the Geology Department has been given adequate facilities for operation, facilities which were previously lacking.
Farnsworth estimated that the physical plant has been increased by three times its previous size.
He stressed the importance of this additional work space, saying that it has provided a""tremendous psychological boost to the morale and prestige of all concerned with the department.
Farnsworth, ""but now we have left our shabby surroundings and we are here for business.
We no longer have a feeling of being just tolerated, but we are rather a full-fledged department with adequate space in which to operate.
The new facilities provide an expanded departmental library and a room used specifically for maps.
Farnsworth explained that convenient mineral display cases are placed where only scattered samples existed before.
He emphasized the fact that he has good student assistants in the department, but it will be two or three years before everything is completely straightened out.
Also among the new facilities are two individual research rooms of great advantage to seniors working on their theses, and mineral, chemical, and microscopic testing laboratories.
Farnsworth expressed a strong feeling that the expanded facilities will draw a great many more students into geology as a major field of study.
The expanded geology department is another example of the desire on the part of Bates College to move forward and offer its students a higher quality of education than ever before. the Indian Press 1857-1961.
The year 1960 brought a new opportunity to Mr Singh when he was asked to serve as advisor for the Indian delegation to the Committee on International Law at the United Nations.
Always observing and learning, Mr Singh says of this experience, ""How fortunate it was both for the world and the United States to meet on the soil of America.
When I saw thousands of Americans coming every day to see the U N., it gave me inspiration.
What a strange thing it is that the very people who rejected the League of Nations have taken the United Nations into their hearts.
It is very important that the mightiest and noblest country in the Western Hemisphere should take upon itself the mission of which the prophet Isaiah dreamed.
He shall judge between the nations and shall decide for many peoples; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks.
Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
Nobody Knows My Name is a collection of essays written within the span of the last six years, and is the product of a genuine writer who has seen much, and has endured many slings and arrows.
Most of the time he writes in an uncluttered and personal, almost conversational manner.
Desire can be acted out there; over this fence, behind that tree, in the darkness, there; and no one will see, no one will ever know.
We seem to be living in an illusion, and the illusion becomes reality, and that becomes a nightmare.
His concern is not with ""the masses,"" but the people, the individuals in search of identity.
The second part of the book contains essays on Andre Gide, Ingmar Bergman, Richard Wright, and Norman Mailer.
They are tributes to real artists, who go beyond ""the pablumclogged cries"" of Jack Kerouac.
As the military effort becomes the principle national activity, so the defense department and the Pentagon take a dominant position in the center of the government.
The defense department not only employs the most people but it also controls industrial and educational institutions as well as political groups.
It receives from Congress half a million phone calls a year, most of which ask for favors or complain about the lack of them.
The defense department is in close collaboration with those independent countries which are concerned with the development and production of the modern military monsters.
Such cooperation can expect from the government each year a billion dollars — half the armament budget of Great Britain.
As a result, such companies cannot allow themselves to lose contact with the government.
However, it's not always clear whether the decision for production, programming and technical development come front the government or the companies.
This ambiguous and complex relationship between the defense department and its industries has led to great internal conflicts and rivalries which waste both time and money.
The new trend has been to spend more and more for defense, since the belief in a limited military budget of the Eisenhower administration has been dropped.
Brodie of the Bond Corporation stated, ""The more efficient our work in the area of total war is, the greater possibility for conventional warfare.
This program has been managed mainly by financing the scientific departments of universities, most of whom are in far too much need of money to give any conditions.
Most of these universities in the establishment of research programs and the nomination of personnel follow the directions of the defense department.
A great majority of scientists coming out of universities eventually end up by research or teaching in the military circuit.
Scientists are very pleased at this influx of credit which has permitted an increase in the number of people entering scientific fields in universities.
However, scientists are not at all pleased to be brought under the wings of the defense department and are critical of the arms race.
Hans Berthe, for example, has been threatened with a congressional investigation for his position on this issue.
However, it is the American people in general who ask for a continuous increase in military expenditure and security.
Excessive propaganda and ignorance has led fear to far outgrow the real proportion of the problem.
And, no scientists' criticism will have any effect until this hysteria can be controlled and curbed. — A reprint from The Colby Echo.
WUS A central concern of this Seminar was to gain a better understanding of these Asian countries and their people.
In each place visited local WUS and YWCA leaders had arranged sessions with leaders in the Government, education, religion and the arts.
To make possible a period of concentrated study, the group spent four weeks in Bangalore, India, where an especially outstanding program of lecture-discussions had been arranged.
In iddition there were visits in private homes and trips to villages, welfare centers, civic and political organizations, religious shrines, etc.
The Seminar participants returned from the summer's experience with a new understanding of and appreciation for the people of Asia as they confront almost insurmountable problems and also with a renewed consciousness of the underlying unity of mankind everywhere.
For this reason BED ARP'S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston, Maine the song a Kentucky Mountaineer sings as ""Barbara Allen"" may be qyite different in melody and words from a song by the same title rendered on the beach of Carmel, California.
This, then, is what folksongs are, a gift from previous generations to us of the present.
Out of their personal lives ■ and the public events of their time, our ancestors, American and International, drew meaningful stories and lessons in song.
We now call these ""folk"" songs, and sing them to express our similar emotions and to recall a past we never knew, but which still affects us today.
You see, this is a low priority filler type of column and it gets only what space is left over, if any.
Heading for home at Xmas will be Carol Sue Stutzman '66, Pasadena, Calif.
After the Second World War, the United States was the only country in the position to help the countries devastated by the war.
That is why I say that the United States was destined to take over the burden of the unfortunate ones.
One comes away from a talk with Mr Singh strangely in awe of the spirit of the man.
Freeman Leads 3 Team Show; Bowdoin Here Tomorrow Night The Garnet Line By AL MARDEN Pictured above is an example of some of the spirit, long a stranger to this campus, which is beginning to creep into the academic-stifled minds of the studentry.
Don't let it die — a little water and sunlight provided by spontaniety and imagination will develop this seedling into a giant.
The incarnations of such spirit must be well thought-out, however, and must be constructive.
Tomorrow night the Blue-Bloods, long a doormat of the basketball portion of the state series wars, invade Alumni Gymnasium.
A new coach has molded a winning unit from what every one picked to be an utter dearth of material and has scheduled games so they don't conflict with the popular hockey games in Brunswick, thereby developing a spectator interest on the Polar Bear campus.
With most of the exams out of the way and only two days until vacation, tomorrow night would seemingly be a good time to really come out and support a team truly deserving of it.
Not overbounding with talent the Bobcats have done well as a result of hustle, hustle, hustle, and an intense desire to win.
Also don't forget tonight in the cage the Slovenskimen open up their home campaign.
Crowd response is^as much important in track as it is in basketball, perhaps even more so.
It's easy for an individual to ease up a little when behind but when he knows there are people up in the balcony rooting for him it's easy to put out that extra effort that is often the margin of victory.
Although losing the Civil War they have since become the forerunners in many things, especially athletics.
Their Bates cousins have taken their cue and have become the campus leader in the institution of coed athletics.
Tomorrow the MEN from South will make history when they don their hopefully clean gymnasium uniforms and march to the Rand Hall gymnasium where they will participate in a volleyball mach with the WOMEN of Milliken House.
Although much of the Southern relations of our campus Rebels are staunch segregationists, their northern counterparts have spent four years on this Coeducational campus and have finally made a move toward integration.
By DON DELMORE The Bobcats bounced back from their heartbreaking loss to St.
The two game streak firmly established Coach Ullom's charges as a club to be reckoned with during this campaign and must be ranked a top contender for the State Series Championship.
Ullom started the ""Bobcats"" against pre-season* favorite Colby before a full house, anxious to see the squad that fared so well against the powerful St.
Beaudry Hits Forward Fred Stevens hit on a twelve-foot jumper to put the 'Cats ahead only to see John Stevens of Colby drop in two from the foul line to knot the score.
Colby's forward Ken Stone got hot and pumped in four long jump shots in a row as the visitors took a 10-7 lead.
The 'Cats fought back led by Don Beaudry, who hit three of four field goal attempts, and Thorn Freeman, controlling both backboards with his outstanding rebounding.
The two squads matched basket for basket until John Lawlor put Bates ahead 5149 with 3:50 remaining.
Stone, fouled with 2:15 left, dropped in two from the line to knot the score once again and set up the five-minute overtime period.
Cummings took over in the overtime, putting the 'Cats ahead by four on a clutch jump shot and a brilliant drive.
The 'Cats went into a freeze in an attempt to keep possession but Lawlor was fouled with :26 left.
John missed the first one but got the second to give the 'Cats their margin of victory.
Colby got off one last shot but big Thorn Freeman came down with the rebound as time ran out.
The visitors found the range and jumped to a quick 6-2 lead, Glanz scoring the lone basket for the 'Cats.
Led by their strong rebounder, Jim Sands, and a pair of quick guards in Mike Shea and George Sakellis, the visitors unleashed a fast-breaking attack as the second half began and started to peck away at that nine-point lead.
Two jump shots by Stevens and one each from Freeman and Cummings, plus two foul shots by Cummings immediately pulled Bates back into an eightpoint lead with 3:15 left.
FG FT TP Lambert 5 5 15 Tracy 0 0 0 Sands 3 3 9 Shea 4 5 13 Cannon 1 0 2 Davis 0 0 0 Beynor 1 1 3 Lenahan 2 0^ 4 Sakellis 3 2 8 Dvorchak 1 0 2 Kolodziey 1 0 2 Simon 2 0 4 Totals 23 16 62 BATES STUDENT, DECEMBER 12, 1962 */ / SEVEN Slovenskimen Roll Over Tufts Fine Collection Housed In LittleVisited Gym Gallery A portion of the College Club Trophy Gallery By AL WILLIAMS Unfortunately most of the student body at Bates does not know that the College Club Trophy Gallery exists or have a vague idea that it is located somewhere in the athletic building.
College Club Project The College Club, a club to which outstanding seniors are elected each year, is responsible for this show piece.
Dean Harry Rowe, former Dean of Faculty, and now Professor Emeritus has spent many long hours collecting different souvenirs and momentos from alumni.
In one section of the trophy room is a collection of footballs that are symbolic of every win or tie that Bates has gained in the state series.
In the years that Bates wins the championship or ties for it, the footballs are lettered in gold.
At the inception of football at Bates every game won was represented by a football but this soon became impractical from the standpoint of room.
There are pictures of each athletic team dating from antiquity to the present day.
Lux's arrival in 1949 it has been the policy to take pictures of all team members.
There are many famous individuals and teams represented in the collection.
There are pictures of the game, pre-game ceremonies, and the bowl itself.
In one corner of the football gallery is the retired jersey of Bob Martin, captain of the 1956 state series team.
The first letter sweater given to a Bates varsity athlete is enshrined in the Trophy room. to the captain of the 1890 football team with an appropriate inscription is also included.
Former Olympian Represented One of the more outstanding displays is the Buccer Olympic panel.
Buccer, an outstanding miler and two miler in the 1920's went from Bates to the Olympics to gain world fame.
The display is also impressive because of the official Olympic banner which a Bates alumni contributed to the trophy room.
The most recent addition to the collection is the baseball trophy gained for a second place finish in last year's NCAA small college baseball tournament.
Another trophy which immediately catches the eye is one symbolic of the Downeast Consolation championship in 1960-61.
These trophies will reside each year at the college of the eigning champion in the respecive sports.
There will be four pnlicas of these trophies that will remain in the permanent possession of the different colleges with their championship years engraved on them.
The lobby of the gym has been suggested but again the problem of space arises.
Bowdoin has a very similar arrangement as one enters their athletic building.
This serves notice to the upcoming opponents that once again there is a track powerhouse up in Batesland.
This is a young team as wit An old-fashioned razor presented I the past athletic glory. nessed by the fact that there are only three seniors on this club and that means good things in seasons to come.
The high jumping combination of two fine thinclads, Tom Bowditch and Dave Johnson was enough to put a smile on any coach's face as they grabbed the first two places.
In the shot put, freshman Bill Davis showed a lot of promise as he placed third.
Bob Kramer, last year's fine performer in this event, is said to be having trouble adjusting to his new fiberglass pole but look for him to be up around 12 feet before this season is over.
Planchon First In the 50 yd. dash, All-State halfback Paul Planchon showed the speed that makes him so hard to tackle as he won in the good time of 5. seconds.
Tufts lost its best sprinter when Larry Smith pulled up lame in one of the trial heats.
Mike Gregus won the mile in 4:38 as teammate Eric Silverberg was third.
Steady two-miler Finn Wilhelmson won his event in 10:12 and with Silverberg was second.
Bates' two fine hurdlers split up their chores evenly as Al Harvie won the highs in meet record time of 5. seconds.
In the lows, it was Harvie who followed LaVallee as the co-capt. won in 5. seconds.
The team was made up of Bill LaVallee, Garret Benniwig, Paul Planchon and Jon Ford.
Some of the outstanding performances were turned in by Pete Peterson in the 600, Tom Hiller in the pole vault, Dave Harkness in the high hurdles and the broad jump, Wayne Pangburn in the hammer and shot, Bob Sherman in the hammer, Fulenwider in the 1000, John Wayne in the mile, Martin Sauer in the shot and Ken Trufant in the two mile.
In winning the two mile, Trufant beat all the Tufts varsity performers.
Beisswanger hit some nice outside shots and accounted for 18 of the Bobcats' total points.
The game got off to a slow and confused start with both teams having their difficulties in handling the ball and scoring.
Center Joe Matzkin looked good on the rebounds and put in some pretty hooks to score 12 for the Bobcats.
Guards Bob Mischler, 8 point,s and Bob Johnson, 4 points, and forward Paul Savello, 11 points also started for the 'Cats.
The entire 13-man squad, 11 of which are freshmen, saw action against Stephens.
Secondstringer Russ Reilly played hard and added 9 points to the tally.
Ernie Metinier, playing forward, was high scorer for the losers with 13 points.
Mischler and Beisswanger led the team with 16 and 13 points respectively.
Coach's Comments Commenting on the past two games, Coach Leasey said that neither was a real test of the team's ability.
Concerning the team as a whole, ""Chick"" feels he has two good platoons which could be as good as last year's 11 and 4 squad.
Take full advantage of WRJR programming to publicize the events of your group.
As expected though, Cheney and Rand were present at their games in full force, and consequently both can boast of winning three games and losing none.
Among the other dorms, Mitchell, Whit, and Wilson can distinguish themselves thus far, with winning seasons.
It looked as though it would be an easy victory for Frye as they won their first game 14-5.
But, Chase quickly took the lead in the second game as freshman Janet McEachern was able to win eight points from Frye on her serve.
On Tuesday, Rand found that their victory against Page II wasn't quite as easy as their previous victories.
The second one seemed somewhat monopolized by Sally Switzer, as she won eleven points with her quite effective serve.
The girls in Cheney had no trouble at all in achieving two wins this week.
Cheney's game against Hacker was won mostly on serves as Hacker's team consisted of quite a few girls who had had very little volleyball experience.
Those getting the bulk of Cheney's serving points were Judy Warren, Jean Dawson, and Bobbi Reid.
Unfortunately, Page I and Chase had to forfeit to Wilson and Whit, respectively, as they could not find six girls to represent each of their dorms.
Thorn's two-game total of twenty-four points was not, in a whole, a true indicator of his total value to the Garnet five.
His rebounding and defensive play marked his maturity as a complete basketball player.
The Ibftrarawmrafl Sceirne By NICK BASBANES 0 0 1 1 Wilson Frye Milliken Page I Page II Chase Hacker 2 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 Going into its final days of competition, the action-filled volleyball league has produced three apparent champions of the respective leagues.
In , the A league, J.B. has clinched the number one position by virtue of its victory over Roger Bill, and teams from Roger Bill and West lead respectively in the B and C leagues.
These two teams will meet in a B-C playoff game, with the winner playing J.B. for the intramural championship today.
It must be pointed out that these teams are in first place on the basis of games to date, so that conceivably, either position held by Roger Bill or West could be lost.
Perhaps the most exciting and crucial game in the league took place last Saturday when J.B and Roger Bill met to decide the A league championship.
In other A league games contested during the week, Roger Bill downed South in two games, and beat Off Campus by the same margin.
For J.B., Bob Segersten did a fine job of lung exercise, while Ron Taylor's defensive work was widely applauded.
In the B league, the team from Roger Bill is confidently certain of maintaining the undefeated lead.
These boys downed their main opponent for the lead, West, in two out of three games.
The J.B. team, while waiting for North to show, was joined by Hank Stred of the faculty to even the sides, and beat the faculty for the faculty's first loss in two out of three games.
In the C league, J.B. lost its first game and first place lead to West in two out of three games.
Quite happy with their victory, West followed this one up with a 2-1 win over their rivals from East.
It is also worthy to note that this Thursday at 4:15, the A team from South will gamely accept the challenge of Milliken House and meet them on the Rand Hall gym floor.
Reports indicate that the girls are demanding a mixed game and that the boys aren't allowed to spike, making for a more even game.
SKIERS Friday, January 4, Hickories will present the Warren Miller movie, ""Lei's Go Skiing,"" which is in color.
Q TCytOl t Product of 3&Jm*um S&ccv&yx-y U ourJJt, MM C.rc~'~ Scholar dollars travel farther with SHERATON HOTELS STUDENTFACULTY DISCOUNTS Save on the going prices of going places at Sheraton Hotels.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, JANUARY 25, 1963 By Subscription Virginia Erskine Reigns As Queen Smith Presents Organ And Trumpet Concert Professor of Music D Robert Smith will present an organ recital on the Chapel organ on Tuesday evening, January 29 at 8 The program selection contains classical and contemporary works designed to display the many attributes and aspects of the chapel organ.
The works of Sebastian Bach, Buxtehude, and other masters of the 18th century provide a marked contrast to the vivid contemporary compositions of Marcel Dupre and Jean Langlais.
Featured will be Henry Purcell's relatively unknown Sonata For Trumpet, a composition recently discovered in the Library of England's York Minister and reflecting the great heights reached in the art of trumpet playing in the Baroque period.
The trumpet soloist, James Hureau '66 is also a rather recent discovery on the campus.
A native of Stoneham, Mass., Hureau has participated in a variety of musical endeavors.
He continues his musical life in the Bates Choral Society, and in the Concert and Marching Bands, as well as frequent appearances with Bob Cassaday and the Boys at CHDC Dances.
During the Second World War, Professor Smith served in the navy, and in addition to other tasks, gave weekly recitals on the outdoor organ in Balboa Park, San Diego for patients of the naval hospital.
The Pacific Island of Espiritu Santo was his next assignment, and there, the organ by contrast was a portable harmonium.
Following the war, he returned to Puget Sound, coming to Bates as Assistant Professor of Music in 1950.
His musical studies have continued at the Peabody Conservatory, and at the famous Organ Institute at Methuen, Mass., as well as two European periods of study, the first being with the famed Mar eel Dupre, organist of the Church of St.
Sulpice, Paris, and composer of the concluding selection on Mr Smith's recital; the second period was a Sabbatical for the academic year 19601961 where he studied under the prominent Dutch recitalist Piet Kee in Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Rink 3:005:00 Entertainment in Gym 6:006:45 Carnival Banquet in Commons 8:00-11:45 Dance in Gym — Semi-formal 11:30-12:45 Open House in Women's Union Sunday, January 27 Time will be announced Chapel Service 1:455:00 Snow Games on Mt.
David Exhibitions Sugaring Off An attractive twenty-one year old senior was crowned Queen of the 1963 Bates College Winter Carnival last night.
Miss Virginia Hastings Erskine, attended by six members of her royal court, will reign over the fourday activities.
The coronation, opening the 43rd Bates Winter Carnival, was held on the shores of Lake Andrews on the Bates campus.
Charles F Phillips, Bates President, crowned Queen Virginia, and the Queen and her court were seated on a snow dias to watch an ice show put on by student members of the Bates Outing Club.
Winter Carnival traditionally marks the completion of midyear examinations and represents a brief holiday before the beginning of the second semester.
Bowdoin s Winter s Is Three Weeks Hence Young men and women with farm or rural backgrounds are urgency needed by the Peace Corps to replace the unit in East Pakistan whose tour of duty expires in August, it was announced by The Experiment in Intel hationa,l Living.
The Experiment, which trained the unit currently in Pakistan, will also train the replacement group.
Volunteers will live with Pakistani co-workers, and provide day-to-day supervision of village projects.
The projects will be planned cooperatively by Pakistani officials, United Nations technical personnel, and the Peace Corps Volunteers.
However, individuals with experience in working with This year's Winter's at Bowdoin College will take place on the weekend of February 15, 16 and 17.
The evening features the dual appearance of Bo Diddley and Ted Herbert.
Ted will start out the semi-formal dance with his enduring popular music.
The evening will then continue with more relaxing music from Ted Herbert.
Norman Woolworth will start out Saturday for students and their guests.
The exhibition will be held in the Walker Art Museum from 11:00m. to 1:00m.
Coffee will be provided by the StuPhillips Advocates Steps To Increase Economic Growth ""The decade of the Sixties may go down in history as the period in which the United States rediscovered that private enterprise is the best road to economic growth,"" said Dr.
Charles F Phillips, president of Bates College, in his address before the Washington, D C, Life Underwriters Association.
President Phillips pointed to the sluggishness of our economy in recent years as the fact which has gradually made it clear to the leaders of both political parties that high taxes do slow up our progress toward higher standards of living for all.
Specifically, he suggested that TWO BATES STUDENT, JANUARY 25, 1963 The Carnival Court Of 1963 The Queen and members of her court are Judy Mosman, Lee Nelson, Les Jones, Debbie Petersen, Ginny Erskine.
Religious Leaders To Visit Campus; Plan Discussions Representatives of Christian, Jewish, Mormon, Buddhist, and Hindu faiths will be on campus February 6 and 7 for the climax of Religious Emphasis Week.
Sandy Prohl and her CA Committee are planning speeches, discussions, coffee hours, and informal talks for the first Religious Emphasis Week in five years.
Meredith Handspicker, a Bates graduate and Instructor at Andover Newton, will be the first speaker when he addresses the Chapel Assembly on February 6th at 9:20.
Mr Handspicker will be on the campus from Wednesday the 6th until Saturday morning the 9th and will be available to the students at hours to be announced for those four days.
His address will be followed at 8:00m. by an informal coffee hour to be held in Chase Hall.
The oriental religions are to be featured Thursday evening, February 7th.
From 9:00 until 10:30 those interested will divide into three discussion groups in the Women's Union to talk over the three religions presented up to that point.
Friday morning at nine the C A. members will present a Chapel program, the content of which has not yet been decided upon.
That evening at 7:00 Meredith Handspicker will give the keynote address in the Chapel.
This February 6, 7, and 8 you will have an opportunity to expand your own view of religion and the various ways it is practiced as well as to participate in discussions which will provide a chance for you to expound your views.
This is an opportunity to learn and to enjoy beyond the confines of Hathorn or Hedge, and all are welcome to join in any or all of the events of Religious Emphasis Week.
Peace Corps minority and underprivileged groups, and who are willing and eager to live in relatively primitive surroundings will be most useful.
In addition to their basic technical responsibilities, the Volunteers selected for this project will be expected to do everything possible to ""work themselves out of a job"" by training Pakistanis to do the work themselves.
They will return to the U S. about March 15 for a ten-week training program to be provided by The Experiment at its training center, ""Sandanona,"" in Brattleboro, Vermont.
After ten days home leave in early June, the Volunteers who successfully complete the U S. training program will fly to Dacca, East Pakistan, for ten weeks of on-the-job training before they receive their replacement assignments.
In addition to village development workers, there is a need for s i x vocational agriculturists, three civil engineers, three mechanical engineers, and three public health nurses.
Application forms for all positions in the replacement unit to Pakistan may be obtained from Dr.
To reflect productivity gains in lower prices, rather than in higher dollar wages, thereby improving our competitive position in world markets.
To eliminate price support programs for farm products, thus reducing the cost of living for our citizens and cutting the cost of raw materials for industry.
To work for lower manufacturing and transportation costs through the elimination of featherbedding practices.
To give greater freedom to such regulated industries as railroads and airlines so that they can make adjustments to today's technological and market requirements.
To keep total expenditures of the Federal government within income, by minimizing new programs and curtailing some of those upon which we have already embarked.
For example, many of our allies are now in a position to carry a larger share of the cost of the Free World's military budget and of aid to underveloped nations.
The weekend will officially come to a close with a series of fraternity house parties for the rest of the evening.
His plays, particularly The Visit, tend to engender aromas of Brecht and Ionesco, with generous influencings of Shaw, Wilder, and, one of the first upstart playwrights, Euripides.
Concerning The Visit, Durren-* cause this is the 20th cen tury, matt maintains that he has ""described people, not marionettes, an action and not an allegory.
Despite the several levels of insight (and by this I mean ideas and situations with various intentions), the play is readily understandable, for there are no obscure symbols or allusions so subtle that it would take an expert to figure them out.
Perhaps even now you can see the frightening possibilities of what might happen.
The result of this powerful and jarring mixture of grisly humor and real horror is tragedy bordering on classical sublimity.
It is not quite sublime in the sense of the Medea, simply beand it's absurd.
It would only have been entirely meaningful in the mythological kingdom of some ancient polis.
It follows hat the unhappiest man will lave to be sought among the unlappy individuals of memory."" . -Kierkegaard, The Unhappiest Vlan To talk of the unhappiest man n the Bates Student seems trangely out of place.
My tiny olumn is surrounded by all sorts )f Carnival Queens and other ich-like social joyousnesses.
Iere I stand, the ambassador or the kingdom of sighs, garanded in some roses fallen from he Carnival Queen's festooned hawl.
My beat (to e purposely trite) will be evrywhere in the kingdom of emories — memories which lave been and have yet to be.
Perhaps I shall perform a idean chican'ery or two with our minds — if you will allot e your time once a week.
Or erhaps I shall make Malcolmanc pontifications in most scholarand stuffy manner.
Or I may be presumptuous nd interview a professor and, my most reportorial splendierousness, report my findings.
But I shall be honest (foi nee and yet half again) and adit that I am searching for a ommunication with another huan being; and this column will ' a vehicle for this search.
I hall consciously probe my emoions and intellect so that you nay observe my limitations and ualifications.
Like any other olumnist, I shall merely state iy ideas, but I ask my readers o keep in mind that I seek more Han just assent or dissent — I t'ok understanding.
Of pettiness nd triviality sing the words, ut the melody is a great symhony of beauty.
To measure a ife in coffee spoons and uneaten peaches with less fuzz than a woman's arm is to be damned.
It is not our job to discuss the merits of this derivation, nor to dream, but rather to look to the present.
Indeed, it seems to come every year after finals, and it is easy, amidst the dances and varMr Walsh and Dr.
By PAMELA BALL '64 and PETER REICH '65 We just happened to be over in the Alumni gymnasium today, where the seniors were taking their Cultch exam.
We went up to the balcony and took a few pictures of the long rows of heads, and then we went down to the lobby.
A few people were coming out, and some of them looked pale, others frightened, and many had definite expressions written across their faces.
One typical senior, making sure he was within ear shot of d.g., said ""typical"", and huffed off.
Niehaus too, and then tried to get Mr Walsh, who hid very inconveniently under the table.
So we have a picture of a lovely elbow. ious activities, to forget the work which has gone into such a large weekend production.
The Directors of this year's Carnival are Karen ""Bambi"" Brown '65, a French major from Worcester, Mass., and Paul Ketchum '64 from Woods Hole, Mass.
Together, they set up the various committees, and determine deadlines for all decisions.
Each of them goes to one half of the committee meetings and then meet with Dean Boyce and Mr Ross, who represent the administration.
Commenting on the history of Carnival, Paul said ""Winter Carnivals have grown considerably at Bates over the past years.
The budget for carnival in 1950 was approximately $400, whereas the budget for last year was $1,890.
In regard to the improvement of future carnivals, Karen and Paul agreed that a greater degree of cooperation would increase planning efficiency.
Indeed, planning for next year's Carnival will begin immediately after the conclusion of this Carnival.
In regard to entertainment for this weekend, Karen and Paul explained that such groups as Ian and Sylvia, a folk group, and the Dukes of Dixieland were initially considered.
However, it was felt that Dixieland would probably not offer the general appeal desired, and that it would be wise to stay away from folk music.
One very important part of the program this year will be the ice show, directed by Karen, and in which she will perform.
A column of farewell often times slips into the realm of sentamentality, but this is often necessarily so.
I have tried my best to present to my readers interesting and informative sports pages.
I pride myself in having introduced more WAA news than any of my predecessors.
I want to thank all those who helped me through the past two year.s The major plaudits go to Russ Henderson, Web Harrison, Dick Love and Nick Basbanes upon whom fell the brunt of the news and feature writing; along with Phil Tamis, Don Delmore, Keith Bowden, Ted Smith, Al Williams, Stu Field, whose writings have been featured on these pages during the past two years.
I would like to thank all the photographers at the Sun-Journal for their cooperation; Elwood and Everett at the Auburn Free Press who are the real brains behind the Student and too often go unappreciated; Ed Rucci and Steve Talbot who did a fine job as Student photographers; and especially all the members of the Bates College Athletic Department.
Perhaps the most controversial act I will perform as Sports Editor is to name my successors.
For the first time in the history of the paper there will be co-sports editors, a move which I feel will improve the quality of the paper.
The sports editorship is a time-consuming and thankless job and having the duties of the editor spread between two men should make for a better paper.
With this in mind I have selected Russ Henderson and Nick Basbanes as my successors.
These two sophomores have demonstrated a great interest and knowledge of sports and on these criteria I have selected them to follow me.
I wish them luck and am sure these juniors-to-be will do an excellent job in the year to come.
The old record of three hours and 15 minutes for the 30-odd mile run from Augusta to Lewiston with the torch for the opening of Winter Carnival was shattered Thursday afternoon.
A team composed of Skip Butler, Basil Richardson, Doug White, Jeff Starr, Pete Heyl, John Meyn, Dave Williams, Ed Belden, Bill Dunham, and Lloyd Bunten jogged the course in three hours and 8 minutes to break the old mark.
Staff Photographer Steve Wardwell of the Sun-Journal took first place in the annual M.I.A.A. football photo contest for his picture of Bill Davis and a Colby player going for a loose ball while sliding through the mud at Garcelon Field during the Colby game.
The Baldwin, N Y., resident is another example of the depth of this year's Garnet squad as a fine effort placed him ahead of the favorite in the race and shows that another Garnet performer bears watching in the future.
By RUSS HENDERSON It is customary at the time of year when the change in the editorship of the Sports Department of the Bates Student has arrived to devote several columns of well-deserved space to the retiring editor.
For the past four years the sporting events of Garnet teams that have not been observed by Al ""Kibe"" Marden, have been few and far between.
The Student profited greatly from the informed and interesting observations of Editor Marden.
The harbinger of school support for Bobcat athletic teams, Al Marden, will certainly be missed when the fall of 1963 ushers in the renewal of Bates athletic action.
Kibe spent two years at Wachusetts Regional High School where basketball and track were added to a repertoire of sports that includes everything from bike racing to billiards.
Al left Wachusetts after his sophomore year and entered the prep school, Lawrence Academy, located in Groton, Massachusetts.
Lawrence Academy's lacrosse team Al Marden won their prep school league crown and Al Marden was selected to the All -New England team.
Al's teammate and now a Bates junior, Jerry Scott, was also selected to this All -New England prep school All-Star team.
During Al's prep school years his older brother Parker Marden had matriculated to our Lewiston, Maine, campus.
A Bates home was found by Al in the southern end of Smith Hall and also two equally sportsminded roommates in footballers Ed Rucci and Howie ""Red"" Vandersea.
Al became a member of the sports staff of the Student in his freshman year and also found time to participate in the track program of the Bates College Athletic Department in his first two years here at Bates.
In the spring of 1961 Al succeeded his brother Parker Marden as the Sports Editor of the Bates Student.
In doing so he established a Marden Dynasty that was to lead Bates sports reporting and coverage from 1959-1963.
In addition to his previously mentioned activities Al has been on 'he Yearbook staff, the Intramural Men's Sports Council, the Senior Rally Committee, and in the cast of the Winter Carnival Ice Show, 1962.
Picks Northeastern Game In talking to Al concerning the past sport performances of Garnet teams he brought two special incidents to mind as his nominations for the greatest team efforts by Bates athletic squads.
This past fall I was fortunate enough to witness a football game that saw a gallant, fired up Bobcat eleven run roughshod over a tough, favored Northeastern squad.
For the past two summers Al has been employed in the career field of his choice, that of journalism.
In the newspaper business on the job experience is a valuable asset to a professional approach to journalism.
Al received this award on the basis of his work on the Bates Student and his interest in a career in the field of journalism.
During the summer months of 1962 Al was employed closer to home by the newspaper serving Worcester and its surrounding suburbs.
As is indicated by his intense interest in the world of sports Al hopes to be able to concentrate his profession in the sports field of journalism on his graduation from Bates.
Al would also like to try his hand in the realm of freelance writing as the opportunity presents itself.
The members of Al's own sports department would like to add their own nomination of Al Marden as Bobcat of the Week, an honor of Kibe's own origination, to Bates sports supporter number one for his informative coverage and honest opinion as Student Sports Editor 1961-1963.
Jim, who holds sway in the confines of the Alumni Gymnasium, is the bossman on the men's side of the physical education plant.
The Alumni Gym, scene of many social activities, is Jim's special project.
This year Jim has celebrated his 83rd birthday, but his work day is still longer than many, sometimes night work and always a busy Saturday.
Jim's work life has been varied and interesting to him and for thirteen years he was a member of the Lewiston Fire Department.
Jim, as he is commonly called by frequenters to his domain in the Athletic Department, first began working here at Bates in 1929.
He was employed as college gardener, in charge of all the flowers and shrubbery, on our Lewiston campus.
The outdoor work certainly agreed with Jim for he is still on the job, but in another capacity.
Jim's age forced his retirement from the gardening job two years ago but he moved to the familiar confines of Alumni Gymnasium to continue his faithful service.
I'm sure as anyone knows who has tried, that even the fabled Gatecrasher would have his problems getting by Mr Lawton.
During the alumni and commencement weekends Jim is just like an old grad.
We of the Student would also like to add ours, Mr James Lawton, for your many years of service to the Bates campus.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, JANUARY 30, 1963 By Subscription Rob Players Present French Film Friday By PETER d'ERRICO '65 ""A Nous, la Libert*,"" the Rob Players movie this Friday, is a bizarre but joyfully lunatic study of two ex-convicts, Louis and Emile.
Director Ren* Clair has utilized the camera for emotional expression, keeping dialogue to a lean minimum.
Scarcely a speech is more than two sentences, as music and song replace words in this satiric tale.
The film is a combination of fantasy and realism — somewhat like a weird dream — farcial, ironic, and sometimes mystifying.
The central figures, Louis and Emile, make careful plans to escape from prison, but only Louis gets away.
Soon Louis, a shrewd individual, becomes, under an assumed name, managing director of a phonograph factory, the success of which is based on ideas Louis got from the prison factory.
Eventually, Emile is released and finds a job in the phonograph factory, unaware that his prison pal is managing the plant., Louis soon hears of Emile, but because Emile is a whimsical, dreamy sort of fellow, doesn't want to recognize him.
Finally, however, he takes Emile into confidence and the two old friends have a ""high"" old time.
Many sequences follow about their activities and the abortive romanee between Emile and a pretty co-worker.
The tale is lucid, but the manipulation of incidents is sometimes another matter.
M Clair's enthusiasm for the action of the picture causes an occasional lack of clarity — characters are brought on with more concern for the effect of the episode than for continuity.
Clair never misses an opportunity for a satirical stab or a touch of irony.
The skillfully developed comparison of the prison and the factory presents the numbing regimentation of the workshop in which theoretically free men perform the monotonous and unvarying function which binds them as inevitably as their convict fellows to the mechanical world in which both are imprisoned.
The prison is changed into an industrial enterprise; and the monotonous effects continue, with the former prisoners now laborers.
As the film ends, Louis, having been threatened with blackmail, abandons the business.
Boston Museum Treasures From For the first time, selections from the richest royal tomb of antiquity can be seen in the Western Hemisphere.
From February 1 to March 3 the Boston Museum of Fine Arts will present more than thirty pieces from the tomb of the boy King Tutankhamun.
Tutankhamun reigned for nine years, from about 1351 to 1343 B C, and died before reaching the age of 20.
His tomb, with its more than 2,000 fabulous treasures, was discovered virtually intact in 1922.
The opening of the royal mausoleum, which had i» been undisturbed for more than thirty centuries, gave the modern world its first glimpse of ancient Egyptian art and crafsmanship in all their pristine splendor and beauty.
It has been possible to see these treasures only in the Egyptian Museum of Cairo.
Now, to stimulate public interest in the effort to save the ancient Nubian monuments threatened with inundation by the Aswan Dam, the government of the United Arab Republic has permitted a selection of Tutankhamun's treasures to leave Egypt and tour North and South America.
The exhibit included rings, amulets, pectorals, and collars of sheet gold and feyance taken from the king's body; his favExhibits Royal King Tut's Tomb orite hunting dagger, fashioned of gold and found enclosed in the mummy's linen wrappings; a richly decorated minature coffin of gold inlaid with carnelian and lapis lazuli; the ceremonial crook and flail of gold and blue glass, symbols of his power; libation jars; decorated chests; statuettes of the gods — all expected to be of significance to the Pharaoh in the afterworld.
Also on display at the Museum are collections of Egyptian art, considered the finest outside of Cairo, the result of an expedition maintained in Egypt by the Museum for over 40 years.
Any questions should be directed to Kenneth Woodbury '63, Howard Blum '63 or Professor Quimby '18.
Olegna Fuschi Gives Concert This Evening As part of her third full-scale tour of North America, pianist Olegna Fuschi will appear tonight in the Lewiston High School Auditorium at 8:15 This concert is this year's third performance in the Concert-Lecture Series.
Students will be admitted at the righthand door on presentation of their I D. cards.
Mr Lapointe will give a short* T~ talk on some of the problems that are planned during which any tutors may encounter, with a problems encountered in tutorauestion-answer session following wiI1 be disc "" s sed.
At this meeting, those students who wish to tutor will be asked to submit schedules of the time they will have free to tutor.
Students who did not sign up during the first semester will be asked to give some additional information.
Tutoring will take place in Lewiston High School anytime from 2:00 until 5:00 weekday afternoons.
Each student will tutor twice a week for a period of one to one and one-half hours, depending upon the need of the student being tutored.
A tutor will handle from one to three students in a session, according to the difficulty of the subject matter and the problems of the students who are being tutored.
The subject matter to be tutored will include most high school subjects.
A student may tutor any subject in which he feels competent, although it is preferable that one tutor in his major.
After the onset of the program one or two discussion sessions problems to see Mr Lapointe at the high school.
Lewiston High students who are being tutored will have periodical interviews with him.
The students who will be tutored will be those who have shown a definite interest in the program and desire to be tutored.
If a tutor finds that he cannot be at the high school on a day when he is scheduled to tutor, he should make arrangements for either a substitution or cancellation through a student whose name will be announced at the meeting.
After the meeting Friday and the setting up of a tutoring schedule, the project should go into effect immediately.
NOTICE Miss Libbey reports that first semester grades should be available next Tuesday. number of international performances to her credit.
Two seasons ago she went to Poland for a short stay, but attracted so much attention that she was offered a recital at the famed Warsaw Philharmonia followed by an engagement by Pagart, the state music agency for a tour of Polish cities.
Her mother was a concert pianist and her father, in addition to holding 80 United States patents on inventions, was an operatic coach; each hastened to instruct young Olegna in her favored art.
Miss Fuschi became adept in both of her parents' fields and she still treasures a tape recording made when she was four years old on which she sings ""Vissi d'arte,"" the bravura aria from ""Tosca"" and accompanied herself on the piano.
The direction of Miss Fuschi's career, however, soon became evident and the piano won over singing.
Until she was twelve years old, Miss Fuschi continued to study exclusively with her mother.
During her teens, Miss Fuschi studied as a starlet at the 20th Century Fox studios, but successive acting teachers there died shortly after she came under their tutelage.
She eventually decided that it would be better for her own morale if she gave up all thought of a dramatic career.
During the years with Madame Lhevinne, in addition to the Juilliard Scholarships, Miss Fuschi also won the school's 1958 concerto competition, the Josef Lhevinne Memorial Award and the Concert Artists Guild Town Hall Award.
As Durrenmatt is to the modern German theatre, so is Hesse to the modern German novel.
Two of his novels, The Journey to the East and Siddhartha. are the impressions of a European who went to the East and incorporated Eastern culture.
The style is simple, uncluttered, and honest, reflecting the author's internal dialogue with himself.
Concerning The Journey, it would not be presumptious to say that Hesse was strongly influenced by The Little Flowers of St.
Brother Leo, the Franciscan, is very close to the servant Leo of the League, which is a brotherhood of men who pursue their individual destinies, and are bonded together by a common Truth.
The trial of Joseph K is alluded to, as the narrator, ""Self-accuser H."" is put on trial as a consequence of his infidelity and lack of perception and understanding.
Hesse deals with the despair of H H., and the Judge concludes that it is not the actual sins that are bad, but that fact that H is unaware of these sins.
It is when the mutable and arbitrary are perceived by the self (individual) as universal and distinct truth, and, like Joseph K., when the individual comes to depend on outside authority and assistance to provide direction and strength, when this is the ""case"" of the individual, he has committed a sin which is is not aware of, but of which he is guilty.
The picture is one of despair, and H H. is melted away into unreality, into nonexistence.
He does not have wisdom, even at the end of his trial — like Joseph K., he can only see what is happening to him, and that only dimly.
In Siddhartha, Hesse presents his problem again, but with a different man.
It is the Brahmin's son, the god-like Siddhartha who pursues the journey, and the difference is that he is already in the East.
In his spiral path towards awakening and sublime consciousness Siddhartha goes through many self-imposed trials because of his selfaccusation.
The dominant theme that Hesse seems to pose again is the transitory world of the senses is illusion and that reality is the immutable unity which is in all things — the Truth of Om.
It is the understanding that everything has in the germ of the divine, everything is an end.
There is an Eastern paradox of freedom and fate; Siddhartha sees that he has an irrevocable destiny, but that he has infinite freedom within that destiny.
His awareness is a revelation arising out of a continuous process of progression and regression.
Out of the realization that he is completely alone, that the subjective understanding and wisdom of the Buddha can not be communicated to another subject such as himself, that ""opinions mean nothing"", that he must see the wisdom within him, — out of these he achieves his own Nirvana.
As unit manager in the Wilmington, Delaware, business office of The Diamond State Telephone Company, Al Lussier, Jr. supervises 32 people.
Al's unit collects over a million dollars in monthly bills and is an integral part of a team serving 47,000 customers.
On one of his previous assignments he did an outstanding job of reorganizing two other business offices serving 95,000 customers.
Al Lussier and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
During the summer of 1957, on the recommendation of Guiomar Novaes, she made a concert tour of Brazil, and even more important, Madame Novaes helped Miss Fuschi to impart to her playing a greater sense of nuance to add to her formidable technique.
In the United States, Miss Fuschi has made a reputation as a brilliant orchestral soloist under such coveted auspices as the Boston Pops, Arthur Fiedler conducting, Hollywood Bowl and Grant Park, Chicago, where she has played several times.
Saturday, February 2 Basketball, Northeastern, here Chase Hall Dance, 8-11:45 Sunday, February 3 Outing Club Ski Trip, Sugarloaf, 7-7m.
February 6 Meredith Handspicker, Instructor at Andover Newton, Keynote address for Religious Emphasis Week MASS LECTURE SCHEDULE Friday.
This student newspaper, although depending heavily on cigarette advertising for revenue, was convinced of the destruction smoking does to the heart, lungs, and other organs.
Despite the protestations of the cigarette manufacturers that the evidence against smoking is not conclusive, we differ.
The British Government's report on the harmfulness of smoking offers substantial evidence.
It distorts the truth, suggests a flimsy system of causality, and attempts to overwhelm the senses.
However bodacious and sultry a wench is Julie London, she, or any reasonable facsimile, cannot be had for a mere pack of cigarettes.
However much cigarettes stimulate, we seriously question whether they measurably assist and improve one's thinking.
The Bates Student and other Bates publications rely on cigarette advertising for its financial vigor.
A newspaper is effective in a context of freedom; its editorial policy must remain independent.
On page four of this issue we are not merely presenting an ad; we abet the cause of the cigarette manufacturers and the concomitant results.
EVALUATE CARNIVAL The Outing Club should now evaluate the purpose and success of Winter Carnival.
Ostensibly the Carnival provides an end-of-the-month outlet for pent-up emotions and frustrations.
Much money and work (primarily by members of the Outing Club) goes into a Carnival weekend.
Carnival should provide social entertainment for all the students; last weekend failed to do this.
Since the Carnival is for the students' benefit, and since the majority of the students do not benefit, why not channel the money and work into another weekend or a number of weekends.
Instead of a single ""big"" weekend, a series of smaller ones might be planned.
Either of these two possibilities, or any other practical suggestion, should be considered.
Merely because Carnival is a tradition does not justify its continued existence.
We praise the Outing Club for their work; we cannot condemn those students who did not support it.
Entered as second-clasH matter at the Lewiaton Post Office Jan., 191S, under the act of Mar., 1819.
Hume removed the must but somehow not the inevitability of the whole thing.
I choose despair arbitrarily — one can only pattern one's life arbitrarily.
Homo normalis calls me untouchable and moves away from me on the street.
You cannot be intimate for you seek only love when you ;o bare yourself.
I worked on the Pharoah's tomb — but not with the rest of them, for I was an Egyptian and I beat the Jews and kicked them and forced them to so hate that they chose God as their salvation.
Katharine Gibbs Memorial Scholarships Full tuition for one year plus $500 cash grant Open to senior women interested in business careers as assistants to administrators and executives.
And in your system are the checks and balances which eliminate what you most want.
But in telling you that I had a system which in reality is non-existent, I imply a much different system wherein lies my insanity.
Then is your sickness in your 'gamehead' or in your need to play the game? , Old Man: Both are the same and my real insanity lies in my heavy inability to express the relationship which exists therein.
Has this been progresLetter To The Editor Chrysallis Adolescens Perplexed because they are too comfortable and have no real wants, But uneasy as a mal-nourished spirit can make a human, They shuffle to the banquet and gobble • without relish or conscious endeavor.
Constant since that time, my son. make the most of your summer AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN ""In the United States, and indeed the world, few universities rank as educational institutions of outstanding achievement and influence.
I am interested in the 1963 summer program at Madison, so d Please send me your 1963 bulletins on summer study, including course catalogs and guides to student services and accommodations.
A College Mile By RUSS HENDERSON The Bates College relay team showed the way to the runners of four other northeastern colleges as the Garnet soared home first in the College One Mile Relay event of the Boston Athletic Association Meet Saturday, before a packed house at Boston Garden.
Running a bit off their expected form, but finishing first in a classy five college field, the Slovenskimen showed an overall depth which promises improved times under better running conditions.
The one mile relay team consists of four men, each of whom runs a quarter mile before passing the baton to the runner that succeeds him.
The Bobcat in their corresponding running sequence features junior Paul Williams as leadoff man, senior Captain Bill LaVallee, junior Jon Ford, and sophomore anchorman Gerrit Binneweg.
Paul made his move going into the last turn and moved out strongly to a three yard lead as he drove down the last straightaway for his pass to Captain Bill LaVallee.
The Bates captain opened a five yard lead but there was a mixup on the handoff to Jon Ford and Jon bumped a closing Brandeis runner.
Jon quickly recovered and after one lap he had opened a lead of 8 to 10"" yards for the Bates team.
Gerrit Binneweg carried the Garnet hopes for the last quarter mile and the flashy sophomore soared home with a threeyard lead over Joe Goldschmidt of Brandeis.
The winning of three minutes and thirty-one seconds was one that Coach Walt Slovenski felt sure could be bettered by his runner.
Carnival Hockey, J B.-Parker 11, g Smith-Roger Williams 3 By NICK BASBANES '65 The combined forces of J B.-Parker outplayed and defeated their opponents from Smith -Roger at St.
This game coupled keen desire with rough, clean play, keeping the good-sized throng of carnival spectators in a constant state of excitement and appreciation for the skills of the contestants.
Perhaps the main reason for the wide margin of victory was the personnel depth possessed by the winning club.
Time and again, for example, a great effort by South's John Curtiss would be broken up by defenders after a breathtaking and skillful move deep into enemy ice.
The contest started at 1 with the Smith-Roger Bill goalie, Ted Davis, absent for the first two minutes of play.
J B. goalie Ed Gill capably and graciously alternated at both goals until the belated arrival of Davis.
It was within this time that first blood was drawn by J B.'s George Beebe on an assist from Paul Bertocci.
The rest of the first period was tough and rugged, with the skillful Pete Graves scoring the final two goals of the frame for J.B.-Parker.
His first goal came on a double assist from Bertocci and Beebe, and the second from Don Mawhinney.
Charlie Davis hit home first for South-Roger Bill on a fine unassisted shot at the 8:48 mark, followed by a pretty score by John Curtiss, unassisted and shot from just over the blue line.
It was in this period that the defensive strength of John Lund, Jim Brown and Pete Graves came to light, foreshadowing in part the more spectacular efforts they were to produce in the second period.
In the 15 minute second period the J.B.-Parker offensive strength soared with their scoring a total of seven goals.
Their defense allowed few shots to reach their goalie Ed Gill, who, though not called upon to make many saves, turned in some nice ones when the situation so occurred.
The goal tending of Ted Davis, though the score would seem to indicate otherwise, was highly admirable.
Being constantly shot at, Davis made some outstanding saves in the net.
Indeed, tare s de gustibus you never thought you'd get from any filter cigarette."" n w &m&&'v-l.zJz. * Dual Filter makes the difference DUAL FILTER J w u\j m *, * by Russ Wagonfeld at 2:47.
Freshman Bertocci, with three assists at this point, scored after a pass from Pete Graves on a face off.
Paul showed fine skating ability, putting away another goal from Olsen, giving him high scorer honors with two goals and three assists.
Jimmy Brown, to here playing a defensive game, scored unassisted on a fine breakaway at 5:50.
Olsen and Beebe scored the last two goals of the period, the former from Mawhinney, the latter unassisted.
The abbreviated five minute final period was marked by no goalie in the J.B.-Parker net.
The depth of their squad can be illustrated by the fact that even with a vacant net, the losers could score only one goal, that being a spectacular unassisted breakaway shot by Curtiss.
The play of Bertocci and Curtiss was considered by all to be nothing less than spectacular, as they displayed dexterity extending to all phases of the game.
It must be pointed out that boh teams displayed ample skill, however, as pointed out earlier, the boys from J.B.-Parker had just too much depth.
Their constant power plays and strong defense were too much for the opposition.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Frosh Paul Bertocci led the hockey unit of Parker and John Bertram Halls to an 11-3 win over the combine from Smith and Roger Williams Halls in the annual Winter Carnival game Saturday, at Lewiston's Central Maine Youth Center rink.
In doing so, Paul, a slight but quick right winger, banged home two goals and collected three assists.
This is a unique honor for a freshman to be selected as Bobcat of the Week but the Wellesley, Mass., native left little doubt in the minds of observers concerning his skating and stickhandling ability. m ;d rs ry ;s y F Stu ienf Vol.
A Danforth Fellow, he was appointed an instructor in theology at Andover Newton Theological School in 1961.
In addition to teaching, Handspicker has participated in a wide variety of church-related projects.
When an Interseminary Triennial Conference was held at Oberlin, for example, he served on the planning committee, and later, served as secretary of the New England Interseminary Movement.
Handspicker is married to the former Diane West '54 r and they have three children.
While studying at Bates, Handspicker was active in debating, served as an assistant in Religion and Cultural Heritage, and did honors work in his senior year.
Four years after his graduation, he led the chapel service at the Back to Bates weekend of 1958.
From now until Sunday, speakers, discussions, and coffee hours will be devoted to an examination of religion in a world perspective.
On finely printed programs, most recitals look most impressive, yet the acid test, somewhat like the well-known proof of puddings, is in the hearing.
From the authoritaive interpretation of the opening work of Buxtehude, the Prelude, Fugue, and Chaconne in C, to the florid rhythmic flashes of the concluding Dupre Prelude and Fugue in G Minor, Professor Smith superbly fulfilled our highest expectations.
NOTICE All those interested in volunteer work at Pineland or at Central Maine General Hospital are urged to meet at 6:30.
Anyone who is interested in the program but cannot attend the meeting should contact Pam Young in Page Hall.
John Stanley's Voluntary VIII in D Minor was not notably well received by the audience.
The work was written for 18th century English organs which at that time lacked pedals; in addition, it was designed to serve as ""filler music"" before the start of church services; and, by contrast to much of his other music, ended just a trifle too perfunctorily for the tastes of this listener.
Sandwiched in between Buxtehude and Bach, it was a rather lean entry by contrast.
Many organists unwittingly perform this selection Biblical fashion, not letting the right hand know what the left is doing, and the results are highly evident of this.
It is always a pleasure to see the works of Marcel Dupre represented on any recital program, for we will always be assured of exquisite tonal .colouring and prominent melodic lines delightfully mixed with lush chords and juicy fortissimos.
M Dupre did not disappoint us, and Professor Smith presented a masterful interpretation of his former teacher's composition.
It may candidly be said that Tuesday's performance was the best yet heard from Mr Smith.
It was authoritative, not didactic; tasteful, but not exhibition istic; technically clean, but not mechanical.
It displayed a mastery of the instrument which often is neither heard nor appreciated above the ""tumult and the shouting"" of Wednesday chapel.
Following the tone set for the Week by Handspicker, several other men will represent the great traditional religions of the world.
A graduate of Yeshiva College, he was awarded the American Jewish Congress Stephen Wise Fellowship in 1952.
After receiving his Master's Degree in Hebrew Literature, Zion taught Jewish History and other courses and served various congregations.
He became acting-director of the textbook research project of inter-group relations, sponsored by the American Jewish Committee in cooperation with Yale and St.
Louis Universities in 1960 and is also associated with the American Civil Liberties Union.
Later in the PostWar Birth Rate Affects Number Of Student Applications Recent enrollment trends have finally caught up with Bates, and applications for September 1963 admission are below the levels of previous years.
This is in accordance with a temporary national trend which other selective institutions have felt for the past three or . four years.
Bates might have experienced such a decrease last year had it not been for the publicity which the school received from its General Electric ""College Bowl"" appearances.
The nation-wide decrease in college applicants stems from the low birth rate of 1944-1945, which has made for a smaller number of high school graduates The decrease in applications, however, presents little problem to Bates.
It is felt that most of the applications not received would have come from students of either low ability or of a caliber which would win them acceptance to more highly rated institutions.
Those of lesser ability apply in smaller numbers beevening, Mr Hein will particiof the lectures being held topate in the discussions to be night and tomorrow.
The groups held in the Women's Union from will be held at the Women's 9:00-10:30 Union from 9:00-10:30m.
Before these discussion groups During this time, students will meet, however, Bikku Vinita, a participate in informal discussion Buddhist monk from Ceylon, with the lecturers and other stuwill speak on ""Buddhism and dents, and refreshments will be World Peace,"" at 8:00m., served.
Thursday, after a short break The activities on Friday, the following Mr Hein's talk.
Biklast day for speakers during Reku Vinita has been a member of ligious Emphasis Week, will bea Buddhist monastic cf der for gin with the Chapel Assembly at 13 years, and has been in9:00 that morning, when the strumental in establishing BuddCA. members will present the hist centers in England and program.
The Bates team participating in the Har vard Invitational Tourney, which is one of the largest and most important tournaments of the year, was composed of Norman Bowie '64 and Jeffrey Rouault '65.
In a tournament of this nature, two men form the equivalent of a four-man team, as each debater has prepared and must be able to debate either side of the topic.
In one round, for example, a team might debate the negative side of the topic, and an hour later, in the next round, debate affirmatively on the same topic.
Bates met schools from across the continent in the Harvard tourney, including two schools from California, one each from Illinois, Ohio, and Canada, and two from Virginia.
In order to qualify for the ficause of the better college counseling being given in the nation's high schools.
Lack of applications from highest caliber students probably stems from the decreasing number of high schools allowing students to fill multiple applications to colleges.
College Board studies indicate nals, it was necessary for a team to have at least a record of 7-1, that is to have lost only one debate in the preliminary rounds.
Unfortunately, the Bates record after the preliminaries was 6-2, one debate short of placing in the final rounds.
An interesting development of the tourney was that Ohio State, last year's national champion, also failed to reach the final rounds of debate.
Norman Bowie '64 and Kenneth Woodbury '63 argued in favor of upholding a non-Communist economic community.
Norman Davis '65 and Richard Rosenblatt '66 argued in favor of the present United States policy.
TWO BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 6, 1963 GUIDANCE NEW CANAAN COUNTRY SCHOOL in Connecticut is offering teaching fellowships at the pre-school and elementary school levels, the junior high school level, and in the field of the creative arts.
The full-time fellowship carries with it a stipend of $2,000, which includes practical on-the-job training, plus theoretical study.
SPRINGFIELD COLLEGE has broadened its program in the field of applied social science to include working with groups, agencies, councils, and communities.
Opportunities are now available for -professional specialization in group work, international service, YMCA certification, intergroup relations, community organization, and institutional and community research.
MASSACHUSETTS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WELFARE is offering a trainee program for men and women college graduates interested in social work.
Trainees selected by the Department may attend any accredited graduate school of social work and will be assigned to work in the Division of Child Guardianship for three summer months preceding admission to the graduate school and between the two academic years.
STATE OF CONNECTICUT has recently announced its Management Trainee Program for liberal arts graduates.
YELLOWSTONE PARK COMPANY is now accepting applications for employment in the hotels, lodges, camper's cabins, gift shops, and transportation and boat docks throughout Yellowstone National Park.
Burroughs Wellcome & Company; Insurance Company of North Am^^a; CALENDAR Wednesday, February 6 Rabbi Leonard Zion, Chapel, 78m.
Sunday, February 10 Coffee Hour Discussion of Religious Emphasis Week in Chase Hall Ballroom, 8:00 Tuesday, February 12 Club Night, SEA, 8 Libbey Mercantile Stores Company; The United Church Board for World Ministries.
As unit manager in the Wilmington, Delaware, business office of The Diamond State Telephone Company.
AFs unit collects over a million dollars in monthly bills and is an integral part of a team serving 47,000 customers.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES Rowe Addresses Ch apel Group OnHathornHall The history of Bates and especially Hathorn Hall were the subject of Dean Emeritus Harry W Rowe's talk to the Chapel assembly last Friday.
Dean Rowe's theme, the changing face of Bates as exemplified by Hathorn Hall, emphasized the expansion of Bates from a wooded pasture area with one building, to the present elm-studded forty-building campus.
Built in 1854, Hathorn served initially as the college; housing the chapel, commons, and theater, as well as classrooms.
As Bates has expanded, the various uses made of Hathorn have correspondingly diminished.
Today, Hathorn serves only as one of five buildings housing classrooms.
In introducing Rowe as a former Assistant to the President, Bursar, and the first Dean of the Faculty, Dean Healey made clear the particularly fine vantage point that Rowe has enjoyed, which enables him to fulfill his present position of College Historian.
Committees Plan For Betty Bates Week Activities Although the annual Betty Bates program is still two weeks away, plans are well underway for the week.
Linda Browning, Marion Day, Nancy Day, Linda Jarrett, Ingrid Kaiser, Carol Kinney, Nancy Nichols and Lois Warfield.
During Betty Bates week, which runs from February 1822, there will be a variety of activities.
In addition to the annual fruit sale, there will also be several skits, and entertainment by the Deansmen.
A highlight of the week will be a program presented by Miss Jan Clarke, popular Boston fashion model, who will deal with certain aspects of good grooming.
Buildings and properties, Linda Olmstead '65; Invitations and hospitality, Nora Jensen '64; Awards and mimeographing, Arlene Wignall '63; Fashion show, Anne Cawley '66; Fruit sale, Linda Olmsted '65; Daily events, Ginny Erskine '64; Candidates, Louise McCabe '63; Publicity, Donna Whitney '65 and Linda Jarrett '64.
Lewiston BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 6, 1963 THREE Nelson Comments About Experiences And Interests In Teaching At College The following is an interview of Mr David Nelson, Instructor in the English Department, by Herb Mosher '65.
R Would you give me a brief* summary of your previous N N R N R N R education.
I got thoroughly sick of that and returned to Cornell for a Ph.D. at Cornell.
But the most frequent comment was the inclusion of sex in your lectures.
But, I also like to use a variety of approaches because I think that many of them are valid for teaching purposes.
Frost maintained that the meaning of a poem depended, to a large extent upon A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
A poet has a specific purpose when writing a poem and this purpose provides the rationale for the kind of artistic decision he made in making the poem.
So that in trying to grasp the purpose or impact of the poem — the state of thought or feeling that's evoked by it — you can explain the artistic function of any given part of it.
It seems that if you take this approach you'l never learn anything from literature.
Because all you are doing is looking in a mirror and seeing a pretty reflection of yourself.
There's no communication going on between you and the poet Now, presumably when the poet wrote the poem he wanted to move you in certain way and reasonable, sensitive men should be able to sit down and come to an agreement concerning the way the poem should move * you.
By KENT G TAYLOR '64 There is a tendency among artists appearing on the Lewiston High School stage to feel the necessity of performing a sensational rather than a penetrating repertoire.
To find one in which the selections chosen were both of immediate reference and at the same time performed as if freshly composed is rare indeed.
However, such a combination was achieved, momentarily at least, with the help of Chopin and the spotted, yet fresh, interpretation of Olegna Fuschi.
Only once throughout the en tire performance did the listener feel that the exception rather than the rule was an integrated part of the performance.
There was an unshakeable sense of restraint woven throughout the first half of the program.
The Bach and Mozart were rendered more as warm-up exercises than entities unto themselves.
The opening bars of the ""Appassionata"" remind one of Beethoven's Fourth Piano Con certo in which the almost crushing power of the orchestra is ar rested by the assured gentleness of the piano.
Miss Fuschi found it difficult to maintain the duali ty which music of this type de mands.
The assurance and agility with which she commanded the keyboard proved her a more than able interpretor.
The wrathful demands of the Scherzo were met with comparative ease and the vivacity of the Mazurka in C sharp minor with its varied rhythmic patterns was satisfying.
The Etude, perhaps Chopin's greatest form of musical expression, had an elegant grace and beauty all its own.
STONE"" Vivian Leigh plus 'LOVES OF SALAMMBO'l limilllllllWIIIIIUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII HIUHMHHMMMMI I MUMMhS By MALCOLM MILLS '65 Despite a few highspots, Olegna Fuschi's concert last week was, for the most part, unsuccessful.
Her highly romantic style just does not suit Bach's intricacy and delicate tonal arrangements.
She started playing before the audience had quieted down and consequently the first few notes were lost.
Miss Fuschi apparently did not have contact with her audience's mood and hence her playing became mechnical, and failed to produce any real response in this critic.
Only the last variation sounded like Mozart, and she handled this one with a delicacy and taste which was lacking in the earlier sections.
One cannot capture Beethoven with one's fists, but Miss Fuschi persisted through his Sonata in F Minor to attempt this task.
Her trill became uneven in her passion, and there was little note By JOHN DAVID '64 Last Tuesday and Wednesday afforded the studentry an opportunity to witness two different schools of music, the Baroque and Romantic.
To judge the Romantic period on the basis of Fuschi's recital, however, would be unfair to the composers involved.
At the Olegna Fuschi concert, the pianist seemed to have evaluated her audience — something which a politician should do, but never an artist.
I think that something a little more ""meaty"" would also have been in order for a Bach offering, in place of Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring.
It increasingly seemed, however, a dramatic device which had gotten out of hand.
In her encore, she made hash of the Spanish baroque composer Soler; and would have probably done so to Bach at the beginning of the program were it not for the fact that such a lovely and simple piece as Jesu is hard to kill.
Initiating the Tuesday evening organ recital by Professor D Robert Smith was the Prelude, Fugue and Chaconne in C by Deitrich Buxtehude.
Played with a little more of something I call ""conviction"", it would have been superb.
Bach's masterful Fugue in E Flat which was played with forcefulness and clarity.
Henry Purcell's genius for pomp and splendor never fails to show itself in his music for trumpet; and James Hureau '61 delivered the Sanata for Trumpet with polish, precision and verve.
Hureau succumbed to a couple of poor attacks in this demanding piece; but fluffs can always be forgiven, whereas a sustained inadequacy (as in Fuschi's performance) is much more discouraging.
The two final selections on the program moved out of the Baroque and into the 20th century.
Langlais' intense and thoughtful Nativity was followed by the Prelude and Fugue in g of Marcel Dupre, a complex and stirring treatment of an unusual theme, which closed Smith's recital in a flurry of excitement. board regions — all sounds emerged therefrom in a great emotional blur.
In the final movement, she lost most of her fervor, and it came out sounding like a well-executed Czerny exercise.
Somehow Miss Fuschi managed to strike a balance between her technique and her romanticism in her Chopin selections.
It was interesting to note the modern harmonics that Chopin used to achieve his minor effects in the Mazurka and Etude.
For some reason, Miss Fuschi chose to play Karol Szymanowski's lush and weepy Etude in B Flat Minor which was reminiscent of a Dmitri Tiomkin score for some Hollywood spectacular.
She executed this piece rather well, however, since it fit neatly with her own emotional temperament.
Miss Fuschi ended the evening with a jaunt through Liszt's Sixth Hungarian Rhapsody.
Liszt's beer garden music, while repulsive in itself, was well performed by the artist.
The complaints are partially justified; some advanced courses have too many students, particularly those in the History and English Departments.
Too often, however, the grumblers fail to look at the total picture; too often one suffers from an ego-centric predicament.
That certain classes are too large is obvious; that many more classes are small is equally obvious to anyone checking the class size in Registrar's Office.
A number of advanced courses have as few as five or six students; many have fewer than twelve.
In criticizing the student-faculty ratio one must look at all the classes, not just two or three.
Assuming that the committee now evaluating curriculum changes, including a yearround attendance plan, proposes an acceptable alternation, the structure of Bates could radically modify.
Change does not necessarily assure improvement; but any minor alternation, such as the addition of one or two instructors in the English and History Departments, must be considered in light of the possible revolution in the total structure.
This doesn't deny the need for additional instructors; it merely counsels a synoptic understanding.
While the student-faculty ratio at Bates reigns not at the apex of the academic world; it hovers nearer the top than the bottom.
And significantly, the truth in the oft quoted phrase, "" a small, friendly, co-educational college,"" partially offsets the effects of the few large classes.
In a college of this size, the opportunities for initiating out-of-class relationships with the faculty in part vitiates the impersonality of the large class.
And no matter how large the class, most of the students know each other.
In criticizing, however, one must consider the whole as well as the parts.
The former certainly do not justify the latter; but they do add a needed perspective.
We plan to discontinue cigarette advertising; we are presently seeking means of replacing the loss of revenue such a step entails.
We harbor no doubt of the validity of our position; we must consider, however, the financial situation Hopefully, we shall solve this problem in the near future.
By JAMES KIERNAN '63 Last week I was surprised; once by a visitor to our campus and once by a group of our Bates men.
In my three and a half years of association with this institution of higher learning I have heard many times the word animal in reference to some particular men on campus.
Last week I was pleasantly surprised that this quality, the loudness and occasional grossness, is only skin deep, and in relation to certain other groups is negligible.
Never have I heard of tne *R 0 g er Bill foolish, schoolboy trick of beating up someone because he went out with a girl you once went out with.
Last Wednesday night a boorish, overgrown child from Norwich beat up a half asleep Bates freshman in his own room.
His return engagement Thursday consisted of tearing up a bulletin board and urinating on the floor of Roger Bill; after which he loudly offered to ""take a walk"" with any of the dozen or so men who brought him back to Fights are not common on this campus.
It is truly a friendly place, but more than this, there is a certain restraint and respect that the Bates men wanted was that the animalistic wreckage be cleaned up.
While it wasn't an ego boosting experience, I do find the restraint and mature refor the other guy that becomes i action of the Bates men corninstilled in each one of us here at Bates.
The people that live in my part of Brooklyn would never feel restricted because the odds were in their favor and would not deal similarly with such an oaf.
AND YOURS By CHARLES E SMITH '63 Marx and many others since him have said that what a society does for advancement is determined to a very large degree by economic factors.
Although there is academic disagreement as to whether the Marxist view point stresses economic motives in toto, the main point to be remembered is that whatever our motives for action are, the ramifications may well be economic in nature.
At the risk of being called a Marxist, and in today's conventional language to be a Marxist is in very bad taste, this column will attempt to investigate some of the problems that face us as students, and, I hasten to add, as members of a society that has been more than once prophesied to doom because of its capitalistic nature.
This is not to say that the thoughts and considerations will be earthshaking or even called to attention in Washington.
One topic that has been of no small interest to Bates students in the past few years is that of military disarmament vs. military preparedness.
We have all read the ethical, moral, and expedient reasons for complete disarmament and the ethical, moral, and the expedient reasons for continued military preparedness.
Our economic model will contain a public and a private sector,e. we have an active ly spending government as well as private industries.
With public sector that spends we will necessarily have taxation and most likely debt.
Occasionally these ghosts come back to haunt us with the withering sickness of perfection-lost.
For a while, be it a split second or a considerable length of time, love seems perfect and fulfilling in itself.
But always after the zenith there comes the pause where reality sets in.
Stekel, in his book Auto-Erotism tells us (or at least presents us with a theory) why this is so.
He calls love a projection of the self onto a loveobject or another person.
When our projection or idealization of the love object breaks down, we feel incomplete — and love dies.
The reason for this is quite simple, really, since another person cannot be exactly like us, he/she must eventually assert his/her conflicting aspects.
And yet the perfection we knew when the self -projection was complete lingers with us.
It can be in the form of a Haydn symphony which reminds us of long black hair and first love — or of a walk alone through a familiar neighborhood which we took a year before with our then current love.
I am making things sound ex tremely scientific, and love is not so mechanistic.
Stekel's theory may be true or it may be false, but still it remains that love and its loss produce phantoms which stalk us and seek to turn us to sorrow by forcing us to recognize our aloneness.
Never is one more completely alone than after the loss of love — of unity.
Then one can only turn inward and die in the disjointed world he sees there.
They see nuzzling, laughfilled talking, and sex as the only components of an ideal relationship.
Stekel would call them too much filled with triviality to be capable of completely giving over of the self to divine emotion.
Most of mankind is like the lawyer in Bartleby the Scrivener who does not even recognize his ability to love.
Wilhelm Reich, in his book, The Sexual Revolution, echoes the cry of Erich Fromm in The Art of Loving when he says that man is becoming disabled and is being forced into a form of emotional stasis by his highly repressive society.
And those people who know the sorrow of ""total love lost"" are becoming more and more alone in this society of loveless people.
There is no joy that spans eternity No comedy without a tragic tear; When laughter but suggests a deeper grief.
Military spending has been large, in the neighborhood of 50 billion dollars.
WRJR-FM. your campus radio station, provides an excellent forum for the dissemination of news news and notes about club activities.
SUBSCRIBERS Please write if you have not been receiving THE STUDENT regularly.
Ruth Walker, a new instructor in French and German, is a living testimonial to the truth of this assertion, for her knowledge of languages has enabled her to gain a keen insight into some of the world's most pressing problems.
Walker returned to Germany, and managed to secure passage through the Iron Curtain into East Germany.
Ostensibly, her mission was to attend the Leipzig Fair, but her primary interest was to observe the living conditions of the East Germans under Communism.
Unemployment will result because of the closing down of government supported defense industries.
In many cases the large private industries will be forced to curtail production of defense items and lay off employees.
This creation of unemployment will cause a reduction of incomes in other groups as consumer consumption falls.
Investment will fall, giving further impetus to the lowering of the model's aggregate income.
For the economically minded who favor reducion in our military stock-piling, the above problem can be partially alleviated.
By efficient channelling of the public sector away from military spending into other areas of public concern the reduction of government spending might be' held to a minimum.
Our model might experience public spending in education, welfare, urban renewal, and other areas.
If we have been (and to some extent we have been) so brash as to assume disarmament politically feasible, then more spending in the above areas emerges as feasible.
In our model society disarmament is possible as long as alternative actions are immediately available for continued government spending.
I would now refer my diligent readers to other sections of this newspaper and other newspapers to determine the non-economic justification for disarmament.
In the same vein, next week 1 would like to discuss some of the problems that have confronted economists when they try to apply modern economic theory to defense spending.
An Air Force general views the difference between a super-sonic fighter and a long range bomber just as you and I, as consumers, consider the difference between a red Chevy and a black Cadillac.
The Intercollegiate Broadcasting System will provide full membership status ,for Bates College radio.
The membership of the network consists entirely of college and university radio stations interested in helping each other to provide a variety of programming and management ideas.
For WRJR this will mean an increase in feature programming, specifically those programs which have great interest to the national college audience as a Nelson than any other.
You're confusing the fact that I talk explicitly about sex in class when it's appropriate— when the work is about sex.
I do this largely because I think that it is the only honest thing to do.
I feel that it is also effective pedagogically because it makes the student sit up and pay attention.
N If I understand what you mean, I don't think that there is any more hypocrisy here than there is anywhere else in a Puritan society which makes very strong moral judgments about sexnight ski trip to King Pine Ski Area or Sugarloaf.
As an alternative to the overnight trip, which can only be held late in the season, it was suggested that the trip be planned for a Sunday in the near future.
All freshmen are urged to see their dormitory representatives if they have another feasible plan.
The freshmen also considered the desirability of sponsoring trips to attend symphonies in Portland, and the possibility of having instrumentalists attend the college.
After some deliberation, the class reserved April 20 and April 27 as tentative dates for the Freshman Dance whole.
We will also have the opportunity to bring topnotch WRJR programs to the audiences at other member colleges.
Though it seems the year is flying past entirely too fast, WRJR still has four months to bring to Bates students many fine feature programs.
One away state series basketball game remains, at Maine on February 19th.
New programs from IBS will soon be on the way, as will the music of the annual Pops Concert.
Meanwhile WRJR provides music for everyone at some time from Sunday at 6 till Friday at 12.
A student in such a society is constantly involved in a situation where his own natural drives must be somehow coordinated and made to cooperate with social norms.
What I try to do is use an exam not as something which the student regurgitates all the information he has piled up in his notes, but as a situation for creative thinking — an attempt to give students information and make them put it together themselves.
I give them a basic idea, let's say an individual novel and make them relate this specific novel to general ideas.
This, I think, is essential to r Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS » ■ Mrs.
Hundreds of young men belonged to ""flying clubs"", so called because Gearmany was forbidden to rearm, but which, in reality, were the beginning of the formidable German Air Force.
East German officials boarded the train and collected all the passports; then the passengers were locked in the train.
While they waited, they saw troops of ""triggerhappy"" armed youths in uniform marching by the train.
The situation was especially dangerous because there was no Canadian Consulate in East Germany.
Once inside the border, she was impressed wherever she looked by the extreme shortage of consumer goods.
They are exhausted from overwork and undernourishment, and they are helplessly apathetic.
They all suspect one another of being an informer, and this attitude, together with the behavior of the police, reminded her of the bitter days under the Third Reich.
In class I use a discussion method even w^ien I have a class of 45 students.
Post-War that in the next two years there will be a nation-wide increase of over fifty per cent in college applications.
This will be due partly to the high birth rates of 1946-1947, and partly to a greater percentage of high school gradu/ / / 6 (p SIX BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 6, 1963 B G Trackmen Topple Cats 69 44 SPORTING S Cjc \ By NICK BASBANES < By and RUSS HENDERSON In this, our initial installment of the ""Sporting Scene"", we would like to extend our sincere thanks to all who have so generously assisted us in our goal of maintaining the high standards of sports coverage upheld by our predecessor, Al Marden.
This praise is especially directed to Al himself and the members of our staff.
A note of interest has recently come to light concerning next year's State Series basketball competition.
A A., governing body of college athletics in the state, has voted to decrease the number of games between state teams so that each team will meet the others twice, as opposed to the present three.
Repercussions in this case would include increased expenditures for traveling out of state, and present a state series in which the presence of a possible rubber game is eliminated.
A tip of the hat to sophomore Don Cellar who has recently won himself a berth on the local Holiday Lanes bowling team.
This team will compete with other Holiday Lane groups from the New England area to determine a champion.
An event that promises top notch billing is the upcoming Jay Vee Intramural All Star tilt.
The Jay Vee's have shown that they have a fine team, but we feel that a talented Intramural Team will certainly make it an interesting night for the Bobkittens.
A pleasing innovation has made its appearance on the Bates sporting scene.
Some twenty hockey enthusiasts, not content with limiting their skills to the carnival tilt, joined forces and rented the local arena this past Sunday night.
The results of this encounter are anti-climactic in view of the overall implications that their initiative has produced.
At last a group of Bates students, though their sport specialty is not readily accessible, have nevertheless found a way to their means.
Interested Batesmen should contact sophomore John Lund of East Parker if they are interested in joining this group of enthusiasts.
Looking forward to next fall and the return of King Football, the 1962 football schedule has been announced by the Athletic Department.
The Garnet gridsters open against the Cadets of Norwich at the Vermont military school's Northfield campus on the twenty-eighth of September.
The 'Cats then face Northeastern, Worcester Poly, Middlebury, Maine, Bowdoin, and play their curtain closer at Waterville against the Colby Mules.
The surprising fact is that no game has been scheduled to replace Tufts on the Bates lineup.
This was to be the 'Cats' opening contest on the twenty-first of September and was to be a home contest played before the upperclassmen are scheduled to return to school.
The Garnet are only playing two games at home, those being the Worcester Poly and Maine contests.
It seems in this corner that the Bobcats deserve an eight-game schedule and at least three home contests.
In closing, we send our regards to the two most attentive spectators at Saturday night's Northeastern basketball game who succeeded in doing both their homework and cheering at the same time.
It was a highly weakened team that donned their spikes that day, for recent injuries to Paul Planchon and Allen HarDeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 COLLEGE PHARMACY, Inc.
Bill LaValle leads the way in the high hurdles make the most of your summer AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN ""In the United States, and indeed the world, few universities rank as educational institutions of outstanding achievement and influence.
I am interested in the 1963 summer program at Madison, so □ Please send me your 1963 bulletins on summer study, including course catalogs and guides to student services and accommodations.
Starting off in excellent style was junior Paul Williams, who leapt 22' 4%"" to grab first place in the broadjump.
After an unwelcome defeat in the mile by a triplet of very strong ""Beantown"" distance men, John Curtiss nailed down second place in the hammer throw.
Bowditch Jumps 6' 3"" The high jump, traditionally a winning event for the Garnet because of two devoted jumpers, sophomore Tom Bowditch, and junior Dave Johnson, held form as Tom sailed over the bar at 6' 3"" to chalk up first place.
Bill also broke the tape in the high hurdles and settled for a time of 6. seconds.
Takes Weights And Distances B C. showed their great depth and strength in a number of events.
Confident and strategic, Jack Rawson nudged out Bobcat Eric Silverberg in the last two laps of the mile to win the event in the time of 4 min. sec.
Shortly afterwards Rawson followed Finn Wilhelmsen around the track until he broke into a sprint in the last two laps of this twenty-one lap race for the win in 9 min.. sec.
Here, Gilvey opened up a substantial lead in the first hundred yards and maintained it to flash across the finish line and set a new meet record of 1 min, 13. sec.
Despite the loss, our cindermen turned in praiseworthy efforts to post 44 points against a very strong team.
Harkness Shines For JV Rarely seen in the limelight are the JV cindermen, who in spite of their lack of recognition, deserve the credit due for their fine performances.
Down by ten points at the close of the first half, the 'Cats fought back to within two points with 14:24 remaining, only to see the Mules open up a six point lead and coast home for the win.
Cais Take Early Lead Sophomore guard Don Beaudry hit on a floating drive and John Lawlor dropped one in from the foul line as Bates jumped to a 3-0 lead.
The 'Cats cleared out the middle for Cummings who drove hard and drew a foul.
The half time intermission failed to cool off the shooting of either team.
Stone and Stevens matched baskets three consecuback on a foul shot by John tive times, followed by a short Gibbons and a jumper by Ken Federman to knot the score at 3-3.
Sparked by the crisp passing of Beaudry and the rebounding of Captain Thorn Freeman, the 'Cats moved to a 9-7 lead after six minutes of play.
The Mules asked for a time out and changed their strategy, which proved to be the turning point of the game.
Up to this point both teams had been employing pressing manto-man defense, but now Colby abandoned these tactics in an attempt to cool off the hot shooting Bobcat five.
The Mules came zone defense, which proved capable of cooling off the fine shooters of the Bates attack.
The hustling 'Cats continued to pressure Colby in an attempt to force them into making mistakes, but time was running out and the Mules were able to protect their lead.
Stevens High For 'Cats It was a tough one to lose for the 'Cats, fighting the uphill battle all the way.
The scoring was well balanced as Fred Stevens, who at one point canned five in a row, led with fourteen points.
Seth Cummings and John Lawlor had twelve, and Thorn Freeman chipped in with eleven.
Once again Freeman was outstanding in the rebounding department as he picked off seventeen.
Kittens Stop Colby, Thomas The junior edition of the Bates basketball team surged to victory twice in the past week's action to give Coach Leahy's charges a seven-win, two-loss record for the season.
It seems that there are many classes this year which are extremely large.
As a faculty member, could you tell me if there has been a change in 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-6:00 8:30-8:00 7:30-6:00 HOURS Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday SMITTY'S Barber Shop Katharine Gibbs Memorial Scholarships Full tuition for one year plus $500 cash grant Open to senior women interested in business careers as assistants to administrators and executives.
But in any case this ratio tends to be misleading because it depends on who you count as faculty.
I've got four or five faculty members who are coming now and we meet once a week.
If possible, I'd like to turn it into a student, faculty and townspeople chess club.
It would be a matter of getting a meeting place which would be satisfactory for all.
One, it is the most purely rational game that you can play in the sense that there is no element of chance in it such as in bridge where the game is partly dependent upon the fall of the cards.
But there is ^another way you can look at it which is very interesting.
In a sense, chess is purely a matter of free will, or the free play of the intelligence.
It's a game in which you can truly have chance in a way that you can't have in bridge.
In chess, since you don' have any mechanical ele ments, it may happen that you can get an example of pure chance.
Perhaps at the end of the game the position of this pawn may be the determining factor in the course of the game, even though it's, in a sense, quite accidental that the pawn is in that position.
So you do have a type of chance in chess which you don't have in any other game.
I was serving as a liaison person for some townspeople who are interested in the peace movement.
R I believe it was you I saw at the last Men's Smoker playing a wild game of ping pong.
N Certainly, I feel that my position is literally one of an advisor and nothing else.
I don't try to influence what goes into the paper in any way other than to insist that the material that goes in is, on the one hand honest, and on the other, responsible.
I'm very strongly against any kind of censorship other than the kind of self-censorship which is always implicit in any responsible citizen's actions.
How do you By LEIGH CAMPBELL '64 A slow-down, ball control offense and alert defense by the Bates Bobcats kept powerful Northeastern in check for more than a half Saturday evening.
Northeastern, rated the best small college team in New England, won its thirteenth game against only four losses.
Bates, dropping its eighth straight, now has won three and lost ten this season.
There was no scoring for the first three minutes, as Bates con trolled the ball most of the time, allowing Northeastern only two shots at the basket.
Finally, with 16:45 left in the half, Tom Martin hit a jump shot and the Huskies led the rest of the way.
Northeastern moved out to a 10-1 lead before Thorn Freeman scored the Bobcats' first goal from the floor with 13:30 remaining.
Then Husky coach Duke Dukeshire prescribed a zone press, but Bates beat it easily the only time it was used.
Fred Stevens took a pass at midcourt, dribbled into the key, and hit a jump shot.
After a Husky free throw by John Malvey which Don Beaudry of Bates matched, two fouls by Bob Lanz and Seth Cummings' first hoop of the game the score stood 2319.
Captain Bill Tully scored for Northeastern, but Freeman made a fine three point play and Bates trailed by only three, 25— 22.
Bates had shot a dismal 29 per cent from the floor, hitting only seven of twenty-four attempts.
Huskies Widen Gap Bates continued its cautious style in the second half and the teams matched points for the first five minutes.
For the next four minutes a foul shot by Castolene and two by Beaudry amounted to all the Bates scoring.
The game degenerated into a race up and down the floor, as the Bobcats were forced into an all-court press but could not find the hoop in numerous tries.
They shot for only seventeen per cent, 6 for 35, in the second half, while Northeastern was 11 for 22.
Malvey led Northeastern with eighteen points, Martin had fifteen, and Tully eleven.
Cummings High For 'Cats For Bates, Cummings had eleven points, hitting double figures for the seventh time in a row and the eleventh time in thirteen games of the season.
Freeman with nine and Lawler with eight were the only other Bobcats with more than three points.
Bates' foul shooting kept the margin from being greater, as they shot 16 for 20; Northeastern was 14 for 23.
Jacobs has done a fine job, given the physical circumstances in which she is operating.
I think that the bookstore committee, if I understand it correctly, is arranging to have a group of students act in an advisory capacity for selecting books for the store.
I think it's certainly unfortunate that students have no greater interest in the supply of books than they seem to have.
Personally, I much prefer teaching the students here to the students I had at Cornell.
N Not that they're more aware, but they are more serious, more industrious.
They're not corrupted, and I use the word perfectly aware of what it means, by certain fraternities and sororities as they are at Cornell.
I had some very unhappy experiences with freshmen who would come to Cornell very eager and ready to w ork.
They join a fraternity in the middle of the semester and bingo, they wouldn't lift a finger from then on.
N Conformity, yes, the fraternities dictated a type of blas<§ indifference for your studies.
If they felt that you were really serious, they informed you that this isn't cool.
On the other hand, I wish that they were in some respects a little less of a grind because I feel that this is the reason that they are not interested in more books over at the bookstore.
R Along this idea of outside interests, do you have any comments concerning the students' criticism of the Bates social life.
Student ""games"" are over, the intramural competition has once again appeared on the scene with team standings becoming more stable.
The winners, led by Mark Silverstein, were in complete control the entire game.
Three-Way Tie In B-l The B-l league saw J.B.'s undisputed hold on first place become a three-way tie.
In all meekness I must admit I was outstanding for the losers as I swished the nets for 13 beautiful points.
J.B.'s defeat has caused a three-way tie between Smith Middle, East Parker, and John Bertram Hall.
Pete Pequignot drove in from Lou's just to make the game, and did a marvelous job by leading his team with 13 points.
The ""Golden Boys"" were piloted by the sterling play of Pete Bowman who was high scorer in both contests.
However, for me and the majority of the other girls, it was a rather unique, or more correctly, confusing event.
For you see, women's basketball has been completely revoluntionized — cheers and adulation at this point, please! — BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Tom Bowditch, standout Garnet high jumper, has been selected by the sports staff as this week's Bobcat of the Week.
Tom is a sophomore from Rye, N H., and his performances as a member of the Garnet cinder team have rated high praise from track mentor Walt Slovenski.
In this week's B.C. meet, Tom jumped for a new personal high of 6 ft. in. in winning the high jump for the Bobcat team.
As a high schooler at Portsmouth, N H., High, Tom was high-point man as a senior and the recipient of the Howard Hunt Trophy symbolizing the most valuable track performer.
J*W«rf of Jgjtuutan £l£c*r&y>~y -S&*~ is cur middlr , New Rules For Girls Seriously, basketball for women has become a very different sport.
It is much faster, more competitive, and has increased the team coordination of the sport.
That is, one guard and one forward from each team are allowed to ""rove,"" or cover the entire court.
The number of dribbles has been increased, therefore making a much swifter game.
No longer does the play return to center (i.e., a pass from the official to the center forward) after each basket.
Instead, an opposing guard takes the ball out of bounds at the end line after each field goal.
No longer is the ball ""dead"" after a foul shot, but if the basket is missed, then the ball is instantaneously put into play.
However, if the free throw is made, an opposing guard, without stopping the clock, takes the ball out at the side line.
To accompany the addition and deletion of rules, officiating has had to be revised, too.
New terms, such as for forfeit, balanced court, rovers, and face guarding have been added.
An official's whistle, signaling ""timein"" and the foul ""boxing-up"" have been omitted from the present rules.
Intramural Season Starts The preceding are only a few changes made in women's basketball, but they serve to better the game considerably.
As a result, with the inter-dorm basketball season beginning, some rather unusual games could be viewed.
The new rules are very confusing for girls adjusted to rules and regulations of the previous game.
However, with a game now similar to that of the men and some outstanding players in the freshman class, this year's W.A.A. basketball will be more spirited, competitive, amusing, and enjoyable. *)* c Trackmen , high hurdles, the high jump, and the broad jump, in addition to taking second place in the 45 yard dash and the low hurdles.
Another fine runner, Ken Child, who hadn't ran the hurdles until last year, took a first in the low hurdles and a third in the 45 yard dash.
NOTICE Coach Hatch has announced that all prospective football players are to meet Thursday, February 14 at 5:30 in the projection room of the gym.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, FEBRUARY 13, 1963 By Subscription Students Obtain Academic Honor; S even Earn 4.
Miss Libbey announces that the following students achieved a quality point ratio of at least 3. for their academic work last semester, and have thus earned a place on the Dean's List.
Class of 1963 Linda Antoun, Carolyn Berg, Howard Blum, Elizabeth Buker, David Compton, John Cook, James Corey, Joan Curran, William Dunham, *William Holt, *David Hosford, Barbara Hudson, Mary Jasper, Sue Jones, *Nancy Levin, Carol Long, Marjorie Lord, Nancy Mamrus, Joan Mills, Carole Murphy, Leslie Nute, Lois Payne, Mildred Pruett, Nancy Robinson, Marion Schanz, Joyce Schilcher, Paula Schmidt, Evelyn Shepherd, Natalie Shober, Shirley Snow, George Stone, Judith Trask, Catherine Wakefield, Judith Warren, Martha Webb, Arlene Wignall, *John Wilson, Eugenia Wise, Samuel Young.
Class of 1964 Robert Ahern, Marilyn Becker, *Norman Bowie, David Campbell, Marion Day, Nancy Day, Douglas Dobson, *Marilyn Fuller, Diane Gallo, Norman Gillespie, David Harrison, Richard Hoyt, Nora Jensen, David Johnson, Judith Johnson, Roger Klein, Casimir Kolaski, Nancy Lester, Dorothy March, K Scott Norris, Robert Peek, Penelope Polleys, David Quintal, PeggyAnn Root, Gracia Seekins, Sarah T Smith, John Strassburger, Richard Walker.
Class of 1966 Susan Alward, Paul Baker, Everett Barclay, Elizabeth Bogdanski, Royce Buehler, Linda Carter, Lois Hebert, Karen Heglund, Alice Kaplan, Judith Laming, Rebecca Nally, Robert Parker, """"Kenneth Petke, Susan Pitcher, Bonita Popek, Ruth Woodford.
Eight Junior Women Compete In Perennial Betty Bates Selection Buddhist Leader Explains Faith; Shows Its Role In World Peace A Buddhist monk from Ceylon, at Bates for Religious Emphasis Week, spoke in the Chapel on Thursday, February 7.
His speech, entitled ""Buddhism and World Peace"" traced the origins of the religion as well as clarifying its customs and role in world peace.
It does not require that its followers believe in a Supreme Creator, ritual, prayer, or worship.
The Buddhist religion had its origin in Northern India during the 6th century B.C. when it revolted against the accepted practices and beliefs of the time and the Indian caste system.
Because of this conflict Buddhism disappeared from India and spread to the countries of Burma, Ceyion, Cambodia, Viet Nam, Laos, China, and Japan.
Today the Buddhist population includes 15,000 followers in England, 20,000 in Germany, and 170,000 in the United States.
From a meager though dedicated beginning of five persons, Buddhism has grown into a religion encompassing one-fifth of the world's people.
The founder of Buddhism was Siddhartha Gautama (563-483 B.C.), an Indian prince whose father was ruler of a small province in Northern India.
Siddl hartha was raised in luxury and J was well-educated, yet at the age of 29 he renounced everything into which he had been born in order to search for a way of life that would bring happiness to himself and to humanity.
Siddhartha and his followers spread his philosophy of life so that by the time he died, the Buddhist religion became an important influence in the lives of all it reached.
This path consists of right belief, right resolve, right speech, right conduct, right occupation or living, right effort, right contemplation, and right ecstasy.
The Buddhist does not blindly accept these Competitors for Betty Bates Title Madsen Speaks On Viewpoint Of LatterDaySaints President Truman Grant Madsen spoke last February 8 about the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter Day Saints.
After presenting a picture of the active community spirit of the Latter Day Saints, President Madsen analysed the factors in their religion which are responsible for this spirit.
For the Mormon, God is pictured as the Eternal Father — literally the Father of the human family.
God is not an abstract concept but is, instead, a person, glorified and radiant.
A second concept basic to their religion is that of Jesus Christ as a man, the son of Man. not identical either in substance or in person with God.
He is a man who had powers beyond those of most men, and to his people he is Redeemer, Lord, Savior, and, most important of all, Revealor.
The Spirit of God demonstrates its presence through the love, peace, and faith of mankind.
This Spirit can manifest itself in the persons of men of the Latter Day Saints.
Closely related to this idea of the Spirit of God is the Mormon picture of Man.
Rather, each man, | as an offspring of God, has within him the embryonic traits of diety.
Every single human being has, within him, a tremendous potential for good.
No matter how ""evil"" a man may appear, these ""seeds of divinity"" as President Madsen called them, may still make themselves known.
Both Miss Clarke and Nadine will speak Monday evening in the Little Theater, starting at 7:00m.
Nadine will set and comb out hair-dos for some of the girls whom Miss Clarke will later use in her demonstration to illustrate the correct and incorrect ways to dress and to apply make-up for different occasions.
The week of nightly entertainment in Rand will be concluded Friday at 8:00m. in the Little Theater.
At this time the candidates will be judged on their qualities of poise, leadership, good grooming, versatility and athletic interest.
From eight girls of diversified talents and interests, a Betty Bates of 1963 will be chosen.
Linda Browning, an English major from Fairhaven, Mass., is the President of Chase House.
She is also a member of the Publishing Association board and the Choral Society.
Linda is a Junior representative on the WAA board and a member of the Yearbook staff.
Marion and Nancy Day, twins from West Hartford, Conn., are both Biology majors and members of Jordan Ramsdell.
Marion is president of Wilson House, Junior class secretary, and a member of the Yearbook staff.
Nancy, a Biology major, is a majorette and a member of the Intergovernment Committee.
Lois Warfield, an English major from Hampton, New Hampshire, is a proctor in the Women's Union.
Two strains of Hindu religious thought, termed monism and theism have been extensively developed.
The monistic school, based on the ancient Upanishad writing, claims the existence of a semi-personal god; and that man's primary goal is merger with this being.
Accompanying this ConViction is the belief that no individual is ever completely alone, beyond hope.
God, the Father, is always within man. and man may yet redeem himself. and immortal""; spirit is at peace since it is all-inclusive and therefore is in no need of change.
Hindu theismhas modified Hindu monism and the teaching of the Upanishads to a belief in a personal god, Krishna, who is directly concerned with man.
Salvation does not entail disappearance of the individual in a total merger with God, as in the Upanishad tradition, but consists of communion between God and man.
The importance of the two existing traditions, Mr Hein concluded, lies not in the truth of one and the falsity of the other.
He suggested that perhaps no religion can encompass God as He actually is, but each individual concept is an honor paid to the true God.
He discussed Christianity, emphasizing that fears and prejudices must be broken down and that Christianity must be accepted by man being subject to God alone.
After an introduction by Sandy Prohl '64, Reverend Handspicker began by examining the essence of Christianity.
He pointed out that the Christian God is a God who seeks man without requiring man to endure hardships to gain His favor.
Secondly, he concerned himself with the divisions within the Christian religion, and primarily the tendency of most people to other sects, yet they believe their sect to be the only right one.
We began recently to take steps toward unity through interdenominational conferences — but each religion must be willing to listen to the beliefs of other denominations.
The third division of Handspicker's address centered around the stand a Christian ought to take regarding the other religions of the world.
The only practical alternative to coercing people into Christianity through fear of ""Hell"" or by bribing them by means of food and sustenance given through missions, is sharing the knowledge of Christianity with others as we would share good news.
In conclusion he asked that everyone ""Let God be God"" — while we desire Him to meet our requirements, and want freedom to decide for ourselves whether God exists, at the same time we demand from our Religion and Philosophy professors a method of proving that He does exist.
The debate topic, ""Resolved, that Bates College should adopt an accelerated academic program,"" constitutes the first public discussion of the program of acceleration formulated by the faculty committee organized last autumn.
Drafted as a recommendation which may be revised or scrapped, the program is modelled around neither a trimester nor a quarter semester plan.
At present this plan is being studied by faculty members to determine its effect on their departments.
Freshman Max Steinheimer, Linda Lash, and George Strait will argue the affirmative position.
Each member of the winning team will receive a prize of five dollars, and the best speaker will be awarded ten dollars.
Stu-G Begins Proctor Selection; Juniors Vote On Classless Dorms creeds and organizations inter1 Tournament from Thursday to pret it.
These organizations can Saturday, February 14 through direct us toward God, but we 16.
Two teams will represent Bates,, and will alternate their positions in each debate.
Howard Blum '63 and Robert Ahern '64 will form one team; John Strassberger '64 and Thomas Hall '64 will form the other, Bates instructor Richard Warye will accompany the debaters and Janice Bauld '63, chairman of a committee rewriting the Constitution of the New England Women's Student Government Association, reported to the Student Government Board on February 6 that five of the eleven member schools responded with suggestions for revision in the present constitution.
The Bates Committee will send cover letters with the proposals to the eleven member schools, and at the annual meeting of the Association to be held in April these recommendations for revision will be discussed.
A committee composed of Nona Long '63, Gretchen Ziegler '64, Andrea Buck '65. and Ruth Christensen '66, will re-evaluate the present Bates Student Government Constitution.
They will bring their suggestions to the en tire board, at which time these recommendations will be aired.
The process of selecting proctors and Stu-G officers for 196364 is in full swing.
Proctor rating sheets and Student Government nomination papers have been distributed in all of the dormitories.
A formal vote is to be taken among the junior women during, this week to determine whether | serVe aS 3 3 ge they would prefer to live in in tegrated dormitories (all four ous dormitories are requested to classes living together), or in follow the same food schedule Rand.
The junior women must that the y were on durin S last also vote for one set of proctors semester, in the event that the majority of President Bette Ann Little juniors vote to spend their | announced that freshmen vis senior year in Rand.
INTERVIEWS ON CAMPUS On Thursday, February 14, Mr John B Annett, Assistant to President Phillips, has arranged a ""career orientation"" supper meeting in cooperation with Mr Roger Schmutz '54.
Mr Schmutz (Training Director at Standard and Poor's) will discuss job candidating in general, and more particularly opportunities in financial analysis and investments advisory work.
The supper meeting for men is planned for 6:00 in the Lane Room, Chase I Hall.
Also on Thursday, February 14, Mr Chester A Baker and Mr Paul Bernholdt '58 will interview men and women interested in the Young Men's Christian Association.
Grant Company and Mr Roger Schmutz from Standard and Poor's Corporation.
On Monday, February 18, Mr Ervin J Gaines from the Boston Public Library will interview NOTICE David Harper '59 will speak of his experiences doing alternative service for the American Friends Service Committee in Mexico this Sunday, February 17th at 7:30m. in Libby Forum.
Harper will illustrate his talk with slides taken during the two years in which he worked in Mexican villages.
The talk should be of particular interest to students interested in the Peace Corps or other work which involves major adjustments to different cultures.
Harper was a geology major and was especially active on the Outing Club Council.
C ruary 13, Page 3 and 4 on Feb ruary 20, and Hacker and Chase on February 27. men and women interested in the training program in librarianship.
Handy from E I. du Pont de Nemours and Company will interview men and women on Thursday, February 19.
On Thursday, February 21, Mr James N Drake and Miss Mary Lou Hutchinson from Connecticut General Life Insurance Company will meet with interested men and women.
Also on Thursday, Miss Mary Allen from the Girl Scouts will interview women interested in professional Girl Scouting.
UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL, a worldwide news service, offers a promising field to men graduates interested in journalism.
UPI offers more flexibility than most newspapers in the sense that a man who would prefer to work in Washington, London, or Rome can usually get transferred to those cities when qualified.
The starting salary is $83.75 per week and climbs to a minimum of $164.50 after six weeks.
HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER ' 73 Lisbon St.
Lewiston THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Augusta, Maine BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 13, 1963 THREE Crater's Edge By JAMES KIERNAN '63 Last year the college was privileged to have Basil Rathbone, sulky and sauve, stumbling and finger snapping, grace the stage of the Bates Chapel.
The Lewiston Daily SunJournal claimed that it was a great cultural event; that Bates would never forget his performance.
As much as I rake my memory, I cannot think of anything I've seen in our chapel that was as absurd as that presentation, except perhaps the concert of the Lewiston High School Marching Band.
Last week a small group of* about forty gathered in the Little Theater to listen to another man of the Legitimate theater.
But those who were attracted by the whispering campaign listened to a warm sincere man who made us rock with laughter and brought an occasional tear to the eye.
Max Gordon started in the early days of Burlesque and grew through the great golden age of Vaudeville to become one of Broadway's great producers.
This trouper was every inch a showman and his story is the story of the theater.
It was his story, a brief sketch of a sprawling and eventful career, that was the subject of his tale.
He said his first few informal words and his audience was his, cherishing every story as if they were sitting down with him at the stage delicatessen.
Everything he said was rich with folklore of the theater; stories that seemed so unbelievable and unforgettable that they could only be real.
Mr Gordon blames the sick state of the on-Broadway theater on the lack of good plays and the lack of plays in turn on a lack of good playwrights.
He also mentioned that there were few good producers and that both actors and writers were being stolen by other media.
While he is correct in most of the above, Mr Gordon is not correct in assuming that the main cause is a lack of good plays.
Mr Gordon never said directly that the real trouble of the theater is mainly economic, which I believe it is.
Increased cost and inability to produce except on a large scale has caused a consolidation of the producers and a streamlining of the product.
Only half of the on-Broadway theaters that were operating thirty years ago are functioning today because of production and maintenance costs.
Not only the many skilled laborers (ex. carpenters and electricians) that are needed for production, but also the actors, demand of the theater benefits and wages that have turned the performing arts into a performing business.
To move a piano from the stage to the pit two union piano movers are required.
To have a rehearsal, even with just a director and one player, a stagehand must be on stage and be paid union rates if only to stand there and read the Daily News.
When you pay $6.50 or $7.20 or even $9.80 to see a play on Broadway you are doling out a pocketful of overhead for featherbedding and padded contracts.
Many good things may never be brightened by footlights with this method of judgment.
In the next issue of the Student I will describe a most curious aspect of the theater, the newspaper reviewer, especially the pompous knucklehead, Walter Kerr.
The Wreck By PERRY BRUDER '65 All males have had some odd dating experiences.
I personally remember meeting one aged grandmother-of-the-date who asked me if I twisted, and a fond father with whom I had to indian wrestle to prove his ability to ""protect"" the fair daughter.
But these horrors pale when compared to those encountered when visiting a girl who resides in Page Hall.
They inspect me, and rapidly discuss my campus status, desirability, and whom I probably have come to see.
These decided, one of them, a member of Page's elite ""Crony Express,"" rushes upstairs to tell the news.
This is no small problem, as the proper bell must be rung the proper number of times, lest some unnamed (and most certainly unrung for) species descend upon the victim.
Thus, there are two modes of being in the world, the sacred and the profane.
The former concerns itself with the divine, the latter concerns itself with itself.
Eliskie maintains that the religious man, or the man in the sacred universe (where one seeks the realm of atemporality, the mystical quintessential) has a pervading and omnipresent desire to live or enter into the realm of pure being, pure reality, as it was ""before the fall"", or before man had dissipated his inherent divinity. — The nonreligious man, or the profane man lives in a profane space, where there resides no God, where there is no divine cosmicizing of the chaos.
To a religious man, the profane man is existing in non-being, that he has no real essence.
Within primitive religions, and in many of the more sophisticated religions, there is much use of myth, ritual, and symbolism.
In the final analysis, these are manifestations of a symbolic interpretation of the Creation, or any creation.
Since the creation of woman — with the removal of Adam's lower rib — was a surgical operation, the doctor contended that his profession was the oldest.
The architect pointed out that in the creation of the world the techniques utilized by his trade enabled order to develop from chaos.
He emphasized the role of man in his relationship with God and biological organisms.
Gone is the primitive, the divine passion, the subjection to the divine creative power.
Music, forever timeless, ""Le Sacre du Printemps"" of Stravinsky, ""Le Creation du Monde"" of Milhaud, reflects the eruption of the ""superabundance of reality"" from a mystical source and into the hearts of men, and remains to be explained, if it is not itself its own explanation.
But in these man God history i relationships there is no place for the cosmos.
He even sees the nonreligious man ""not without his greatness."" importance of the creative thinker.
Man's latent spiritual capacities provide the possibility for self-fulment or self-actualization.
Man cannot operate within the confines of any rigid law — there must always be movement.
To preserve freedom, equilibrium is needed in our government, labor unions, sexual relations, and in every other area of human relations.
To exercise true freedom, man needs a certain ""at-homeness"" with the world.
History shows many men — Socrates, Jesus, Spinoza — who Committee Alters The Ivy Weekend Proposal At a meeting of the Junior Class Dorm Reps, held last Tuesday, it was disclosed by Norman Bowie, president of the junior class, that financial plans for the Ivy Hop had been vetoed by the Extra-curricular Activities committee.
The class through Bowie had received subsidies of $300 from the C.A., Stu C and Stu G and, with the difference put up by the class, planned a budget amounting to some $2,000.
With this sum they planned to get a ""big name"" band — Jimmy Dorsey — to play for Ivy Hop.
President Bowie said that he had met with the chairman of the Extra-curricular Committee, Dean Boyce, and discovered that according to established administrative procedure, dances must operate on a balanced budget.
Judging from previous attendance figures at Ivy this could not be done unless the price was radically prohibitive.
In addition to budget problems, the subsidizing of class dances by all-campus organizations would establish a precedent allowing all classes or other groups to demand allcampus subsidizing.
The administrative policy at the present time is not to encourage major transfers of funds from one organization to another.
The Dean, according to president Bowie, was most explicit when he said that the College was not opposed to ""big name"" bands, and such organizations could be had if advance ticket sales indicated a paying proposition.
He said, however, that we cannot, practically speaking, expect to offer social competition to Bowdoin, Colby, and Maine, because of a lack of available capital, and a small studentry.
Upon hearing this, the dorm reps voted to have their president call a class meeting as early as possible to discuss the matter.
Cut the $2,000 budget down but sell tickets in advance to try to get smaller grants from campus groups.
President Bowie stated that he would await the comments and decisions from his class meeting on Friday, and would proceed from that point. have resisted dogmatic patterns.
Freedom is not a question of Jewish truth, but a state of openness to examine any truth.
It rests with the high capability of man to create the ultimate academic freedom.
Judaism has lived in many countries and experienced many rigid patterns of discipline.
But, it is always renewing the concept of life in the process of creativity.
Following his lecture, Rabbi Zion answered questions ranging from the concept of truth in Isaiah to the distinctive qualities of Judaism.
In every case the Rabbi adapted his answer to the nature of the enquiry.
The editorial page should serve as a forum for a dialogue of ideas, issues, criticism and campaigns.
Many students articulate verbally their reactions to editorials and articles, yet they fail to write letters.
Perhaps, however, the critics fear to expose their ideas; perhaps they are just lazy.
With few exceptions, the average student goes to class, occasionally reads all his assignments, hits the Den, and perhaps dreams of going down to the Holly.
Rarely does this student think seriously about non-required subjects; rarely does this student engage in a dialogue about something as significant as fallout shelters ; rarely does this student break the shackles of this tight little academic world and consider other horizons.
We plead for a dialogue, an increased awareness of the controversial and stimulating ideas outside the classroom.
The efforts of logically organizing one's arguments and ideas apparently create obstacles the student body is unwilling to face.
Reply lo Paul Ketchem's letter By its very nature every editorial which takes a stand is biased.
The fact that the Outing Club has in the past ""tried to change the date"" indicates that alternatives have been considered.
But simply because they have not borne fruit is no reason for stopping.
For many reasons the students do not support this event; the urge to go home is understandably great.
The Student editorial did not suggest completely abandoning all post-semester frivolity; it suggested devoting some of the efforts of the Outing Club to other weekends.
The Student looks at ""the total picture,"" a picture a seething mass of male cock not limited to one weekend.
We regret that Mr Ketchem finds the editorial ""lacking in insight;"" but even with his insights we shall not alter our position.
We do not condemn the Outing Club; we suggest again, however, that alternatives be considered, in spite of their past failure or suppression.
What many ""emancipated"" people reject is only a legalistic moralism, which is far from being the high point of even the Old Testament.
One can, however, have some respect for the person who is Daffled by the problem of evil, and hence rejects Christianity as beautiful dream.
If you do feel this way, you won't delude yourself into believing that you are a serious thinker while you merely toy with ideas that are only half understood or not understood at all.
Entered as second-clas»( matter at the I^ewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879.
What both Saint Paul and Jesus were saying is that love, well served by intelligence, is God's will.
It is His will ""that they may have life and have it more abundantly"", a goal to be best approached by intellinet love.
This emphasis on intelligence is strikingly brought out by the fact that Jesus changed the last word of his quotation from ""might"" to ""mind"", an idea The editor of this paper has the right to make value judgments, but there is no justification for inconsistency in methods used when attacking campus organizations and student opinion.
The editorial evaluating Winter Carnival was biased and was lacking in insight, almost to the point of ignorance, of the situation.
For four years the Outing Club has been faced with the problem of making Carnival benefit the entire student body.
Carnival is a convenience to the Administration because it gives the students on campus after exams organized activities which to participate.
We have tried to change the date so that it would fall during February, but this plan was surpressed by the Administration.
Carnival is now set up for those people who wish to participate in the activities.
The Outing Club agrees, but with the lack of support shown by the students we cannot finance a Utopia of individualized, tailored, social, activities.
Winter Carnival is faced with the problems of a disadvantageous date, lack of student support, and financial limitations.
I suggest that knowledge about the subjects expressed in future editorials be examined more closely so that ""The Student's"" goals may be to build up what social life is left at Bates instead of tearing it apart by negativism.
The ideal method of approach was expressed in last week's editorial on Student-Faculty Ratio.
I'm Present Republican Aims And Philosophy By ALLEN KERR '66 The word ""Republican"" connotes a basic philosophy of the essence of human existence.
This article attempts to convey the fundamental aspects of this philosophy.
The basic concept of the Republican philosophy is that of Freedom for the whole individual.
Republican philosophy sees man as a creature with two sides, a material side and a spiritual side.
It is the purpose of this philosophy to establish and maintain a political atmosphere where both may flourish.
It is a philosophy which takes into account the differences between men, and in accordance with these attempts to establish a climate conducive to man's development of his unique self as he sees fit.
Although much is said of the ""common man,"" it has been the ""uncommon man"" that has made this nation what it is today.
A philosophy which permits and encourages the existence of the ""uncommon man"" is a philosophy that will prevent a society from becoming stagnant, and will allow it to advance in full accordance with the individuals who constitute it.
It believes that the individual has the right and the capacity to set his own goals, not those of a paternalistic state, and to pursue them intelligently and responsibly.
It forms a state of equilibrium in the division of power between the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government.
It is also a strong supporter of m states' rights, and for that matter, community rights.
It, however, desires to check the present trend toward Socialism, and initiate social legislation only when the individual cannot cope with the problem with his own resources.
It sees any other action as detrimental to indiv dual responsibility, and thus detrimental to that unique quality which has made our nation great.
BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 13, 1963 it3 FIVE Buddhist Leader ideas, but instead tests the teachings of Buddha.
The message of Buddha is one of non-violence and peaceful existence, and the Buddhist believes two factors are responsible for conflict in the world.
One is the greed of the optimist and the other is the hate in the pessimist, Vinita stated, ""Change must come from the hearts of the people.
The goal of Buddhism is to see things as they really are, and this necessitates an escape from greed and hate.
He concluded by asking the question many will ask of the Buddhist, and by answering with a question of his own.
A members are reminded thai the February meeting will be held tonight, February 13, at 7 , at the home of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewision Superintendent of Schools, Mr Russell will speak on teacher recruitment.
The premium on couch space gives way to one on porch area, as a great mob of couples blocks the doorway.
Embarrassed, I leave, trying to elbow everyone aside, while staring straight ahead, for even a chance look to left or right draws a multitude of icy stares.
AND YOURS By CHARLES E SMITH '63 ""The supermarket is crowded but I don't mind the crowds; I am thirsty and nothing can quench my thirst like a few bottles of beer.
A decision must be made, well let's see, I sampled that brand over there last week but I didn't like it.
Ah, here is a lower price brand (has a pretty good label too) and I think my risk is reduced because I do not have to pay as much as the higher priced brand.
Although my example might be considered inconsequential, the same methodology is carried on by businessmen, on a more sophisticated scale.
The businessman must choose between not merely two, but a myriad of alternatives every time he considers production problems, such as the buying of capital goods, or what pricing policy to follow.
A considerable amount of economic theory is centered around the act of choosing between alternatives of action.
As I suggested last week, our government also must make production, distribution, and employment of military goods However, the economist faces a problem in attempting to help our prodigal Generals in choosing the economically correct proce dures of defense spending.
Gen erals view their available choices differently than you and I and the economists consider our pos sible choices in buying consumer goods.
Before continuing, I must tip my hat to the economists of RAND Corporation who have spent considerably more time and money on this problem than I have.
A market is used by the consumer to choose that which best agrees with his utility function.
We are assuming here that we as consumers have the privilege of choosing the best alternatives from the available methods of national defense.
This would coincide with the pure economic theory of consumer sovereignty.
National defense may be considered a public good, but it might not necessarily be a pure (or Samuelson) public good.
Anti-aircraft missile battalions in northern Maine give more protection to us than the battalions of California, but they both have something to say as to whether we win or lose a war.
Now, winning or losing the war would involve the essence of a pure public good.
Anti-aircraft missile battalions in northern Maine would be a public good only to those of that area.
We see that an interdependence of public good conceptions exist and because of this an economic military market will fail to reach a social optimum.
Therefore, we as consumers are incapable of determing our own state of military preparedness since a suitable market mechanism is lacking.
Also the interdependence is aggravated because we are not always certain as to the state of consumer intelligence.
We might not know everything there is to know about waging a modern war, or defending our shores from attack.
The economist can not to any great degree help the Generals purchase military goo'ds because the latter refuse to operate in the context of an economic market.
Military decisions are made administratively in a partially decentralized organizational structure (sometimes called a Pentagon) where today's problems hardly resemble those of yesterday.
Moreover, an inconmensurability of costs and risks for military spending makes it very difficult to devise a valid test of efficiency.
Without this measurement, economic efficiency as known in the business world is hard to achieve.
In addition, the technological revolution in military goods staggers the imagination; and military planners must include in their calculations the possible actions of an intelligent enemy.
Perhaps next week we can help these military men achieve some order in their spending.
You should be proud, not only of the efforts of a fine and inspired team, but also of yourselves.
For the fact that the 'Cats' record at game time was 3-10, with 8 losses in a row, and their opponent being rated third in New England small college ranks didn't prevent the appearance of an enthusiastic crowd.
This enthusiasm carried over to the next day, as a fine-sized gathering of spectators filled the cage to see the defeat of the Bowdoin Polar Bears at the hands of our fine track team.
Cheers and yells again proved to be the rule, and this spirit was evidenced through the fact that the majority of the throng didn't leave until the final event of the meet was over.
It's a great feeling to hear Hathorn ring for something other than the summoning of classes.
This Saturday, the sixteenth of February, three members of the Bates student body will journey to Sugarloaf Mountain to participate in the M.I.A.A. state series ski meet.
The three men, Tom Adams, Al Skoksberg, and Pete Koch, are going on their own initiative and as individuals, but through the cooperation of Dr.
Lux and the athletic department, they have been properly cleared and entered officially in the meet.
They will compete in the Alpine events, consisting of the downhill and slalom races.
The first event will commence at 10m., the second at 1:30m., with either time subject to possible change due to weather conditions.
We will be eager to see what they can do, and we Wish them the best of luck.
He feels that though Howie still must actually make the team, his chances are good, in view of the fact that he is a needed linebucker, and was sought for as a free agent.
Coach Hatch also indicated that the Chicago Bears, unlike many of the N.F.L. teams, takes on a fewer number of rookies, thereby enhancing further his prospects.
He stated finally that he was ""very pleased with the choice,"" a statement which I feel expresses all of our feelings.
Reports from Orono bemoan the loss of four basketball players due to academic difficulties.
Though this last item is unrelated to athletics, it's related to ""sports"", and this is that word is out that I have passed another Indian History quiz.
Down by seven at the close of the half, a fast-breaking and ball-hawking Bobcat five, led by the deadly shooting of Seth Cummings, pecked away at the lead and opened up a comfortable margin as time ran out.
Wesleyan Once Beaten The Cardinals came to Bates with a very respectable record showing only one defeat to powerhouse Williams College and pointing towards a possible post-season tournament berth in the NCAA small college division.
However, looking beyond Bates proved to be their downfall as the 'Cats were more than ready to break back into the win column.
A second half attack under the direction of Cummings, who connected with sixteen of his twenty-three total, and Captain Thorn Freeman, chipping in with ten points plus nine rebounds, proved to be too much for Wesleyan to handle, The offensive demonstration put on by the Bobcats' all-state nominee, Cummings, brought spectators to their feet time and time again, lauding the talent of this sophomore guard.
Cardinals Open Slight Lead The game got off to an exceptionally slow start as both squads had trouble finding the range.
However, Wesleyan forward Paul Brands started hitting and the Cardinals opened up a twelve-point lead and it looked like the frigid 'Cats were in for a rough night.
A glance at the statistics showed Bates had hit on only eight out of twentyfive attempts from the floor although canning a respectable eight for fourteen from the freethrow line.
The Cardinals went eleven for twenty-three from the floor and nine out of thirteen from the line.
Three Guard Offense However, Coach Ullom changed the tactics of the 'Cats which proved to be extremely successful.
Abandoning their ball control offense for an exciting fastbreaking style of play, the 'Cats began to close the Wesleyan lead.
The key to the fast-breaking attack was the rebounding of Freeman and Carl Johannesen, along with the new three-guard Bates offense.
The playing of the sophomore speedsters, Cummings, Don Beaudry, and Ted Krzynowek at the same time proved to be too much for Wesleyan to cope with.
Time and time again the Bobcat forwards cleared the boards and the three guards were off to the races.
It was exciting basketball and the Cardinals could do nothing to stop the determined 'Cats.
Cummings Sparks Surge Johannesen hit from inside to close the spread to one point.
Promising freshman Mike Hine, who turned in a real fine job relieving the Bobcat forwards, connected on a drive to push the 'Cats into a one-point lead once again.
At this stage in the game Cummings took over and personally made certain that the nine-game losing streak would be snapped.
In the last six and a quarter minutes he hung up six field goals and three free throws in scoring fifteen of the last seventeen Bobcat points.
What was truly remarkable about his offensive display was that Wesleyan knew Cummings would be getting every shooting assignment but still failed to contain him.
Johannesen and Paul Castolene set up beautiful picks as he moved about working for his shots.
Cummings was then carried off the court on the shoulders of teammates and spectators alike.
Bates was fourteen for thirtyfour from the field in the last twenty minutes and eight of ten from the line.
The Cardinals turned cold and connected on only nine of thirty field attempts and five out of six from the free throw line.
The game will perhaps go on record as one of history's longest, due to the number of fouls committed.
Coach Leahy's platooning wore down the AllStars, and the JV's pulled away in the second half as the Stars ran out of gas.
Johnson And Mischler Scorers The balanced scoring of the Bobkitten attack showed Bob Johnson and Bob Mischler with fourteen points apiece, Paul Savello with thirteen, Dave Heckman with twelve, John Wyman with eleven, and Joe Matzkin with ten.
The All-Stars were led by Phil Tamis and Bill MacNevin who accounted for fifteen and eleven points respectively.
Mark Silverstein hit for seven and Walt Lasher for six to round dut the scoring leaders for the Stars.
Five Games Left The 'Cats swing back into action on Friday the fifteenth when the Tufts Jumbo's trek north to the Bobcats' den.
The Wesleyan game has showed that the 1963 edition of Bates basketball has some surprises in store for its fans and Friday night's Tufts game would certainly be the place to hush their skeptics with another win.
Five games remain on the schedule for Coach Ullom's hoopsters, three of them important state series clashes, a fast finish for the 'Cats is more than a possibility.
Finn Wilhelmsen and Eric Silverberg, better known for their one-two punch in the two mile, came through in championship style by winning the one mile.
Finn overtook Chamberland of Bowdoin and left him at the hands of Silverberg who passed the fading Bowdie with two laps remaining.
Frost Paces Bears Bruce Frost of Bowdoin dominated the weight events, winning three and setting two meet records.
Senior John Curtis and junior Dave Harrison captured second and third respectively in the 35 lb. weight event.
Two Bates frosh, Bill Davis and Martin Sauer, grabbed third places behind Frost in the discus and shot put respectively.
Paul go+ perhaps his fastest start of the present campaign in the 45 yd. dash and the race was his all the way.
Bill LaValle repeated last week's fine performance against Boston College by sprinting home ahead of the field in both the 45 yd. high hurdles and 45 yd. low hurdles.
Bill event to watch is the pole vault and this proved no exception in Saturday's meet.
Showing the finesse and competitive spirit that held the crowd to the end. fair-haired sophomore, Bob Kramer, cleared the bar with picand Finn were double winners | turesque form at 12' for the secfor the 'Cats.
Nicking another point to the cause by j the bar at 12' 6"" shows much snatching a third place in the highs.
Won by everdangerous sophomore G e r r i t promise for Bob in the future.
The third meet record of the afternoon came in the one mile One of Bates College's all-time standtout athletes has been given a contract to play professional football with a leading National Football League pro-team, Dr.
Howard S Vandersea, of Whitinsville, Mass., co-captain of the 1962 Bates football team and an excellent baseball player, has been sent a contract from the Bears effective next ing competitor and athlete at Bates,"" Coach Hatch commented.
Despite a near collision as Bowdoin's Ted Slowik fell attempting to pass Ford on the inside, John managed to sidestep him and win the first heat handily.
Garnet Sweeps High Jump Last week's 'Cat of the week, sophomore Tom Bowditch, again won his specialty, the high jump.
Combining for the Garnet's second sweep of the afternoon were juniors Paul Williams and Dave Johnson who tied for second place behind Bowditch's 6' winning effort.
Finn Wilhelmsen and Eric Silverberg repeated their earlier victory in the one mile by hitting the wire one-two in the two mile.
Silverberg proved to be the workhorse on the team as he came right back to compete in the 1000 yd. run in which frosh Marsh Snow won third place.
Joe Brogna 81 38 .469 Peter Finn 54 25 .463 Al ^oane 58 24 .414 John Gillette 74 30 .405 Harry Silverman 83 32 .386 Bill Flahive 70 27 .386 Ken Stone 99 37 .374 Ken Federman 92 34 .370 Seth Cummings 73 27 .370 s Statistics Thorn Freeman 19 13 .684 Dick Whitmore 93 34 .366 FOUL SHOOTING Player FTA FTM Ave.
La'die Deem'r 15 14 .933 Al Loane 32 26 .812 Seth Cummings 19 15 .789 Peter Finn 21 16 .762 Ken Stone 41 30 .732 Thorn Freeman 19 13 .684 Dick Whitmore 25 15 .600 Dave Svends'n 22 13 .591 John Lawler 22 13 .591 Ken Federman C) 23 12 .522 ing of Paul Williams, John Ford.
Coach Slovenski was impressed with this effort and realizes that with no seniors on the relay team, he'll have the nucleus of a fine squad next year.
Lux stated, ""we are recommending that he not sign the contract until he completes his college athletic career next spring.
Robert W Hatch, Bates football coach, expressed his pleasure at Vandersea's selection by one of the outstanding pro-football teams of the country.
Sophomore hoopster Seth Cummings and junior trackman Finn Wilhelmsen each turned in spectacular performances during the past week's sports action while leading their respective Garnet teams to victory.
Under Coach Vern Ullom's Bobcat basketball regime, Cummings nailed down a starting berth at guard during pre-season drills.
His play has been consistent and he is the leading scorer on the Bates squad.
His play as Bobcat middle line backer won him All-Maine honors three consecutive years and as a senior he made the Little All-America selections.
As a center for Coach Hatch, he was named to the Eastern College Athletic Conference All East Team, then, moved to guard, he immediately made All-East the following week.
He is considered a power hitter and good first baseman on the Bates nine.
Finn Wilhelmsen, a junior thinA native of Shrewsbury, Massthe 'Cat harriers to a well-deachusetts, Cummings was a served victory Saturday over the starting guard for two years on ■ Bowdoin Polar Bears by capturthe Shrewsbury High School ' ing two first-place finishes in the team.
He was the sparkplug of mile and the two mile events, two championship teams that Finn's time of 9:52. in the two won the Central Massachusetts ; mile run established a new meet High School campionships in record, basketball during his junior and senior years.
While in high school, Cummings also partici1 t j c i pate( j pated in baseball, track, and cross country.
As a senior he Finn entered Bates from New Hampton School where he parin cross country and skiing.
After suffering a bad case of shin splints as a frosh, Finn was the number twelve finisher seriously considere d withdrawin the New England Cross Coun; ing from track) but rest and try Championship.
On his gradCoach slovenski > s running pro uation from high school he was awarded the distinction of being the student-athlete of his class.
Seth entered Bates with the class of 1965 and decided that economics would be his major field and basketball his sport specialty.
As a freshman he gram had the determined Finner back on the tracks, much to the relief of Garnet sports followers Finn is hoping for a finish in the 9:30 bracket this year and the word is out for opponents to watch out for this flying Norwe gian.
Using the platoon system in the first half, all of the Bobcats were very cold from the outside.
The Bobcats, utilizing their zone press, posed a mild threat early in the second half, but never seemed to find the range.
The lead changed several times in the second half, but paced by Bob Mischler and Johnson, the Jayvees copped their sixth win against two defeats.
Johnson led the Bobkittens with 21 points, Savello and Mischler each contributing 17.
John Wyman added 10 points, many of them coming at crucial points in the game.
NOTICE Head Football Coach Robert Hatch has announced that all prospective football players are to meet Thursday, February 14 at 5:30 in the projection room of the Alumni Gym.
The ""Golden Boys"" won it by a mere two points, which is a testimonial to the valiant effort of Roger Bill.
Vance was J.B.'s high man, scoring a magnificent 13 points, while Phil Tamis once again held the O.C. club together with 11 points.
Mark Silverstein was high man for the ""child prodigies"" with 22 points while Bill Graham and Paul Sadlier scored 11 apiece for the losers.
DICK BUTZ Dick Butz is manager of Pennsylvania Bell's Lancaster business office.
Dick supervises the 25 employees who are responsible for sales and the service needs of approximately 41,000 customers and their half-million-dollar monthly billing.
His initiative has paid off in terms of satisfaction and increased responsibility.
Dick Butz and the other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES Still Tied Up B-I still remains in a 3-way tie as Smith Middle, John Bertram Hall, and West Parker all won their games.
Hank Stred finally made the big time, scoring 18 points for the winners.
Age started to tell on the Faculty as J.B., led by Grant Farquhar's 21 points, defeated them 53 to 35.
The WP ""team"" scored 32 points, while Smith North kept the game honest by scoring 31.
Smith South Takes Two As I look into the ""C"" league I see a win for the Smith South boys.
It was a close one, but the marvelous play of Dave Parmelee coupled with the very poor play of John Bertram Hall was enough to give Smith South the win.
Pierce was high man for R.B. with 9 pointe, while J.B.'s beloved Stu Solomon led his squad with 14 points.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, FEBRUARY 20, 1963 By Subscription National Review Publisher Speaks This Sunday Night William A Rusher, publisher of the National Review, will discuss the probable 1964 presidential nominees this Sunday evening at 8:00 in the Chase Hall Ballroom.
Rusher's visit on campus, which will also include an address to Monday's Chapel assembly on U S. domestic policy, is sponsored by the Young Republican club.
However, club President Anderson emphasized that not just club members, but all interested students are invited to Sunday night's discussions Rusher has served as publisher* of the National Review, one of the nation's leading conservative publications, since 1957.
Both he and the magazine believe that a strong conservative sentiment exists in America, and that this trend will greatly influence such important facets of politics and government as the next presidential election and future domestic policy.
He has made four trips to Europe in the past four years, covering almost every country on the continent.
Recently he returned from a tour of Africa, which he says increased his understanding of the battle for survival which freedom and communism are fighting in the world's newest nations.
He served as associate counsel to the United States Senate's Internal Security Subcommittee in 1956.
In this capacity, he participated in hundreds of public and secret hearings concerning the communist menace in America.
In October 1956, he went to Honolulu to prepare for the Subcommittee's hearings there, and in November of that year he was sent to Austria by the senate on a special investigatory mission.
Rusher, who was born in 1923, received his A.B. at Princeton, William A Rusher majoring in its school of public and international affairs.
After three years in the Air Force he entered Harvard Law School, where he received his law degree in 1948.
Also during this period he served as a member of the Executive Committee of the Young Republican Nationtional Federation.
Gon ch aroff Lectures OnNewSovietSociety Doctor Nicholas Goncharoff, Russian-born political scientist who serves as Secretary for International Education of the National Council of YMCAs, will be on. campus as a Danforth Visiting Lecturer in the Bates Lecture Series tomorrow and Friday.
He will present the George Colby Chase Lecture on ""The New Soviet Society — Education, Indoctrination, and Search for Democratization of Life"" tomorrow evening at 8 in the chapel.
At chapel service on Friday, February 22, he will speak on ""The Wholeness of Man in a Divided World."" The importance of the underDebating Squad Competes With Fifty Select Teams Four Bates debaters participated last weekend in the Dartmouth Invitational Tournament.
The tournament was composed of fifty outstanding teams from across the country, who took part in the debates by invitation only.
The Bates ""A"" team, Howard Blum '63 and Robert Ahern '64, finished with a 5-3 record, one short of the 6-2 record needed to qualify for the final round.
They defeated teams from Scranton, Saint Peter's, William and Mary, Dartmouth, and Saint Anselm's; and lost to three mid-western teams, Northwestern, Emporia, and Southern Illinois.
The ""B"" team, consisting of John Strassburger '64 and Thomas Hall '64, compiled a record of 2-6, also short of the qualifying mark.
They defeated teams from Illinois Normal and Fordham; and lost to teams from Dade, Brandeis, George Washington, Ohio State, Wake Forest, and Navy.
These same teams will participate in the annual MIT Debate Tournament on Friday and Saturday, February 22 and 23.
There will be a ""Bates Day"" at the Augusta Kiwanis Club on Thursday, February 21st.
Priscilla Clark and Richard Rosenblatt will uphold the negative. . developed nations of the world must be recognized, argues Goncharoff.
And they are ripe for vast political, economic and social changes — now.
From 1955 to 1961, in an attempt to bring to North Americans a new awareness of the basic problems and conflicts facing the world and the relevance of Christian principles to them, Goncharoff conducted a series of seminars for the YMCA on the Friday Narks Climax Of Betty Bates Week The annual Betty Bates night will be presented Friday, at 8:00 , under the chairmanship of Joan Mills '63, in the Little Theatre.
The presentation of Betty Bates 1963 will highlight the week's activities for the women on campus.
The three rounds of competition will begin after an introduction by Margie Lord, mistress of ceremonies.
In the second, the girls will display their athletic ability in various games.
Finally, the third round of competition will require each of the candidates to answer both a serious and a humorous question.
Hinman and Miss Nell, instructors in Physical Education, June Gustafson '63, Stu-G representative, and Virginia Erskine '63, WAA representative.
In addition to the competition, other student entertainers will perform.
Anne Cawley '66, of the WAA, has arranged a Fashion Show with freshman and sophomore models, and Karen Hastie '66 as narrator.
In 1958 he toured the world studying the needs of youth in nineteen countries of Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East while in 1961, his tours covered several of the Latin American nations.
Commenting about these trips, Goncharoff said, ""We met people from a tremendous variety of fields.
Some were intellectuals and students, and some belonged to the business world, labor movements, military groups and political parties.
Born in Kiev, Russia, in 1921, the son of a career diplomat who turned to the Orthodox priesthood, Goncharoff was educated in communist schools.
He was also a member of the Orthodox Church despite religious persecution.
Later he was captured and interned, first in a prisoner-of-war camp in the Ukraine, and then in a forcedlabor camp in Germany.
After the war Goncharoff joined the staff of the YMCA, and in 1948 became president of Dr.
At the same time he served as secretary in Germany to the Russian Student Christian Movement.
A year after his arrival in the United States in 1952, Goncharoff became connected with the National Council YMCA public affairs program.
Two informal sessions with students and faculty members will be conducted by Goncharoff Thursday and Friday mornings.
Lewiston Jaycees Inaugurate Local e 63 Miss America Contests A preliminary meeting of candidates for this year's Miss Lewiston-Auburn Pageant will be held this Sunday, February 24, at 2:00'm. in the Saint Joseph school auditorium.
This meeting, held under the auspices of the Lewiston Jaycees, is designed to bring together any girls who may be interested in entering the Miss America competition.
A Entrant must be single and never been married, divorced or had a marriage annulled.
B Entrant must be of good character and possess poise, personality, intelligence, charm, and beauty of face and figure.
E Entrant must either be a resident of city, county or territory in which local Pageant is 1 held for six months prior to Pageant, or be a college or university student in city, county, or territory where Pageant is held.
This last requirement points up the desire of Pageant officials to have college girls enter the competition.
Any girl presently attending Bates who feels she may be interested in entering the Miss America Pageant is urged to attend the meeting.
Chute Comments On Religious Atheism Last Friday morning Bates students greeted Dr.
Chute, the new head of the Biology, Mathematics and Geology Departments with appreciative laughter as he commented on their captivity under the compulsory chapel program.
The audience listened attentively to a humorous introduction, then settled back in expectation of an entertaining 20 minutes.
Chute first expressed the opinion that the recent Religious Emphasis Week was incomplete without a representative of atheism.
Critics of atheism claim that if no Creator is accepted, all is chaos; the atheist answers that it is possible to view chaos as the interaction of Harper Lectures To Gould Club On AFSC — GUIDANCE systems according to natural law.
Atheism does not claim a design or purpose for the world as a whole, but maintains that the individual can find meaning in a chaotic world.
Art and science must serve to relate the fragmentary pieces of reality offered to human understanding.
The decision between right and wrong in a given situation depends on the individual.
The atheist admits no ""pseudo-objective"" moral or ethical law; he, himself, is the only one on whom he may depend.
Its implications lead to an ac ceptable mythology, a meaningful life for the individual, and a satisfactory ethical code.
Russell Speaks To SEA Group About Teaching Requirements Mr J Weston Russell, Lewiston Superintendent of Schools, addressed the Student Education Association last Wednesday evening.
He spoke about the qualifications he seeks when interviewing prospective teachers for available positions in the Lewiston school system.
The first consideration is the applicant's appearance and manner; the teacher must create a positive impression, especially since the younger students many •times seek to emulate him.
A well-dressed, well-groomed individual with a reliable sense of social responsibility will be preferred to other candidates who lack these qualifications.
Russell continued by stressing the importance of the potential teacher's interest in people, particularly the age group he de sired to teach.
The teacher will not be able to carry out his tasks well unless he has a strong sense of dedication and interest in his work.
In respect to a major, the speaker stated that he usually required thirty hours of credit.
More credit in a major as well as eighteen hours in a minor is a definite asset.
On the subject of graduate study, Russell felt that the teacher would gain more from his graduate work if he took it while teaching.
Any student who has work he wishes to exhibit may do so in this weekend's exhibit.
For this spring's outdoor exhibition, the association will invite students from other Maine colleges to exhibit their efforts.
He spoke at a meeting of the Gould Political Affairs Club, last Sunday evening in Libby Forum.
Harper, a conscientious objector, spent two years working in Mexico with the American Friends organization in place of military service.
In Mexico, he worked with a group of young college graduates, also conscientious objectors doing alternative service, in drilling water wells.
In this effort to bring potable water to small villages, the A.F.S.C. cooperated with CARE, which donated the drilling rigs; the United Nations officials in Mexico City; the state government, which chose the villages the men would work in; and the local government, which paid for the materials used.
The committee's groups should be composed of international volunteers, thus promoting international understanding and working toward peace; 2.
The A.F.S.C. will not get involved in any political issues where it is working; 3.
There should be a minimum of set rules about how to approach the work; and 4.
Whatever work is being done shall be turned over to the local people when completed.
Also on Monday, men and women interested in TRAVELERS INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with Mr John H Grimes '43.
Mr Bruce Wald from NAVAL RESEARCH LABORATORY will meet on Friday, March 1, with men and women interested in physics, chemistry, and mathematics.
John A Curtis '33 from NEW ENGLAND MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with senior men and women.
He will also interview sophomore and junior men interested in the Summer Seminar Program.
Drive In— Restaurant 11:00 AJVL to 2:00 AJVL DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 in is a great advantage,"" said Harper when asked what courses a Bates student who wants to join an organization such as A.F.S.C. should take in preparation.
He had never spoken Spanish until he reached Mexico, and found it difficult to communicate for about nine months.
AETNA LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, which will be represented at Bates on February 28, is looking .for two men to train investment analysis and portfolio management.
Work in this area offers an above average opportunity for the capable man.
A brochure containing a description of this position is available in the Placement Office.
Stanley E Bradley is looking for a young woman to work with him as a research assistant in the Department of Medicine.
He is engaged in research on liver disease, nephritis, and high blood pressure, and a beginning salary of $4400 is offered.
STUDENT'S INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL ASSOCIATION, one of the most extensive travel organizations in the world, offers a program containing a tour of your choice through European cities and a summer job in a country of your choice.
This unique experience of living with foreign people is much less expensive and more interesting than going as a tourist.
Miss Mary Allen, regional Scout Executive, will be interviewing career and summer candidates (for camp counseling) on Thursday, February 21.
Lewiston THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES A Gift To Your College Can Result In A For Your Family Larger Income Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
These questions are not easily* answered and because of this decision making by the Department of Defense they are again subject to difficulties that few businessmen ever see.
After World War II our defense system operated under the assumption that the enemy employed contemporary planes and relatively few atomic bombs.
Little need be said about the change that has taken place; the prevention of destruction of our cities is now near to impossible in the event of war.
Military stock-piling by the enemy has increased, as well as the ability to deliver their punch, beyond our wildest dreams.
Our main objective now is retaliatory capability in the event of attack and therefore the indirect protection of our cities.
The job of the Defense Department is to not lose sight of these objectives.
Efficiency Called For Efficiency should be achieved in spending money allotted to defense.
Our Defense Department should act to maximize output as private industries act to maximize profit.
Maximization of output will give greater efficiency, and as I said last week, greater efficiency means that decision makers who are better equipped to handle defense problems can be employed.
It should be noted that a difference exists between optimum and efficient maximization.
Any point along a firm's (or in this case, the Defense Department) production function is by definition a possible efficient scale of production.
Now along these possible efficient points an optimum position may be located.
In this case the optimum point is defined in terms of the higher level criterion of minimum cost, given the factors of prices.
SuZANNEPlESHETTE-Claire Wilcox. ...-urn sua m mm -mm m ran sum mm mccariky nil modus ■ NN smut ■ mm m cient alternative can be inferior to an inefficient one.
When comparing alternatives the efficient and hopefully the optimum one is always preferred.
The economists of RAND Corporation have favored the policy of ""suboptimization"", or in their own lingo, partial equilibrium analysis, to mitigate efficiency problems in the Defense Department.
They optimize alternatives at an intermediate leve because there is no way of de fining what they call a ""globa optimum"", ie. the highest possi ble objective.
The commander of a fighter wing who controls several squadrons has the job of maximizing the tota capabilities of his squadrons Further up the latter the air de fense sector commander is in charge of several fighter wings, missile battalions, radar units etc.
He must maximize the tota capabilities within his sector And so it goes.
Economists Useful If national objectives change new criterions for decisions are required for the choosing of al ternatives.
This replacement of criteria, either because they are not optimal or they are outdated because of changes in technology and objectives, is a very serious matter for the Defense Depart ment to consider.
It involves new ways of thinking about and choosing among possible courses of action, reassigning of respon sibility and authority, replacing the present means of communication, and reallocating resources A RAND publication states tha there is ""... a range of circumstance in which policy improvements are available through the substitution of a better scheme of suboptimization criteria, but in which it would not pay to make a formal change in the de cision structure of the Department of Defense.
The first of these, the work song, usually originated in the prisons or on the plantation, where the music-loving Negro sang to lighten his burden of work.
Or the old darkie of the South might have rendered Oh when those cotton balls get rotten.
In those old cotton fields down south. as he rhythmically shuffled down the rows of snow-white cotton.
A second group might be Republican Club Demands A Firm Position On Cuba By KENNETH PETKE '66 and DAVID FOSTER '66 Over a year ago, a cry of anguish went up in this country that we never should have permitted Castro to come to power.
It was conceded, however, that the opportunity for action had passed, and it was too late to do anything about it.
Thus the halfhearted liberation attempt by the United States at the Bay of Pigs became a fiasco, and Cuba, bolstered by the victory, continued to get stronger.
More recently we have heard a similar cry that we should have supported that invasion, but once again it was conceded that it was too late, and therefore the recently planned invasion of Cuba for late autumn, 1962, was cancelled.
The ""offensive missiles"" have been removed (leaving only ""defensive missiles"" to turn on the United States), and have been replaced termed morality songs, and by an estimated 2 0,000 fully would contain both the purely equipped Soviet troops with religious and the more mundane.
A young girl falls in love, but is jijted by her suitor, and warns Come all you fair and tender maidens.
Or a maid who has married a handsome face unaware of the shiftless heart it hides might say to a companion Go and tell my baby sister.
Because of his training in marginal comparisons the economist employs considerable flexibility in the choice of suboptimization criteria, and this gives a vitality that is generally associated with a ""darn good idea."" mere ""conventional"" weapons such as jet planes and tanks.
The Soviet government seems to be making no new bold moves, but instead has settled down to the peaceful pursuits of distribution of arms to other Latin American nations.
In addition to importing . and distributing opium from China, Castro has also embarked on a program of putting hundreds of acres of Cuban And there's no sickness, toil or trouble.
An educational as well as interesting segment of folk musio is that termed historical.
One can be carried back on the wings of song to 1307 and the Battle of Bannockburn, and hear Robert Bruce stirring his Scots for the coming engagement with the English, under Edward II, with Wha. for Scotland's king and law Freedom's sword will strongly draw.
Soviet arms have shown up just recently in government struggles in Venezuela, and as we look at Friday's newspaper we see that Castro has offered asylum to Communist hijackers of a large, Venezuelan freighter.
Whether or not the crisis in Cuba is ""settled"", we have lost another cold war battle by failure to take decisive action.
As a result, we are faced with an all too large and growing danger from Cuba.
We proved that Russia would back down in the face of force, but then stopped there.
We fear war more than loss of Freedom, and when faced with a choice between the two, war and surrender (""concessions"" or ""compromise"" in White House talk), we will select the latter.
The United States has waited about eighteen years for the situation to change peacefully, but . to no avail.
Our time grows increasingly short, but if we are to survive, we must turn the tide somewhere.
Communist imperialism is difficult to combat, because it proceeds in a slow, patient, peacemeal manner, degenerating economically and politically.
They aren't as gentle as Caroline, nor are they playing with PT-boats in the bathtub.
That failing, we should turn to possibly less ""rational"", although undoubtedly more effective methods.
Chute Comments On Religious Atheism Last Friday morning Bates I students greeted Dr.
Critics of atheism claim that if no Creator is accepted, all is chaos; the atheist answers that it is possible to view chaos as the interaction of systems according to natural law.
Harper Lectures To Gould Ciub On AFSG ""The whole idea is helping people to help themselves,"" stated David Harper '59, concerning the American Friends Service Committee.
Roberta Austin, who will DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 in is a great advantage,"" said Harper when asked what courses a Bates student who wants to join an organization such as A.F.S.C. should take in preparation.
Lewiston Dally 11:00 AM. to 2:00 AJL THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE oi ALL TYPES A Gift To Your College Can Result In A For Your Family Larger Income Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
It is obvious that we cannot operate under the same national objectives that followed World War XL Our main objective now is retaliatory capability in the event of attack and therefore the indirect protection of our cities.
AND A fONOFJbY 1 ' \ < flit tASTUAN COLOR PAHAVISION C0 S1ABRING _ ~""~ INTRODUCING s ...turn siokh • Mm murpht mm mm um sum KEVIN ftCWn HOWARD MORRIS ' WW SIMS ■ SIM ««i SulIPLESHETIE'CLillco^ IT MUPPHHIMIID JW IWARD MORRIS ■ KKABRFN STIVJ PhilSiu/ers cient alternative can be inferior to an inefficient one.
They optimize alternatives at an intermediate level because there is no way of defining what they call a ""global optimum"", ie. the highest possi ble objective.
The commander of a squadron of fighter planes has control over specific men, airplanes, etc., anc is told to maximize his ability to destroy enemy bombers.
The commander of a fighter wing who controls several squadrons has the job of maximizing the total capabilities of his squadrons.
Further up the latter the air de fense sector commander is in charge of several fighter wings, missile battalions, radar units etc.
This replacement o criteria, either because they are not optimal or they are outdated because of changes in technology and objectives, is a very serious matter for the Defense Department to consider.
It involves new ways of thinking about and choosing among possible courses of action, reassigning of respon sibility and authority, replacing the present means of communication, and reallocating resources A RAND publication states that there is ""... a range of circum stance in which policy improve ments are available through the substitution of a better scheme of suboptimization criteria, but in which it would not pay to make a formal change in the decision structure of the Department of Defense.
I Elvis Presley and ""ERRAND BOY"" Jerry Lewis j Sun., Mon., Tues.— ■ ""MUSIC MAN"" Buddy Hackett plus | ""DAVID AND GOLIATH"" j | — Closed Wednesdays — | ^Tiiiiniiriiiiriiiiriiiiif tiiittiiirii iriiiiitiiif itiiiiiiinif iitiiriiitititritiiiriiiiiif iitmiifittntitiiiiiiii^ Hudson Surveys Folk Singing And Comments On Four Categories By BARBARA HUDSON '63 In our previous article, we tried to define the folksong, deciding that a song handed down from preceeding generations, and expressing some universal emotion or relating an historic event would fit this classification.
Oh ya' work all day for the sugar in ya' -tea Down behind the railroad.
You can't pick very much cotton, In those old cotton fields down south. as he rhythmically shuffled down the rows of snow-white cotton.
A second group might be termed morality songs, and would contain both the purely religious and the more mundane.
By KENNETH PETKE '66 and DAVID FOSTER '66 Over a year ago, a cry of anguish went up in this country that we never should have permitted Castro to come to power.
The ""offensive missiles"" have been removed (leaving only ""defensive missiles"" to turn on the United States), and have been replaced by an estimated 20,000 fullyequipped Soviet troops with mere ""conventional"" weapons such as jet planes and tanks.
An educational as well as interesting segment of folk musie is that termed historical.
With increasing frequency the Republican leaders in Congress have bombarded President Kennedy and their colleagues with pleas for armed action against Cuba.
Attack Cuba now; don't allow communism to spread to other parts of this hemisphere.
The communist presence in Cuba annoys; but we should not allow it to precipitate an armed clash.
The Republican leaders in Congress and on this campus who advocate armed intervention are nearsighted.
The effect of communist Cuba's proximity overshadows the more serious problems this country faces in Europe and elsewhere.
The Communist countries have lived with American troops juxtaposing their borders for many years.
The Chinese Government on Formosa continually sends spies and saboteurs into mainland China, just as Cuba sends them into other Latin American countries.
For power politics today plays not with the chess pieces of the Second World War.
Once the Queen is committed the game is either won or lost; there is no chance for a regrouping of forces.
If force be truly needed, use it against your opponent's major pieces; not against a pawn.
Other possibilities exist, the best of which is to work through the U N. or other diplomatic channels.
Justification of military initiative in Cuba based on the Monroe Doctrine and Teddy Roosevelt's bunglings are invalid.
Petke and Foster's concluding statement that we should turn to ""possibly 'less rational' although undoubtedly more effective methods,"" indicates well the nature of their position — a reflection of Barry Goldwater's irrationality.
Entered as second -clasti matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913. under the act of Mar. ft.T9.
Letters To The Editor The following is directed to the writer of that so-called piece of journalism that frequents the last page of The Student.
May we also point out to this prejudiced one that it might be advisable that he wipe off his fogged glasses and notice who is in first place in two out of the three leagues they are entered.
Also our teams have never forfeited a game because of a lack of interested participants, a fact which was omitted from your lopsided writings.
May we also point out to you, the high school winner of the Alfred E Newman Award, that a journalist has no right to set himself up as a God in whose hands the power to judge others lies unless he has the tact to utilize it properly.
May we finally remind you that we play intramurals fpr the intrinsic fun of the games.
We participate because we enjoy the game, and we feel that we should not be subjected to the abuse that has been directed toward us by your narrow-minded pen.
According to the Student, this is done by our newspaper here on campus.
It seems that an editor should be happy if his editorials simply stimulated discussion.
Since the Student itself admitted that the students ""verbalize"" in the den and the commons, I see no reason to call the student body apathetic just because it does not put its discussions in writing.
The students are neither apathetic nor afraid to put their arguments in writing.
We have Biologists, Psychologists, Chemists, Historians, and Economists, to mention a few, who see no reason to wrote to the newspaper on every controversial article that comes up.
The Student has accomplished its purpose when these students meet in the den and commons and verbalize.
To write is to prove an ability to do so, and does not prove any more veheYoung Democrats Believe Dynamic Policy Essential By NANCY LESTER '64 The events of the past half-century have confronted the United States with problems which it can no longer ignore.
Two major world wars, one resulting in an unprecedented depression and both resulting in a breakdown of the balance of power in Europe, on which our own security so largely depends, have led to a demand for courageous and creative leadership.
This is far from being opposed to a basic belief in the worth of the individual.
On the contrary, the prosperity and security of the individual is the end toward which such programs as social security and medicare are directed.
Any dynamic society, whose needs are constantly changing, cannot expect satisfaction from stagnant, unchanging government policies.
The European balance of power was mentioned above and is worthy of explanation.
In a nineteenth century world, the Western hemisphere was able to isolate itself, to a large extent, from the political struggles in Europe.
When the United States finally became involved in World War I, public opinion demanded an idealistic crusade designed ""to wipe out those evil Germans"", ignoring the fact that total destruction of German power would drastically alter European power politics.
Wilson was aware of this danger when he proposed a moderate peace treaty, but many of his suggestions were disregarded.
In World War II, public opinmence than would be found in a den discussion or a commons conversation.
We are pretty sick and tired of being called apathetic by people we never even see around at the campus functions.
I have just completed digesting the inspiring article concerning the animals at ""Norwich Prep School"" that suddenly appeared on the bulletin board.
At Norwich the well-known Guidon is offered with no charge and in almost unlimited supply, so I assume that Bates, being of nearly equal prominence, offers their paper in the same manner.
However, if there is a small fee involved, I will be glad to reimburse you the full price.
President Truman recognized the fact that the United States then stood alone, no longer under the protective shadow of Great Britain; with this understanding, plans for the revitalization of Western Europe and an aggressive policy against Communism were developed under the Marshall Plan and the Truman Doctrine, respectively.
The American people became committed to participation in international affairs.
During these years, a minimum of concern with foreign affairs and a maximum of concern with domestic interests predominated.
In such a system, it is hoped, each party will be receptive to its electorate and yet responsible enough to make wise and far-sighted decisions.
There is room for both a forwardthinking, progressive party and a party which moves more slowly, serving as a check on possible over-enthusiasm.
However, as future voters, we of the Bates College Young Democratic Club choose the former, the party of progress.
Focus On Religion with Bob Livingston '63 as host will feature all the addresses and the chapel service of Religious Emphasis Week.
There have been many comments by students that they were not able to attend all the lectures in this series, and WRJR hopes that Focus On Religion may fill this gap.
Focus On Religion will be heard MONDAYS at 10:10 Steve Adams '65 has worked up another interesting feature program.
BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 20, 1963 /a/ FIVE Dean Comments On Junior Year Abroad The Sophomores shown above are all in some stage of planning to take their Junior Year abroad.
Right, Evelyn Breck, Brenda Kaulback, Emily Blowen, Janice Kopco, Linda Olmstead.
We asked three questions about present preparations of prospective travelers for next year.
Many have filled out and returned the necessary information, and several have been accepted.
Eight sophomores have been admitted to foreign schools to date, andmany are waiting for replies.
Next year's juniors abroad will most likely be situated in either England, Spain, or France, as the prospective universities include Aix-Marseilles, Nice, Nottingham, Manchester, Barcelona, and Dijon.
Healey expects at least five more definite candidates for this program.
Our second question concerned the reason for the small number of B.S. students who go abroad.
He also mentioned that most B.S. students are not proficient in a foreign language and are necessarily restricted to English-speaking universities.
The science major also has difficulty in completing his core course requirements before junior year, but as was emphasized, it is by no means impossible for the science student to study abroad.
Bill Ford became Acting Manager of New Jersey Bell's South River Business Office before he had been with the company a year.
In South River, Bill was given management responsibilities that would demand the best abilities of even an experienced manager.
He handled them well, and, j ust before his first anniversary with the company, was rewarded with a promotion to Manager of the Woodbridge Business Office.
Bill Ford and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES arations this year's freshmen have started and will be involved in through next year.
Several freshmen have already expressed an interest in the Junior Year program, and have been preparing by completing as many core courses as possible this year.
The students have complete freedom of choice as to which school thy will attend, as long as it is accredited.
The offered program of work must be adequate and acceptable to Bates (few foreign universities fail to meet this requirement), and the student should feel competent in the language of the country to which he wishes to go.
France, Spain, Germany, and England are the usual student selections, not excluding Commonwealth countries.
Several years ago a Bates ' student went to an English-speaking university in Japan.
Dean Healy expressed the hope that any students interested in this program will see him and have the possibility examined.
There is ample time for any freshman to register for this opportunity, and Dr.
Today in our struggle with the problem of nuclear war, new songs are being created which may well join these in years to come as recognized folksongs.
With the Peace movement, one of these might well be Men and women, stand together Do not heed the man of war.
The fourth, rather heterogeneous category one might make would be the amusing or whimsical songs.
Included would be those especially for children, such as Mister Froggie went a courtin' and he did ride, mm-mm Mister Froggie went a courtin' and he did ride, A sword and a pistol by his side, mm-mm.
The oldsters enjoy laughter too, and find it in the tale of The most chivalrous fish of the ocean To ladies forebearing and mild Though his record be dark Is the man eating shark.
Yet, whether fast or slow, sad or gay, in English or a foreign tongue, they have generally been accepted as folksongs and are sung today by increasing numbers of folk performers.
BATES STUDENT Cats Top Tufts 7860; Clark 8364 SPORT.NG S \ By RUSS HENDERSON ^ Hoopster Surge — A familiar term of the sporting scene is the word team, another is a derivative of this same word, namely teamwork.
A more meaningful display of this last term has yet to be seen in truer form than that shown by the Garnet basketballers in their wins over Tufts and Clark during the past week.
Lacking a great individual star, the thirty-point per game performer, the 'Cats have found the key to victory in a self-sacrificing attitude of teamwork and hustle that has carried them above and beyond the exploits of any one individual player.
The Ullommen have been displaying unexpected rebounding strength that has enabled their fast break and harrassing defense an opportunity to pressure the opposition.
Saturday features the Bobcat in his home den, facing the Colby Mules and highscoring All-East forward Ken Stone.
On Wednesday, February 27, the state series leader, the Bowdoin Polar Bear, journeys to Alumni Gym to face the Bobcat in the season finale.
This is in reference to the Jay Vee basketball aggregation of Coach Chick Leahy.
The Bobkittens have an eleven and two record that is highlighted by an eightgame win streak which is the longest streak of any kitten club.
The early arriving fan is in for a real treat if he catches the junior Bobcats in their tilts which are the preliminaries to the varsity encounters.
Johnson, Mischler, Savello & Co. provide the J.V.'s with a ""thrill a minute"" showcase.
A unique Saturday that saw the Garnet post a win in basketball but a defeat in track, also saw a Bates group of doubtful status brave the wintery gusts of a Maine winter as they joined the ski teams of the other Maine colleges for the Maine Intercollegiate ski championships on Kingfield's Sugarloaf Mountain.
With the co-operation and encouragement of the Athletic Department a skeleton crew of three men, Pete Koch, Tom Adams, and Al Skogsberg, carried the Garnet colors at Kingfield in the state ski meet.
Competing in only two of four events, the downhill and the slalom, the Batesmen were able to compile 205. points despite the fact they only had three men competing while the other teams had the full complement of five skiers.
The Bates skiers did not compete in the Nordic events which include the crosscountry and jumping competition which were held Friday at Farmington's Titcomb Slope.
Pete Koch was ninth in the downhill followed by Adams in twelfth spot and Skogsberg in thirteenth.
In the slalom Tom Adams was eighth, the ""Owl"" tenth and Al Skogsberg fifteenth.
In finishing behind the other three Maine schools, the Batesmen proved that they can hold their own among the skiers of the established state powers.
The weightmen of Maine captured four of the six positions in the shot put and weight throw competition.
Arnie DeLaite smashed all Maine records with a heave of 52 feet, 4^ inches in the shot and Bill Blood set a meet record in the weight throw.
Any Garnet supporters making the trek to Maine will surely witness down to the wire duels in the dash and hurdle events.
Maine's duo of MacPhee and Hicken are performers in the class of Garnet stars Paul Williams, Bill LaValle and Al Harvie.
Bates will be at full strength and hungry for victory against the favored Bears.
Highlighting the next show will be journeyman middleweight Randy Sandy and former New England light heavyweight champ Bob Young.
Those who witnessed Friday's encounter didn't have long tc wait to see more of the same.
Saturday night at Alumni Gymnasium the opposition was different, but the script was the same.
Tufts arrived fresh from a near-upset over Boston College, one of New England's large school basketball powers.
John Lawler sank one for the Bobcats early in the game to put the Garnet five in front by a 4-3 margin.
The starting five consisting of Lawler, Stevens, Glanz, Castolene and Freeman jumped to a 16-8 lead behind the shooting of Castolene, Lawler and Stevens.
At this point the ""Bobcats"" departed to be replaced by Cummings, Beaudry, Krzynowek, Hine and Johanssen.
This unit, appropriately nicknamed the ""mosquitoes,"" took the game into their hands and put on one of the most exciting exhibitions seen by this viewer in three years of watching Bobcat basketball.
The 'Cats took to a fast-breaking attack with a pressing defense sparked by the ""little three"" of Beaudry, Cummings, and Krzynowek.
Time after time, Tufts was forced into committing costly errors on offense.
Tufts made a determined effort to get back into the game early in the half, but the hot hand of Freeman kept the 'Cats in front.
The shooting and passing of Cummings picked the Tufts defense apart, and Ted Krzynowek Carl Johanssen . moves in to block Jumbo shot As Mike Hine and Don Beaudry ready for rebound scored from the outside.
The pattern of this game was quite similar to that of the previous night.
The first team behind the shooting of Stevens, Glanz and Freeman jumped to a 17-9 lead before being replaced by the ""mosquito"" unit.
Again Cummings, Beaudry and Krzynowek sparked with their fast-breaking and pressing type of game.
John Lawler then scored six of the Garnet's final ten points in a streak that saw the 'Cats leave the floor at half time with a 4430 lead.
This time they really clicked in leading a great team effort which saw them gradually pull away.
Bob Lanz took charge, setting up Bill Gardner for a bucket and then contributing two driving layups.
Sparked by Dave Svendsen and guard Ladie Deemer, the Black Bears surged to an early lead and were never headed.
Lawler Leads Cats This game, like the former showed a great team effort.
The trio of Krzynowek, Cummings and Beaudry again displayed hustle and ball-handling which had the fans going wild.
Lawler enjoyed his finest game of the season and set up many scores when he was on the court.
Paul Castolene played an outstanding defensive game on Clark's Duane Corriveau who owns a 33 points per game average for the season.
Castolene's effort was evidenced in his ability to constantly prevent his opponent from getting the ball, proving ultimately to hold him eight points below his average.
The next home encounter for the Bobcat quintet will be against the Colby Mules on Saturday night.This state series game should be interesting, in view of the recent revitalization of the Bobcat quintet.
Bales G F P Castolene 3 5 9 Glanz 1 0 2 Freeman 4 0 8 Stevens 4 0 8 Lawler 3 3 9 Cummings 4 3 11 Johannesen 0 1 1 Beisswanger 1 0 2 Hine 2 2 6 Beaudry 3 0 6 Krzynowek 4 3 11 Lanz 1 0 2 Gardiner 0 1 1 Macko 0 1 1 Love 0 0 2 29 20 78 Tufts G F P Solomon 1 0 2 Brennan 5 5 15 Jacobsen 0 1 1 French 0 6 6 i BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 20, 1963 SEVEN Veteran Coach Ullom Adds Spark To Cats By BILL GOODLATTE '65 A familiar face at football and basketball games this year, in all probability, will be absent from the Bates scene next year.
Verne Ullom, head coach of basketball and tennis and football line coach, was the Garnet Athletic Department's choice to temporarily replace Coach Peck, who is expected to return to the Bates staff at the conclusion of his sabbatical year in Finland.
L Player A four-year football, basketball, and baseball standout at Hughes High School in Cincinnati, Ohio.
Upon completion of his college career, Ullom was contracted to play professional football for the Brooklyn Dodgers, an early N.F.L. team.
Ullom then returned to Cincinnati where he accepted a position as teacher and coach in the public school system.
His first real coaching opportunity developed at Taylor High School in North Bend, Ohio, where he spent eight years in charge of football, basketball, baseball, and track.
North Benders will never forget the high standard of athletics that Ullom established at Taylor.
His last four years at Taylor were the most impressive, during which time he produced three AllLeague football teams, an AllState baseball team, and three All-League basketball teams that won 52 out of 58 games played and finished one season undefeated.
The following year, he became varsity end coach and then defensive line coach.
The year 1956 saw Ullom at Bates coaching Bob Hatch's line, varsity basketball, and J.V. baseball.
During his two-year stay, Bates won a Maine Series Football Championship and took a second to Colby in Maine basketball competition.
Ullom's next stop was Principia, in Elsak, Illinois, where he was Athletic Director for two years.
In 1961, he was at Columbia, coaching the line of the eleven that tied Harvard for Ivy League honors.
Team Effort Impresses Commenting on Bates football, Ullom remarked that he was particularly impressed with the overall team effort.
He Went on to say that the weather really hurt the Bobcat effort at the end of the season, but the worst blow to Bates in his opinion was an undeserved third down penalty in the Maine game.
The penalty threw the Bobcats out of scoring position and into a definite passing situation.
Concerning Garnet basketball, Ullom feels the biggest drawback to the season was the lack of co-operation between coach and team, a unity that only comes of longer association.
Another thing that helped to pull the rug out from under the Bobcats was the strenuous schedule that they faced directly following Christmas vacation.
Spirit Pleases On the whole, Ullom is pleased with the enthusiastic spirit of his predominantly underclass squad which has produced some exciting and outstanding wins.
The Bates weightmen came through with their finest showing this year, gathering ten out of a possible eighteen points.
Dave Harrison, a dean's list student, captured second place behind Curtiss.
The record for this event in the M.I.T. cage is 60' l¥z"" by former world record holder Gary Gubner.
In the high jump, in which Olympian John Thomas holds the record at 6' 8%"", another Bates dean's list student, Dave Johnson jumped 6' IV 2 "" for a first place.
Paul Williams, fouling all but once, chalked up Bates' only point in the broad jump as he placed third.
The pole vault saw soph Bob Kramer soar over the 12' mark for the fourth consecutive meet.
Bates' first victory in the running events came in the 50 yd. dash as junior Paul Williams hit the wire ahead of Flink and Reinhardt of the hosts.
Eric again became Finn's ""shadow"" as he finished second behind Finn's 10:05 sec. victory in the two-mile.
Frosh Marsh Snow repeated his effort against Bowdoin by placing third in the 1000 yd. run.
Misfortune again hit junior John Ford as for the second meet someone has interfered with his running.
Running first at M.I.T., a small girl wandered onto the track in front of John.
To avoid hitting her, John side-stepped, losing his balance momentarily.
This allowed Green of M.I.T. to slip by John for a second place, with John finishing third.
John is to be commended for his fine performance despite the near tragedy.
The strong hurdle contingent from M.I.T. swept the hi's and grabbed first and second in the lo's.
In the one-mile relay it was the Bates team of LaVallee, Peterson, Ford, and Binnewig, finishing on top in the time of 3:41.4.
The cage record in this event is 3:37. by B.C. which gives evidence to the slowness of the low-banked M.I.T. track.
This victory by MIT leaves the 'Cats record at 4-3 with two meets remaining.
The first two have already been mentioned — the third beingv.00 yd. man, soph ""Dave"" Williams.
Dave has shown tremendous improvement in his first season as a trackster.
With three games yet remaining in Maine Series competition, Bates can't be ruled out as a possible contender.
There is no assurance that Verne Ullom will be on the Bates campus next fall, but even if he is not here in person, his spirit will prevail.
No lineman will ever forget running through his iron cage or the imperative trinity of hostility, mobility, and agility.
Flying time interfered with the ball game and the base was forced to forfeit.
Coach Chick Leahey has had success imitating the varsity and using two units.
The first string led by Bob Johnson, Bob Mischler, Paul Savello, John Wyman, and Russ Reilly have formed a well-balanced scoring attack.
The loss of Bill Beisswanger and Mike Hind to the varsity hasn't seemed to hurt Leahey's attack.
Mischler Top Scorer The Gorham State junior varsity didn't come close to their varsity counterpart's gaudy 99. points a game average.
Lewiston | Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 Mischler took scoring honors with 28 points.
John Wyman besides making his presence felt off the boards also scored ten points.
Dave Hillman played his best game of the season, collecting seven points.
The game was close in the early stages but the Bobkittens press and running game eventually broke the contest open.
The reserves saw plenty of action and everyone made the scoring column.
The game Tuesday was closer but the first string had enough scoring punch to win.
Bob Johnson with his fine outside shooting cut the cords for 22 points.
Stale Action The Leaheymen will hope to continue their winning ways next week as they face Maine at Orono on Tuesday, February 19 and meet the Colby Mules at home Saturday, February 23.
The Bobkittens hope to reverse an earlier one point loss to Maine who has been weakened by the scholastic difficulties of several key players.
B E D A R D ' S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston, Maine SIX BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 20, 1963 Cats Tod Tufts 7860; Clark SORTING S \ * By RUSS HENDERSON V* Big Team Effort Sparks Garnet; Bounding Key To Break, Press Hoopster Surge — A familiar term of the sporting scene is the word team, another is a derivative of this same word, namely teamwork.
The Bobkittens have an eleven and two record that is highlighted by an eightgame win streak which is the longest streak of any kitten club The early arriving fan is in for a real treat if he catches the junior Bobcats in their tilts which are the preliminaries to the varsity encounters.
A unique Saturday that saw the Garnet post a win in basketball but a defeat in track, also saw a Bates group of doubtful status brave the wintery gusts of a Maine winter as they joined the ski teams of the other Maine colleges for the Maine Intercollegiate ski championships on Kingneld s Sugarloaf Mountain.
Pete Koch was ninth in the downhill followed by Adams in twelfth spot and Skogsberg in thirteenth In the slalom Tom Adams was eighth, the ""Owl"" tenth and Al Skogsberg fifteenth.
Those who witnessed Friday's encounter didn't have long to wait to see more of the same.
Bates Castolene Glanz Freeman Stevens Lawler Cummings Johannesen Beisswanger Hine Beaudry Krzynowek Lanz Gardiner Macko Love Tufts Solomon Brennan Jacobsen French G F P 3 5 9 1 0 2 4 0 8 4 0 8 3 3 9 4 3 11 0 1 1 1 0 2 2 2 6 3 0 6 4 3 11 1 0 2 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 2 29 20 78 G F P 1 0 2 5 5 15 0 1 1 0 6 6 I BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 20, 1963 '13 3 SEVEN Veteran Coach Ullom Adds Spark To Cats By BILL GOODLATTE '65 A familiar face at football and basketball games this year, in all probability, will be absent from the Bates scene next year.
The record for this event in the M.I.T. cage is 60' IV2"" by former world record holder Gary Gubner.
In the high jump, in which Olympian John Thomas holds the record at 6' SW, another Bates dean's list student, Dave Johnson jumped 6' IV2"" for a first place.
State Action The Leaheymen will hope to continue their winning ways next week as they face Maine at Orono on Tuesday, February 19 and meet the Colby Mules at home Saturday, February 23.
Landing only three first places out of thirteen, the 'Kittens showed their strength in nailing up seconds and thirds in five events.
In the hammer throw Wayne Pangburn captured the winner's wreath with a toss of 40 feet.
Harry Mossman sewed up second place, while Ted Davis managed to stay in the circle and make it a clean sweep with third place.
After taking a reluctant second in the broad jump, he was nudged out in the 50 yd. dash by M.I.T.'s Sivers, who won in a time equal to the varsity's.
Dave came back again to take a second in the high hurdles, a first in the low hurdles (with an excellent time of 5. seconds) and another second in the high jump.
Trufani Gets 13 Points It takes a real ""gut-runner"" to come back after placing second in the mile to casually grab up first place in the two-mile run.
But such is Ken Trufant who not only performed these feats well by winning the two-mile in 10:44.4, but found time to win the pole vault besides.
It is the all-around ability displayed in these runners that makes the junior thinclads a strong team.
Other fine individual performances were displayed by John Meyn who won third place in the mile, Dave Fullenwider who took second place in the 600.
Dave Campbell who chugged around the track to nail up second place in the 1000, and Mark Biel who followed Dave across the finish line to place third in the same event.
It is obvious from these performances that a great deal of this squad's threat lies in its depth, and the depth of the JV tracksters was not to be denied when it came around to equaling the singular, but excellent performances turned in by the M.I.T. freshmen.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Selected this week for ""Bobcat of the Week"" honors is senior forward John Lawlor.
John, a native of nearby Auburn and graduate of Edward Little High School, emerged as an instrumental cog in the great team effort displayed by the Garnet five against Tufts and Clark.
Friday, against Tufts, John and his teammates fought and van quished their opponents from Medford, Mass.
The ""Ghost"" also contrib uted a consistent effort on defense, and figured prominently in the assist column.
J GER It looks as if the ""Golden Boys"" are turning a palid green as / it is extremely hard for me to see a win in either the ""A"" or ""B"" leagues.
They probably think I'll win games for them by calling them nice names.
South Leads ""A"" Smith South has just about sewed up the ""A"" league championship.
OC played the boys from Smith South in a makeup game and were defeated 64 to 43.
Wallach and Silverstein were high men for S.S. while Phil Tamis was the backbone once again for OC, scoring 23 points.
Ron Taylor was more interested in smiling at the fans than playing basketball.
By BOB SEGERSTEN '63 Bill Graham scored 16 unbelievable points for the bases.
Middle Leader The ""B"" league winner was practically decided as Smith Middle downed JB's B-l squad 40 to 30.
A highlight of the Smith Middle Smith South game was the play of ""Sweet Willy"" Farrington.
He didn't score any points but he did receive a beautiful black eye for his efforts.
In the second J.B. game, Art Purinton scored 12 points for the victors, while John Devendoz dropped in 12 points for Smith North.
It is interesting to note that Dick ""No-Hit"" Jones has made it once again in the world of sports.
He was high scorer for the Smith North squad in their fatal endeavor Roger Bill managed to salvage a win before the week was out by defeating West Parker 3433.
South In C-l The ""C-l"" league is drawing to a close with Smith South as the probable victor.
In the other ""C-l"" game, J.B., led by the ""Milford Flash,"" Stu Solomon, defeated Smith North 40 to 29.
A Sportslight By MARCIA FLYNN '65 The climax of the WAA Volleyball season will come Friday night, Betty Bates Night, when Louise McCabe, president of WAA will present a trophy to Judy Warren, captain of Cheney's victorious team.
Wins 5 Cheney Rand Wilson Whit Frye Milliken Mitchell Page II Page I Hacker Chase 4 4 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 0 Losses 0 0 1 1 2 3 3 3 4 4 4 $4.00 1/TTLE, BROWN* Boston The top four teams played off to determine the championship.
Rand, quite surprisingly ended up near the bottom, as they were defeated in their first games by Wilson, 13-5, 8-14, and 11-7.
Cheney, as expected, won over Whit 12-6, 15-6, and over Wilson 15-5, 4-12, and 10-5.
The last set of games TTTTTTTTT Arbeitgeber bevorzugen junge Damen mit einer GIBBS Ausbildung.
Of course the seniors of Cheney really proved their superior ability to those in Rand.
Basketball Watching girls' basketball especially with the new rule changes is very amusing.
Confusion appears the rule so far this season with the exception of a few excellent players.
The outstanding players noted in the opening games of the season were Jan Soltis, Chris Faulk, Pris Clark, Karin Mueller, Gretchie Ziegler, Nancy Nichols, and Barb Remick.
Possibly the biggest detefent to good sound play is the size of the floor.
It is nearly half the size of a regulation court and limits play tremendously.
Why the women should be subjected to such conditions, warrants an explanation.
The short time needed per week for W.A.A. games would not disrupt organization in the Alumni Gym.
Credit must be given to Louise McCabe, Barb Remick and Pris Clark for their time in learning the new rules in order to referee the afternoon games.
Credit also should be given to Linda Jarrett for her organization of the WAA season.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, FEBRUARY 27, 1963 By Subscription Women Select Kinney As Betty Bates 1963 By PHYLLIS SCHINDEL Betty Bates of 1963 was* chosen last Friday night in the Little Theater.
Carolyn Kinney, President of Mitchell House, was awarded the silver Betty Bates bracelet after demonstrating her poise, grace and co-ordination in a series of three situations.
The first ordeal for the eight contestants, Linda Browning, Lois Warfield, Nancy Nichols, Ingrid Kaiser, Marion Day, Nancy Day, Carolyn, Kinney, and Linda Jarret, w£s the Social Situation, a very formal tea party.
Yet each candidate managed to bring a spark of life and even humor to a situation difficult enough in real life.
Seniors are also nominating Alumni officers of President and SecretaryTreasurer.
Primary elections will be held in the Alumni Gym, Monday, March 4, from 9m. to 4m.
These are only class primaries, as the majority of the campus groups by-pass the primaries with nominations.
Final elections are set for March 11, and will also be held in the Alumni Gym, from the hours of 9 to 4 Voters will choose from a slate of two candidates for each class office and the nominees for the various campus organizations.
Stu-C is the only exception and will present eight juniors, six sophomores, and four freshmen who have petitioned for next year's council.
Betty Bates competition; the necessity of the candidate's being a quick-change artist, the stagefright, and the strong feeling of companionship that the experience generated among the candidates.
Carolyn Kinney was particularly outstanding as she dribbled a basketball around and between all the other candidates.
Carol later demonstrated how to play tennis — or how to learn to play tennis well enough to impress the captain of a tennis team, and how to do it in thirty hours.
After a second fashion show — more formal attire this time, including a really stunning Oriental outfit, round three began.
Selects Gillespie As Editor Of Student * Norman Gillespie '64 will succeed John R Wilson '63 as Editor-in-Chief of the Station, John Lang '63, President of the Publishing Association, announced Monday.
At an afternoon meeting, the thirteen member board considered applications for the positions of Editor and Business Manager of the three campus publications.
A Philosophy major from Sta The audience couldn't help admiring the courage and poise of the candidates which enabled them to relax on stage, to be genuinely natural in spite of a series of situations, all of which were a little improbable.
Ahem Blum Finish Third At NTT Tourney Robert Ahem '64 and Howard Blum '63 finished third in the MIT Invitational Debate Tournament this past weekend.
Their record of five victories and one defeat qualified them for the semi-final round, in which they lost to Boston College, who went on to win the tournament by defeating Harvard in the finals.
Blum and Ahem, the ""A"" team representing Bates, defeated Providence, Brooklyn, Fordham, Trinity and Amherst.
Their only loss, in the preliminary rounds, was to the same Boston College team that they met in the semifinals.
The Bates ""B"" team of John Strassberger '64 and Tom Hall '64 finished with three wins and three losses.
Hall finished tenth in the individual speaker ratings for the tournament.
Presently, an Assistant in Philosophy, he was,, until this semester, a member of the Varsity Debating Squad and de facto Chairman of a Literary Club.
Professor Quimby requests that students interested in delivering semi-humorous, after dinner speeches at a speech festival of the four Maine colleges, see him before April 28th.
By PETER d'ERRICO '65 ""Open City,"" or ""Citta Ciper ta"" in Italian, is next in the Rob Players film series.
This awardwinning picture will be presented at 7:00 and 9:00m. in the Little Theatre this Saturday.
The hard simplicity and genuine passion is somewhat shocking to American audiences, who have become used to the slick Hollywood studio productions.
This film tells its story in a frank, uncompromising way, very different from what spoon-fed, sheltered audiences are accustomed to.
The anger is not hysterical, but the clear anger of those who have known the depravity of their foes.
The cruelty of the enemy, the passion of life in the underground, and the intensity of the conflict are depicted in detail and with realism.
The producers are obviously anti-Fascist and antiNazi, and this determined feeling against the Germans and their collaborationists pulses through the film.
More than anger, the film expresses an admiration for people who fight for freedom's cause.
The film shows a real sense of human fortitude — a quiet exultation and an inconquerable belief in life.
The story of the film is literal based on actual facts of the occupation of Europe and of the underground resistance.
A leader of the resistance is the central character of the film, and is cornered by the Germans in a part of R""ome.
H i s girlfriend, however, a dope addict, informs on him and he is captured and tortured to death in the Nazis' frantic quest for information.
The drama and emotion in the film — its illumination of human qualities — are not nearly conveyed by this outline of the plot.
To understand this film is to experience the total effect of the picture; and to experence the total effect is to find a sense of real experience not often attained in a motion picture. these positions.
A Dean's List student for the past three semesters, Gillespie presently serves as a member of the Rob Players Movie Selection Committee.
An active participant in all intra-mural sports, Gillespie has also been an avid and competent participant in various Chase Hall activities.
Previous honors include numerals for TV Tennis and the Almon Cyprus Libbey Award for Freshman Prize Debating.
Phillips Announces New Administration Building; No Tuition Raise Next Year President Phillips spoke to two groups of alumni recently about plans for the college in the near future.
Speaking in Salem, Massachusetts, on February 12, he announced that'' before the end of 1963 ground will be broken for the new administration building.
On February 13, speaking before a group of alumni from Rhode Island, President Phillips said that Bates expects to maintain its currenttuition rate for the 1963-64 academic year.
Moreover, it seems likely that these costs will continue to advance in the years ahead.
Trufant Gels 13 Points It takes a real ""gut-runner"" to come back after placing second in the mile to casually grab up first place in the two-mile run.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK It looks as if the ""Golden Boys"" are turning a palid green as / it is extremely hard for me to see a win in either the ""A"" or ""B"" leagues.
Selected this week for ""Bobcat of the Week"" honors is senior forward John Lawlor.
With three games remaining, the fine come back of John and his teammates will be severely tested in state series play.
SALI By BOB SEGERSTEN '63 Bill Graham scored 16 unbelievable points for the bases.
Wins Losses Cheney 5 0 Rand 4 0 Wilson "" 4 1 Whit 3 1 Frye 2 2 Milliken 2 3 Mitchell 2 3 Page II 1 3 Page I 1 4 Hacker 1 4 Chase 0 4 The top four teams played off to determine the championship.
The last set of games $4.00 LITTLE, BROWN 'Boston TTTTTTTTT Arbeitgeber bevorzugen junge Damen mit einer GIBBS Ausbildung.
Bates 44—83 Clark 30—64 Officials: Crozier, Hallsey Time: 2-20's i Student Vol.
Primary elections will be held in the Alumni Gym, Monday, March 4, from 9 to 4 These are only class primaries, as the majority of the campus groups by-pass the primaries with nominations.
The audience couldn't help admiring the courage and poise of the candidates which enabled them to relax on stage, to be genuinely natural in spite of a series of situations, all of which were a little improbable.
Ahern Blum Finish Third At NIT Tourney Robert Ahern '64 and Howard Blum '63 finished third in the MIT Invitational Debate Tournament this past weekend.
Blum and Ahern, the ""A"" team representing Bates, defeated Providence, Brooklyn, Fordham, Trinity and Amherst.
Presently, an Assistant in Philosophy, he was,, until this semester, a member of the Varsity Debating Squad and de jacto Chairman of a Literary Club.
A leader of the resistance is the central character of the film, and is cornered by the Germans in a part of rtome.
To understand this film is to experience the total effect of the picture; and to experence the total effect is to find a sense of real experience not often attained in a motion picture. positions.
Goncharoff Stresses Rifts In Soviet System By JUDY MARDEN '66 ""In this wonderful opportunity that is given to us of opening our souls and intellects, every one of us is capable of shaping history with an investment of honesty and earnestness,"" stated Dr.
He fought in the Second World War as a Russian tank commander, and was captured and put in a concentration camp by the Nazis.
As a refugee, he came to the United States, in 1952, and became a naturalized citizen in 1957.
Limiting himself to remarks about his twenty-four years in the Soviet Union, and observations about recent meetings with Russians, the major portion of Goncharoff's talk was based upon examples of his life under Communism.
When 13, in 1933, the peasantry were ""resettled"" — scattered far from their homes.
They rebelled against this treatment, and the government sent troops to put down the rebellions.
When the troops refused to fire on their own friends and relatives, Stalin withdrew all supplies, and people began to starve and die.
Eight to ten million lives were lost, and his mother's was one of them.
When a national purge began on the week before Easter, 1937, security police arrested his brother.
Somewhat later, a note came for Goncharoff from the government, congratulating him from being ""liberated"" from his religious brother.
They are idealistic, and their desires to receive liberty and to break the bonds of peasantry were what excited them to follow the ""essentially spiritual promises"" of the revolution of November 7, and Marxism.
Since Communism demands the faith and belief of the individual in its en* tirity, doubt will weaken the system.
He was optimistic as to a Republican victory with a conservative candidate.
During the seventy years in which the Republicans were a majority party, from the time of the Civil War until 1932 the Democrats were unable to penetate Republican dominance.
Democratic success matured in 1932 when the depression, labor organization, immigrant groups, and the South combined to enforce a new, Democratic majority.
However, according to Mr Rusher, Governor Rockefeller's margin of victory in the past two gubernatorial elections was too slight to guarantee his victory over President Kennedy.
As plantation aristocracy yields to industrialization and Southerners are exposed to national communications media, a more bipartisan politics is developing.
Republican state chairmen in the South feel that with the support of the new, active middle class a ""sane conservative"" could easily carry the previously Solid South.
Lecturer Points To Role Of Individual For World Peace Addressing last Friday's chapel assembly on ""The Wholeness of Man in a Divided World"", Dr.
Nicholas Goncharoff pointed to the individual's role in minimizing the conflict among differing cultures of the world.
He attributed the fluctuating world situation to misunderstanding among cultural entities — notably those of East and West.
Formerly backward countries, as those in Africa and South America, search for aid to enable them to participate in the benefits of the Industrial Revolution.
Both Communist ""East"" and United States ""West"" offer aid — but the more personal assistance offered by the communist system appeals to the pride of these nations whereas the economic aid of the U S. seems to come from a large and impersonal force.
The U S.'s economic aid is not accompanied by persons who desire to help such countries fulfill themselves in the most beneficial manner possible to their culture.
Often the only impression these people have of the U S. has been left by inconsiderate, condescending, ""Ugly American"" tourists.
The rectification of such misconceptions, as well as underlying ignorance, challenges each of us.
A beginning may be made with the mastery of a foreign language, and study of courses in foreign cultures.
Student organizations such as student and culture congresses may also further understanding among cultures.
PhilSilvers STARTING FRIDAY DEAN MM UNA TURNER A PAKAM0UN1 Rtl£AS£ PANaVMT • TECHNICOLOR ' THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES Guidance INTERVIEWS ON CAMPUS On Monday, March 4, Mr J G Ronayn from HUMBLE OIL & REFINING COMPANY will interview men interested in petroleum products marketing, management, and technology.
LAWRANCE LEATHER COMPANY, O R T H O PHARMACEUTICAL CORPORATION, AND POLAROID CORPORATION will meet with interested men on Tuesday, March 5.
ALL STATE INSURANCE COMPANY will be represented by Mr Richard A Peterson on Wednesday, March 6.
Also Mr John F Sweeney from the NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (Department of Defense) will interview men and women interested in communications research, the foreign language program, and the technical program.
On Thursday, March 7, Mr Richard L Whitehead from HOME OFFICE LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with sophomore and junior math majors interested in the summer internship program.
MASSACHUSETTS MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will be represented on Friday, March 8, by Mr Robert Scott, Jr.
Also Mr Wyn Dangelmayer and Mr Lincoln A Divoll from NEW ENGLAND TELEPHONE & TELEGRAPH (AND OTHER BELL SYSTEM COMPANIES) will meet with men interested in management, marketing, sales, administration, manufacturing, purchasing, and programming.
AND YOURS By CHARLES E SMITH '63 A colleague of mine has been a very fortunate fellow.
Businesses, and especially one large corporation, are opening their doors to him.
One night while relaxing at the local emporium I asked him to what he attributed his overwhelming success.
Studentry Seeks Greener Grass On The Other Side ""Hold on . . . it's not necessarily that specific law which afforded me the key to success.
The understanding of the whole scheme of Parkinson's book enables one to see campus interviewers in their proper perspective.
Assuming this high official must retire at 65, our young friend could well be unable to step into the position at that time.
When this fellow joins the firm, his boss will be in the age of Achievement (approximately 40 years old), and most likely will be looking forward to 25 more years of service.
Our Junior Exec, also reaches the age of Achievement somewhere around 40, but he was forced into a different series of stages of growth — Frustration, Jealousy, and Oblivion.
A Gift To Your College Can Result In A For Your Family Larger Income Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Air travel and filling in forms will make any elderly man retire early.
By suggesting frequent conferences that a high official should attend, for instance in Manila, Ottawa, Mexico City, Hong Kong, etc., and only giving three or four days between each trip, the deed is half done.
During these short intervals he should be required to come to the office and fill out forms relating to his recent travels.
My friend reminded me that it was getting late; seems he was 1 flying to Cincinnati early the next morning and he had yet to get all his personal resume forms together.
Well, to say the least, the next day I tripped into the book store and paid out $1.15 of my money for a copy of Parkinson's Law and Other Studies in Administration by C Northcote Parkinson.
My friend was right; it makes the conservative business world shine in nonsense and at the same time shows the intelligent reader who to beat these industrial giants at their own game.
By JENNIFER WINGATE '64 Probably at one or more points in a college career a student considers transferring to another academic institution.
The reasons are many — dissatisfaction with courses, financial difficulties, and personal problems, to name a few.
As one student expressed it, ""I would like an environment which is completely different.
This desire for new blood is particularly evident in these rather bleak months when we are haunted by the disappointments of last semester and are apprehensive about the evercoming school threats.
Transferring is a good topic of conversation which not only brings sympathy but is a kind of pat on the back that the problem is outside of ourselves.
Transferring reaches epidemic proportions during January and February when whole groups of friends decide on a mass exit.
Thus, a student gets ready to transfer only to find that he may not be able to do so as easily as he thought.
Schools equal to Bates or with better academic ratings often do not have room.
Most colleges do not want problem children who are looking for a Utopia.
The feeling seems to be that students bring their personal problems with them wherever they go.
Large numbers of students feel that their individual growth and freedom is being hampered in every direction at Bates.
No, they are either shielding us from independent thought by the many regulations which restrict almost to absurdity the freedom of the individual, or we are discouraged in every way possible.
Although all of these students will not transfer, this kind of universal cry for freedom and responsibility can be heard among them.
Bates is ""small and friendly"" but with a social life close to extinction.
The fact that many students do remain at Bates does indicate something is found to be meaningful here.
Perhaps we are all defeatists and do not have the courage to try a new environment or improve the old one.
Those students who are transferring and those students who are using their imaginations to improve Bates are at least doing something.
INTERESTED IN On Monday, March 4, representatives from Humble Oil & Refining Company will visit Bates College to interview men interested in petroleum marketing careers.
We invite you to examine these and to visit with our interviewers on March 4.
Lewiston NOTICE There will be a semi-formal dance this Saturday night in Chase Hall beginning at 8:30, featuring the fabulous quartet of Barry Davidson, James Curtis, Don Mawhinny, and Carroll Googins.
SEVEN DAYS A WEEK t FOUR BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 27, 1963 Editorials ATHEISM When Dr.
Robert Chute spoke to a chapel audience recently, his topic was atheism.
As the first new faculty member to address the chapel assembly this year, we commend Dr.
Chute for his initiative and willingness to present his views on this subject.
The presence of this editorial demonstrates that we consider his comments significant.
Any attempt to outline a religious viewpoint within twenty minutes, must necessarily be general.
Chute failed to provide an adequate basis for ethics and morality, which according to him is basic to any religion.
Chute would look to the individual as the basis for morality and ethics.
He stated that in a given situation, the decision for right and wrong depends on the individual.
In allowing each decision to be made in view of the relative circumstances of different situations, Dr.
In order that decisions about behavior and possible action will not be relative to every situation, men seek ethical assurance.
Ethics is an attempt to formulate and organize principles as a guide for what ought to be done.
These principles are not relative, but are applied to specific circumstances for guidance.
The ethical individual does not consider merely the uniqueness of each decision, but looks instead to the similarities in different circumstances.
The ethical-minded concludes that it is not the uniqueness, but the pervasive aspects of human existence that are striking.
Chute's belief that atheism is ""more than a denial; it can be an affirmation,"" was not realized in his address.
The implications do not ""lead to a satisfactory ethical code,"" but provide the basis for a denial of ethical considerations.
The following letter is in reply to a letter printed in an earlier issue of the STUDENT from the Student Government, Student Council expressing support to James H Meredith.
The support, encouragement and kind thoughts expressed by all of you during this period will always be remembered.
Meredith RETRACTION An article on Cuba, written by two members of the Young Republican Club, appeared in last week's Student.
The article's headline and the Editorial comment on the suggested policy towards Cuba mistakenly stated that these two members were spokesmen for the Republican Club.
The opinions expressed in that article represent only the views of the two authors, and not the position of the Young Republican Club.
Allan Williams '64, Leigh Campbell '64, Donald Delemore '64, Keith Bowden '64, William Goodlatte '65, James Fine '65, Steven Edwards '65, Marcia Flynn '65, Robert Segersten '63, Howard Vandersea '63, Allan Harvie '65 Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year.
This letter is in response to the position taken in last week's Student by Mr Petke and Mr Foster in regard to the Cuban situation.
I shall not comment on the military status of any weapons there, for I do not have any direct line of communications with that island nor have I ever been there.
Clearly then, communism was a significant factor before Castro's coup on New Year's Day 1959.
Granted it is to our advantage to keep active communism out of the Americas, but we have no right to be indignant any more than does the opposing pitcher when the batter hits a home-run.
The last statement to be criticized here is the absurd request to demand that communism be withdrawn from Cuba.
The most that could be done conceivably would be to force a withdrawal of a number of prominent Communists, or to destory the structure of the Cuban government.
But how one can destroy the idea for which the word communism stands is far from being clear.
The primary purpose of this letter is to qualify a headline and hence a general misunderstanding resulting from last week's Republican Club article.
Each Republican Club member writing his opinion in an article to be published must submit his name to be included therewith.
Although beliefs of other club members may very well be identical or similar to those published, this is not necessarily so.
The person whose name appear with a particular statement accept total responsibility for that statement.
It should be evident that in a Republican Club which must necessarily include in its membership different strata of political outlook that such an opinion as that to which I refer in the February 20 issue of this paper could not be construed as representative of the entire group.
If an article which is of less controversial nature, embodying the sentiment of the whole group, is submitted, it will either go unsigned (as a regular news item) or will bear the name of Public Relations Director, Allen Kerr.
I hope this explanation has cleared up any misinterpretation resulting from last week's headline which more correctly might have read, ""Republican Club Members Demand Firm Stand on Cuba,"" followed, of course, by the two names.
My second objective is to comment on the editorial appearing, in opposition to our statement, on page 4 of the same issue of the Student.
I used to believe sincerely in this peace-promoting institution as it was established and described in its charter, but since that time it has so digressed from its original goals that it now supports and actually carries on warfare.
In refernce to your blistering editorial in last week's Student. as president of the Republican club on campus I wish to make it clear to all members of the campus at large and all readers of last week's article entitled ""Republican Club Demands A Firm Position On Cuba"" that it is not an official stand of the club nor is it a consensus of current opinion.
It must be taken as only the personal opinion of those whose names appear as authors of the article.
If at any time in the future the club does take a formal stand concerning a certain issue, it will appear in the form of a resoluSchaeffer Comments On 'Hamlet' Casting Beginning on April twentyfifth, the Robinson Players will present the first of three performances of William Shakespear's Hamlet.
Alan Clark '64, Barbara Hudson '63, Elizabeth Davis '63, and Jean LeSure '65.
Although the process of casting is not yet completed, most of the longer roles have been filled.
Starring as Hamlet will be Carl ""Todd"" Lloyd '64; as Claudius, King of Denmark, Robert ""Skip"" Butler '63; as Gertrude, Queen of Denmark, Abby Palmer '65; as Polonius, John Holt '64; Laertes, David Kramer '63; Ophelia, Judy Mosman '63; Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, Ned Brooks '65 and William Hiss '66; and as the player Queen, Nancy Dillman '64.
Commenting on the up-coming play, Miss Schaeffer explained why Hamlet was chosen.
Miss Schaeffer continued to say that every effort had been made to reduce the length of the play to reasonable limits consistent with faithfulness to the text.
Great care was exercised in arranging the scenes to allow the full impact of the tragedy to be felt by the audience.
But she quickly commented that the actors themselves were also spending hours in individual thought and study to prepare for their roles.
Indeed, Miss Schaeffer admitted that Hamlet provides a tremendous challenge to the Robinson Players — both to the actors and to those behind the scenes.
In several ways, she continued, the production difficulties of the two plays are quite similar.
An elaborate set is unnecessary and often undesired in Shakespeare, where characters usually tell where they are.
Hence, lighting will be used as an integral factor in the play to separate scenes and create moods.
Miss Schaeffer seems acutely aware of the challenge before the Robinson Players; she is confident in their ability and potentiality.
As she expressed it, ""We approach Hamlet with awe, but with the sense of having a very good theater piece."" tion and the club as a whole will take full responsibility as the author and supporter of the cause.
I would appreciate it if you would print this article as a letter to the editor.
Besides clearing the air, it is necessary for the protection of the club and its individual members.
Of the three genres, poetry, essay, and fiction, the latter merits the most praise.
Jim Kiernan's ""A Fragment,"" although certainly more a thumb-nail sketch than story (as the title suggests), successfuly creates the fantasy world of a young boy.
With little difficulty one senses the two different worlds, the land of large rats and cluttered fields, and the boy's vision of Indians and defenseless Howard Johnson stands.
She writes as though though she were gazing up at a cumulus cloud-filled sky and identifying each white puff with some pleasant remembrance.
Anne creates not characters, but fleeting impressions; her fragment is more subjective than Kiernan's.
In the penultimate paragraph she becomes sentimental; she sheds a tear over the image, moistening it too much.
She displays neither the poetry of Kiernan nor the sentence agility of Toby; yet she convincingly portrays a woman and a sandpiper, with much in common.
The series of declarative statements describing Laura's environment jar the reader; they should either £e a part of Laura's memories, or developed more fully and unobtrusively in a longer story.
The essays should have been entitled research papers, for all three writers seek from minds other than their own; perhaps, was submitted.
Althrough the examples he chooses might alienate the Cummings novice, in spite of his illuminating comments, he presents the problem clearly and logically.
Few reading his paper could now go to a Cummings poem not better prepared to cope with the verbal monstrosities.
Clancy Lowenberg's plot summary doesn't require comment; Peter d'Errico's ""A Juxtaposition,"" however, needs editing.
The introduction and conclusion are excellent; my compliments to Yeats and Eliot for their success here.
Nowhere does he substantiate or document his assertions %bout contemporary man.
An occasional fragmentary image emerges, Doug Smith's for example, which arbors a possible poetic embryo; but generally the rest is sophomoric.
To develop, however, he must break the bonds of his subjective, personal little impressions.
The rhythm of the inital stanza flows as smoothly as a good wine, as effortlessly as fair weather clouds.
She so juxtaposes the subjective and the objective, the ""I,"" and the ""you,"" the personal experience and its setting, that the experience becomes communicable; she avoids sentimentality.
This fact makes it difficult for this reviewer, who has read it only once, to formulate an adequate analysis and present it as an authentic document.
Of course, you may indulge in that graduate school pastime, ""criticism of criticism"" if you wish, but the book is the root and creation,* and we must return to the creation and circumvent the omnipresent barbs that lie in wait.
Sprung from the intense mind of Djuna Barnes are a handful of powerful characters who collide within time and arbitrary destiny, each one breathing life and suffering into a spectral mosaic pieced together by some unholy master who dwells in a nightly wood.
However, it is not the depression and hatred of those angry young men, who are blinded by the age and see only the glare.
Doctor O'Connor, in his ""helpless power among the helpless,"" streams out dialogue to drown out the whimpering about him.
Love is ultimately self-love, and the confusion drives them to the brink of insanity.
The paradox of Nightwood as a novel is that the beginning can only be fully appreciated once the end is revealed.
Stylistically, it resembles some phases of Joyce, but comparison is specious.
Not too long ago this obstacle was cleared by an American vaulter, John Uelses.
But today, thanks to the efficiency and creativity of American technology, the emergence of a fiber glass pole has revolutionized the sport.
The former mark of sixteen seemingly insurmountable feet is now cleared with the frequency of major meets.
The complete philosophy of the sport, such as grip and approach, have been altered to suit the magic wonder of the sporting scene.
It is not my intention to condemn the usage of this appartus on the Bates squad; that would be foolish, as almost everyone in the world is using it.
They further report that in Finland, home of the present world champion, Pentti Nikula, hundreds'of boys have broken hundreds of bones in attempts to conquer this new-found sporting craze.
This innovation to me is somewhat analogous to a person running the hundred yard dash on a one-wheeled motor scooter.
Though a great deal of skill is involved (a point which I am not trying to discredit), records are broken and rebroken with the swiftest rapidity.
Though there is indeed a great deal of human effort and skill apparent, the records themselves become insignificant, defeating the main purpose of athletic competition.
It is on this basis that I feel fiber-glass poles should be disallowed, the same basis, incidentally, upon which a special shoe formerly used by Russian high jumpers was disallowed, a device with which they would certainly have cleared an eventual eight feet.
And with regard to records, Sports Illustrated asked Nikula to divulge his ultimate goal.
It might take even more time for him to recuperate from the fall following the jump.
Next week the Student sports staff will announce its choice of an All-Maine basketball team.
Though this seleo tion is done independently, it is usually quite similar to those of more official status.
There are many fine basketball players in the state to select from, making the choice even more arduous.
Perhaps some of you noted that Bowdoin beat Colby last week to clinch the state series championship.
The Polar Bears from Brunswick have lost but one game in series competition, that game being at the hands of our Bobcats.
Tonight, Bowdoin will attempt to beat the cagers for the second time, as at present the score between the two stands at one win apiece.
I trust that you will all be in the gym this evening, in spirit as well as body.
It would be gratifying to end the season with a win, especially at the expense of the state champions.
The intramural track meet was run Sunday afternoon, and the boys from J B. found Lady Fortune smiling pleasantly as they emerged victorious by twelve points.
Perhaps the most colorful event of the day was the ""fat man's mile,"" won in fine time by J B.'s Bobby Thompson.
Congratulations to South's Al Marden, who finished third to add one point to the Rebel cause.
In last week's track meets, perhaps an omen of future consequences could be pointed out from the JV track meet.
They displayed a good deal of depth and awesome power, and their varsity was led by Pete McPhee, considered by his coach to be the best sprinter in Maine state history.
His speed was apparent in his setting a meet record in the 50 yard dash and anchoring the relay to a victory.
Omitted from ""Ullom's All Stars"" printed last week was Jack Hartleb, a leading scorer in Maine with probably the best outside set shot ever in the history of Bates College basketball.
The hot shooting, fast breaking Maine squad, led by Dave Svendsen and Art Warren piled up a quick 5-0 lead before Lawler scored a foul shot for the Bobcats.
Inspired by Johannesen's rebounding and tight defense, an attempt was made to stop the Maine drive.
Freeman returned to action, and he and Cummings hit outside jumpers to narrow the liad to six points with 8:27 remaining in the half.
Again switching units, none of the 'Cats could find the range or contain the torrid Maine offense.
Krzynowek High The second half was to spell little relief for the Bobcats, in quest of their first road victory.
At times early in the second half they spurted, but never could muster quite enough steam to overtake their opponent.
Deemer and Svendsen continued to pace the Bears to leads as much as 31 points.
Willie Gardiner and Bob Lanz rallied with their hustling crew to reduce the lead to 20 in the closing minutes of the ballgame.
For Bates, Ted Krzynowek contributed 14 points, Johannesen 11, Cummings 12, and Freeman 10.
The ""Ullommen"" got off to a quick start as Pete Glanz hit a field goal and Lawler, Stevens, Castolene, Freeman and Glanz battled Colby during the first five minutes of the contest.
With a fancy behind-the-back pass by Cummings to Johannesen, the score was evened at 1616 with 9:50 remaining in the half.
The scrappy Mosquitos left the game in favor of the more B E D A R D * S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston.
With Maine drawing closer, Fred Stevens hit two long jumpers to bring the lead back to six points, but amazing Ken Stone continued to pour in jumpers to keep his team in the ball game.
Seth Cummings threw a fine pass to Paul Castolene to give the 'Cats their largest lead of eight points.
Thus with the score 5547, the other Mosquitos (Beaudry, Kyzynowek, Hine, and Johannesen) joined Cummings.
Shuffling units, Bates could not seem to regain its early second half form.
Lewislon DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 i BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 27, 1963 /3/ SEVEN JV Split With Maine, Colby; Johnson High The go-go Bobkittens ran their record to twelve wins and three losses by virtue of splitting the two games played this past week.
Once again it was Bob Johnson sparking the JV's by throwing in fifteen points in the first half.
Johnson paced the JV's with twenty-six points, followed by Paul Savello with thirteen, and Bob Mischler with nine.
Johnson Sparks Win The 'Kittens defeated a tall and talented Colby freshman squad Saturday night for the second time in as many attempts.
In the second half action, the 'Kittens managed to protect a small lead, largely due to the fantastic jump shooting of Bob Johnson Colby fought back and cut the deficit, finally pulling ahead 7775 with 1:00 remaining.
Johnson then went to work for one last shot, canning a twenty-five foot jumper to tie the score with only one second remaining.
The JV's were led by Johnson, scoring thirty-two points, twenty-six coming in the second half, Mischler with twenty points, and Hillman with thirteen.
When asked to comment on the game, Coach Leahy said, ""It was a great one to win.
A Sportslight ... vw. .tftl-'-.-lviirS Louise McCabe presents volleyball plaque to Cheney's Judy Warren By MARCIA FLYNN '65 The completion of the W.A.A. volleyball season took place Friday night as an added entry to the proceedings of the Betty Bates competition.
Louise McCabe, Betty Bates of 1962 and the mistress of ceremonies, announced that the team from Cheney House had been victorious throughout the season with eight wins and no losses.
She explained that there had been ties for both first and second places, and that a round-robin tourney had been necessary to decide the winner.
Louse then presented Judy Warren, captain of this excellent senior team, a very lovely plaque which will remain in the winning dorm until next year's season.
Because of the events of Betty Bates Week, there was little action in the basketball court.
Only two games were played which resulted in MillikenMitchell over Wilson-Hacker, and Frye-Chase over Page.
As mentionad last week, the strong team of Milliken-Mitchell looks like a tough team to beat Outstanding play on the parts of Barb Remick, Nancy Nichols, Eileen Sylvia, Kathy Mincher, Pris Clark, Sue Cottrell and Linda Pacquet poses a problem to any opponent.
Bowditch was awarded first on the fewest number of misses and Johnson picked up a third place.
Consistent Bob Kramer once again cleared 12 feet to pick up the other Bates first.
Arnold Delaite won both the discus and the shot put, bettering a meet record in the shot by more than three feet.
Speedy Pete MacPhee tied a meet record in the 50 yard dash with a time of 5. and anchored the mile relay team to a victory.
Another Maine star, Barron Hicken set a new cage record in the high hurdles, beating Captain LaVallee and Al Harvie and ran on the mile relay team.
John Curtis averted the expected Maine sweep in the weights by grabbing a third in the 35 lb. weights.
Finn Wilhelmsen ran his specialty, the two mile, and came in second Bob Kramer clears 12 feet as 'Cats lose to State U with a time of 9:43.
Paul Planchon gained two Garnet points by coming in third in both the 50 yard dash and the broad jump.
Captain Bill LaVallee gained his third point by placing third in the lows and Harvie had seconds in the broad jump and highs.
Wakefield of the Black Bears cleared 20' IO14"" in the broad jump to better the winning effort in the varsity meet by two inches.
The Maine Freshmen seemed to be loaded with Track talent and will provide stiff competition for the Bates Track teams in the near future.
Versatile freshman Ken Trufant turned in the best performance for the junior varsity men.
The lanky newcomer finished third in the mile, came back to grab a second in the two mile, and then finished off his afternoon by taking another second in the pole vault.
Ken Child, another versatile performer, took a second in the 50 yard dash, another second in the hurdles, and came back to earn a third in the lows.
The Home Life representative will be on campus on March 7. \ // you are considering a career in business management or actuarial science, we invite you to investigate the Summer Programs at the Home Life Insurance Company.
HOME LIFE'S SUMMER PROGRAMS There are two programs — the Summer Internship for men interested in a general business management career and the Summer Actuarial Program for Math Majors.
The Summer Actuarial Training Program— if you are interested in exploring an Actuarial career, are a Math major with at least a ""B"" average, and have successfully completed your Sophomore or Junior year.
And since one of the chief prerequisites of management is a strong educational background, we're continually searching for imaginative, forward-thinking men.
You'll start in management with advancement dependent upon your ability.
And the Bell System is synonymous with job satisfaction, because of the importance of the job you'll do, and your potential to do it well — either as a technical or non-technical graduate.
Applicants will be interviewed for all regional operating companies in the United States and Canada.
BELL SYSTEM TEAM INTERVIEWS Friday, March 8 NEW ENGLAND TELEPHONE This past week ended the regular season of the intramural basketball leagues.
Smith South J was the A-League champion and completed its second undefeated season in three years.
The ""elegants"" of Smith Middle came through with a championship in the B-l League.
Undefeated Smith South's C-l team won in its league, while the C-2 League belonged to Roger Williams.
The playoffs begin next week when South's C-l team plays Roger Bill's C-2 champs.
The winner will play the winner of the B-lB-2 contest, and the winner of that game will play the ""rebels"" of South for the championship of the intramural league.
Ian Pravda led J.B. with 18 points, while Billy ""I'm Not the Preacher"" Graham led all scorers with 19 points.
The next night saw the boys from West win their first game of the year with a hard-fought victory over the ""Penthouse Playboys"" from downtown.
Gene ""Play"" Safir hooped 14 for the winners and that old steady Phil Tamis hit for his usual 15.
The ""Silver"" BOBCAT OF THE WEEK An Equal Opportunity Employer It seems that a new first in area that is noted for its firsts has occurred this week.
As the selection for this week's Bobcat of the Week the sports staff of the Bates Student proudly presents a member of a Garnet Junior Varsity Team for the first time.
Bobby Johnson, a freshman guard on Coach Chick Leahey's flashy Jay Vee basketball squad, was unanimously selected to the honored Bobcat of the Week.
Johnson, a native of Wethersfield, Conn., where he captained his high school baseball and hoop squads, scored 32 points against Colby in one of the most spectacular individual performances of outside shooting ever seen in Alumni Gymnasium. was high again, and Webster was good, too.
Middies Take ""B"" In the B-l League, Smith South continued its defeated ways by losing to the Faculty 4440.
The Faculty, led by Walt, Chick and Verne held intact the ""elephant backcourt"" of the younger and slower undergraduates.
The ""trinity"" along with Hank ""Yes, We Give Greenstamps"" Stred proved again that age means wisdom and cheating.
In ""C"" There are two possibilities open when a C League game is scheduled.
Last week saw about three games lost to lack of interest, initiative, and, of course, players.
The games are an opportunity for all the men on campus to take part in some form of organized physical activity.
Let's not let your fellow dorm-mates and your crumbling bodies down this spring.
Al Cruichshank netted 11 for the winners, while Revoir scored half of East's points.
The refereeing this year has been of a much higher calibre than of past years.
Oftentimes under conditions . of great emotional and physical stress, a player will blame the unassuming ""whistle-blower"" for his own mistakes.
But with the likes of Dick Love, Russ Henderson, John Bart, Charles Lasher, Al Williams, Joe ""Boogie Man"" Verga, and many others, the intramural games have picked up a new rationalistic style of play and throws away the ""guillotine style"" that was so popular in the past.
Coed Award The Student sports staff this year is presenting the ""First Annual Stoic Award"" to the coed who sat in the balcony of the gym for one complete game.
This year's winner is Les Jones, who fought off many forms of the English language to cheer her favorite team on to victory.
I will not give you a quotation for the week, because I forgot to do my classical outside reading.
Art Valliere picked up a point for his third place finish in the high jump.
Sophomore Don Celler and freshman Mike Biel avoided a complete sweep for the Black Bears in the 1000 yard run as they earned second and third place.
Harry Mossman got the only points for the weightmen, picking up a second in the 35 lb. weight.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, MARCH 6, 1963 By Subscription Robert Lanz Chosen As Business Mgr.
Of Student Robert Lanz '65 will succeed Stephen Barron '64 as business manager of the STUDENT, the Publishing Association announced Wednesday.
An economics major from Rockville, Conn., Lanz held the post of STUDENT advertising manager this year, and has been a staff member since his freshman year.
In addition to his newspaper work he is a member of the varsity basketball and baseball teams, and was the varsity soccer team's leading scorer this fall.
Despite the increased responsibilities of his new Student position, he hopes to be able to continue all these activities.
Lanz first became interested in newspaper work at Deerfield Academy where he was a member of the student newspaper.
There he developed a real interest in newspaper business management, which has made him aspire to the post he has just been given on the STUDENT staff.
Countryman heads the national staff of the Northern Student Movement office in New Haven.
Under ordinary circumstances, he would have been a senior at Yale this year, studying philosophy.
With the rest of NSM's staff, however, he has interrupted his education to work for this movement, whose main objective is to get Northern students to lead the attack against prejudice and discrimination in the North.
The Northern Student Movethe largest and most successful f r Final Candidates Vie For 1963-64 Positions Nominations for Final All-Campus Elections, March 11 Student Council Senior Representatives, Class of '64 Robert Ahem Douglas Dobson John Meyn David Piasecki Paul Planchon Paul Sadlier Robert Sherman Daniel Stockwell Junior Representatives.
As a result, they spend much of their time waiting for it to come to them and in so doing commit the fateful sin of passivity.
The accumulation of facts is an irttegral part of the educational process, but if the process ends here so does education.
The essence of a full education is the active process of making these facts meaningful.
This additional process must be put into action by the student himself and cannot be drawn out against his will.
The professor finds his greatest limitation in this failure of the student's will to learn actively.
External Substitutes Many times the student will find himself limited by time, and by a strenuous amount of busy work.
Yet, by self dedication rather than procrastination, the cause of oself-realization can be approached.
External causes cannot become substitutes for the central cause; mere activism cannot be a substitution for intellectual activity.
It is the duty of the institution to prevent the encouragement of the superficial education so prevalent today.
Too many students are emotionally dead and this is the first step to intellectual inactivity.
Note taking is not enough; the student must participate in the process itself.
One must basically care about certain things in order to understand them.
Knowledge for knowledge's sake is passivity;; intellectualism for intellectualism's sake is insidious.
If one is emotionally alive he will come away from Dante caring for it. ment originated at a conference to raise funds for the Freedom Riders sponsored by the New England Student Christian Movement in June, 1961.
A committee was formed to investigate the possibility of creating a Northern student civil rights movement.
The following October, representatives from 20 colleges gathered in New Haven, Conn., at the committee's invitation to adopt a structure and a general program.
Supports Southern Program In its first year NSM worked to provide support for the Southern student movement and to develop programs relating to the Northern civil rights problems.
Some $9000 was raised for the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee's voter-registration program in the South.
Busloads of New England college students participated in weekend sit-ins on the eastern shore of Maryland.
A, large conference dealing with discrimination and deficiencies in the areas of employment, education, housing, and politics was held in April at Sarah Lawrence College.
In the spring term, NSM sent 10,000 books donated by students from eight colleges to Miles College in Birmingham, Ala.
This past summer, NSM implemented four student projects, being in Philadelphia, Pa.
There, a group of 22 college students lived in the Negro community, held jobs and administered an educational program for high school students from the community.
Philadelphia Program Cooperation for the tutorial program was obtained from the Philadelphia school board, in the form of publicizing the project in the five high schools in the Negro community.
Each tutor met with two to four students for an hour and a half a day, twice a week.
Today there are over 30 tutorial programs in college towns throughout New England, involving 1200 tutors and about 2100 students, with 15 other groups planning to begin similar programs during the spring term.
Coram Library Initiates Display Of Faculty Suggested Reading Coram Library institutes the) first of a, series of exhibits featuring faculty readings suggestions this week.
In response to requests for suggested reading, either in their fields, or books they have found particularly rewarding, various faculty members have prepared selective, but inclusive bibliographies.
These exhibits are primarily a result of a poll taken last year to determine student reading interests.
Miss Foster reports that many students seemed to indicate a strong preference for faculty suggested reading.
Hopefully, this series of displays will familiarize students with faculty preferred reading matter.
Presently in the catalog alcove area are several works dealing with The Contemporary French Theater selected by Dr.
Plays by such representative dramatists as Jean Anouilh, Albert Camus and Eugene Ionesco are featured; many in the original text and in translation.
These titles have been chosen from the library collections as particularly worthy of notice for students seeking to broaden their reading horizons.
For some ten days these books, initiating the program, will be available for browsing or for circulation.
BELL SYSTEM TEAM INTERVIEWS Friday, March 8 NEW ENGLAND TELEPHONE An Equal Opportunity Employer This past week ended the regular season of the intramural basketball leagues.
Smith South was the A-League champion and completed its second undefeated season in three years.
The ""Silver"" BOBCAT OF THE WEEK It seems that a new first in area that is noted for its firsts has occurred this week.
Johnson, a native of Wethers field, Conn., where he captainec his high school baseball and hoop squads, scored 32 points against Colby in one of the most spectacular individual perform ances of outside shooting ever seen in Alumni Gymnasium.
Last week saw about three games lost to ack of interest, initiative, and, of course, players.
The games are an opportunity for -all the men on campus to take part in some form of organized physical acivfty.
Oftentimes under conditions . of great emoional and physical stress, a player will blame the unassuming ""whistle-blower"" for his own mistakes.
Harry Mossman got the only points for the weightmen, picking up a second in the 35 lb. weight. i Hates Stufant Vol.
The Northern Student Movethe largest and most successful Nominations for Final All -Campus Elections, March 11 Student Council Senior Representatives, Class of '64 Robert Ahern Douglas Dobson John Meyn David Piasecki Paul Planchon Paul Sadlier Robert Sherman Daniel Stockwell Junior Representatives.
These meetings are held informally at the Baptist parsonage home of John Schroeder at 8:00m.
On March 10, the topic, ""Judaism — A Miracle of Survival without Assimilation -Ethical Monotheism, Parent to Christianity"" will be discussed.
A local rabbi will present a talk on this religion which has endured through world-wide dispersion, ghetto, and continued persecutions climaxing in the attempted genocide of Nazi Germany.
Also, distinctive in sights of this religion which in eludes much of Judaism and some of Christianity will be sought.
These meetings are open to everyone for the presentation of doubts and convictions concerning religion.
Elects Gomes Chairman Recently the Chase Hall Dance Committee Elected its officers for the coming year.
Peter Gomes '65 succeeds Paul Sadlier '64 as chairman, Russell Wagenfeld '65 will follow Gomes as treasurer, and Pauline Grimmiesen '65 succeeds Sally Walker '63 as secretary.
Additional information about CHDC will appear in a subse quent issue of the STUDENT after the group prepares its first report to the students.
Committee Suggests Curriculum Changes The Educational Guidance and Curriculum Committee has recommended to the faculty that certain changes be made in the curriculum.
The most important changes under consideration concern the B S. departments.
The courses that would be required of all biology majors would include General Biology, Genetics, one semester of Physiology, one semester of Botany and one semester of a new senior level course, Special Topics in Biology.
Also, Health-Education 101W would be added to the curriculm as of September, 1963.
Debating News On Thursday, March 7th, Bates will host the ""Maine College Forensic Festival"" in the Little Theater.
John Strassburger '64 and Howard Blum '63 wil each deliver a persuasive speech.
Thomas Hall '64 and Robert Ahern '64 will each give an extemporaneous speech.
Professor Quimby is in charge of the festival and will be assisted by his speech teaching class.
Monday, March 11 Spring Elections, Alumni Gym, Guidance INTERVIEWS ON CAMPUS On Monday, March 11, Mr Henry Mountford from the NATIONAL SHAWMUT BANK OF BOSTON will interview men interested in training programs in credit, operations, and branch banking.
On Wednesday, March 13, Mr Wendell K Whipple, Jr., from CONNECTICUT MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with men interested in the sales and sales management training program and actuarial opportunities.
Mr Richard J Malatesta '45 will interview men and women interested in FILENE'S training program in re tailing.
Ryder from MU TUAL FIRE INSPECTION BU REAU OF NEW ENGLAND will be here on Thursday, March 14, to discuss fire protection engin eering.
Seniors and undergrad uates will also meet with Mr Harold C Harlow, Jr., from SPRINGFIELD COLLEGE if they are interested in 'graduate training for careers in com munity agency, intergroup rela tions, international service, or community development.
KEENE CLINIC in Keene New Hampshire has an opening for a medical secretary to work with four doctors.
The work consists of general and medical dictation, completing workman's compensation and personal insurance forms.
If you think your degree offers you the base for a rewarding career in our management and if you're in the upper half of your class, then come talk with us when we interview.
She feels Bates allows the individual to grow, .and stressed that the happiness which the student seeks at any school must come from within.
Unlried Areas Available Hudson feels that Bates offers other concrete advantages.
These numFraternities and sororities serve a function at large universities as smaller social units.
Rushing can be very cruel, and at a small college these fraternities could turn into cliques.
Social Life Adequate She thinks that those students who have social problems will not find a paradise at a large university where social life can be overwhelming.
Bates, although it is not socially oriented, allows students to know each other on other than festive occasions.
Cultural opportunities, Hudson feels, are not entirely lacking at Bates, although they could be added to with student The STUDENT Editorial Staff bers also offer stiff competition in outside activities such as drama, the arts, and sports.
One of Bates' outstanding qualities is that it allows the amateur to participate.
Bates provides students needed opportunities to develop in untried areas.
Bobbie feels that the California-style beach parties and nightclub jaunts are a little out of keeping with the Maine climate.
Perhaps those who are not ski fans could use a student union for more sedentary activities support.
By pooling funds and organizing student transportation, much could be done in this direction.
Already Bowdoin extends invitations to Bates which few students take advantage of.
Seminars Valuable Hudson believes our seminar classes are important as well as the core program and Cultural Heritage.
At large universities exams are often multiple choice which can be graded by a machine.
Bates exposes students to exams which give students an opportunity to reason.
Students considering transferring should know well the school they hope to attend.
And if you're traveling by car, there's Free Parking at most Sheraton Hotels and at all Sheraton Motor Inns.
Get these discounts at any of Sheraton's 80 hotels in the U.S.A., Hawaii and Canada by presenting your Card.
The opinions expressed in this article are solely those of its author and are not necessarily those of the management.
The new staff of the STUDENT, under the dynamic leadership of Norman Gillespie is, for the most part, a modification of the top-notch staff which worked under the sparkling direction of John Wilson.
Marge Zimmerman, formerly assistant news editor, is now managing editor, and I am quite confident that she can manage things with ease.
Herb works at WRJR where he takes The Masterworks Hour on Thursday nights from 8-10.
Peter d'Errico '65, comes from Fargo , North Dakota, and because we aren't prejudiced against furriners, we let him be Feature Editor.
Peter is a philosophy major whose major outside interest is ""people""; however, we tend to think it somewhat more particularized than that.
Linda comes from Boxford, Mass., and is an undecided English or Government major.
He likes short pipes, long cars, the stock market, and enjoys popular novels.
Don ""Frosty"" Frese, otherwise known as Long John, Jenkins, or Cap'n, worked for a newspaper last year, and is an editorial assistant.
Still More Sally O Smyth just wandered in and isn't quite sure what she is going to do here, but it is sort of nice to have her smile around.
SNEAKERS HOOD'S RUBBERS For The Entire Family Shoe Repairing While You Wait at / JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main Cheerleaders Report SpringSquadTryouts By HOLLY MILIUS and LESLAN JONES '63 All those interested in cheer r leading, either male or female, should attend the squad-tryouts which begin following spring vacation.
Preliminary meetings will be held before vacation begins, the first on Monday, March 11, at 4:30m. in the Purinton Room in the Alumni Gymnasium.
The opportunity is especially great for making the squad, since five girls are leaving.
The Constitution states that it may consist of either eight or nine members.
The sophomore members and the subs will be required to try out again this year.
Instruction and practice will continue for the two weeks following vacation and then tryouts will be held.
The team of judges will consist of the four senior members of the squad, a representative from the Women's Physical Education Department, and one representative from both the Women's Student Government and the Men's Student Council.
True, the squad is far from perfection but Bates is not high school, and we don't spend two or three hours a day practicing.
There are too many other things to take into consideration, eg., studying.
We hope that anyone trying out for the squad will feel free to express his or her ideas.
It is not an easy thing to try to foster school spirit when one is rewarded with only the sound of eight voices.
As the name cheerleading denotes, we are supposed to lead or direct the crowds in displaying their enthusiasm for the team.
Maybe you've got some fresh,; new ideas — if so, come to tryouts and bring them with you.
These meetings are held informally at the Baptist parsonage home of John Schroeder at 8:00 On March 10, the topic, ""Judaism — A Miracle of Survival without Assimilation -Ethical Monotheism, Parent to Christianity"" will be discussed.
A filmstrip preceeds this program These meetings are open to everyone for the presentation of doubts and convictions concern ing religion.
Peter Gomes '65 succeeds Paul Sadliei '64 as chairman, Russell Wagen feld '65 will follow Gomes as treasurer, and Pauline Grimmiesen '65 succeeds Sally Walker '63 as secretary.
Additional information abou CHDC will appear in a subse quent issue of the STUDENT after the group prepares its first report to the students.
Miss Alice R Brooke '56 from HARVARD UNIVERSITY and HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL will be on campus Tuesday, March Lfi„ to interview women interested in positions as secre taries, office assistants, computa tional and statistical workers, course assistants, library assist ants, and research assistants.
On Wednesday, March 13, Mr Wendell K Whipple, Jr., from CONNECTICUT MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY wil meet with men interested in the sales and sales management training program and actuaria opportunities.
Seniors and undergraduates will also meet with Mr Harold C Harlow, Jr., from SPRINGFIELD COLLEGE i they are interested in 'graduate training for careers in community agency, intergroup relations, international service, or community development.
Untried Areas Available Hudson feels that Bates offers other concrete advantages.
The sheer number of stusuch as bridge, co-ed studying and good conversation.
Fraternities and sororities serve a function at large universities as smaller social units.
Hudson feels, are not entirely lacking at Bates, although they could be added to with student The STUDENT Editorial Staff dents is a handicap.
She enthusiastically enbers also offer stiff competition in outside activities such as drama, the arts, and sports.
On campus, Herb works at WRJR where he takes The Masterworks Hour on Thursday nights from 8-10.
Yet, to the extent that other ""sections"" of opinion do not use the STUDENT to express their ideas, this state of affairs must necessarily continue.
Hopefully, succeeding issues will evidence some changes in layout and content.
Such innovations will be designed to improve the STUDENT both by journalistic standards as well as in the eyes of the studentry.
Comments on what this newspaper should present or represent are welcome.
Criticism of the STUDENT, past and present, does not have to take the form of a letter or article, but can simply be expressed to any Editor.
The following Guest Editorial emphasizes the policy of this newspaper, and also provides an example of a student taking advantage of the opportunity the STUDENT affords for expressing opinion.
Guest Editorial The Bates STUDENT is a weekly paper that contains articles in various fields.
Some of the articles are merely informative, but others are sometimes provocative.
These articles are not meant to be read and then thrown away with a shrug of complacency and a ""So What"" attitude.
From the very few, if any, letters received by the Editor of the STUDENT, it would not be unfair to say that the majority of the students who read this newspaper are not concerned about what they read.
Every student knows that this weekly newspaper belongs to the studentry of Bates College.
Again, it would not be harsh to say that very few take advantage of this medium.
Instead, students prefer to complain about things they do not like to other students.
The STUDENT is not only read by the student body of Bates College, but by subscribers and alumni, trustees of Bates, and parents of students.
Surely this weekly newspaper is the best medium to let others know about your grievances, opinions, and attitudes on different topics of campus as well as universal interest.
FEATURE STAFF Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Richard Dow '64, Robert Borland '66, Dennis Hill '66, Granville Bowie '66, Phil Brookes '65, Richard Derby '66, Jennifer Wingate '64, Carole Cooper '66, Charles E Smith '63, Priscilla Clark '66, David Olson '65.
SPORTS STAFF Russell B Henderson Jr. and Nicholas Basbanes '65, Editors; William Davis '66, Cartoonist; Allan Williams '64, Leigh Campbell '64, Donald Delemore '64, Keith Bowden '64, William Goodlatte '65, James Fine '65, Steven Edwards '65, Marcia Flynn '65, Robert Segersten '63, Howard Vandersea '63, Allan Harvie '65.
The news article covering my chapel address on Atheism and more especially your editorial of last week make it clear that, whatever my objectives, I did not fulfill them.
I thank you for the recognition . of the limitation of such a brief address, and for the editorial, which gives me the opportunity to correct the misunderstanding.
I am not the complete relativist you describe, although I may have created that impression.
I believe in an ethical code just as I believe in a system of taxonomy for animals and plants.
Things are all different, and to present a basis for reasonable action they must be classified.
Thus a particular response may be considered as ""the right"" response to a class of situations.
Whatever any of us would like to believe, meaningful action without presupposition is not possible.
An Atheist could adopt, as a code, an interpretation of the teaching of Christ, of Mary Baker Eddy, or of my Uncle George.
All I ask, if the Atheist wishes to be a member in good standing, is the recognition, as an individual, of the responsibility for the selection of the code.
Viewed in this light, Atheism provides as good a basis for morality as any other system, if, and the if is the key, we accept the principle that all ethical codes are subjective.
An Atheist may be as moral or as immoral as the next fellow, but he must accept the responsibility for his acts and his code.
He will admit no authority higher than man to which he can appeal decisions, vine plan, no ""other life"", the no transcendent purpose, no dipreparation for which may induce him to allow ends to justify means during this one.
Robert M Chute Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during' the college year.
Good judgment is a ""halo"" realized by only a few, and only discovered after years of learning and making mistakes.
I have not reached that level, as witnessed by my Betty Bates performance.
As a result, I am using the STUDENT to mediate my apologies to anyone offended by my music.
The songs were parodized merely to add a little humor to the dull interim when the votes were being counted.
I had no conception of their apparent inappropriateness nor resulting controversy.
However, again, I say I am sorry to all those who thought my songs were a sour note in the night's competition.
Perhaps the ""mistake"" will, in the future, help and direct me to wear that ""golden circle"" of good judgment.
Any letter which does not constitute a personal attack or exceed the limits of good taste will be published.
In reply to the article appearing in last week's ""Sporting Scene"" regarding the validity of the records attained by the use of the fiber-glass pole, I would like to present the opposing side of the argument.
In 1904 an Olympic champion named Charles Dvorak vaulted 11 ' 6"" with a plain, old-fashioned hickory pole.
According to his statement in Life Magazine, Dvorak remembers a similar controversy upon the introduction of the bamboo pole.
Cornelius Warmerdam, using a bamboo pole, soared over 15' consistently.
The greatest fault with the bamboo pole is the danger of its breaking while in a bent position.
A high-school vaulter in Bristol, Conn., was vaulting with bamboo when the pole snapped below his hands and fatally speared him.
Following this, the bamboo pole was outlawed — because of its danger only.
Don ""Tarzen"" Bragg held the record of 15' 9 l 4"" with an aluminum pole until the fiber-glass pole was introduced.
In my opinion, pole vaulting is merely going through an evolutionary pattern all over again.
The switch from metal to fiber-glass is comparable to the switch from the hickory pole to bamboo.
The February 23rd issue of Sports Illustrated states that today's science is capable of developing a metal pole which will surpass fiber-glass in flexibility.
It was then that an American named Budd Held developed a new, more streamlined javelin which would go much farther than the type formerly in use.
This was introduced into track and field and there was no fuss about its entry into the sport, although it radically revised records.
Formerly, hitting a hurdle on the way over was like hitting a stone wall.
However, today's hurdles have been streamlined, both in style and in the introduction of aluminum as the basic material, allowing it to give upon contact.
These examples are merely to illustrate that various ""evolutionary changes"" are, in actuality, very common and normal occurrances.
The vault is sup posed to have a foreign implement incorporated in its tech nique.
Unlike the pole vault, the high jump is an event requiring only an individual and a bar.
Here, the introduction of this outside help in the form of a special shoe defeats the original purpose of an athlete using his own ability to clear the bar.
The introduction of the fiber glass pole has definitely in creased the spectator interest in the pole vault.
Basically, although they paid for various services, they were not allowed to decide how the money they supplied was to be spent.
As part of our bills, we pay for the activities of certain campus organizations such as the Student Council, Student Government, and the Christian Association.
According to the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee, the funds of these organizations are alloted according to the decisions of the committee alone.
The committee voted February 26 to forbid the proposed transfer of funds to the junior class.
Note here that one of the two student members of the committee joined the majority in rejecting the proposal.
It is the administration that feels uneasy about getting involved in subsidies.
It seems to me that any institution dedicated to providing a ""broad » base for democratic living"" could not seriously allow control of money raised from the students — for student activities by a group which has but two student members.
The Extracurricular Activities Committee, it seems, has the unchallenged right to control, in whatever way it wishes, the expenditures of organizations run by the students with money supplied by the students.
Now the offensive team must attempt to make a basket within 24 seconds of their possession of the ball.
The argument stating that it only takes a gymnast to master the fiber-glass pole holds no water, because even with a metal pole, one must be somewhat of a gymnast to assume a vertical position while flying through the air over a bar and then falling into a pit, supposedly landing on his feet.
This does not place too great a burden on a small family with a substantial income, but for families with several college age children, expenses can be more than a strain.
John David Sleepy-Time Express Bob Livingston 11:00 to 12:00 Especially For You Peter Heyel Especially For You Al Skogsberg Especially For You Doug Wakefield Especially For You Dan Clarke jobs, but few men can earn anywhere near $1200 in a summer.
College students are consequently forced to seek aid outside the famly.
Work this summer in one of the 1600 branches of the SINGER Sewing Machine Company near your home.
Gain valuable business experience while earning salary plus commission.
Your potential abilities will be developed by our proven training program.
Successful men who wish to finance their education may continue on a part-time basis during school term.
If the benefactors come from Massachusetts, Maine, or Connecticut, the gifts go into a fund % for their state.
Friends from outside these three states contribute to the $447,000 General Scholarship Fund.
Last year's Bates' victories on the College Bowl won for the college eight $1500 grants.
Last year, forty Bates students received aid from sources other than the school.
Churches, high schools, clubs, and businesses grant many awards, and there were several National Merit Scholarship winners.
In addition to grants, many students depend on loans from the Federal Aid programs.
Up to a thousand dollars a year may be borrowed at low interest; and the student has ten years from his graduation to repay the loan.
These jobs include assistance-ships, cafeteria work, Oligarchy gest open protest to faculty, student representatives, and administration about the Bates financial oligarchy.
Challenge the right of the Bates financial ""brain trust"" to determine what happens to our money.
Next year I hope to keep the campus in touch with France, where I expect to spend my junior year.
One family sized cabin with lakefroni, heating (oil and wood), running water.
Pay is by the hour, and students work according to the hours they can afford.
The effect of rising expenses on student aid offered by the College is demonstrated by comparing last year's figures with those of a decade earlier.
These figures are not astounding when compared with large universities, but the Bates financial aid program is expanding rapidly, as each year the aid given increases more than the costs.
Vjjtt&i.a. 13$ six BATES STUDENT; MARCH 6, 1%3 Cats Drop State Champion Bowdoin spOR T,N G S \ By RUSS HENDERSON ^ The Bowdoin Polar Bear sporting a state-series championship and five starters as double figure scorers rolled into Alumni Cage Wednesday night to go through the motions of bringing their season record to .500.
The cellar-dwelling Bobcat was ready and after 45 minutes of spine-chilling basketball it was all over but the shouting for Bowdoin College.
In the process of dropping the rubber game of the 3 game series with Bates, the White Bears staged the most disgraceful exhibition of sportsmanship this observer has ever witnessed.
Displaying the middle digit on several occasions and a vocabulary from the bowels of the earth the Brunswick student-athletes certainly shattered any AllAmerican boy image while doing their Alma Mater a deep moral wrong.
It makes one wonder at the caliber of a coach that would knowingly allow such a display.
He must have been the only one in the gym who didn't hear what one Black and White forward let go at him wordwise.
Intercollegiate athletics has no room for exhibitions a la Bowdoin or the officials or coaches that tolerate it as a part of the game.
Castolene, Freeman and the Mosquitos were fantastic and ""Oh That Cummings Boy"" is back for two more seasons.
Currently running at the Clifton Dagget Gray playhouse is a two week preview of Bates football, 1963.
Minus several leading characters from last year's successful production, such as four year keystones Howie Vandersea, Phil Tamis, Paul Castolene, Bill Davis, and Willy Williams, Coach Hatch is casting for line depth that could prove to be the deciding factor next autumn.
The I-formation with its extra blocker and tendency to rely on a power-running backfield is a new feature that possibly might figure in Coach Hatch's multiple offense plans.
Watching line mentor Vern Ullom and his ""Iron Monster"" run the line hopefuls through their paces brings to mind the wistful thought that he could become a permanent fixture on the Garnet sporting scene.
Coach Hatch has invited thirty area football coaches to observe the final Spring scrimmage Saturday afternoon and for an out of season view of ""King Football"" don't miss this attraction.
While the rest of the student body breaks for home with the beginning of Spring recess, Coach Chick Leahey's defending champion National Pastimers move from the gloom and nets of Gray field house south of the Mason-Dixon line for a renewal of the baseballer's swing into Dixie.
Scheduled against Rider and Washington Colleges, the 'Cats face a possible shakedown against the Naval Academy at Annapolis.
Talented returning veterans include Monty ""Woolen"" Woolson, Bud Spector, Bill Davis, Paul Holt, Archie Lanza and pro-caliber hurler Thorn Freeman.
Indications point to a strong Garnet tint in the the spring tide sporting scene as it rolls baseball, tennis and golf north to the Pine Tree State this year.
The professional pugilists return to the local Armory Monday, March 11, with an All-Star card.
The ""Sugar Man"" himself, in the twilight of a fantastic career that saw him regain the world title five times and permanently engrave his name on the fistic honor roll as the greatest middleweight of all time, highlights promoter Chick Wergele's showcase.
Billy Thornton, the veteran Memphis, Tenn., slugger could make it an interesting ten rounder for Sugar Ray Robinson who is fresh from a comeback win over highly ranked Ralph Dupas.
The sordid prelim action that has weakened Chick's first three Lewiston cards gives indication of being a thing of the past as he features as a supporting cast a group of tough, hungry, young pros that any arena in the country would be proud to present.
Portland's fine welterweight Freddie Butts, faces Willy Mitchell of Boston, a crowding mixer who was split-decisioned by Freddie two months ago in a real thriller at Portland's Expo.
A roaring crowd was kept on its feet throughout much of the last few minutes, as the two teams battled back and forth in the season's tightest and best game at Bates.
Bowdoin had al ready clinched the State Series title, and wound up with an 8-10 record.
Their only two defeats in nine Series games were here in Lewiston against Bates.
Lead Changes Often Bowdoin led 9-4 after four minutes, but Paul Castolene's two driving layups and a jump er by John Lawler gave the Bobcats a 10-9 advantage.
The Polar Bears' fine guard, Al Loane, had ten points in the first half, but these were to be his last for the evening.
After free throws by Castolene and Beaudry, Beaudry hit a field goal to put the Bobcats in front.
On the latter hoop, Loane committed his fifth foul, and referee Tom Kiley slapped a technical on him for beefing.
Beaudry made two foul shots after a basket by Bowdoin's Pete Finn — the Mosquitoes had then scored eleven straight points.
Overtime Decides The Polar Bears were far from dead, however, and pecked away at the lead.
There were ties at 58 and 62, when Cummings took matters into his own hands.
He scored twice from the floor, and Harry Silverman and Finn quickly tied it up.
Silverman's long jump shot put Bowdoin ahead, but Cummings scored again to even the count with 55 seconds left.
Bowdoin missed several chances in the late minutes and the game went into overtime.
Krzynowek wrapped up the victory with two foul shots in the last seconds.
Cummings led Bates with 17 points, followed by Freeman's 15, Castolene's 11, and Krzynowek's 10.
Bates won the game on the foul line with 15 for 23; Bowdoin was 10 for 14.
Dick Whitimore, Loane, and Silverman all fouled out, and neither was at all pleased with these events.
Good Home Season Bates completed a 7-13 season with one more win and four less defeats than last year.
Overall statistics show that the opposition outshot the Bobcats from the floor by 4 per cent and 50 goals.
Bates was out-rebounded on an average of 50 to 45, a margin of five per game.
All the away games were lost; this offset an impressive 7-3 home record.
Will Gardiner, Carl Johannesen, Castolene, and Pete DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 Glanz were the leading floor shooters, all hitting better than 40 per cent.
Doug Macko had 12 for 15 for an .800 percentage at the foul line, and Cummings was .792 with 57 for 72.
JV Finish High The Bates Jayvees wound up a fine season with two wins last week, giving them a 14-3 record, including a forfeit win over Topsham Air Force Base.
Bob Johnson had 24 points each night and Bob Mischler was runner-up scorer in both games.
John Wyman's clutch shooting helped beat UMP, as he had six of Bates' last seven points.
Johnson averaged nearly 17 points, and had a 25-point average in his last six games.
The rebounding of Wyman, Russ Reilly, and Joe Matzkin was very valuable.
Paul Savello's late season improvement was also important in the Bobkitten victories.
The speaker was Coach Ullom; his subject was Thorn Freeman, captain of the Garnet Five.
Coach Ullom went on to say that some of Thorn's ""fringe benefits"" had to be sacrificed to the faster type of game that was initiated at Bates this past season.
During the season, he averaged 11 points per game, hitting .331 from the floor and .750 from the free throw line.
In addition, the lanky center managed to pull down on the average of 10 rebounds each game.
The psychology major commented on the excellent team spirit and and hustle of this year's squad.
Thorn considers his most thrilling basketball experience to be the 1961 E.C.A.C. small college in preparation for a possible career in social work.
LaValle Devoted Leader While Thorn Freeman was maneuvering for position under the boards, another Bobcat captain, Bill LaVallee, was bringing home the bacon for Coach Slovenski's cindermen.
The leading varsity scorer, with a total of 70 points, Bill is known as the ""jack of all trades"" on the track team.
Concerning his captain, Coach Slovenski remarked, ""Bill has exceeded my normal expectations of a team captain through his qualities of leadership, devotion to the team, and loyalty to the college.
Bill LaVallee graduated from South Portland High School where he lettered in baseball as well as track.
He considers his most exciting moments in track to be the E.C.A.C. triumph and the victories over Maine in his freshman and junior year.
Bill is looking to a good spring, although the thinclads will face As is customary each year at this time, the Sports Staff of the STUDENT reflects upon the top individual performances of the past hoop season in order to select an All-Maine squad.
Named to first team All-State were guards Seth Cummings of the 'Cats and Allan Loane of Bowdoin.
Also center Dick Whitmore of Bowdoin, forwards Ken Stone of Colby plus Art Warren of Maine.
Second team selections were Laddie Deemer of Maine and Harry Silverman of Bowdoin in the back court, Thorn Freeman of the 'Cats at center, and the forecourt combo of Dave Svendsen of Maine and Joe Thorn Freeman tournament held in Springfield, Mass.
Looks Toward Pros With the close of basketball season and the gradual approach of spring, Thorn's thoughts natur ally turn to baseball.
An AllMaine choice last season, he is the number one hurler for Coach Leahey's Nine.
Following his major league career, Thorn' hopes to continue his education Loane, Bowdoin Cummings, Bates Bill LaVallee as tough a schedule as they did this winter.
The STUDENT Sports Staff joins with the regulars out at in saluting Garnet standouts Thorn Freeman and Bill LaVallee.
Cummings, a sophomore, and Loane, a senior, present an interesting contrast in playing styles as well as in appearance.
A tremendous clutch performer throughout the campaign, Cummings possesses one of the deadliest jump shots in the State.
Loane, a short and stocky competitor with catlike reflexes, is perhaps the most outstanding driver in the State, and his passing surely must be rated excellent.
Sophomore Dick Whitmore of Bowdoin was a unanimous selection at center.
An extremely strong rebounder, Whitmore was able to give an advantage of three and four inches to taller opponents and still emerge the winner in the battle of the boards.
Forwards Ken Stone and Art Warren of Maine would make a very successful forecourt.
Stone, a senior, is a prolific scorer, able to hit his amazing jump shot with radar accuracy from as far out as thirty feet.
Many teams realized this year that Colby needs little rebounding as long as he is doing the shooting.
Lewiston | Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 Norris Hayden | Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS fensive wizard.
Art's ruggedness helps him to battle taller opponents for rebounds and loose balls.
Second team selections show the backcourt pair of Laddie Deemer of Maine and Harry Silverman of Bowdoin.
Although Deemer lacks height, his quickness allows him to get off his deadly jump shot, often uncontested.
The center of the second unit is senior captain Thorn Freeman of Warren, Maine the ' Cats.
Joe Brogna, a senior from Bowdoin College, and Dave Svendsen of Maine, a sophomore, are the forward selections.
ALL-MAINE SELECTIONS 1st Team Allan Loane G Bowdoin* Seth Cummings G Bates Dick Whilmore C Bowdoin Ken Stone F Colby* Art Warren F Maine* 2nd Team Laddie Deemer G Maine Harry Silverman G Bowdoin Thorn Freeman C Bales* Dave Svendsen F Maine Joe Brogna F Bowdoin 'Repealer from last year's squad HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET 73 Lisbon St.
Lewiston 1 / 13 { BATES STUDENT, MARCH 6, 1Q63 — Cats Drop State Champion Bowdoin SP 0 R T,NG S \ By RUSS HENDERSON The Bowdoin Polar Bear sporting a state-series championship and five starters as double figure scorers rolled into Alumni Cage Wednesday night to go through the motions of bringing their season record to .500.
Minus several leading characters from last year's successful production, such as four year keystones Howie Vandersea, Phil Tamis, P^ul Castolene, Bill Davis, and Willy Williams, Coach Hatch is casting for line depth that could prove to be the deciding factor next autumn.
Silverman hit to give the Pol, 1 r----------— — — — — ~t Tough 'Cat defense prevails.
Finn's basket and two free"" throws returned the lead to Bowdoin, but % again Cummings scored, making twelve straight points for him, to tie it up.
Second team selections were Laddie Deemer of Maine and Harry Silverman of Bowdoin in the back court, Thorn Freeman of the 'Cats at center, and the forecourt combo of Dave Svendsen of Maine and Joe Loane, Bowdoin Thorn Freeman tournament held in Springfield, Mass.
Following his major league career, Thorn' hopes to continue his education Cummings.
Lewiston | Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 m i m mm i mmm J Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS fensiye wizard.
ALL-MAINE SELECTIONS 1st Team Allan Loane G Bowdoin* Seth Cummings G Bates Dick Whitmore C Bowdoin Ken Stone F Colby* Art Warren F Maine* 2nd Team Laddie Deemer G Maine Harry Silverman G Bowdoin Thorn Freeman C Bales* Dave Svendsen F Maine Joe Brogna F Bowdoin 'Repeater from last year's squad HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE Bl JET 73 Lisbon St.
Lewiston , ao BATES STUDENT , MARCH 6, 1963 Rebel Hoop Champs By BOB SEGERSTEN '63 Last weekend ushered in the end of the intramural basketball season with Smith South the victor.
Tex Ritter was top dog for the ""Middies"" with 18 points and Pete Bowman led the J.B. team with 13.
B-l team and Roger Bill C-2 team to determine which team will have the divine privelege of facing Smith South.
Don ""featherfingers"" King led his boys with 12 big ones (not points, just big ones), while ""Punchy"" Cruickshank led the vanquished ones with 10.
Rebels Hoop Champs The final game, contrary to popular belief, was played in the Alumni Gym, not out at Lou's.
Smith Middle, having soft sledding in the lesser leagues, fell like the proverbial strawmen to the powerful Smith South combine.
Red Vandersea, writer, poet, and prophet, was the outstanding player of the game, pulling down innumerable rebounds and scoring 12 points.
An interesting sidelight, however, was Web ""Tiger"" Harrison, who temporarily stopped playing guns, to put on a fine ball handling demonstration.
BOBCATS OF THE WEEK A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Meet For this week's selection of Bobcat of the Week, the Sports Staff extends its weekly honor to the ""Mosquito"" duet of Don Beaudry and Ted Krzynowek.
These two Garnet hoopsters, aptly termed by their coach as Mosquitos for their speed, dexterity, and ability to harass the opposition, amazingly performed this task in Wednesday night's victory over Bowdoin.
Early Friday morning the mile relay team consisting of Jon Ford, Gerrit Binneweg, Pete Peterson, and co-captain, Bill LaVallee along with Coach Walt Slovenski boarded their plane bound for Madison Square Garden.
That night La Salle, Lafayette, Rhode Island, and our own leadoff man, Bill LaVallee were set at the starting line.
A quarter of a mile and a little more than 53 seconds later Bill handed off to Pete Peterson twelve yards behind first place Rhode Island.
Pete, turning in the best time of the Garnet four, shortened the lead by half with a 50. second leg.
Baton in hand, John Ford took over continuing to close in on the lead, running a 51 second leg.
As Jon passed off to anchorman Gerrit Binneweg, there were breathless hopes for a victory.
Gerrit crept up on the leader's shoulder, but the Rhode Island trackster ran a strategic race, and kept Gerrit hovering at his side until he dipped into the tape, just nipping Gerrit by twotenths of a second.
They fought hard, lost, however, turned in their best relay time of the year.
The ""green and gold"" were in the process of moulding their untested track squad, and simply could not stand up to the proven strength of the Garnet regiment.
Whirling the discus for second place was frosh Bill Davis, while in the hammer circle Dave Harrison flung the 35 lb. weight 48' 8%"" to wrap up first place.
In the shot put three more points were captured as freshman Martin Saur flipped the shot for second place.
Eric Silverberg, one of our better endurance runners to date, had no trouble winning the mile in a casual time of 4 min., 36. sec.
The prancing Norwegian, Finn Wilhelmsen, conserved himself for the two-mile and eased nicely behind Eric for second place.
As had been his habit throughout the season the ""Finner"", in his untiring gait, tore up two miles of track to scuttle across the finish line in 9 min., 49. sec.
Bob has come extremely close to clearing this height previously, but wasn't quite used to his new fiberglass pole.
Lunging across the finish line in 5. seconds was Paul Planchon to win the 50 yard dash.
Paul's injuries have hurt the Garnet cindermen during the season as many of his 5 point wins were missed.
It was a clean sweep in the 55 yard high hurdles as Bill LaVallee won in 7. sec, and Al Harvie and Bill Evans finished second and third respectively.
In the low hurdles it was LaVallee again in first place, followed closely by Harvie and then Jon Olsen.
Jon Ford, the other half of the middle-distance duo, sewed up second place.
Paul Williams, unable to make the trip because of a pulled muscle, was missed especially in the broad jump where Al Harvie secured a third place.
Dave Harkness was again seen wandering from event to event to post a total of 12 points.
Dave placed second in the broad jump, third in the 50 yard dash, first in the 55 yard hurdles, and second in the 55 yard low hurdles.
Lanky John Meyn sauntered around the track to zip across the finish line in the 1000 yard run in a time of 2 min., 27. sec.
The talent shown by the Jayvees this season will, no doubt, be put to good use next year to fill the Varsity squad with the depth it lacked this year.
Look for fine performances from Dave Harkness, Ken Child, Dave Fullenwider, Mark Biel, the Traiser twins, and Bill Dye.
As Coach Slovenski framed it, the squad had excellent performers but there just weren't enough of them.
Stricken with a number of drop outs, and continuous injuries, the team simply lacked the depth necessary to win.
In spite of all the shortcomings, a greater crew of athletes couldn't have donned the Garnet uniform.
This time, the sport will be volleyball, with hopes of better results than those of the fall hockey playday.
The decision for this game came on such short notice that our team has a very short time to pracice.
Again because of the time element, it will be difficult for Coach Hinman to pick her team.
But according to the """"Spiking Smith Southers,"" she has some good material from which to choose.
Milliken -Mitchell Leads As predicted, the MillikenMitchell team is still on top with five wins and no losses.
STate 2-3771 • Cheney by a smashing score of 10-3 Friday, they have pretty well cinched their victory.
Remick Stars A member of the MillikenMitchell team, freshman Barb Remick of Eliot, Maine, has certainly added well coordinated skill, coaching, and a majority of the points scored to this season.
Her high school team had a record of 78 straight wins, beginning with her first game as a freshman until her last game as senior when she was captain of the team.
Basketball is not her only sport for she played well on the hockey team this fall.
Lefl to right, Robert Ahern, Stu-C, William Holt, Alumni Pres., Norman Bowie, '64, Newt Clark, '65.
Listed here are the successful candidates who were elected to the various campus positions in last Monday's elections.
The Student Council and Student Government members will serve until the new Student Senate Constitution and the Proctor Councils have been approved by both faculty and students.
At that time, hopefully next Fall, an interium election will be held to choose the members of the Senate.
When that occurs, Stu-C and Stu-G will no longer be separated, but united in the Senate.
Countryman's attack is aimed at what has come to be called the ""Negro ghetto"" so prominent in many of our Eastern states' largest cities.
The problem is acute and will alter the future of the country""s cities.
He comes seeking a degree of personal freedom and finds instead the enigma of helplessness.
A job (a sort of serfdom to the elevator and the janitor's mop), a home (three rooms in a firetrap), and here he remains.
Business in its purest form has become mass production at the lowest possible cost.
Those jobs ""traditionally"" held by Negros, no longer require a human being.
All around him the Negro sees the status symbols of a life that has no place for him.
Eventually, he withdraws from his own community in the ghetto and isolation replaces gregariousness.
Political concerns cease to be important to him mainly because they, in fact, don't concern him and never have.
The black man adopts this spirit as an alternative to what is offered by the white man's world.
Such unrest is prevalent today among the masses of of lower class Negros.
Countryman pointed out that organization within the Negro community itself can mobilize the collective efforts of well over One million Negros in this country.
Unless conditions in the Negro's immediate environment are changed drastically this force can become a formidable form of violent expression.
First, by making the North as aware as possible of the imminent dangers of allowing this persistent degradation of the Negro, and secondly, by giving the Negro a fresh look at himself.
The latter is the more important, for the individual must have a sense of belonging to a society, of being a participant.
The Negro must be acutely aware of the political and social mechanism available to him for improving his lot.
He must learn to fight that which he presently cannot understand — a system of institutionalized prejudice.
Pops Concert Features Seasons Of The Year As Spring pokes its welcome face through the slush and snow, ""Echoes of the Seasons"" will resound at the annual Pops Concert on April 6.
The sun will be shining, the wind warm, and the blue sky reflected in the little rivers of melting snow.
All to create an acute awareness of the seasons, and set the mood for this year's performance of the Bates College Concert and the Choral Society.
The topic for debate, ""Resolved, that the non-Communist nations should form an economic community,"" will be affirmed by John Strassburger '64 and Howard Blum '63.
In addition, Blum will participate in the oratorical contest, Ahern will enter the extemporaneous speaking contest, and David Kramer '63 will represent Bates in oral interpretation.
Colby, Bowdoin and Bates held a ""Forensic Festival"" March 7 in the Little Theater as a preliminary to the New England Conference.
Blum and Strassburger presented orations; Ahern and Hall spoke extemporaneously.
Neither Colby nor Bowdoin had entrees for the after dinner speaking contest, which was canceled as a result.
NOTICE The GARNET board is now accepting material to comprise a spring issue.
All students are invited to submit poetry, fiction, essays in all subjects, and illustrations in the form of ink sketches or other black and whie media.
The deadline for material submitted for publication will be March 31, the first Sunday • after Spring Vacation.
NSM has 2,500 workers spread throughout four major Eastern cities fostering an awakening in the Negro youth, a renewed sense of values and a national perspective rather than the usual tenement outlook.
Countryman concluded by asking each individual to re-examine those beliefs and traditions which have been the prominent influences in his development.
Only by doing so can one uncover those latent prejudices which possess a society and one's self. appropriately decorated to signify one of the seasons.
Al Corey's band will provide the dance music between the Band's performance at 9:00m. and the Choral Society's presentation at 10:20m.
Norman Ross, and tickets for reserved tables may be purchased at her house, 32 Frye Street.
Since these tables are reserved, it is important for you to get your tickets early in order to have a desirable loca-. tion.
Committees Selected The general chairmen of the Concert are Jean Stahlin '63, and Kevin Gallahger '64.
David Williams '65 and Frank Sroka '65, publicity; Don Fredenburg '63 and Larry Trufant '64, tables; Mary Ingraham '65 and Jarey Lee Adams '66, refreshments; Sherrie Templeman '65 and Merrilyn Brown '65, ushers; Joyce Killay '64, open house; Peter Allen '66 and Jim Pomfret '64, clean up; Sandra Root '65 and Deborah Perkins '64, tickets; and John David '64 and Lyn Parker '64, decorations.
NOTICE Friday evening, March 15, the Chase Hall Dance Committee will sponsor a dance from 8:00 to 11:00m.
If* TWO BATES STUDENT, MARCH 13, 1963 Senate Constitution Passes Extra-Curric Committee The Student Senate Constitution is now well on its way to becoming a reality for Bates students.
Under this system of government, the now separate women's Student Government and men's Student Council would be incorporated under the general heading of Student Senate.
The composition of the women's government would remain the same, but the men's government would be revised to the same form as the women's Proctor Council.
Progress To Date Last Spring, the proposed constitution passed a preliminary vote of the student body.
This fall, the committee made minor revisions, and sent the completed constitution to the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee.
About two weeks ago, ExtraCurric passed the Senate Constitution itself, although the Extra-Curric Vetoes Junior Class Plans The Extra-Curricular Activities Committee has vetoed plans for the Ivy Day Dance.
The committee has resolved that any class dance must provide a budget based solely on anticipated ticket sales.
The junior class had initially intended to feature a ""big name"" orchestra for their Ivy Dance.
In light of the committee's decision, the class has decided to present the dance in traditional style.
It will be held in the Alumni Gymnasium on Saturday* May 11, with music by Bob Hall and his orchestra.
Augusta, Maine Proctor Council Constitutions, which are still being revised and printed, have not yet been approved.
Future Prospects In the near future, the Constitution will be presented to the entire faculty.
Stu-G and Stu-C will then re-educate the campus concerning the plan of the Senate, and hopefully next Fall the Constitution will become operative.
In 1955 the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee and the faculty voted on and passed a similar plan which had been presented to them.
It failed to go through because the students voted against it when it was put to an all-campus vote.
Those accepted attend a summer orientation course followed by supervision in a teaching position for which they receive a salary.
Liberal arts graduates with depth of background will be prepared for secondary school assignments in Central, East, and West Africa.
BOSTON UNIVERSITY anticipates over thirty openings in June for non-teaching employment.
Positions available include research assistants, librarians, medical technologists, secretaries, and business machine operators.
McLEAN HOSPITAL, a division of the Massachusetts General Hospital, has several positions open for research assistants.
The positions call for college graduates with a chemistry and/or biology background.
RADCLIFFE PUBLISHING PROCEDURES COURSE is an intensive six-week, summer program for recent college graduates.
The purpose is to give men and women an idea of the job opporunities and requirements in the field, as well as a basic preparatory training in publishing techniques.
A descriptive brochure is available in the Placement Office. , EUROPEAN SAFARI program, conducted by the American Student Information Service, offers men and women summer jobs in Europe.
Exact working hours and wages depend upon the position in which one is placed, and in turn, that position is determined by the candidate's basic skills, language capabilities and past experience.
Those interested are invited to read the pamphlet on this program in the Placement Office.
Anyone interested in writing for the Bales STUDENT, on either the News, Feature, or Sports staffs, should contact a member of the editorial staff listed in the Masthead.
John Daly, Jr., is Assistant Sales Manager in New Jersey Bell's Morristown Commercial Office.
He supervises 10 salesmen who keep Morristown businessmen informed on new advances in business communications.
During that time, he earned a management level promotion by proving what he could do on two other assignments in the Commercial Office— first supervising 5, and later, supervising 36 employees.
John Daly and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications serviee in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES TELEPHONE MAN-OF-THE-MONTH [ BATES STUDENT, MARCH 13, 1963 THREE Quimby Comments On Bates Policy By PRISCILLA CLARK '66 Professor Brooks Quimby started his career at Bates in 1914.
Since then, he has been closely connected with the college, and has wached it evolve into its present form.
His comments to the present student body, may help them to better understand Bates and what it represents today.
Quimby R — Reporter R — Many students commenl thai Bales is a thoroughly traditional college.
Q — Having been here since 1914, I've seen quite a few changes in traditions.
I think the oldest tradition of the college has been the thought that Bates was a place for study.
Some colleges are interested mainly in having a good time, or are week-end colleges.
Q — The question is whether the present generation of students — which has perhaps more money, not so much interest in education, but certainly higher I.Q.'s — will do as well as those past.
Sometimes it's hard to tell just what is motivating some of our students, and I'm sorry about that.
R — Many students claim that when they came to college they were motivated by a desire to learn, but with so many rules and regulations they fell restricted, academically as well as socially.
It seems that sometime or other somebody went ahead and did something and a rule had to be made.
Practically every rule we have today was caused by the fact that some students in the past were not responsible.
Q — I've found that students like to be treated as grown-ups, and I think that's fine.
You may call me paternalistic, maybe I am sometimes, but I hate to see people kick themselves out foolishly and so does the faculty in general, I think.
Q — We sometimes drop people pretty well along in their senior year and everyone puts up a howl.
Q — The President's general idea was that there is a need to make better use of our manpower and equipment.
Q — One of the greatest advantages is in the better use of the equipment.
I got through fairly young, and I think I would have developed more and got more out of education if I had had another year.
Maybe the coach is getting older, but I prefer to think the competition is much better.
Bates is an academic institution, and in debating we strive to better the student, not the record.
If we can have both, of course that's fine too, but it is the student's development we are most concerned about.
The issues which Peter Countryman raised are relevant to all of us, not merely as possible supporters or workers for the Northern Student Movement, but as individuals.
To understand Countryman's comments one must examine one's self and, more importantly, one's possibilities as a human being.
Not the solitary self, but the human (i.e. member of humanity) self must be understood.
The genus ""humanity"" may add little to the description of a person, but it demands a great deal from the individual.
Countryman's reference to compulsory chapel, our strictly regulated college, and Nazi Germany were not asides, but central to his underlying theme.
For what is essential is not the institutionalizing these references allude td, but rather the individual's thought about such aspects of human life.
Chute has emphasized in his recent comments, understand that in making this choice, you and you alone must accept the responsibility of your decision.
If you deny these problems, then realize that you are denying your humanity.
That these are significant issues and in need of correction forces the individual to decide what action he will under take.
In your attitude — not as a class, a team, or any group, but as an individual — lies the extent to which change of any kind can emerge, take effect, and prevail.
The Electoral Process Elections at Bates College are noteworthy in two comple mentary aspects — the lack of organized campaigns and the uninformed electorate which decides on next year's officers.
The main thesis of these comments is that the importance which an individual student attributes to a campus organization depends, to a large extent, on the general viewpoint or attitude of the studentry toward the organization.
If the student is informed about the duties and powers of a campus group, and knows that the officers of the group have been carefully selected, then he will be able to have some under standing of the organization and question any action it takes If this is not the case, however, and the individual knows neither what an organization is nor whom he is electing to its leadership, then he concludes that the organization is not very important.
For if a group allows its leaders to be chosen by an electorate that is almost totally ignorant of the candidates and their prospective duties, that group is viewed as a haphazard organization with little importance.
The enjoyment and interest which accompanies any organized campaign is absent.
Secondly, no effective organization exists on campus which the students can view as capable of initiating new policies.
A direct increase in ""power"" will not necessarily follow an organized campaign which produces an informed electorate.
But necessarily, if any group is to be effective in its pursuance of any campus policy, the students must view the group as a capable organization with recognized leaders.
Such an attitude towards an organization is essential to any possible success that might result from attempts to change a situation.
The successful candidate and those who elect him mus feel that something has been accomplished.
The involvemen that a campaign provides for candidates and supporters will carry over and provide them with a sense of responsible concern.
In its present form, the Student Senate Constitution does not recognize these considerations.
The main purpose of the Senate is to unify campus govern ment and provide an effective organ for student leadership Yet, if the student attitude towards such organization con tinues in its present state, then the desegration of govern ment will make little difference.
Specific changes, which would improve the electoral sys tern will be presented in the next issue of the STUDENT We ask' the new officers of the various campus organizations to consider them carefully as a means to enhancing their positions and the position of the college.
Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year.
Chute says the atheist must accept the responsibility for his acts and his code.
An excellent short editorial in the February 27 STUDENT pointed out that morality plays an essential role in the health of a society, so that it cannot be left to the whims and ignorance of each individual in that socie ty.
The editor could have added as striking illustrations of this the stern puritanism that now exists in both the Soviet Union and in China.
When Communists want ed to ruin a ""bourgeois society,"" they busily urged people to throw off the stupid inhibitions that they had inherited, and some of the propagandists themselves were probably naive enough to believe what they preached.
But in any case, as soon as they were in charge of a whole country that had to be strong or perish, they quickly imposed curbs on every side and used all of their powers of persuasion and coercion to make the new moralism operative.
Edgar Snow's ""The Other Side of the River,"" a recent and sympathetic account of ""Red China,"" gives due attention to the strictness of the present re gime.
Snow apparently ob served this trend with some distaste, as he is frankly very much an ex-Christian who would like to believe that individual judgment is sufficient in the moral sphere.
His feeling is, in the long run, basically sound, because an im posed morality can function only because of fear or because of pride in being perfectly docile When a country is under pres sure from the outside, these emotions are strong and fre quent, but these are signs that by now many people in Russia are not very impressed by apBy CHARLES E SMITH '63 I often wonder how it all began.
When a sound currency became available during the 17th century (one would not believe the amount of inflation during the Middle Ages) businessmen sighed with relief.
Money that was now supported by the government could be used as a reserve to have and to hold for better or for worse purposes.
People discovered that by selling their surpluses,e., their extra left over goods, they could make a profit with which to buy more surplus.
Well, this is not all that startling, but some lean and lungry guy figured that if he could apply the above fact to the aw of large numbers the profits would be greater.
Any letter which does not constitute a per sonal attack or exceed the limits of good taste will be published A letter which is not published will be acknowledged.
There you are more than likely to find the latest book of your choice, easily and inexpensively.
If you need a book, whether for a course or for ""extra-curricular"" reading, the library staff is always anxious to help you in locating it.
If the library doesn't have the book, they will look into the possibilities of obtaining a copy.
Suggestions Welcomed The primary objective of the Bates library is to support, the teaching curriculum.
Thus, ' the largest part of its collection has originated from suggestions made by faculty members.
They survey the output in their various fields, and submit recommendations for purchase in areas connected with subjects offered at Bates.
These recommendations by the members of the faculty have been of tremendous help to the library staff.
Suggestions from students to their instructors and the library peals to the national welfare.
Spanish anarchists (the largest political party in 1935) held to very strict standards, through both pride and love, while completely rejecting theology.
Miss Iva Foster, head librarian of Coram Library, stated that although there is no student committee for book selection, this does not mean that student recommendations will not be given consideration.
New books are on display in the periodical room each week, Monday through Thursday.
Students may brouse through these before they go into the stack collection.
Collection Expanded Aside from the books which the library purchases, books are often given as gifts, from private and professorial collections.
Personal memorials and donations from alumni and other friends of the college are frequently made for book purchase.
Miss Foster stressed that the library is always happy to receive publications by Bates graduates to be added to the Batesiana Collection which, in part, contains past Bates publications (e.
BATES STUDENT, MARCH 13, 1963 FIVE Gardiner Elected CaptainAtBancjuet LaVallee Gets Seavey Award; Sun -Journal Wins Photo Prize * By NICK BASBANES 4 The green lurf of Garcelon, though presently obscured by tons of snow, will in a few weeks accommodate the needs of outdoor teams.
It is usually during this short duration of time when our squads aren't competing that our athletic attention turns to viewing practices and speculating possibilities.
The baseball team, for the past few weeks working out in the cage, will journey south this weekend to polish and ready for the upcoming schedule.
Outdoor track, on the other hand, has had ample opportunity to practice and ready through the availability of indoor track.
Though the official season ended at Vermont, March 2, this past Saturday saw a number of our tracksters compete at the first indoor U S. track federation track and field meet in Maine.
Bates was represented by Bill LaVallee, Bob Kramer, Gerrit Binnewig, Tom Bowditch, Al Harvey, and Finn Wilhelmson.
Senior captain Bill LaVallee provided the spark for the Bobcat delegation by taking two wins.
His time of 7. seconds in the 65 yard low hurdles established a new Garnet indoor record.
Bruce Frost of Bowdoin and Jerry Ellis of Maine were the meet's only other double winners.
Another Bates indood record was set with Finn Wilhelmson's two mile win in 9:40. time.
Other place winners for the 'Cat contingent were Gerrit Binneweg, third in the 600; Al Harvey, second in the low hurdles and fourth in the high hurdles; and Bob Kramer, fourth in the pole vault.
They took home four firsts, one second, one third, and one fourth, being entered in six out of eight events.
We are very happy to see this meet initiated as an annual affair, and are more than satisfied with the results.
The Bobcat power displayed at Maine gives an indication of the outdoor strength to come in a few weeks.
With the brief period of spring football practice now at a close, our next view of the team will be in the fall when the official season commences.
With the arrival of the new season will come two significant rule changes.
Perhaps the most significant innovation is the one allowing free, unlimited substitution.
Coach Hatch feels that this rule change is to the disadvantage of small clubs like Bates, as opponents from larger schools have larger squads and more depth and will now be able to substitute them at will.
The other change is that the quarterback, previously ineligible to receive a pass, is now free to do so.
With regard to the former change, it is unfortunate that the rules committee didn't consider the consequences now presented to small schools such as Bates.
After seeing Coach Hatch's second squad function the other day, I feel that the Bobcats will again prove to be a formidable team.
The quality of the roast beef promised an impressive evening and those attending were rewarded that double pleasure.
William Gardiner of Framingham, Mass., was unanimously selected as captain of the 1963-64 Bobcat basketball squad.
The six foot one inch senior to be, who saw but limited service this past season as a reserve guard, was tabbed as a leader and hustler by his coach, Vern Ullom.
LaVallee Awarded Director of Athletics, Lloyd Lux, presented senior indoor captain, William LaVallee of South Portland, Maine, the John Stark Seavey Award.
Lux explained the dedication to track of the late John Seavey, in whose name an anonymous donor presented the award.
The award's purpose is to honor the Bates senior who has contributed most to track while at Bates.
Garnet Athletic Publicity Director, Arthur Griffiths, acting on behalf of his colleages representing Maine's four major colleges, awarded the Publicity Director's Picture of the Year Award to the Lewiston Sun-Journal.
The Journal's winning picture was an action shot of Bobcat footballer Grant Farquhar stopping a Colby ball carrier in this past season's mud bowl encounter.
As the evening moved to the coaches and presentation of letter and numeral awards to the individual players, the audience was prodded into a jovial mood by the toastmaster Reverend Schroeder, and the members of the Garnet coaching staff.
Coach Chick Leahey, working on borrowed jokes and the honor of having another fine year as JayVee hoop coach, voiced some comical incidents from the past year's action.
Ullom Speaks Head hoop coach Vern Ullom honored his fighting Garnet squad with words tinged with the ' strains of the dedicated spirit of fair play and sincerity that mark the coaching profession in its aspired ideal.
The hush that settled over this assembled group of Bates athletic supporters provided fitting tribute to the real qualities of Vern Ullom, a coach that gives a player that needed lift ta manhood while instilling the patterns of competitive athletics.
Anchoring the speakers podium was former Syracuse football great, coach Walt Slovenski.
Coach Slovenski, the breeder of the Garnet track successes and probably the Athletic Department's vaudeville type comedian, lauded his hard working squad on their successful season.
Rucci Photo Last Saturday afternoon at Alumni Gymnasium an audience of students and approximately 30 high school football coaches viewed the final scrimmage of the spring football workout for the Bates eleven.
I Revealed Of special interest during this scrimmage was Coach Hatch's experimentation with the I formation on offense.
This is a pattern where the quarterback, halfbacks and fullback line up in a straight line perpendicular to the center.
Its chief purpose is to be able to deplore all the backs in any direction and thus HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER cause the defense trouble in ganging up on any one side of the line or keying on any one man.
Coach Hatch, commenting on this year's spring drill, said, ""It was the most successful one we have ever had.
Coach Hatch was particularly pleased with the performance of Pete Pequignot, back at quarterback after a year's absence, and also Willy Farrington, Carl Johnneson, Ron Leblanc, Dave Piaseki, John Williams and Grant Farquhar, at his new end position, Coach Hatch indicated that his tentative starting lineup would probably be Pat Donovan and Jim Callahan at ends, Charlie Lockhart and Ted Davis or Carl Johanneson at tackles, John Schatz, Dave Stockwell and Willy Farrington at guards and Steve Ritter at the center position.
In the backfield will be Tom Carr at fullback, Captain Paul Planchon and John Yuskis or John Williams at the halfback spots and Bill MacNevin directing the attack at quarterback.
Although the Garnet eleven will sorely miss the presence of such seniors as Howie Vandersea, Bob Williams, Paul Castolene, Phil Tamis and Bill Davis, the Bobcat mentor feels that next season's team has the potential to equal last season's performance.
SNEAKERS HOOD'S RUBBERS For The Entire Family Shoe Repairing While You Wait at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main six BATES STUDENT, MARCH 13, 1963 A0 Hantor £>m 0 Jt By HOWIE VANDERSEA '63 After many hours of research, interviews, and voting, the sports staff of the STUDENT announces its Intramural All-Star Basketball Teams.
Smith South and J B. placed five and four players respectively on the three teams selected, while the senior class had seven players on the squads.
South Tops Smith South, as expected, placed three men on the ALeague All-Star Team.
Both Wallach and Silverstein are two of the greatest shooters to ever live at Smith South, and to top it all off they have another year to play for the champs.
J.B.'s contributions are Ron Taylor, the flashy playmaker, and ""Ion"" Pravda, the fine all around front court performer.
Even though J B. didn't win its league these two kept their team in contention at all times.
The final berth on our team goes to a glayer who overcame many obstacles in order to play for a losing team.
The B-League All-Pros are led by sophomores Bill MacNevin and Steve ""Tex"" Ritter, both of Smith Middle.
Their game savvy was quite apparent in the championship game with South, as they held together their pugilistic teammates in a losing cause.
East Parker had two claims to fame — Paul ""The Old Smoothee"" Holt and Pete Weatherbee on the honor squad.
Al Marden was selected for the second time in his long, long long career at Bates.
Musketeers Picked Unanimous choices in the CLeague are the ""Three Musketeers"" from Roger Bill — Al ""The Scrimer"" Cruickshank, Sandy Randy, ""Cotton"" Bales and David Dolwell.
The three rookies led their team to the championship of the C-Conference and also to their defeat in the playoffs.
Rick was superb in his play throughout the year and played with a tremendous handicap — his body.
The J B. ""dorm rep"" finished the season with an average of thirteen swears a game.
Thanks To Monty A tribute is in order to Monty Woolson, the co-ordinator and administrator of our intramural program.
He has spent many lonely nights in the gym looking after his fellow school friends.
Monty is known for his humanitarian qualities and this year he has lived up to his reputation again.
He has given his entire intramural paycheck to the athletic department with the specific purpose of buying new softballs for the spring.
For this and many other innumerable services the Sports Staff of the STUDENT is presenting the ""Wheaton Whiz"" with a monogrammed clipboard.
A BASKETBALL W-L Mitchell-Milliken 5-0 Frye-Chase 4-1 Cheney 3-2 Wilson-Hacker 2-3 Rand 1-4 Page 0-5 Baseball Team Goes South To Prepare For Spring Schedule By AL MARDEN '63 Lewiston — The Garnet Pastimers, defending state champions, inaugurate their 1963 baseball season this Sunday as they journey to Washington College in Chestertown, Maryland, on the first southern spring trip in five years.
In addition the Leaheymen will play several practice games while in the ""warmer climes"" on their one week trip.
An experienced pitching staff headlined by ace pitcher Thorn Freeman should assure the Garnet squad of an equal of last year's 8-4 regular season record.
The 'Cats were 9-5 overall as they split a pair of games in the NCAA Small College Tournament at Teaneck, N J., where they were runnerups.
Freeman, a unanimous All-Maine choice last year as he posted a 7-1 record, finished with an outstanding 1.83r.a. and struck out 67 opposing batters.
The senior fireballer is backed by junior Ted Beale, sophomores Bob Lanz and Ted Krzynowek and frosh Bill Beisswanger.
Receivers Equal Lettermen Bill MacNevin and Dennis Feen along with sophomore Steve Egbert will handle the catching chores this season.
MacNiven recorded a .242 batting average in his freshman year as he saw considerable action as Freeman's battery mate.
First base duties will again be performed by All-Maine selection Howie Vandersea.
As a four year trackster, LaVallee provided Coach Slovenski's thinclads with a competitive spirit of highest quality and leadership in the truest sense of the word.
LaVallee established the Bates indoor record in a 7. second time in the 65 yard low hurdles.
The power-hitting right-hander slugged four home runs during the 1962 season.
A new face will be seen at second base where either freshman John Yuskis or senior Dick Dolan will get the starting nod.
Dolan was a fielding standout with the junior varsity squad during his freshman and sophomore years while Yuskis has impressed in pre-season workouts with his hitting.
Smooth glovemen Paul Holt, a junior, will be back at shortstop where he excelled as a freshman and sophomore.
Holt led the team in R.B.I.'s during state series play last year as he drove in six runs.
Top Hitter At Third Hard-hitting John Lanza will hold down the hot corner once again this year.
As a rookie third-sacker, Lanza led last year's squad with an impressive .344 batting average.
Freshman Brad Akerman is expected to see action as a utility infielder.
Captain Ron Taylor should start in left field, a position he has held for four years.
Taylor, who was All-Maine in his freshman and sophomore years, led the team in stolen bases last year with five thefts.
Taylor is also an occasional pitcher called on mainly for relief chores.
Monty Woolson, called by Leahey, ""the best defensive outfielder in Maine,"" Bill Davis and Bud Spector will share the outfielding chores with Taylor.
First Floor open 5:30-lO; Sundays to 9:30 SEVEN DAYS A WEEK I Hates Stucbnf 1*7 Vol.
Losing in the final debate round to Vermont, by a two to one decision, Bates finished two points behind Vermont in the compiled list.
In other individual events Howard Blum '63 took fourth place in oratory and David Kramer '63 was fourth in oraf interpretation.
In addition, Woodbury and Bowie will participate in the extemporaneous speaking event and Rouault and Boyd will enter the persuasive speaking event.
Ohio State chose to argue the affirmative, Morris Lelyveld '64 and Norman Bowie '64 will uphold the negative for Bates.
The debate will be conducted by mail, and after a complete exchange of speeches, each school will have a tape of the entire debate, which shall be used as demonstrations at debate clinics next fall.
The debate will also be published in a new edition of Professor Quimby's book for high school debaters, ""So You Want to Discuss and Debate,"" which is distributed in forty states.
Tourney Here The New Hampshire Secondary School Championship Debate Contest will be held in the Little Theater on Saturday, April 6th.
Wilfred Martin '59, a former debater and president of the Student Council, will attend as the coach for Laconia High School, last year's debate champion.
Preliminaries for the Bates Oratorical Contest will be held at 4:00 o'clock on the afternoon of April 9th, in room 300, Pettigrew Hall.
Each entrant will be required to deliver an eight to ten minute persuasive speech.
Phillips Presents 3 Point Foreign Aid Program A three-point foreign aid program, designed to provide military security for the Free World and to encourage the economic growth of underdeveloped countries under the private enterprise system, was outlined by Dr.
He suggested to the Life Underwriters Association of Kansas City, United States government grants to other nations for military purposes, a limited amount of government loans to aid in carrying out the normal functions of government, but with full reliance on private funds for economic development.
Military Aid Necessary ""There seems to be general agreement among our citizens,"" said Dr.
Phillips, ""on the necessity of military aid to our friends throughout the world.
Such aid is really an insurance policy to protect the entire Free World from the spread of Communism.
Phillips said, we are quite willing to devote a limited amount of money to help underdeveloped nations improve their roads, build schools, and train their civil servants.
These loans can be a factor in providing stable governments throughout the, world, and it is certainly to the advantage of the United States to encourage such stability.
Economic Aid Wasted ""However, our experience with government grants and loans to encourage economic development in the underdeveloped nations,"" continued Dr.
Too many of these governments have wasted a large part of our aid on uneconomic programs.
The president emphasized that the solution to these problems is to stop all government controls and loans for economic aid.
This step will encourage the underdeveloped nations to take steps to attract private funds — checking inflation, balancing their budgets, removing restrictions on trade, and undertaking economically sound projects.
Chapel Gets Grade A Snow Job From Men's Bucket Brigade By ALLEN CUMMINGS '66 Spontaneity is hard to come by at Bates, but once in a great while some idea comes along which seems just too good to be passed up.
One of those ideas smote the Bates men two nights prior to the Spring recess. — — — — ; — — — — • Throughout the day, rumor spread that the Chapel would be ""snowed in"" at 11:00m.
The appointed hour arrived and evildoers appeared from out of the chilly Maine night and converged on the Chapel as though it were a Yankee-style ""Bay of Pigs"" invasion.
Nor did they waste a single minute discussing the pros and cons of the venture.
Ashcans On Parade In less than an hour the four smaller doors had been piled high with the glorious white stuff.
Wastebaskets, smuggled in just for the occasion, swung in systematic rhythm and the piles grew with the hour.
The finale was an all out effort on the huge double door on the south end of the edifice.
Pail after pail of water was thrown on to freeze the soggy snow and the water arrived by the ashcanful aboard toboggans hastily rigged for the job.
All appeared to be going well when two swarthy Lewiston policemen arrived to ""disperse the rabble"" and to restore order to the slushy premises.
The real ""mopping up"", however, was left for the College Snow-Shovel Corps to cope with in the frigid dawn.
Whether a protest against the ancient, mandatory, and much revered Chapel program; a Machiavellian move by the Bates Young Republicans to keep Mr Ted Silvey, the AFL-CIO representative, from speaking to the eager students; or merely a goofoff stunt, this incident was the biggest student act of spontaneous reaction since the now-forgotten cheese sandwich outbreaks of past years.
Marilyn Fuller, to succeed Harriet Schoenholtz '63 as editor of the Garnet; Linda Browning '64 replacing Eunice Jansen '64 as editor of the Mirror; and Alan Pethick '64 who will succeed Ted Smith '63 as business manager for the Mirror.
In an interview with Marilyn Fuller, the editor of next year's Garnet commented upon her objectives.
With respect to the last issue, I would prefer personal rather than critical essays.
They are squeamish at the thought of having classmates read their personal thoughts.
For example, we need good satire which would stress wit rather than the debunking techniques common to contemporary humorists.
Linda Browning '64, President of the Publishing Association, was appointed by the Association as editor of the Mirror.
Miss Browning commented that she expects no real conflict in her dual role in the Association ""The presidency is a business position, whereas the position of the editor is of a creative nature.
Connecticut, Pethick has been assistant business manager for the past two years.
During this past year he has been secretary-treasurer of the Economics Club and treasurer of the Outing Club, a position he will hold again next year.
He hopes that he will be able to do a good job in both the O.C. and the Mirror despite the increase in responsibility of his new position.
Pethick plans to pursue a business career in the field of sales and marketing.
The yearbook is primarily for the senibrs but is also a record of campus life for all students.
Our new business manager encourages student support of the Mirror staff in order that an excellent yearbook may be published.
Joseph D'Alfonso, Professor of Philosophy, will be a panelist at the St.
Francis College Symposium on ""The Christian in the Modern World"" in Biddeford, Maine, on April 8 and 9.
The two-day symposium will consider papers, and question and comment on their major issues.
TWO BATES STUDENT, APRIL 3, 1963 Guidance INTERVIEWS ON CAMPUS On Friday, April 5, Mr Robert L Adam from Baker and Adam will meet with men interested in onthe-job training.
Also on April 5, Captain Barbara A Davis of the Army Medical Specialist Corps will meet with junior and senior women interested in summer and career training programs in physical therapy, occupational therapy, and dietetics.
On Friday, April 12, a team of Navy Officers will visit the campus to discuss with interested students, the opportunities available to prospective graduates as commissioned officers in the United States Navy.
There are also programs available to women college students in both junior and senior years.
MEN CAREER OPPORTUNITIES The Hyde Park YMCA has recently announced a position vacancy for a Boys' Secretary.
The letter may be seen in the Placement Office, and the person to contact is Mr Arthur C King, Executive Secretary, Boston Young Men's Christian Association, 1137 River Street, Hyde Park 36, Mass.
WOMEN CAREER OPPORTUNITIES AND INFORMATION Parke, Davis and Company has positions available in Ann Arbor for women graduates in chemistry.
There are also openings for women graduates in analytical chemistry for the Detroit analytical laboratory.
The Harvard-Radcliffe Program in Business Administration has sent the Placement Office ""Job Profile Leaflets"" under such titles as retailing, marketing, advertising, journalism, and electronic data processing.
TEACHERS COLLEGE, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY offers a work-study program for financing graduate work.
This program lends itself well to the needs of students who are willing to pursue their studies more slowly and be self-sustaining while doing so.
March 27, 1963 Time: 6:45 Attendance: All Present Guests: New Council Members Committee Reports Extra-Curricular Committee — Ahem reported that the New Senate Constitution has been passed by the Committee.
Social Committee — Mawhinney reported that the Close Harmony Concert plans are going slowly with little reaction from invited groups.
A decision as to whether or not the proposed Concert will be held should be made by April 1-8.
Dobson reported that the Men's Proctor Council Constitution is to be submitted to the Extra-Curricular Committee.
If this article is accepted by the Committee, the Senate Constitution as a whole will go to the Faculty for approval or rejection.
President Stone then welcomed the New Council and collectively swore them into office.
President Ahern took the Chair, and opened the new meeting by making the committee assignments.
Proctor applications, picked up in the Dean of Men's office by all interested men of '64 and '65, must be returned to that office by 4 on the 8th of April.
The Council will start interviewing applicants on Wednesday, April 10th.
The right honourable Phil Brooks took hold of tradition and moved to adjourn.
Smith leads the Choral Society in rehearsal for this Saturday night's Pops Concert.
April 7. the Lewiston-Auburn Council of Churches will sponsor a festival service in the college chapel.
FREE REGISTRATION NOW for SEPTEMBER VACANCIES This Saturday night music and decorations will combine to set the mood of this year's performance of the Bates College Concert and Choral Society.
The green, red, white, and yellow decorations for the Concert will also be unique.
With the stage representing Spring, each of the other three sides of the gym will signify another season.
The canopy will be a spoke effect instead of the usual tent, and the artistry will also include mural designs and ""trees"" on the stage and at the opposite end.
For those who do not wish to dance there are seats available in the balcony for 50c.
Al Corey's band will provide dance music between the Band's performance at 9:20 and the Choral Society's presentation at 10:25 Refreshments will be served during the intermission.
The Band and Choral Society have beep rehearsing since the beginning of the semester for this week's annual Pops Concert.
They will not be doing numbers that everyone has heard but plan ^uiiiiiiiitiiiuftf]iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiTitiriuMMit«ffiiirinriiiiirtitiTtiMitiii(tiiiiirf fiiiiiimiMtttiiitir^ Ritz Theatre I Thurs.-Fri.-Sat — KING SOLOMON'S MINES 1 ""NAKED SPUR"" Sun.-Mon.-Tues. — ""WHATEVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE"" ""MERRILL'S MAURAUDERS"" — Closed Wednesdays — iiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiii miiiiii minium iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinniiiii on a different approach this year, and will present a predominance of mood pieces.
An open house will be held in The Women's Union from 11:45 to 12:45; sandwiches and coffee will be served.
EMPIRE NOW PLAYING ""TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD"" GREGORY PECK MARY BADHAM PHILIP ALFORD Sun. Mon. Tues.
CHUCK WAGON i v Orrve InRestaurant — Juniors Plan Ivy Program The annual Ivy Day exercises will be held Monday, May 6, 1963, in the chapel.
On April 2, 1963, the dorm representatives met to select nominations for speaking parts.
Nominations for class marshal have already been made, the final selection will be made by Professors Buschmann and Smith.
Submitted for consideration were Richard Saylor, John Strassburger, and Robert Peek.
A prize of an Ivy Dance ticket will be given to the person from the class submitting the best design for the program cover, the best design for the stone inscription, and the best Ivy Day Ode.
Designs and odes should be submitted on or before April 15 to Norman Bowie, Paul Goodwin, Marion Day, or Eunice Janson.
April 8 Mr Paul Bockwalter from the Japan International Christian Universities Foundation Wednesday.
April 10 Paul R Carmalk, a Christian Science Practioner AM. to S:M YACHTING SUMMER POSITIONS The Welherill Company, a crew placement intermediary with yacht listings on the East coast.
Due to the preference of most yachtsmen, we are accepting applications from college students and graduates as crew on motor cruisers and sailboats.
Each application will be sent to over 3000 large yacht owners in April.
Crewing affords an opportunity to acquire or sharpen boating skills, visit new places here and abroad while earning a good salary in pleasant outdoor surroundings.
To apply, send us a short resume using the following form along with $5.00 processing fee.
BATES STUDENT, APRIL 3, 1963 THREE Aaaoftlfoer Mam's Ponsonn By MALCOLM MILLS '65 Mozart deals with people as expressions of his themes.
His string quartets explore the outward personality — the shyness, sadness, or gaiety.
And in his symphonies he takes the dreams and internal working of his quartet personalities and gives them harmony.
His creations run up hills and lie down in the grasses and look over the world.
Mozart catches the essential strain in a man in his quartets and sings it to all men in his symphonies.
It is not unusual, therefore, to find reminiscenses of Johann Christian Bach flitting here and there in this quartet.
Kierkegaard would undoubtedly fumble about with a dissertation on the ""erotic"" and its immediate stages and tie Mozart together around this theme., But since I tend to a more psychological or sociological perspective, I hold by my thesis that Mozart was profoundly concerned with people and the themes they presented to nun.
All of his symphonies were individually dedicated, according to Einstein, — and not only to his patrons.
Make Peck's your thrifty shopping habit. quite satisfying to think that one has found the essence behind a composer's ideals.
Wilhelm Reich, in his famous Character Analysis, third edition, states, ""Every musical individual knows the stale of emotion created by greai music; yet, it is impossible to put this emotion into words.
Nevertheless, it is an expression of movement and creates in the listener the impression of being moved.
The wordlessness of music is generally considered either a sign of mystical spirituality or of deepest emotion incapable of being expressed in words.
The naturalscientiiic interpretation is that musical expression comes from the very depths of the living.
Music is the creation of an internal pressure thrust outward in a wordless whisper of love.
Music expresses the true soul in the only way that a soul can be understood.
Music is a vapor of essential meaning, whether it is condensed to the simplicity of the quartet form, or magnified into the complex phrasings of a symphony.
Wright Speaks Of Life, Love And The Outing Club NOTICE ' Lxme'ughiers"" are coming to Lewislon on April 28. to hold a Sunday Afternoon Concert in the Lewiston Armory.
All seats are reserved and will be sold on a first come first served basis.
The tickets may be purchased at dinner and supper at both Rand and Commons, and may be bought at any other time from Al Francoeur.
A heavy advance sale is extremely important as this is necessary to insure the performance.
Superb quality by the makers of the world famous NIKON camera and accessories.
Call or write for special Nikon Medical Student Miscroscope brochure and special discount offer for students entering medical school.
Phone KI 7-8600 This is the third in a series of extensive interviews with members of the Bates faculty.
Wright R A little bird told me that you are in a publishing race with Prof.
Prior to this, you had spoken to me concerning the problems you were having getting your book published.
W I should say it's a race — cither I quit right now, or I want a handicap.
W I am in the process of trying to get my doctoral dissertation published.
The problems I'm having stem from the fact that dissertations are not very saleable.
Therefore, I don't have a wife who wants me to do odd jobs over the weekend.
But as to the philosophy of chaperonage, I know what your informants have in mind.
I don't want to create problems for the Extracurricular Activities Committee by stating this philosophy publicly.
R This brings me around to my favorite topic — the professor's opinion of Bales College social life.
Mr Nelson's answer was that the students should make their own social life.
This is a typical answer of the upperclassman who has a girl at home or up here or has his social life worked out.
I have found students who have sat through one of my classes a whole year who don't know the person of the opposite sex sitting next to them.
This may indicate that there is a lack of initiative or a lack of informal places where students can meet, know that there is a lot of complaining about this and I'm not sure that it's all justified, particularly when the O.C. makes an effort to sponsor hikes, ski trips etc., and doesn't get a good at tendance.
In the long run, think we badly need a student union, and more lounges in dormitories.
I gather that the men's dorms don't have any. think other parts of this problem are the fault, of the students themselves or this whole generation.
Here I would like to put a particular complaint in against the institution of going steady, a vicious institution which came on the American scene shortly after I got out of college.
Let me play old man for the moment and say that in my day we played the field — met a lot of girls and had a lot of dates.
With going steady, you get stuck with one girl and don't see other possibilities.
This might actually lead to divorce if, after marriage, a man meets someone who really interests him.
Anything the college can do to break up this evil institution would be good for the social life.
W In World War II, I was scheduled to land on the main island of Japan.
When the Abombs were dropped and the war halted, I was practicing landings at Lido Beach on Long Island.
W Well, skiing at Aspen is rugged — the long trails and all — and I thought it would be good to hit the sack early.
But my comrades insisted that I go out to the various picturesque nightclubs and nurse a beer for an evening.
At the clubs, these fantastic bunnies would show up in their stretch pants and do the twist all evening, and the twist in stretch pants is quite provocative.
W I have noticed a trend over several years for extracurricular activities such as O C. to be curtailed by excessive academic work.
At least this is the chief excuse students give for not participating in outside activities.
Students keep^ telling me that standards have been raised at Bates and we have much longer reading lists, more exams, etc.
I think the college ought to seriously consider dropping the course requirements to four.
You can't do justice to all five, and it tends to kill off extracurricular activities — which are supposed to be one of the benefits of a small, friendly, coeducational college.
Perhaps there are other activities such as Robinson Players which are flourishing like never before.
But I do think that the student's workload has affected all activities.
I like to see them every weekend while skiing, hiking, or working on the trail.
I would particularly argue that the kind of things the O.C. does can be continued when the student is out of college with his spouse and later with his children.
SNEAKERS HOOD'S RUBBERS For The Entire Family Shoe Repairing While You Wait at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main COLLEGE PHARMACY, Inc.
STate 2 3771 FOUR BATES STUDENT, APRIL 3, 1963 Editorials | Student Senate Elections A brief analysis of the Bates electoral process appeared in the previous issue of the STUDENT, and attempted to maintain three things.
Also, it leads to an informed electorate and subsequently to the increased effectiveness of a campus organization.
What the organization's function is, and who its members are, would be better known by the students.
The electoral process should be structured to allow, in every instance, for an informed electorate, and where possible, for active campaign.
Dan Ustick '63, this year's past chairman of the Student Council's elections committee, points out that during the special freshman election in the fall, interest and enthusiasm was noteworthy.
Indeed, with more time, ""parties"" or at least groups of candidates and supporters would have gotten together and campaigned for office.
In this initial Bates election, the male and female members of a class vote not only for their officers, but also for their representatives to the Student Council and Government, respectively.
It is this electoral system that should be maintained for subsequent elections.
Instead of all the men electing the Student Council, the representatives from each class should be elected by only the men of each class.
All that the Student Senate Constitution provides, in effect, is that the present Student Council and Student Government, can meet together.
In the selection of officers, all the men would continue to elect the male members, and all the women, the female members of the Senate.
And without increased campaigning, the present extent of uninformed voting or non-voting, among the men at least, would continue.
To have the system used in freshman elections continued for all four years would result in better elections.
In this manner, the electorate that a Senate office-seeker must consider would range from 90^125 students, and each of these voters would become significant.
If an office-seeker is not known by some of his constituents, he would have to make himself known.
With a relatively small constituency, the task would be neither difficult nor avoidable.
With only one hundred or so votes to be cast in his particular race, every vote is that much more decisive.
Perhaps this structural change cannot overcome the ""passivity"", or whatever you wish to call it, that characterizes Bates College.
But if some remnant of the enthusiasm that characterizes freshman, and their elections, does survive, it should be maintained rather than consumed by the electoral process.
David A Nelson Faculty Advisor Published weekly at Ghsuse Hall, Bates College, during the college year.
Entered aa second-class matter; at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879.
Inherent in any three semester plan is a danger which challenges the basis of higher education.
Although the danger is not necessarily overwhelming by itself, it must be considered.
This danger is the thesis of Paul Goodman's new book The Community of Scholars.
Mr Goodman begins by observing that the original function of a college was to bring students and men of learning together in a community where the students wanted to learn and the scholars wanted to teach, and which was independent of the larger world.
The American colleges and universities have become adjuncts of the larger world and they are not run by their faculties and students, but by their administrations under pressure from trustees and legislators.
The students waste time 1 and the role of the faculty is compromised by Administration and its own academism.
Finally, the colleges lose their function; which is ideally to refresh the larger community by insisting on higher' purposes and rediscovering new meanings within human experience.
Miss Logie's letter in your March 13th issue has just been brought to my attention.
If it is not too late to be of interest I will attempt to answer her questions.
In my phrase ""things are all different,"" the word ""things"" should be understood to include all those entities we usually call objects and all those interactions between objects we call events.
When I say an Atheist must do certain things to be a ""member in good standing"" I simply mean there are criteria a person must meet before I would classify him as an Atheist.
I should not be allowed the easy out, of riding the coat-tails of Christian morality.
It appears that any student of contemporary life would agree that this is what is needed.
In his rescue of Freud from the insubstantial neo-Freudians, Brown the iconoclast and enfant terrible builds his ideas like the construction of an inverted Gothic cathedral in a courageously brilliant diagnosis of the universal modern sickness.
Although I may not always express it in my acts, I profess an empathy for fellow humans.
It is on this basis ultimately that I feel we must decide what is best in a situation.
I am supported in my reliance upon this basis, not only by my own feelings, but by what I can surmise of the feeling of others, by the empathy of art, and by the Observation that moral dicta, from whatever source, tend to minimize individual and group suffering and maximize the continued and successful existence of the species.
The justification for an Atheist's adopting the Christian moral code would be found in his conviction that its predictions seemed sound and have been ""validated"" over a long period of time.
A study of the results of the application of this code could convince him it was a reasonable guide to' behavior even if he expressed total disbelief in its supposed origins.
Finally I would disagree with Miss Logie's implied equating of the responsibility of the theist and atheist.
There is a difference between being responsible for something and being responsible to something or someone.
To avoid my spending the remainder of the Semester writing letters to the Editor, my wife suggests I include the following list of readings, assuming Mill's Utilitarianism as a background.
Science and Human Values by J Bronowski The Philosophy of Science by Stephen Toulmin Human Society in Ethics and Politics by Bertrand Russell.
Robert M Chute we are saying very sweeping generalizations without giving the steps beforehand.
That's why the book must be read, for Brown, even if he is mistaken, is a vigorous thinker and an intellectually honest writer.
Reacts To Freud Brown wrote Life Against Death as a reaction after a deep study of Freud and psychoanalytical theory.
As we all know, Freud did not see any dancing butterflies coming gaily out of the unconscious mind.
He doesn't know what he's doing, and he's heading towards ultimate selfdestruction.
This characteristic is the result of the reality-principle infringing on the pleasureprinciple (erotic enjoyment of living), with the death instinct predominating over the life instinct.
Instead of affirming life we affirm death, and have rejected any weak eschatology we may have heretofore accepted.
Civilization Represses Civilization, with its institutions and other-worldly realitymorality, represses free expresr sion of the Eros, imposes rules and external laws and glorifies material inorganic and dead objects.
Everything is death instinct orientated (Luther's pronouncement that the world is ruled by the Devil) ; even (especially) the economics of capitalism, where condensations, mediations, and practicalities rule.
All this mess (Brown consistently refers to it, as excrement) is the result of sublimation of the anal-sadistic phase of infancy.
The essence of sublimation is the transference of energy-orientation from the lower processes to the higher ones.
Brown demonstrates that the death-instinct is closely related to anal fantasies.
Freedom Necessary He thus brings together death, anality, excrement, money, and societal repression under one heading.
By the way, Brown comments that Utopian thinking is just what is needed.
One of the important ramifications bound to repression, sublimation, and neurosis, is the pervading feeling of guilt.
Stating the problem brilliantly, Brown, like Freud, has only li BATES STUDENT, APRIL 3, 1963 IS/ FIVE Air Waves By DAVE OLSON '65 The newly elected executive board of WRJR assumed their 1963-1964 duties as the directors of Bates College Radio this week.
John David '64, the station manager, has served as disc jockey and commentator on the weekly Jaxx U.S.A. and as station worker during his three years at Bates.
Program Director Richard Dow has a variety of station experiences ranging from news director to assistant program director.
Dan Clarke '65 who is now Business Manager, has served for two months as news director and news broadcaster, as well as emceeing an Especially for You show on Thursdays.
Doug Wakefield, news public relations director, is featured on the Folk Hour on Wednesday.
The only returning board member is Technical Director Bruce Cooper '65.
His work has been instrumental in keeping the broadcasting equipment in working order.
Executive secretary Martha Ryan has, with Carol Stone, broadcast the On Campus show this year in addition to her duties as a staff secretary.
The past few weeks have seen both Stu-C and Stu-G appropriating $100 each for improvements and construction of convertor systems to enable campus AM radios to receive WRJR with increased power and quality.
The last segment, ""A Way Out,"" shows you where the door is but leaves you to figure out where the key is hidden.
Instead of the higher mental processes being sublimations of, say, infantile play with feces, they would be the result of an awareness of and regulation to the most enjoyable manifestations of Eros.
Nothing could be nuttier than a world that prides itself on its rationality and down-toearthness, its humaneness, equality, faith in God, idealism, happiness — and all the rest — and then behaves the way it does.
Agree with him or not, Norman O Brown is thorough, erudite, Bates Musicians Play In Festival By KEVIN GALLAGHER '64 David Harrison '64 and Kevin Gallagher '64 played with college musicians from the New England area at the New England Intercollegiate Band Festival held at Colby College on March 23.
Paul Lavalle, the guest conductor, worked with students from Colby, Bates, Bowdoin, Tufts, MIT, and several other colleges in the northeast.
Evening's Highlights The highlights of the evening were Darius Milhaud's ""West Point Suite,"" composed for the Sesquicentennial celebration of the United States Military Academy; and ""Symphonic Fantasy on Folk Themes"" by Dr.
This composition is based on several folk songs which Comparetti heard while on sabattical in Italy.
Originally written for orchestra, the Fantasy was transcribed for band for the Festival.
This writer was very favorably impressed by the quality of musicianship which Lavalle was able to get from the group.
Wright or ski-wear, I could find out many interesting opinions from students who blabbed away, thinking I was a fellow undergraduate.
But , I found for the outside world this is not such an advantage at conventions and so forth.
So the purpose of the moustache was to make me look a little nearer my chronological age. witty, persistent, creative, and penetrating.
David Kramer, Nancy Dillman, Bill Dye Sexton Bill Dye Gravedigger Steve Barron Fortinbras Kelly House Soldiers to Fortinbras Ned Brooks, Bill Hiss, Bradley Butler, Al Beemis, Steve Barron, Kevin Gallagher Palace Guards Woody Trask, Steve Edwards, Paul Goodwin Lords Peter Hyle, Lou Lelyveld, David Dodwell, Peter d'Erricco, Allen Skogsberg Ladies Phyllis Porton, Liz Metz, Sandra Prohl Assistant Directors — Allen Clark, Elizabeth Davis, Barbara Hudson, Jean LeSure.
Prompters — Jarey Adams, Chris Carter, Carol Cooper, Mary Ellen Keenan, Nancy Marshall, Anne Rodgers, Jane Sauer, Jan Soltis, Diane Van Nordstrand, Nancy Wetherell.
With Coach Walt Slovenski's garnet and whiteclad track forces opening the season on the confines of Garcelon April 20th and Chick Leahy's defending state champion baseballers following two days later, we hopefully look forward to a continuance of the blessings from Zeus and his idle storm gods.
Reflections on the southern swing of the Bobcat baseball squad are optimistic and expected, as the 'Cats will field a fine, veteran club.
Front line pitching depth behind ace Thorn Freeman received an added boost with the fine performances of sophomore hurlers Bob Lanz and Ted Kryznowek.
These two are expected to see considerable action as the Cats resume their 16-game schedule against Tufts in Medford on the 11th of April.
Frosh football star, John Yuskis, has found he is as much at home on the baseball diamond as on the gridYuskis' sharp second base play and threatening bat Pitching Promises Top As Cats SdIU Southern Season Games iron.
X UB&1S anai crv.».v»"">» — — x j — — . _ — , i have given him top billing at second base for Chick Leahy s state champs.
As usually proves the rule, the Pitchers have the early edge on the batters and with our Bobcats the same is true The potential for a solid hitting club is present and improvement along this line is expected and essential.
Several members of Vera UUom's hoop squad joined forces with a strong local contingent keyed on Lewiston High hoop coach Fern Massey and Edward Little mentor, former Maine great, Wayne Champeon.
As a team they journey to the State Amateur Basketball Championships held m Portland.
Seniors John Lawlor, Paul Castolene, and Pete Glanz backboned the rugged local aggregation that progressed as far T£e semi-finals beforelSsing to New England Teachers College champs, Gorham State.
The locals playing without Champeon and using only five men led most of the way before losing to the deeper Gorham team that went on to win the tourney.
Williams, judging from his performances in our own weight room, must be made a contender for the state laurels.
He was no longer the kid who had come pounding out of the streets of Harlem, a whirling, jabbing, tireless master with the kick of Carolina corn whiskey in his dusky fists, but he still bore the title of Sugar and awe of greatness still flashed in his fortysecond year.
Ray Robinson is in the ebb of a career that saw him win the welterweight title, five times become middleweight champ and almost gain the light-heavyweight crown Sugar Roy Robinson belongs to the mythology of fistdom that reverts to the image of the ideal champion.
In a final glance at the Garnet sporting scene the editors salute the promoter and backers of the Sonny-Cassius battle.
From all reports, Cassius' lightning moves proved too much for the game Sonny.
The College championship is at stake and the Las Vegas board has it a 6-5 pick 'em affair.
Fred Woolson, Garnet center fielder, quickly moves back to first base in game with Rider.
By RED VANDERSEA '63 The Garnet baseball team returned last week from a successful swing into the South where they officially opened their season with a record of 1-1.
The Bobcat Pastimers topped Washington College by the score of 9-1 while dropping a 10th inning clash to highly-rated Rider 2-1.
This trip, the first such excursion in four years, evidenced the presence of some prime quality pitching in both the Garnet and opposing teams.
The weather was much colder than expected, proving to hamper somewhat the potential of Bates hitters.
Despite this obstacle, however, the teams got some fine work in and the trip in general was regarded as a success.
Opener In Maryland The first game was played at Chestertown, Maryland, home of Washington College, the club the 'Cats opened against in winning style.
Ted Krzynowek started for the Bobcats, pitched four innings of no-hit ball, struck out 9 opponents, and received credit for the win.
He was followed by Ted Beal in the 5th inning and Bob Lanz in the 8th inning who struck out the side.
Although the 'Cats were held to one hit, a triple from the bat of Archy Lanza by Washington's ace, Chuck Meding, they teed off on the next two pitchers.
John Yuskis,. playing his first varsity baseball game, got 2 hits, and along with Bill Davis played a very important part in Bates' big first inning.
Davis didn't stop here for he went on to get on base four times and score four times.
The Bates bats gradually demolished the efforts of both the second and third pitchers, and in the 5th inning Red Vandersea hit a two-run homer to put the game beyond reach.
Also of importance was the fine base running displayed by Bill Davis, Ron Taylor and John Lanza.
Now Thorn Freeman can expect some good support from Ted Krzynowek and Bob Lanz.
Bates received fine pitching from Thorn Freeman, but couldn't get a rally going against the strong Delaware pitchers.
Delaware was one of the better teams Bates has played in the past few years and they certainly proved it through their talent displayed.
Bates' only run came in the 2nd when Ronnie Taylor walked, stole second, and scored on Fred Woolson's sharp line drive to right.
After that, the 'Cats' hitting turned as cold as the weather and the Blue Hens scored two more runs.
Lose in 10th On the final day of the trip the team traveled to Trenton, New Jersey, to play Rider College.
In the last of the 10th inning the score was tied 1 to 1 with Rider at bat.
The bases were loaded, two men were out and the count on the batter was 3 balls, 2 strikes.
Garnet ace Thorn Freeman straddled the mound prior to blazing his fast ball close in on the batter's wrists.
The batter's jammed swing sent a slow, dribbling, ground ball to the right of the mound that was just too slow to enable the charging shortstop Paul Holt, to force the runner at home.
Ted Krzynowek had started for Bates and had given up one run in four innings before giving way to Freeman.
Freeman held the Rider hitters scoreless until the game-winning infield hit in the tenth.
The Garnet team looked great defensively — making only two errors in three games.
The hitting must be improved and with the material present it promises to be.
Maine BATES STUDENT, APRIL 3, 1963 SEVEN Bates Graduate Heads Baseball By AL WILLIAMS '64 William J Leahey, better known to the Bates students as ""Chick"", has been an omnipresent figure on the Maine sports scene for the last 21 years; seven of which he has spent as baseball coach and coach of the junior varsity basketball team.
He was captain and quarterback of the 1942 Maine Championship football team.
Leahey entered the Marine Air Corps in 1943 and served 43 months — 15 of which were spent overseas.
There he batted .310 and made a fine double-play combination with Jerry Snyder who played several seasons with the Washington Senators.
The next year he was a teammate of the Yankee great Whitey Ford at Norfolk (Class B) where he batted .275.
Deciding to forsake pro-ball, Leahey returned to Lewiston and entered Bates — a decision that he has never regretted.
Because he had played pro-* baseball he was ineligible for college sports but still coached freshman baseball and basketball his last three years.
He continued playing baseball with the Auburn Aces, a local semi-pro team for several seasons.
Holds Masters Degree Pursuing his education further, Leahey earned a master's degree from Columbia a year later.
One and a half years later Leahey returned to his alma-mater as the baseball coach andv. basketball mentor.
Coach Leahey considers Bob Dunn the best allaround player he has ever had.
College's Proving Ground Coach Leahey feels that the colleges are becoming more and more the proving or testing ground for major league ball players.
This has become much more evident in the last few years with the dip ""and subsequent collapse of minor league baseball because of television.
Small college baseball, however, has been weakened because of the cutting down of summer baseball leagues which gave college stars necessary experience.
LEAHEY'S ALL-STARS lb Bob Dunn ""56 2b Bob Atwater ""55 3b Joe Murphy '59 ss Norm Clarke -59 If Ralph Davis ••56 cf Bob Martin ""57 rf Albert DeSantis ""58 c Wayne Cain ""58 c Robert Reny '55 p-1 Fred Jack '56 p-r Jerry Feld '60 * denotes captain or co-captain Final Team Statistics RePers.
SEVEN DAYS A WEEK Tennis, Golf Teams Ready For Upcoming Schedules By KEITH BOWDEN '64 In the upcoming weeks, the Bates varsity tennis and golf teams will take to the road and begin their 1963 seasons, despite all the snow surrounding us at the present time.
Veteran Tennis Squad The tennis team begins the season with a two-day jaunt to Lowell Tech and St.
Coach Ullom has several experienced players on this year's squad plus a promising group of freshmen to fill the ranks.
Captain Jim Corey and Jim Wallach are sure to be two of the outstanding players in state series competition and will give anyone they face a strong battle.
Backing them up will be George Beebe, Todd Lloyd, Perry Hayden and Jim Dodds, all veterans from last season's play.
The Garnet squad will also be bolstered by the return of John Wilson after a year's absence and freshman Bob Thompson, who has looked very impressive in practice.
This year's team looks very strong at the top and has adequate depth for strength in the fifth and sixth singles matches where the day is often won or lost.
The Garnet squad could give state champ Bowdoin a strong challenge in this year's state tournament and should be able to take the measure of both Colby and Maine.
Brown Golf Captain The golf squad will retain a solid nucleus from last year's squad, headed by Captain Thorn Brown.
Lloyd Bunten, John Schatz, Andy Witt, Phil King and a couple of old pros in Chuck and Wally Lasher.
With the addition of freshmen Lynn Simpson and Joe Matzkin, the Bobcats will field a very strong team and should have little trouble improving on last year's record.
Coach Hatch will be preparing the team for May 21 when it will invade Augusta for the state tournament.
The Garnet squad has to be given a good chance to dethrone Colby this year, as all the other Maine teams have incurred substantially heavier losses through graduation than has Bates.
Home Links Golf is the only sport at Bates that does not take place on campus.
The result is that spectator interest is usually lacking and it becomes the forgotten sport at Bates.
Nonetheless, some fine golf is played at this time, considering the soggy conditions of the courses.
Anyone wishing to follow the Bates squad in their home encounters can do so at the Martindale Country Club in Auburn.
Bates rooters may really have something to yell about if the tennis and golf teams enjoy successful seasons along with the baseball and track teams which again look to be strong this year.
Jim Corey, Tennis; Ron Taylor, Baseball; Pete Graves, Track; Tom Brown, Golf; Bill LaVallee, Track.
A at New England's Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS ~4 BEDARD'S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston.
A Sportslight By MARCIA FLYNN '65 Three sports were in pre-vacation activity.
Linda Mitchell, freshman from Greenlawn, N Y., went to Brandeis for the Eastern Intercollegiate Fencing Tourney.
Linda has fenced for two years under Oscar Kolembaforrch, the fencing coach for West Point and the Metropolitan Opera Company.
She was placed in an advanced group at the competition and won two out of her five matches.
Congratulations are due for this Chase House girl as one of the first Bates women to fence in competition.
Colby Congratulations are also in the offering for our fine volleyball team which defeated Maine and Colby on March 9th.
All the girls competing were given U of Maine ash trays or mugs and free rollerskating instruction in the afternoon.
Two teams were sent from each school and they played one team from each of the other three Maine schools.
Louise Carrey, Jean Dawson, Jane Potter, Judy Warren, Genie Wise, Elaine Woodford; juniors: Marian Day, Nancy Day, Linda Jarnett, Nora Jenson, Lynn Parker; and freshman Pris Clark.
Sophomore Bette Davis and senior Joan Spruitt were chosen as alternates.
A very pleasant day was had by all and everyone was very happy at our final victory over the Physical Education majors at Colby and Maine.
MillikenMitchell is technically the victor but a few games remain to be played to vie for the final standings.
Cat Ping Pong Player By AL WILLIAMS '64 Most Bates students are unaware that at least one entirely new extra-curricular activity has been added to the Bates College program.
Last year a table tennis, or ""ping pong"" team, appropriately called the ""Collegians"" was formed by Bill Graham.
The Collegians won more than 50% of their games but still finished a disappointing third.
League Champs This year a determined five of Bill Graham, Pete Glanz, Gene Safir.
Every Tuesday night singles matches of three games each and one doubles match chosen by lady luck were played.
Junior Al Williams complied the best mark 42-6 to finishing second in the league despite losing 4 out of his last 6 games.
Captain Bill Graham, hobbled by a bad shoulder compiled a 41-7 record and trounced the Lewiston-Auburn Twin City champion five out of six times.
Sophomore Gene Safir was fifth in the standings with thirty-eight out of forty-eight wins.
BOB FISK Bob Fisk joined New England Telephone in Boston during 1957 and in less than three years was promoted to the position of Accounting Manager.
Newcomers Jon Olsen filled in well for Lee Sweezy, one of the original five who had more ability with a ping pong paddle than Dante.
Jon, playing for the first time, compiled a .600 record and won severaley doubles matches.
Freshman Bob Thompson only played in two matches , but still shocked a former Lewiston-Auburn champion by beating him decisively.
Ray Sirois, better known to the Bates students for his bridge playing, was the individual champion for the second year in a row with a 43-5 record.
The Naval Air Station in Brunswick has already extended an invitation to the Bates team to play.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Mam ■ i m John Yuskis, a freshman second baseman from New Britain, Conn., has been selected by the sports staff for this week's Bobcat honor.
Journeying south with the Garnet baseballers, Yuskis was the starting second baseman in all three 'Cat games.
Yuskis displayed extraordinary poise as a defensive infielder and his heavy hitting bat paced all Garnet swingers.
John Yuskis, though only a frosh and a rookie in college baseball ranks, rates high praise for his desire and performance in the Batesmen's southern swing.
Each dorm will have a place to leave books, with Page Hall serving as the central parking place This drive will help provide the educational materials needed in those areas where voter registration projects are taking place.
The conditions which the book drive is designed — hopefully — to alleviate are desperate.
The Negro colleges to whom these books will be going have virtually non-existent libraries, and it is almost impossible for the students to get good books.
In the places where voter registration projects are taking place, the books will be used to teach the people to read.
The voter registration exams are usually quite difficult, and an attempt to prepare the prospective voter is a vital part of the program.
Churches Support Drive The churches in the LewistonAuburn area are taking part in this drive.
Other church groups, as a result of students speaking to their ministers during spring vacation, will also be running drives.
In addition, this project is and has been taking place on college campuses throughout the country.
This project, as well as the speakers on campus concerning civil rights, is an effort to involve more students in this is sue.
Further activities are planned, foremost of which are discussion groups which will per form an educational function.
Anyone who is interested should see either Carline Harris '66 or Kelly House '66.
Dean Boyce Outlines Off-Campus Policy To maintain the Bates tradition of being a centralized residential college, the President and Trustees have decided to eliminate off-campus residence.
Off-campus living began only recently in 1956 with the closing of naval ""quantum"" houses, which created a large surplus of students without quarters.
With the proposed men's dorm near Smith, and new rooms in Roger Williams Hall with a smaller men's enrollment, the college hopes to include all men within campus houses.
Naturally, married or commuting students, or those living with faculty will not be included.
By the senior year of the \ Class of '65, this goal will be nearly realized.
The size of the incoming class will, at that time, have been reduced for two years in a row.
Thus sophomores who would like to room off-campus during their senior year, will be allowed to do so only if they are successful in obtaining off-campus residence for their junior year, too.
Independents or supporters of either faction are invited to the dance which will begin 8:30. at NOTICE The STUDENT is looking for reporters on either the News or Feature Staff.
Thursday at 4m. on Juniors Select Ivy Speakers John Schatz as Toastmaster will be master of ceremonies for the Ivy Day chapel assembly on May 6.
Other juniors who have been elected to back up Mr Schatz include John Strassburger delivering the Ivy Day Oration, Bob Sherman'who will toast the coeds and Lee Drury who will reciprocate by toasting the men.
Bob Ahern toasting the seniors, Steve Talbot doing the honors for the faculty and Nancy Day toasting the athletes will complete the program.
Holy Cross, Lisbon St. — Low Masses, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10; High Mass, 11m.
Contests Provide Opportunities For Students To Earn Money Committees Plan For Next Year As Bates Approaches Centennial Faculty committees and the administration are planning, with the community, to make the Centennial Year a noteworthy one; lectures, dedications, conferences, and colloquims will be among the events to mark Bates' 100th Anniversary beginning in September, 1963.
Carnegie Science Building, and The Maintenance Center will be dedicated at this ceremony.
They have been invited to take part in a two day academic colloquium and convocation.
Community Banquet To celebrate the 100th anniversary of the granting of the Bates College Charter, a joint community-college function will be held January 18.
This will be a Community Testimonial Dinner, sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce.
Another dinner meeting, for all of the Twin City service clubs, will be held in the Spring.
Commencement, with its emphasis on music, art, and drama, will be the third big occasion of the year.
In addition to entertainment by both the Robinson Players and the Music Department, there will be visiting speakers, and probably a wellknown professional performer.
On this weekend as well as two or three other times in the year, the plans call for a major art exhibit.
This would be in addition to the annual Bates Art Exhibit, and would be rented from a gallery or a museum.
Guest Speakers Throughout the year there will be a series of small on-campus conferences.
They will take place between faculty and alumni who have related interests, and will deal with such things as new developments in a particular field as related to the academic program.
One of these alumni will be selected, each week in which an assembly program is scheduled, to address the student body; and some of the visitors from each group will be available to students who may be interested in the careers which these alumni represent.
Professor Brooks Quimby '18, plans to give recognition to the 1913 founding of the Bates-conducted High School Debate League.
This will take place on November 8 in connection with a High School Debate League Clinic.
The science departments will hold a Science Fair as a 45th anniversary celebration of the first such fair in 1918.
By PHYLLIS SCHINDEL '66 Several contests are available to Bates students which provide opportunities to earn money and recognition.
The winner of this competition will receive not only a salary of one, hundred dollars a week, but his board and traveling expenses will also be provided.
Win Experience The summer position entails sitting in on sessions with authors, agents, artists, and book production specialists as well as participating actively in conferences with members of the editorial department.
A book review of not more than five-hundred words based on a selection from the book list provided by the' company is all that is necessary for entry.
This list includes books by Herman Melville and William Butler Yeats, as well as books by Walter Lippman and Harold Laski.
Choice Of Topic For all radical Bates scholars, there is the manuscript competition sponsored by the quarterly magazine, Studies of the Left.
The magazine is offering two prizes of three hundred dollars each for an essay on the social and natural sciences and for an essay on literature and the arts.
The Philosophy room bulletin board will provide further information concerning this contest.
Critical Essay Still another essay contest is being sponsored by Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Co.
The essay must not exceed 3,000 words and must be sent to Human Relations Program.
There have been others — an art contest sponsored by Madamoiselle magazine, which was to ""encourage imaginative students of the fine arts"" and which was to be judged by professional artists; and a poster design contest sponsored by the Yivo Institute for Jewish Research.
As a campus-wide organization, the Christian Association Council organizes and coordinates many varied activities which are performed by and for Bates students.
By announcing new commission heads, with a brief explanation of what their jobs entail, we can point out specific areas in which the C.A. is active.
Campus Service — Natalie JFischer '65 Planning for Freshman Week begins immediately, and it is Natalie's job to coordinate plans for IMUR, Stanton Ride and freshman chapel.
Community Service — Beth Bassett '66 Much work goes into finding jobs for C.A. work projects and organizing their execution.
Such volunteer programs as Pineland, CMG and Sarah C Frye visiting are all ways you can contribute to others while benefiting yourself, under Beth's area of emphasis.
Faith Commission — Peter J Gomes '65 Peter has done a ""splendid"" job this year.
It is only through your criticizing constructively to Carol in planning for the conference '64, that it can be better.
Nancy Vail '66 is the head of the Tutorial Project which has had such outstanding success, and is a new Council member.
As last year's president, he's the man to ask if you have any questions or requests.
Debating News The Delta Sigma Rho tournament at Dartmouth, scheduled for April fifth and sixth, was cancelled, according to debate coach Brooks Quimby.
On Saturday, April thirteenth, the fiftieth anniversary of the Maine division of the Bates debate clinic will be held in the Little Theatre.
On Saturday, April sixth, the New Hampshire division of the Bates debate clinic was held in the Little Theatre.
Thomas Aquinas, Stevens, Holderness, Portsmouth, Winnacunneet, Keen, and Dover.
The Bales Oratorical Contest will be held tomorrow night at 7:00 in the Little Theatre.
D C. is a member of The Board of Lectureship of the Mother Church, Boston.
The lecture is sponsored by the Christian Science Organization at Bales.
This consists of on-the-job training in several of the departments of the Comptroller's Division and could include such areas as financial accounting, electronic data processing, credit administration, and internal auditing.
This division is responsible for the continued development of new and the improvement of existing products, processes.and equipment.
Further career opportunities' with the Eastman Kodak Conu pany are listed under the headings of engineering, science, business, and liberal arts in the brochure available in the Placement Office.
Camp Vega and Camp Vega Senior Girls' Camps in Readfield, Maine, have openings for tennis counselors and for someone to head the tennis program.
Baker Brook Resort in Littleton, New Hampshire, is looking for five girls who would like employment as chambermaids and also a girl for the office.
Those eligible should have a bacheler's degree, qualifications for a college provisional certificate in the State of Pennsylvania, and evidence of successful student teaching.
April 15 Henry Walter Oakes Oratorical Contest The following minutes were taken at last week's Student Council meeting.
These meetings are held every Wednesday evening at 6:45 in the basement of Roger Bill and are open to everyone.
April 3, 1963 Time; 6:45 Attendance: Steinheimer absent Guests: None Committee Reports Extra-Curric.
Comm. — Aikman reported that the Men's Council Constitution of the new Senate was passed with few changes.
The constitution will now go before the Faculty at its next meeting,, amd if passed will go into effect in October of 1963.
Lecture Comm. — Dobson reported that the comCALENDAR Thursday, , April1& Speech Dept.
On Easter morning; a* 5:25 the C.A. will sponsor a sunrise service, on ML David* Following the service., breakfast will be served at the Federated Church in; Lewision.
WALT DISNEY ^fk Stallions TECHHICOLOR ROBERT TAYLOR LILLI PALMER CURT JURGENS CHUCK WAGON ~ ^ Drive In -Restaurant — * — mittee is working on the program for next year.
Old Business It should be noted that all organizations wishing to have dates set aside for specific -events on the 1963-1964 school calendar should consult Dean Boyce as to the proper method of procedure.
Their use is an ""immediate dismissal"" offense, and the Council warns that strict action will be taken againstviolators.
So, on May 8th, the Council will entertain the retiring members with, dinner and much ■ enlivened conversation.
A recent editorial in The Bridgeport Post said of ""home"" ""That home is ... 'a heap of liv ing' beyond price.
The home represents a loyalty among those who dwell therein, that goes deep reaches far, and outlasts the years.
To brace it against every strain, guard it from every dan ger — particularly the danger o:' uncaring — that it our task.
Shopping with mother on Fri day nights — or those fritters and dumplin's that dad cooked on the barbecue — these are the memories we must harbor close to our bosom and never lose.
Think of those problems which melted before a structure of nails, mortar, beams, and a heap of love.
Your home is the for giveness that is big enough to forget, and the understanding that laughs at mistakes anc makes allowance for human frailty.
Lewiston Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects' of the educational gift you have in mind.
Augusta, Maine through my copy of Edgar A Guest and think of how true his humble verses are.
Now we are at an age when we consider ourselves (falsely consider ourselves) superior to our parents.
Think of the many tears that mom wiped away from our eyes with her cotton apron.
When we first came to college we wrote home often — sort of wantin' to tell ""mom and pop"" about how lonely we were and how unhappy we felt — but we were scared of being babies.
Quickly college became more important to us and the letters dwindled and mom and pop sat around the dinner table — alone — musing about their son or daughter.
We had him for eighteen happy years, but now he has found his own life."" ""1 know, Warren ... oh how 1 know. only wish 1 could hear from him now and then — find out what he is doing.
And then the father shuffles slowly out to help the hands with the harvest while mother starts to read her prayer book.
Bates students who are tutoring at Lewiston H S., meet to discuss possible approaches to problems encountered.
Tutors Meet To Discuss Problems And Approaches HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JfWELfft 73 Lisbon St.
Lewiston By PAM YOUNG '65 At a recent tutorial meeting, reflections and problems encountered during tutoring were discussed.
Although some tutors were discouraged, at first, the warm friendliness and assistance of the Lewiston High teachers, has been reassuring.
This tutorial meeting, which took place last Thursday, brought out a discussion and exchange of approaches used by the tutors.
Many tutors were impressed with the gravity of the situation, and the difficulty which many of us encounter when we try to understand why a senior in high school doesn't know the difference between a subject and a predicate.
Interest High Many students find the biggest problem they have to cope with is that of very poorly motivated students.
Many tutors have found themselves trying to project their own attitudes and ambitions on the Lewiston students.
When the Lewiston student is not personally ambitious, some tutors find that they feel disappointed.
It has been hard to realize that most of the students we work with are just interested in getting through a course.
Nevertheless, the interest on both the part of the tutor and the tutee is very high.
One tutor brought an issue of the Garnet to a session and had her students grapple with some of the poems.
Others have tried to provide interest by referring as often as possible to sports.
Some tutors have found themselves reading the Lewiston paper so as not to be behind on what's happening in Lewiston High basketball.
Because this program is still very new, there are a great many problems which will have to be straightened out.
To help the tutors, a list of books to which they can refer is in the process of being compiled.
In addition, through discussions with the high school guidance department, an attempt is being made to provide more homogeneous grouping for the tutors to work with.
Slowly, the tutorial is evolving into a smoothly-working and definitely satisfying program.
The committee for the Dedicatory Convocation, a group working on the ""alumnus-of -theWeek"" program and career conferences, and a committee planning a two day Campus colloquium.
Further plan* for the Centennial have not been formulated, but it is expected that they will progress quickly now that the end of the academic year is so near.
The Bates Concert Lecture Series Committee Is now planning a series of informative and entertaining distractions for Bates students and the Lewiston-Auburn community in the coming year.
Taking the interests of the student body into consideration, as well as aiming for programs which are both entertaining and educational, the committee searches out people who will draw the habitual dorm dweller out for an evening well spent.
Such speakers as Norman Cousins, Ashley Montagu, Carey McWilliams, Martin Luther King, and Vance Packard have been considered for next year, but only until their availability is found out can solidified plans be made.
No Musical Events The noted lack of musical entertainment, which appears to be implied in the committee's title, is felt to be handled by the Community Concert Series which brings several musical events to the area.
The high cost of importing musicians is a ""major factor in this decision.
It was expressed that it would be feasible for both concerts and lectures to be on campus if there were an unlimited budget.
This, however, does not mean that music will not be considered in future years as a part of these programs.
Interest Low Committee members are scratching their heads trying to find events which will put an end to the marked lag in student attendance at these programs.
Committee Concerned The type of program offered has not changed over the years, seeming to indicate a lack of interest.
There has been mention of the heavier work load, yet this does not seem to have lightened the turnout at basketball games.
The professors are aware of the problems envolved in taking a night off from studies for a lecture and are expressing the possibility of making work loads for the following day somewhat lighter.
Dillon, Professor Berkleman, Mr Annett, Norm Bowie '64, Newt Clarke '65, Doug Dobson '64, or Marge Zimmerman '64.
FREE REGISTRATION NOW for SEPTEMBER VACANCIES FOUR BATES STUDENT, APRIL 10, 1963 Editorials | 'Social Life' In Context Previous editorials have stressed the importance of the individual, and the decisions that he makes regarding Bates College.
Al Francoeur's efforts to have the Limeliters come to Lewiston, and Norm Bowie's chicanery for Ivy Weekend, are commendable.
Both individuals decided that ""social life"" could be improved and sought to do so.
The total situation must be understood, and decisions should not be based solely on the wish to remedy one aspect of a situation.
If the action is, however, fighting a situation, it will probably reap only frustration as a consequence.
Such factors combine to make the possibilities of ""big name"" entertainment impossible.
In January 1961, Joan Baez, Cisco Huston, and the New Lost City Ramblers, performed in Chase Hall on the same afternoon.
This Spring, the Tradewinds, a good, but not ""big name"" singing group, will perform in Chase Hall.
Such efforts, by the Outing Club, the Deansmen, and the Chase Hall Dance Committee, will continue to meet with success.
We're sorry that Ivy Week-end will not feature a ""big name"" band, but we realize that the Extra-Curricular Committee's decision was the only feasible one.
For this year, the students should support ""social life"" both by attending the available activities and by making known their ideas and comments.
If you enjoy a performance or have some suggestions for next year, let someone know it Above all, consider the context within which an idea must be formalized.
Seek to improve not to conquer a situation If you work within, instead of against the college framework, success, not frustration, is that much more likely.
Dean Boyce s Doodles In his Doodlings last week, Dean Boyce wrote, "". . . it seems fairly obvious that attention will be given before long to the idea that the right to stay in college is perhaps not to be governed solely by mathematical computations of an acad emic record.
A man's general attitude and behavior may become as important as his meeting the minimum academic requirements.
Before this is possible, however, the Dean must clarify what he has in mind.
In thinking that college should be more than meeting academic requirements, Dean Boyce is correct.
Yet, what this more is, and how it is to be determined who is and is not worthy of an invitational return, is far from clear.
Yet, he does not explain what methods are to be used for evaluating student activity.
He stressed the importance of the Youth Employment Act of 1963, introduced in the Senate by Sen.
This bill would establish a Youth Conservation Corps (patterned after the successful New Deal agency, the Civilian Conservation Corps), and a local employment program, involving activity of young people in state and local government and private, non-profit organizations.
Manpower Act The proposals are a follow-up to the youth employment provisions for occupational training, passed in the Manpower Development and Training Act of last year.
The Youth Conservation Corps is also expected to reduce the eight billion dollar backlog for conservation projects in national and state parks and forests.
The Local Area Youth Employment Program should provide service for public and private local agencies whose funds are limited.
This Act, it is hoped, will reduce delinquency when young people with no satisfactory prospects are able to find work.
At present, unemployed youths between 16 and 21 comprise only 7% of the potential labor force, but 18% of the total unemployed.
By 1965, the labor force will have to absorb 3. million young people, a nearly 50% increase over the 1960 figure of 2. million Job Qualifications Service in the YCC is limited to men.
The pay ranges from $60 per month for the first six-month enrollment to $65 per month for each successive enrollment; total service may not exceed two years.
In addition to the above benefits, the enrollee re ceives tax-free room, board, transportation, and health and recreational facilities.
The Local Area Youth Educa tion Program is open to men and women who would be employed by state and local agencies.
They would work in schools, hospi tals, settlement houses, parks, libraries, Visiting Nurses Associa tions, orphanages, and the like.
Naturally, a major condition for their employment is that no regular worker be displaced.
Each service is to be headed by its own Director under the authority of the Secretary of Labor.
Appro priations would be determined by Congress according to annual necessity.
Youngs Dems Urge Support The Young Democratic Clubs of America are enthusiastically endorsing this proposed bill.
As Medicare concerns the aged, so does the Youth Employment Act concern us, our contemporaries, and our communities.
Mere rec ognition of the problem as one of direct concern and passive, si lent approval of the attempt at its solution are not enough; a Congressman cannot judge public opinion if no opinion is ex pressed.
As from this hour You use your power, The world must follow you! — Charlotte Perkins Gilman ""To Labor"" Labor led and we followed.
We followed victory after victory as she made the laboring man part of the general public.
But now the battles have been won and the labor movement is showing a different face.
Now, we must assume that labor will consolidate her gains, realize her responsibilities and develop a very realistic approach toward co-operative solution of the nation's expansive problems.
The vital brain power is missing and gone with it is the direction toward progress.
I have always attached great importance to the American labor movement.
So, it has been especially disheartening for me to watch this degrading transformation.
Hope In New Blood Every institution becomes oligarchical after its membership becomes disinterested, leaving the ruling power in the hands of a very few.
However, the existence of a totalitarian power structure cannot be tolerated.
The labyrinth of strength maintained by the old men who came up through labor's ranks, swinging fists and making their demands will change with the infusion of new blood, or so I thought.
As recently as March 4, 1963, I could write to the editor of the Lewiston Evening Journal confident that, ""The introduction and development of the young labor leader will find an awakening to the challenge.
They are going to provide the sophistication and awareness of the public sector of the economy in their decisions.
Reform Needed Now, I find that the younger leaders are a sterile group as well.
Chicago Labor Lawyer Lester Asher says one of the real tragedies of the labor movement ""is the lack of young intellectuals.
In the New Deal days, when I said I represented labor unions I was someone.
In 1945, Aaron Levenstein wrote a book entitled Labor Today and Tomorrow.
Union Abuses This country and the responsible union members are fed up with the abuses of power and are out to curb union excesses.
Senator Everett M Dirksen introduced a bill calling for compulsory arbitration in the maritime industry and injunctions against walkouts in the industry for up to one year.
Senator Barry Goldwater calls for a government conducted secret vote among the workers involved before the union leaders could call a strike.
Senator John L McClellan would ban strikes in defense industries and at missile sites and apply the antitrust laws to unions in the transportation field.
Representative Robert P Griffin also urges secret ballot elections before strikes.
Representative Bob Casey said any new law probably would call for compulsory arbitration.
He finds it much healthier to drag his heels in the face of our biggest internal threat.
BATES STUDENT, APRIL 10, 1963 FIVE Tracksters Prepare For Outdoors SP ORT,NG S » By NICK BASBANES 4 Reflecting on Friday night's championship encounter I must openly applaud the prowess of the pugilists and the enthusiasm of the supporters.
The battle, unique in itself, was enhanced by the most decorous display of ingenuity that I have yet to witness as a reporter.
Rho Beta Phi, home of former champ Cassius, had prepared a setting that left little to be desired.
The handlers of the green demon were clad for the occasion, as each loyalist proudly displayed a Cassius T-shirt.
But the real show was provided by the ""untouchables"" of Panda U., a group whose presence gave one the feeling of an impending arrival of Eliot Ness.
Amid a cloud of cigar smoke, and peering through the transparency of dark glasses, the dapper-clad ""untouchables"" cheered their hero Attila to a split-decision victory.
To one who failed to see this exhibition this would perhaps seem like a silly fuss and too much bother to exert over the viewing of two fish in the exercise of their instinctive behavior.
Of paramount importance was the evidence of a revived spirit which has suddenly taken hold at Bates.
This enthusiasm, which was kindled in the fall and raged through the winter, has proved that it's still alive in the spring.
To this combination of a harmless instillation of enthusiasm and loyal support which our teams have enjoyed, we salute, and hope for its continued existence.
Last Saturday saw three athletes from Bates compete in Portland in the annual state of Maine weightlifting championship.
Paul Williams, Bill LaValle, and Harry Mossman represented the Garnet cause and finished quite commendably.
It's interesting to note that if Williams had competed in the next heavier class he'd have won, as the winning total there was 595.
Reports from the sunny south express woe over the efforts of the other Maine colleges.
Colby, considered by many to be Bates' top Maine opponent, seems to be unable to find the winning caption since their opening and only victory against Ft.
Maine, on the other hand, beat Columbia for its second victory in six outings.
Though these results are encouraging for Bobcat loyalists, the fact that they are merely outside at the present time is an advantage.
With the weather following its present course however, Bates should be on Garcelon shortly.
Coach Styrna of Maine reports that his track squad mav be the best one he has fielded yet.
Not hurting in any department, he feels his squad is ready for the outdoors.
With such a note of confidence, and the tact that Maine has won the Yankee conference two years in a row and is defending state titlest lends an ominous foreboding to all opponents of the big Black Bears.
In closing, I would like to say that it was indeed an honor and a pleasure to have been selected as a judge for the already-mentioned aquatic encounter.
Added To Strong Slate m Returning Hurdle Strength, Harvie and LaVallee By STEVE EDWARDS *65 While the remnants of winter linger on to keep the outdoor track well irrigated with puddles of water, the Garnet track tigers can be seen carefully training in the Cage for a rugged spring schedule.
Opening on April 20, the thinclads will entertain the red and black of Northeastern on what we hope will be a hard-packed track.
The Huskies who beat us soundly in indoor competition will be displaying their customary strength and it should be a tough battle for the Bobcats.
On April 27th the Slovenskimen will journey to Colby to engage Brandeis, Norwich, and Colby.
Coach Slovenski is fairly confident about this tri-meet, as neither Colby nor Brandeis have posed a serious threat in 'the past.
Brandeis, however, 1 while not possessing outstanding strength, may give the thinclads some trouble.
A recent addition to the spring lineup is a very powerful U of Mass. team.
The Garnet will have to contend with not only U of Mass., but also Tufts and once again Northeastern in this same encounter.
The thinclads should be able to place third in this meet, as the Garnet has already trounced Tufts this winter and many 'of the Jumbos' potential pointgetters should be beaten by U of Mass. and Northeastern.
On May 11th, the thinclads will be found at Colby in the State Meet convention against U of Maine, Bowdoin, and Colby.
Byron Hicken of Maine will once again be seen running the hurdles against Garnet captain Bill LaValle and sophomore Allen Harvie.
These three are almost co-equals in ability and the man who wins, says Coach Slovenski, will be the one in the best con dition. Co-Capt.
Graves Baefc Back to add steani id the Garnet distance men is eb-captain Pete Grave's.Pete, Who is de fending state champ in the halfmile, will not want for competition as both Bowdoin and U of Maine possess strong halfmilNorn's Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners i Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS BEDARD'S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston.
If you are a Liberal Arts graduate, in one year yoti can . . . • qualify as a specialist teacher of science or mathematics in the elementary sctiool. • obtain a Master of Arts degree. • receive certification as an elementary teacher.
Good Potential Coach Slovenski estimates this year's team as possessing as much potential as last year's, with the strong events again held down by the distance and middle distance men.
The prancing Norwegian, Finn Wilhelmsen, and the undeniable Eric Silverberg, who both possess that qualits called intestinal fortitude, will be seen grinding out the mile and two mile positions.
Perhaps the most interesting competition will be supplied by the quarter milers, Jon Ford and Gerrit Binneweg.
Filling out the trio of middle distance men is frosh Pete Peterson, who has shown a great amount of potential in indoor competition.
Kramer In Vault In the pole vault, Bob Kramer Will again be the One to watch.
Bob, however, has recently undergone an operation which may set him back in conditioning.
Whirling the discus will be frosh letterman, Bill Davis, while Dave Harrison and Wayne Pangburn will be seen in the hammer circle.
If they are not stricken with the host of injuries that plagued them this winter, and if the lingering cold weather does not hinder their training, the cindermen will be able to boast another winning season.
And if final exams do not interfere, the Bobcats will journey to Central Connecticut to defend their championship title in the Eastern I.A.A. meet.
SIX BATES STUDENT, APRIL 10, 1963 Attila New Bates Champ By Way Of Split Decision Attila and Cassius go at it behind the enthusiastic cheers of their respective supporters.
Attila won the big bout, sending the title to Panda U A standing room crowd witnessed Friday night's fight in which Attila the Hun, representing East Parker, dethroned the favored Cassius Marcellus of Roger Bill by virtue of a close, split decision victory.
Cassius Cocky An official paid attendance of one hundred and nine, breaking the former mark of thirty-nine set last week, saw the wellmatched contest.
The Rho Beta Phi Corp. followed shortly and introduced their champion Cassius, dressed in turquoise.
Attila Fearsome The battle began at 11:15 with very little exchange for the first few minutes as the opponents went into their usual stalking tactics.
Cassius finally threw the first punch, stunning the East Parker hopeful with a blow to the side.
It was all Cassius for the first ten minutes as Attila failed to land a punch.
However, the East Parker challenger GOLF AND TENNIS SCHEDULES Varsity Golf April 17 at Clark April 18 at Tufts w/Bowdoin April 19 at Lowell w/Bowdoin April 23* at Colby April 25 Babson April 26* Bowdoin April 29* Maine Mav 2* Colby 6 St.
Thomas Brown '63 Coach: Robert W Hatch Varsity Tennis April 19 at Lowell April 20 at St.
James Corey '63 Manager: James E Steward '65 Coach: Verne Ullom proved to be waiting for the opportune moment, finally hitting Cassius with as vicious a blow as ever seen by this observer.
The champ dove to the bottom of the ""bowl"" as Attila proudly ""swam"" away to a neutral corner.
The fight resumed after the unexpected delay and the Hun controlled the action for the remaining forty minutes.
Split Decision Judges Nick and Willy voted for Attila while Judge Ron saw Cassius the victor, thus account ing for the close split decision victory for the Hun.
Student Salutes Cheerleaders; Jones, Milius Lead Retiring Six By STEVE RITTER '65 To be a cheerleader at Bates is challenging task.
Instilling school spirit is a hard job when your team is not winning consistently.
Although this is not always the situation at Bates, it has been at times, and the girls whp^ have attempted to inject this spirit into the student body deserve a lot of credit.
The ability to jump and yell are, prime requisites for a cheerleader, but the Bates cheerleader needs more than this to survive.
They are often subjected to tests more severe than those we face in the classroom.
A course in swimming might have been helpful to the gallant girls who waded through a treacherously wet football season.
Maintaining self composure while the ""Bowdies"" fire ribald comments across Alumni Gym requires a special type of girL All of those who attended Bates athletic contests this year are undoubtedly aware that our girls did a fine job under these trying conditions.
Four Graduate The four women leaving Bates via the graduate route are led by this year's co-captains, Les Jones and Holly Milius.
These girls deserve a lot of credit for their organization of practices and rallies.
Spring, along with its. welbasis of the number of men in a dorm and would work on a percentage basis, eliminating the large edge John Bertram Hall has over the rest of the men's abodes.
Recent intramural tourney action was centered in the handball courts of Alumni Gym.
Happy Ed reached the finals after a violent semi-final match with Bates' own Golden Greek, Phil Tamis.
Stu-C Tourneys The Student Council spring series of Chase Hall tournaments is underway, featuring pool, billiards, cribbage, chess, bridge and ping pong.
Slick Dave Kramer is expected to give last year's pool finalists Tom Brown and Norm Gillespie a frantic encounter in the race for the college crown.
Chess action features Norm ""Perry White"" Gillespie and his pool opponent, Tom Brown as the leading contenders again.
Al Williams looks real tough in the pingpong action. corned weather, has added its zest to our Bates College intramural activities.
Competitive action featured by our intramural program offers a wide variety of diversion from study in our six remaining campus weeks.
As the athletic fields ready for action, boasts of dorm softball proweress already are a topic of campus chatter.
Lux's office that this year's softball league will be able to return to a regular league basis as opposed to last year's single elimination tournament.
Leads Interdorm competition is a neck to neck, down to the wire race this year and as usual campus monster, John Bertram Hall is leading the way.
Decisive points will be hotly contested as the boys from Dixie fight to take the intramural crown back to the ""Home of Champions"" after a year's absence.
A pleasing innovation in intramural point awarding would certainly be a welcomed feature for Batesmen returning next fall.
This would award points on the Seven new faces will appear as graduation and retirement thin cheerleaders. leaders, the squad's success I stands, cast and all, giving her would not have been so great.
Lesie Jones, a psychology major from Roesmont, Pa., enjoyed three years of cheering for the 'Cats, as did all the seniors.
She was pleased with this year's squad and especially enjoyed the challenge of cheering in the rain and snow this fall.
Les will trek across the country this summer with two cronies, with he hope of finding a job in social work in California.
Holly Milius, from Cranford, N J., used her cheerleading activity as a lab for her major, speech.
Holly will go to dancing school this summer and after completion of those studies hopes to work in Boston.
Holly also hopes that next year's squad will add a few cheers with a little more zip.
She feels that the induction of acrobatics into the routines would help ""liven up"" the performance and possibly promote better spirit.
Teaching Career Marjorie Lord, a psychology major from Bedford, Mass., was a valuable asset to this year's squad.
The fourth senior is Judy Wendell, who comes from Fairfield, Conn., and is an English major.
Judy unfortunately missed much of the basketball campaign due to a broken leg.
Paul Planchon '64 , Manager: Stephen Talbot '64 Coach: Robert W Hatch at Norwich at Northeastern W.P.I, at Middlebury Maine at Bowdoin at Colby DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College 1 support to the other squad members.
Marriage Bells Two other members of this year's squad will be leaving Bates to face a challenge greater than cheerleading, namely marriage.
These girls did a fine job as cheerleaders and will be missed next year.
These six girls deserve a cheer from the students for their fine efforts this year as well as those in the past.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Selected for Bobcat honors this week is Wayne Corson, a history major, whose prowess on the handball court won him the campus championship this past week.
A native of Lynn, Mass., and an avid hunting and sailing enthusiast, Wayne proved himself too formidable for his opponents to handle.
Competing in an elimination tourney, the finals saw Ed Rucci and Corson meet for the championship.
Rucci, himself an established player, was unable to cope with the talented Corson, as Wayne took the three games, 21-4.
Peter Graves '63 Co-Captain: William LaVallee '63 Manager: Jonathan Peabody '64 Coach: Walter Slovenski May May May May ♦ Hates Student fat Vol.
BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, APRIL 17, 1963 By Subscription Loomer Outlines Relation Of Religion To Colleges Dr.
Loomer, a Bates graduate , is a member of the American Theological Society, an Honorary Fellow in the National Council of Religion in Higher Education, a member of the Civil Liberties Union, and a member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
In 1954, he was elected an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa in the Bates College Chapter.
Loomer played football for four years and received his letter in the fall of 1933.
He was also on the wrestling team, hockey team, the Athletic Council, the YMCA board, and was an active debator.
Loomer was selected for the Sports Illustrated Silver Anniversary All-American football team.
He served as a member of the faculty of the Chicago Divinity School and was named the first Dean of Students at that instiCommittee Reviews Healymester « Plan For Accelerated Education The original plan for a trimester system at Bates, which would have involved yearround operation, has been temporarily tabled, according to Dr.
Garold W Thumm, head of the Social Sciences Department and member of the special committee to consider accelered education.
While this plan has not been totally rejected, no action is being taken on it at the present time.
Now being considered by the Donovan Cites Age Of Paradox That Divides American Economy Bernard M Loomer tution.
In 1954, he resigned his administrative positions to devote full time to teaching.
Loomer's books are entitled Integrity, Community and Education and The Structure of the Christian Faith.
He is presently doing a great deal of lecturing in colleges and universities throughout the country.
Orators Share Contest Awards; Frosh Debators Sweep At Colby The Bates Oratorical Contest, held in the Little Theatre on the evening of April eleventh, was won by Robert Ahern '64, who spoke on Capital Punishment.
The judges were Dean Emeritus Rowe, Professor Whitbeck, and Professor Quimby.
Prizes awarded were $40, $25, and $15 for first, second, and third places respectively.
Singh, visiting lecturer on India culture, will show and comment on Mrs.
Kennedy's ▼isit to India; the story of the Land-Gift Movement and a film showing the work of India's foremost land reformist, Vinoba Bhabe. practice tourney held at Colby on April twelfth.
The negative team was composed of George Strait and Richard Rosenblatt.
As this was a practice tourney, critical evaluations were substitued for total scores.
Both of these teams will, compete in a debate tourney at Dartmouth on April twenty-seventh.
Henry W Oakes Contest Thomas Brown '63 and Howard Blum '63 spoke on the role of the Supreme Court in the Henry W Oakes Contest held in assembly on Monday.
Professor Warye and two local attorneys of the Anddoscoggin Bar Association, Fernand Despins and Roscoe Fales, were the judges.
John C Donovan, Special Assistant to the United States Secretary of Labor and a Bates graduate, spoke in chapel last Friday.
Donovan, the paradox of the United States economy is a hidden contradiction.
One of the few indications of its presence can be found in military service statistics.
Thirtyeight per cent of those who apply for participation in military service are rejected because they are illiterate.
These men will experience great difficulty in finding employment of any kind; and they are not alone in their plight.
One America is composed of the comfortable families from which most Bates students come.
The ""other"" America is a country of NSF Awards Bechtel Summer Study Grant Leland P Bechtel, Instructor in Psychology at Bates College, has been awarded a grant by the National Science Foundation to attend a summer institute in Contemporary Scientific Psychology for collegiate undergraduate teachers of psychology at Beloit College, Beloit, Wisconsin.
The six week institute is intended to acquaint the participants with the latest developments in their fields of special interest and will feature speakers, reports on research projects, and discussions of mutual problems relating to the teaching of psychology on the college level.
Mr Bechetel will be one of thirty participants selected from colleges and universities in the United States.
A native of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Mr Bechtel was graduated from Eastern Baptist College and holds a bachelor of divinity degree from Eastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
This mass poverty is invisible to most of us, since we have had little contact with the urban slums where this population lives.
Thirteen percent of those within the fourteen to nineteen-year-old age group are its citizens.
The unemployment rate among colored people of the same age is even higher — twenty-one per cent.
Each year several hundred thousand youths join the ranks of the permently unemployed — to face life-long unemployment.
To solve the unemployment problem, United States citizens must become indignant.
This newest challenge to Americans is within our own country, the challenge of finding more jobs, of resolving, as Dr.
The bill as it stands contains no amendments concerning racial discrimination.
Incoming^ freshmen would report to Bates approximately at the beginning of August for freshman orientation.
The return of upperclassmen around Labor Day would mark the beginning of the first term.
The term would end in the middle of December and would be followed by a vacation ending approximately the second week in January when the second term would begin.
A third term, or ""Healymester,"" would run from the beginning of May to June 25.
Among the points of the plan being discussed is whether or not attendance during the third term would be optional or required.
If it were to be optional, students could take a regular course load of five courses for two terms or a reduced course load for three terms.
Conceivably a student could attend all three terms with a full schedule of courses and graduate early.
Faculty Position Also being discussed is whether this third term would be optional or compulsory for both students and professors.
This is a major point of the plan and one of many which has the committee divided.
There is some question as to whether any changes to be made should be minimal or substantial.
An example of what the committee is faced with can be seen in the question of the teaching load of the faculty under such a new plan.
At present, Bates faculty members are required to teach 12 hours of courses per semester.
The May-June ierm would entail six additional hours of courses per year for faculty members, or a 25% increase.
If the term is made required, then faculty members will have to be compenstated with salary increases.
There are many problems to TWO BATES STUDENT, APRIL 17, 1963 Honors Program Available In Major For Senior Year By JENNIFER WINGATE '64 Outlined in the Bates College Bulletin are the qualifications for students participating in independent research and honors studies during their senior year.
Requirements are at least a 3.000 and a major average of 3.333 (freshman grades not counted), the recornmendation of the head of the department, and the approval of the committee on Honors Study.
Joseph D'Alfonso, chairman of the honors department, answered the following questions concerning honors study.
Persons should have competence in their studies and basic evidence is grades.
It is conceivable that a person could be doing well only in one specialized area and do research in that area.
During the last few years we have tried to bear in mind a total average in all subjects as desirable.
However, there is a possibility for creative writing and for limited projects as well as extensive reading.
If as at other schools the honors program were a separate entity •replacing regular classroom work this, might be true.
There is not evidence that honor students are penalized although the theme itself may be graded harder by the department head as more is expected and it counts six hours of credit.
The bulk of the students who qualify usually participate and usually follow through.
It is advisable for a student to study during the summer before the senior year.
Actually it also entails more work for the department because a professor has to guide one or more students in addition to his regular work.
D You would probably have to separate an honors program from the regular study program.
You would either have to enlarge the faculty or have special student help.
It would be a tremendous burden on professors under the present structure.
Actually the grade average for qualifying has been lowered to compromise with those who desire more participation.
D There is a movement in this direction with year courses instead of one semester courses.
Individual professors can hold students responsible for previous semester work if they desire.
Science Course Taught Here In '64 Bates College has been awarded a grant by the National Science Foundation to conduct an In-Service Institute for secondary school teachers during the* academic year 1963-64.
The program will include work in Earth Sciences and Mathematics for science teachers, and is under the direction of Dr.
Robert M Chute, chairman of the College's department of biology, geology and mathematics.
No college credit will be given for the program, but arrangements may be made for teacher certification credits with the State Department of Education.
Applicants enrolled in the program will receive financial assistance through the terms of the grant.
These meetings are held every Wednesday evening at 6:45m. in the basement of Roger Bill and are open to everyone.
April 10, 1963 Time: 6:45 Guests: Ritter, Strassburger, Rouault, Davis , Sherman, Gardiner, Campbell, Binneweg, Quintal, Macko, Donovan, McEntee Committee Reports: Extra-Curric Comm. — Aikman reported that the amendment proposed by the P A. (as to the term of office of the Business Manager of the STUDENT) was passed by this committee.
A continuation of the Publishing Association discussion will be carried on at a later date.
Comm. — Ahern and Dobson reported that a program to explain, and answer questions concerning the new Senate Constitution will take place in the near future.
Comm. — Planchon reported that a meeting of the Freshman Orientation Week Committee yielded many worthy suggestions which will be passed on to the proper administration authorities.
Chapel Comm. — Brooks reported that he had been in to see Dean Healy in conjunction with the Chapel Program.
The remainder of the meeting was taken up with proctor applicants for 1963-1964.
Finals are just far enough off to be forgotten without straining the mind.
This year the small-but-growing Art Association will provide not only an exhibit, but what promises to be the best exhibit of student art in the history of Ivy Weekends.
Francis; and it is hoped that perhaps in the future this ""festival of art"" will be expanded to include all of New England.
This is perhaps another way of saying that any bashful artists-in-hiding on this campus and on other campuses are invited to give the public a chance to see their work.
Those who have work which they would like to exhibit, or who have any questions regarding plans for this event might best see Linnell, or Bonnie Logie.
Camp will interview men interested in summer positions as Counselors-in-Training Director, Village Director or General Counselors.
All interested students should sign up at the Guidance and Placement Office immediately.
Camp Speers (Dingman's Ferry, Pa., in the Pocono Mts.) has openings for men as Rifle Director, Nature Director, and General Counselors.
Also, women are needed as Crafts Director in Boys' Camp and General Counselors in Girls' Camp.
Numerous other camp counseling vacancies, requiring that candidates take initiative and make written application, are available.
Further details and information about application procedures are available in the Placement Office.
The birds are singing in the stately maples and elms, whose leafy boughs are swaying a big hello to us from mother nature.
Young couples line the walks of the campus, whispering sweet everythings to one another, hugging and occasionally giving one another a friendly kiss on the cheek.
Oh, I could name countless people who have found life very beautiful — but that would be useless.
Every day I look in the paper and see where a new baby has been born — and each time I do this my hope and faith are renewed.
But so often we try to escape to the past or to the future — trying to forget.
I didn't say that — a wellknown poet did — but it is still just as true.
Some wonderful friends have asked me to recommend some books which have influenced me in my philosophy and I hope you friends and neighbors won't mind if I do it right here.
First off, I suggest Adam Bede by George Eliot to be followed up by some of Robert Frost's folksier poems.
Then, for those folks who like philosophy, I suggest some Jane Addams, or Ralph Emerson.
Pride of the North Rob Players Supplement Local Movie Productions Support Rob Players To laugh, perchance to dream awhile Or at least to laugh.
HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE B1 JET 73 Lisbon St.
Lewuton By RICHARD DERBY '66 Reptillicus, Creatures / r o m Outer Spqce, White Slave Ship — these are a few of the fine films offered us during the year by the cultural standouts of Lewiston — the Ritz, Empire and Priscilla.
The Christian Association was first to bring films to the Bates campus to help supplement our townie productions.
But after the construction of the Little Theatre, the Robinson Players took the job of presenting fulllength feature films on campus.
Films Well Received With only an occasional slip, the films presented have been very well received, espcially this year.
There are several outstanding problems involved in trying to present a film series here on campus.
In an attempt to make them selves a little more secure this year, the Rob Players for the first time sold season tickets.
Lewiston Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES widely, this year ranging as high as $125 a film.
Oddly enough, sometimes the most popular films are the least expensive.
Finding dates to show their films is another problem the Rob Players face.
They must plan their programs only for nights on which there is no competition from other activities on campus.
The film committee does not ex pect to expand its eleven film schedule due to this difficulty in finding dates.
Selection Process Another difficulty that con fronts the film committee, and this probably more than any other, is deciding on the films to be presented.
They receive a wide variety of catalogues each year listing hundrds of possibilities and describing each in glowing terms.
In deciding this year's program the committee added recommendations from the faculty to its own ideas.
The film committee — in attempting to please an audience with a great variety of preferences — also welcomes suggestions from the student body.
The object of the series is to present films on a somewhat higher plane than most of the movies shown in town, to be enjoyed by the student body and faculty alike.
SNEAKERS ' HOOD'S RUBBERS For The Entire Family Shoe Repairing While You Wait at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main Air Waves By DOUG WAKEFIELD '64 April first was a day of change for WRJR, as the new board members took office.
Of course, with new officers, you get a landslide of fresh ideas and hopes.
Maybe the new board will not be able to carry out all of its ideas, but a few are certainly going to be given a try, and will be of interest to the campus.
Station manager John David is very much in favor of more discussions held on the air to allow anyone who has anything to say be given a chance to speak.
John also hopes to have an overall trend in programming which fits the description of the station, that is, a non-commercial educational station.
Dick Dow, program director, has definitely got his work cut out for him in filling vacant spots in programming, left by seniors.
Dick hopes to keep up the quality of music played on WRJR and to make various improvements in programming as a whole.
Bruce Cooper is going to be busy keeping us on the air, along with Dan Clarke keeping us in the black.
Marty Ryan is now and always will be looking for any girls interested in secretarial work for the station.
A few major changes have been and will be occurring in the public relations department.
We are hopeful that the various organizations on campus will use our facilities to publicize upcoming events.
All major organizations have already been notified of the possibilities we offer and it is my hope as public relations manager that they will take advantage of these.
As for the rest of the year, a look at up-coming shows seems worthwhile.
Insight, with Sieve Adams is going to be concerned for a couple of weeks with senior theses.
Steve is hoping to get some of the government and history majors to discuss their various topics on the air, Tuesday at ten.
The On Campus show, run by Marty Ryan and Carol Stone, will be featuring its usual interesting guests on Monday nights at ten.
To find out about other shows on WRJR, I recommend that you watch the bulletin boards and also stay tuned.
The result, according to the Post, was that on September 22, 1962, Alabama inflicted an earth-shaking defeat on Georgia, 35-0, whereas, according to the betting, Alabama should have won by only 14 to 17 points.
The article was embellished by photographs of the great educators involved, including one showing Wally leading the Georgia squad in a locker-room prayer.
In the ensuing investigation by Attorney General Eugene Cook of Georgia, some amazing facts were uncovered and set forth in a presentment to Governor Carl E Sanders.
Wally indignantly denied that these calls had anything to do with the topic in which these persons were allegedly interested.
In Detroit, Chicago and other points on the professional football circuit, there are ugly rumors concerning associations between players and gamblers.
But in the Southland, the magnolias are blooming and spring should not be defiled by sordid thoughts.
Sports lovers will continue to believe that all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds, especially in Georgia and Alabama.
FEATURE STAFF Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Robert Borland '66, Dennis Hill '66, Granville Bowie '66, Richard Derby '66, Jennifer Wingate '64, Carole Cooper '66, Charles E Smith '63, Priscilla Clark '66, Janet McEachern '66, Doug Wakefield '64.
David A Nelson Faculty Advisor Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year.
By CLIFF GOODALL '65 ""To grow in self-mastery and personal depth, to develop wider and deeper appreciation, to acquire an enthusiasm for hard work, to love good talk and good books, to delight in the adventures of intellectual curiosity, to become fair-minded, openminded, and generous in all their human responses,"" this is the aim Bates College sets forth for its students. — Bates College Bulletin, 1963.
It seems apparent that the administration and faculty of Bates are concerned about the future of the college and its continuing function as an institution of learning.
This writer regretfully thinks that Bates is definitely standing still, with no immediate progress in sight.
Evidence of this can be found in the decrease of applications which cannot be explained by birthrates alone, decreasing interest in our few cultural events and lectures, decreasing participation in academic work outside of the classroom, a decadent social life, and an increased transfer rate.
It will only serve to aggravate the present problems and send Bates further down its path to mediocrity.
The financial burden of parents will be greatly exaggerated with the decline of student earnings.
With accelerated academia Bates would become even more of a sterotyped middle class factory of middle class thinkers, who could afford it.
Grad School Entrance Even the oft-cited advantage of early graduate school entrance must be seriously criticised.
The product of a three year college (and he is simply a ""product"") will be at a disadvantage in any graduate school and later in life.
He will be a less mature, less experienced processor of unassimulated knowledge.
He will be just another regretable example of our materialistic culture.
It is obvious that these criticisms are based on the assumption that any three year program would be compulsory.
Purpose Of College My last criticism concerns the ideal nature of a college such as Bates.
This ideal function is to bring students and men of learning together in a community where the students wish to learn and the scholars want to teach.
It should always exist for the sake of knowledge and never for the production of marketable skills.
The administration should always be subservient to the faculty and students in realizing this ideal.
By emphasizing this danger I do not wish to accuse the administration of seeking to further its own ends with the proposed changes.
As expressed in the introduction, the need for changes at Bates is obvious, but the needed change is not acceleration which gives too much, too soon, too fast.
Personal depth, wider and deeper appreciation, and intellectual curiosity will need not be enhanced, but subsumed, by accelerated education at Bates.
No more will one endure the runny-nose nuzzle and the foursweaters-and-a-topcoat hug.
Somehow tender words lack the spirit of the occasion when gasped out through furiously chattering teeth.
Gone will be the once familiar sight of couples doggedly marching arm in arm around Prexy's Puddle trying to keep warm.
Finally the little townie kids can cease their tireless vigil from behind the rocks on Mt.
Committee iron out before any definite plan is submitted to the President and Trustees.
If a plan can be submitted before commencement of this year and action taken on it, then it would be put into effect as -of August 1964.
If action is not taken before commencement, the plan would be put off another year.
Four Quadrangle Thoughts By TAM NEVILLE '66 Winter Follow me From the wind swoop of snow Made to go In a hollow Without sound Around The bottom of a tree.
Straight and proud They reach Without a scarf of green To wave In gold and free.
Spring I have a secret with the top of a tree, It tells itself Just for me.
Night The trees Spun a spider web Around the moon And held it Like a cacoon In cris-crosses of wood, Held it To a tiny Wood ticking tune.
The award is part of the Company's continuing program of aid to selected leading liberal arts institutions.
Phillips, ""is a major factor in stimulating educational growth and development.
C 11-5 SPORTING Sc \ By RUSS HENDERSON T 4 Here's to our great God baseball And the sound of the crashing Ash; The wing of the horsehide spheroid, And our players with all their class.
A toast to our Garnet team fans, Is what I propose to you; The Leaheymen of Pious U Have got the guts of few.
To the nebbish Holt And his stops at short; For the Woolen man, Our centerfield cop.
The song of Long Thorns' fast ball As it hits our Mackys' mitt; And to rookie Johnny Yuskis, A star that heaven lit.
For our hustling Billy And his playmate Arch; And to our Buddy Munroe We offer our glass.
A drink for Tiger Ronny, The leader of the blast; And to you, Red, The shots that only Ruth could cast.
A salute to our Polish pitcher, Possessor of an amazing curve; And our tough little catcher Stevie, With his cool and iron nerve.
Here's luck to you, Bobcat baseball, The spawn of an Irish mind; A bed of thorns for your statey foes, And roses in the springtime for the Garnet hose.
Come out and see the ballgames this spring, if just to see this magicman perform at shortstop.
And while we're on the subject of defensive baseball, Monty Woolson's game-ending grab in Medford proves he is one of the best around.
STUDENTS! — MONIER'S TEXACO STATION — Corner of Main and Russell Streets, offers these specials to you Lube, $1 Oil and ALL other accessories 10% off SEE, United States FOR ALL YOUR CAR PROBLEMS By LEIGH CAMPBELL '64 • The Bates Bobcats made a rousing start last week to the northern part of their 1963 baseball schedule with two impressive victories over Massachusetts teams.
On Thursday at Medford, Bates clipped Tufts 3-0, and followed up this win with an 11-5 pounding of American International on Friday at Springfield.
Pitching, hitting, and fielding were more than adequate in both games, and occasionally bordered on the spectacular.
The outlook continues to be very bright, and less than a week remains before the home season opens next Monday with Lowell Tech at Garcelon Field, preceded by a game on Saturday with M.I.T. in Cambridge.
In the Tufts game, ace righthander Thorn Freeman stopped the Jumbos cold with a brilliant four-hit shutout.
Pitchers' Duel The game started off as a pitchers' duel between Freeman and Jumbo hurler Wally Wadman, as Bates sent only seven batters up in the first two innings.
Paul Holt opened the third with a walk, and Freeman's drag bunt single put two men on.
After a strikeout, and a grounder by Monty Woolson which forced Holt at third for the second out, freshman second baseman John Yuskis I slugged a triple to drive both Freeman and Woolson across the plate.
As it turned out, these were all the runs Freeman needed, and he sailed along, helped out by two double plays started by Holt at shortstop.
Ron Taylor socked one of Wadman's offerings for a tremendous home run to left in the seventh inning to ice the Bobcat victory.
Lewiston tiful catch of a fly ball to center field, and Bates had beaten Tufts for the first time in several years.
Freeman had another single to go with his bunt, and other hits were made by Bill Davis, Bud Spector, and Holt.
Bates Bats Boom Against A.I.C., the Bates bats boomed their loudest of the young season, as they pounded out twelve hits, including four triples, to make things easy for southpaw pitcher Teddy Krzynowek.
The little Mosquito had a five-run lead before he even took the mound in the first inning.
Davis opened the game with a single, and Woolson duplicated, moving Davis to second.
Yuskis' grounder hit Woolson on the baseline for the first out, Yuskis getting credit for a single.
Howie Vandersea hit a roller which was thrown away by the second baseman, scoring Davis with the first Bates run.
Taylor and catcher Steve Egbert followed with back-to-back triples, and the score was 4-0.
If you are a Liberal Arts graduate, in one year you can . . . e qualify as a specialist teacher of science or mathematics in the elementary school, e obtain a Master of Arts degree, e receive certification as an elementary teacher.
After the Aces had scored one run in their half of the first, Bates scored what proved to be the winning run in the second frame, when Woolson tripled and scored on a fly ball by Yuskis.
Krzynowek was hit solidly for eleven safemarkers by A.I.C., but had the necessary stuff in the clutch.
Bates' continued strong hitting kept the Aces from getting back into the game after the first inning.
Yuskis had a perfect day with three for three, and Davis, Woolson, Egbert, and Holt had two hits each.
Coach Leahey Pleased Coach Chick Leahey was very pleased with his team's showing.
All phases of its play were more than adequate, he said, mentioning two factors which stood out in his mind.
The first was the perfect defensive execution of the Bobcats, and it appears that defense will again be a big strongpoint for Bates, as it was last season.
The second thing pointed out by Leahey was the depth shown on the trip.
Sophomore Archie Lanza, regular third baseman, was left home with a sprained ankle, but Davis, normally an outfielder, did a fine job in his place, while Spector, Woolson, and Taylor handled outfield duties very capably.
Steve Egbert, replacing Bill MacNevin behind the plate in the second game, had two hits.
Leahey said, was all the more impressive in that he was pitching into a thirty-five mile an hour wind, which ordinarily is tough on a pitcher's control.
Stale Favorite Bates must be rated a definite favorite to win the State Series, and nothing has been shown on the two-game trip to change this belief.
It should be a most enjoyable spring on Garcelon Field, with a solid team and eight home games, and hopes are high for fan support as the Bobcats bid for the State Series title. t SIX BATES STUDENT, APRIL 17, 1963 By BOB SEGERSTEN '63 Well, here I am back at the end of the pen again this week.
I know the substitute columnists that made a vain attempt at writing were not of my superior ability but they did as best they could with the mental equipment they possessed.
Swinging back to the bowling action we find the ""Bluecoats"" of Smith North leading the ""A"" league contingent and the boys that came out of the John (Bertram, that is) in the driver's seat in ""B"" league competition.
Cellar Leader There were three contests held in the ""A"" league last week.
Jack Williams put down his beercans for a couple of hours and led his squad to their crashing defeat.
They either were so stupid as to forget they had a match or, to use Freudian terminology, they are fixated at the anal stage of their personality development.
South Winner The ""B"" league action saw the Smith South ""Dixie Cups"" defeat the pseudo-fraternal, pseudo-intellectual, and pseudopseudos of Roger Williams Hall by the grand and illustrious score of 3-0.
John Curtis interrupted his bridge game to lead the boys from S.S. to victory.
It is interesting to note at this point that this is the third straight time the ""pandas"" (as they so descriptively refer to themselves) have failed to show up.
Perhaps, if there were more ""dimey nights"" at the very lovely Larger A.C., the ""Teddy Boys"" would have enough money to play the sport.
II squad led by ""Stuppy"" Soloman defeated the West Parker team 3 to zip.
Win, lose, or draw, though, each contender will receive a trophy for his efforts.
Footballers Predominale From Smith Middle emerge two contenders, a heavyweight and a welterweight.
In the heavyweight division is one of Bob Hatch's burly gridsters who also proved effective in the clutch for Vern Ullom's basketball squad.
The second half of the Middle contingent from the headwaters of the Androscoggin, Rumford, is Jim ""Hawk"" Stewart.
A Sportslight By MARCIA FLYNN '65 During the past week, sports action on the women's side of campus centered on the annual ping pong tournament.
The tourney was organized through the efforts of Miss Judy Bradshaw and appears to be an interesting affair.
A field of twenty hopefuls opened action this week with the tourney's first round play scheduled for completion by April twelfth.
Early Matches As first reports of early matches were announced, several coeds emerged as serious title contendrs.
A fact also significant in one respect is that the contenders are all senior girls.
This may be due to the fact that the facilities for ping-pong are readily available in the Union, home of many seniors.
Further results are expected next week when the girls head for the cellars of the Union and Chase Hall. are also members of Bob Hatch's football squad.
He is, of course, Grant ""Gaylord"" Farquhar, who shows promise of being a fast puncher and a real mixer.
The ""four"" may currently be seen in their daily drills in the men's athletic building, and if you happen to be up at 6:00 , you might catch a glimpse of their road work.
These men are very enthusiastic regarding their efforts against local contenders and I'm sure they would appreciate some support from the Bates campus.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Selected as this week's Bobcat of the Week is Junior Paul Holt, the slick-fielding, hardhitting shortstop for Coach Chick Leahey's Garnet baseballers.
Paul was a unanimous selection by the STUDENT sports staff and his fellow players.
During the past week's action, specifically the Tufts and A.I.C. wins, ""The Silent One"" was fanastic.
He handled twenty-two chances at his shortstop position, all in the errorless grace that so typifies Holt's seemingly effortless performance.
As an added attraction, Silent Paul ignited two Garnet double play combinations.
Taking his licks with the other Bobcats, Holt poked three hits through opposing fielders, one a solid smash that went for three bases.
FREE REGISTRATION NOW for SEPTEMBER VACANCIES ATTEND SUMMER SESSIONS at the UNIV. of Combine summer study and recreation in the stimulating climate of one of our country's finest vacation regions.
Excellent opportunity for teachers and undergraduates to earr college credits during summer vacation.
TWELVE-WEEK SUMMER SESSION IN 1963 THREE-WEEK SESSION, June 17 — July 5 SIX-WEEK SESSION, July 8 — Aug.
An American Policy to Meet Communism's Challenge."" * e„ v u .„ . ger of the United Press and as Salisbury will deal with the need for recasting America's foreign policy to meet the threat of rising Communist aggression in Asia, the Cuban challenge, surging nationalism in formerly colonial areas, and weakening bonds in the Western security alliances.
Concerning the dilemmas which American policy faces, Salisbury believes that the United States will be able to meet the Communist offensive only by bold, realistic formulation of dynamic new programs under appealing leadership.
Pulitzer Prize Salisbury has won the Pulitzer Prize for excellence in foreign reporting, and has written several books about his experiences, the most recent being A New Russia?, published in July 1962.
In the same year, he published his first novel, The Northern Palmyra Affair.
Salisbury, thought ""overzealous"" for the college paper, began work for the United Press in Chicago upon graduating.
He covered the end of the gang wars of the Prohibition era, Capone's trial for tax evasion, and the assassination of Senator Huey Long.
During World War II, he became London ManaWebber Explains Role, Function Of State Courts Judge Donald A Webber of the Maine Supreme Court spoke on the ""Role and Function of the Courts"" before Citizenship Lab last Thursday.
Judge Webber, an honorary graduate of the class of '62, stated that the purpose of the Court is to preserve the personal rights granted to individuals by the Constitution.
These rights, based as they are on written codes, must be continually interpreted by the courts.
The District Court will replace the less inclusive Municipal Court, which presently concerns itself with minor violations of law.
The Probate Court, which handles such matters as adoptions and wills, and the Supreme Court, which has no jury or witnesses, but rather six judges who make the decisions and is the highest state court, will continue their present duties.
Director of European Coverage, reported the Big Four meeting in Teheran.
Travel in Russia In 1944, the journalist made his first trip to Russia, and since then has made many extensive trips through the Soviet Union.
Communists are building in ""forbidden"" Central Asia — the most extensive trip ever made by any foreigner to this area, which even in Czarist days was sealed off from the outside world.
Rob Players Produce Shakespeare's Play By BARBARA HUDSON '63 The lights are in place, the music taped, the last hook and eye sewed on, and the stage swept clean.
Suddenly the audience grows still and the red curtain of the Bates Little Theater parts for the opening performance of Shakespeare's classic, Hamlet.
The report proved false, but as it did not specify which building was aflame, the fire trucks were required to cruise the, campus in search of the alleged conflagration.
The contestants drew three topics apiece from current events"" of the past two months and selected one of the three for a speech.
Each participant had a holf hour to compose a speech of five to seven minutes.
Phillips Discusses State Of College In Chapel last Friday President Charles F Phillips outlined some of the more prominent problems facing the Bates administration and the student body in general.
Phillips explained the forthcoming policy regarding a decrease in admissions for the 1963-1964 academic year.
Phillips, ""have caused us to look with concern at our admissions policy.
Phillips went on to cite the work done by the faculty and the student committees regarding a year round schedule of academic attendance.
Phillips feels that there will be a change in the current schedule within the foreseeable future.
Phillips encouraged student participation in requesting suggestions on the subject from the student body in general.
Noteworthy also in the president's talk was a tribute to the late George W Lane, for fifty years a friend and benefactor of Bates College.
Lane served both as secretary of the board of trustees and as treasurer of the college, proving himself a vital segment in the financial picture of the institution.
All of the problems inherent in producing this play, one of Shakespeare's most difficult, have been met and overcome.
Many students have heard Tod sing, and it is the musical quality of his voice which adds immeasurably to his performance.
Due to Tod's sensitivity for the character he is creating, the audience can expect a noteworthy performance.
Supporting Tod are Abby Palmer as his mother, the Queen of Denmark, and Skip Butler as his uncle, the new king.
Judith Mosman, David Kramer and John Holt portray the family of Ophelia, Laertes and Polonius.
John's rendition of the bumbling busybody adds comedy, while Judy's stirring enactment of the well-known mad scenes adds tragic depth to the play.
Tod and David have spent many hours working out this realistic and exciting duel under the tutelage of George Orestes of Auburn.
Loomer is a Bates graduate, a member of the American Theological Society, an Honorary Fellow in the National Council of Religion in Higher Education, a member of the Civil Liberties Union, and a member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
The ""button down"" folk music of the Tradewinds will be heard in the Chase Hall Ballroom May 4.
Tickets are $1.25 apiece and are on sale beginning tonight in the dinner lines at Rand and Commons.
An advance sale is imperative to the success of this program, the first of its kind to be sponsored by the Chase Hall Dance Committee.
None of the Tradewinds was* ■ — jazz, rock 'n roll and vocal discovered hiding under a rock in Peru; none has ever been a truck-driver; and none has sideburns.
They also appeared at the Williamsport Jazz Festival where they won top honors competing against groups from many Eastern colleges.
The Tradewinds don't regard themselves as folk-singers in the accepted sense of the word.
They don't disappear into the hills with a tape recorder and then emerge a couple of weeks later with a complete repertoire.
Rather they take a song, either old or new, and adapt it to their style, usually in a contemporary motif.
Between the four of them they Hp TWO BATES STUDENT, APRIL 24, 1963 Notes From Underground The following minutes were taken at last week's Student Council meeting.
Further discussion of Outing Club recommendations will continue next week.
Orientation Committee Report was submitted by Susan Smith, and discussed.
Chase Hall Comm. — Dobson reported that the Chase Hall Tournaments and Smoker will occur on May 14th.
Aikman moved that pin-boys be made available by the Council for the bowling contests, If interested in b eing a pin-boy, for monetary gain, see Councilman Dobson.
It was decided to request the Extra-Curric Comm. to reserve the Friday night after Thanksgiving for a Council night, upon which the Council could provide some sort of entertaining enjoyment for the Campus-atLarge.
Respectfully submitted, Jim Aikman '65, Secretary -Treasurer Smith To Be Renovated This Summer IJftCjjSgSS '■■.■iff The rebuilding of the roof of Smith Hall will be undertaken during the coming summer, Dr.
As part of the rebuilding project the parapet surrounding the present roof will be removed and the current flat roof will be replaced with a pitched roof similar to that on the other college buildings.
It is expected that the new roof will permit improved drainage and snow removal as well as minimize maintenance problems.
Design of the structure has been the work of the college architect, Alonzo J Harriman and Associates of Auburn, and the contract has been awarded to the Paul B McClellan Co., Inc., of Portland.
History Of Bates Provides Understanding Of College JUNIORS Don't forget the meeting in Skelton Lounge tonight from 7-9.
Come and chat with the veterans of this year's business and grad school interviews here at Bates.
Although Bates College is celebrating its one hundredth birthday in the 1963-1964 college year, it has existed continuously as an educational institution since the doors of Hathorn Hall opened for the first class of Maine State Seminary on September 1, 1857.
The Seminary, ""a school of high order or grade somewhere between a College and an Academy,"" had been conceived by a Free-Will Baptist minister and one-time teacher, O r e n B Cheney.
Its material resources when classes started consisted primarily of the newly completed Hathorn Hall, an unfinished dormitory, Parker Hall, and twenty acres of land donated by the Franklin Company of Boston.
Citizens of Lewiston and Auburn had given $15,000, and the State legislature had granted $5,000 in cash and $10,000 in script to get the school started.
Whether President Cheney had originally intended that Maine State Seminary should become a college no one really knows.
There is evidence that this was his goal, but that he decided to promote the new venture as a seminary because there would have been a great deal of opposition to a new college, both from the legislature, since Bowdoin and Colby already existed, and from many of the Free Will Baptists, who felt that higher education was unnecessary, frivolous, and even dangerous to accepted concepts and beliefs.
The college was named for Benjamin E Bates, a Boston businessman who had a substantial interest in the local textile mills.
Although the college was coeducational from the beginning, it was not until 1869 that the first woman, Maria Wheelwright Mitchell, received a diploma.
In view of the assistance that local people gave to get the college started and the close relationship btween the College and the community that has continued, it is appropriate that Charter Day will be celebrated with a community testimonial dinner on January 18 next year.
Tradewinds manage to play a variety of instruments — guitars, banjoes, mandolins, conga and bonga drums.
Guidance PEACE CORPS There are 4,000 Peace Corps opportunities in forty-four countries.
CHILDREN'S CANCER RESEARCH FOUNDATION Children's Cancer Research Foundation in Boston has two positions open for full-time, permanent chemical research assistants.
The research program is mainly involved with the synthesis of new organic substances as potential anti-cancer agents.
The laboratories are located in the Jimmy Fund Building adjoining Children's Hospital and the Harvard Medical School.
LEE REMICK ■ ""DAYS OF WINE ■ AND ROSES"" IS plus I Leslie Caron, David Niven ■ ""GUNS of DARKNESS"" Sabattus St Coles Succeeds Phillips As President Of WCBB The Colby-Bates-Bowdoin Educational Telecasting Corporation, which owns and operates WCBB Channel 10, has elected new corporate officers for the. coming year.
James S Coles, President of Bowdoin College, was named President of the ETV group, to succeed President Charles F Phillips.
This is in accordance with the WCBB policy that the corporation's presidency shall rotate among the three college presidents and that the remaining two shall serve as vice presidents.
Other officers elected at WCBB's annual Board of Trustees Meeting in Augusta were Ralph S Williams, Administrative Vice President of Colby, to serve as Secretary and Glenn R Mclntire, Bowdoin's Assistant Treasurer, to act as treasurer for the ETV corporation.
Channel 10's assistant treasurer will be Thomas M Libby, Bursar of Bowdoin College.
The business offices of WCBB will continue to be located in Chase Hall on the Bates College campus.
Channel 10's unique joint ownership by three independent liberal arts institutions is serving as an example to colleges and universities everywhere of the advantages of close academic cooperation.
NOTICE The Outing Club cordially requests the pleasure of your company at its annual Spring Spruce Up to be held at Thorncrag and Sabattus cabins this Saturday.
Anyone interested should be in back of West Parker at one o'clock and if he has a means of transportation available, it would be appreciated.
BATES STUDENT, APRIL 24, 1963 THREE Passion And Intensity Prevent Hamlet From Taking Action By SUSAN C SMITH '65 Toward the end of the play Hamlet is being shipped off to England by the king whom he wants to kill in revenge of his father's death.
The response to this question appears to be the concern of the play — Hamlet's inability to consummate his revenge.
The most elucidating approach to the play, therefore, seems to lie in an understanding of Hamlet's problem.
Attempt To Understand In the course of the play we are given those elements of Hamlet's personality and temperament most important in explaining his actions.
He has the passion and intensity of students and youth, though they are directed more to a student's idealism than to the action of, say, a Claudius.
This is illustrated in his attempt to understand and do the right thing, to act in the light of truth.
The death of his father shocked him, but his state was intensified with the almost immediate remarriage of his mother.
A distraught son's mind could easily construe something rotten in this state of affairs.
With the entrance of the ghost, therefore, the so-far dormant suspicions of foul play are validated.
He thereby gives his vengeance the second thought which changes the emotion into a more intellectual consideration, retribution.
Appropriate to the idealistic student, his concern with the problem before him reaches philosophic proportions.
The spirit I have seen T' assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such spirits, Abuses me to damn me.
If his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech It is a damned ghost that we have seen And my imaginations are foul As Vulcan's stithy.
Emotion To Intellect The development of the vengeance motif from emotion to intellect causes Hamlet's initial doubt that the king is guilty.
The problem that accompanies this is his inability to act in the face of his belief in the truth of the king's guilt.
Not So Close Harmony Results From Generally Good Concert By JOHN DAVID '64 Peter Gomes '65 again proved himself one of the most capable MC's on campus by officiating last Saturday night at the Second Annual Close Harmony Concert, in the Alumni Gymnasium.
Last year, there were six different groups which provided a full evening; but trying to stretch last Saturday evening's program to two hours plus, made the concert somewhat lacking in variety of material and treatment.
Colcongervative but beautifu] byettes: He's Gone Away, You off Qf L m Sun which Go to My Head, Garden in the Rain; Dirigos: The World is vals and excellent phrasing.
I would also single out for individual acclaim the Wheatones' rendition of Danny Boy which did manage to escape, to a certain degree, the average, overromantic treatment this song usually gets.
The double quartet from Waterville managed, among other notorious achievements such as When Sunny Gets Blue, to make Lullaby of Birdland sound completely new and refreshing — bordering, at times, on the jazz vocalizing of such as L H. -|_ Ross.
The Dean's Men, also, sounded better than usual on Lonely Nights in Paris, and a Waiting for the Sunrise, Stormy Weather, Love is the Sweetest Thing — All of these were good enough, but lacked real sparkle.
The Colbyettes' treatment t of Black is the Color was quite impressive, employing wide interB E D A R D * S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston.
Maine vm >vam „ r their dollar was well spent was ""made"" by Tad Lloyd's solo.
Generally speaking, the program was over-weighted with female voices and ""adequate"" selections, but I am sure that those who attended found that A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Augusta, Maine Thus conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of resoolution Is sicklied o'er with the pale , cast of thought HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET 73 Lisbon Si.
Lewiston And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry And lose the name of action.
Inability To Act His inability to act is foiled yet more painfully in the instance of the players, their concern for the fate of persons not even connected with them, and when Hamlet speaks to the Norwegian captain and learns that men are going to fight even against ridiculous odds.
He sails for England and one cannot forsee that he'll ever take his revenge, except when pushed to a point at which he can only act impulsively.
In the final scene this happens to him. and it seems almost an accident that the king dies; it certainly doesn't seem the result of a wellplanned scheme.
And the result is the death of six people, instead of the one murderer.
Tragedy Throughout the play Hamlet is restrained from action by his own contemplative mind.
As a student he is more dominated by the intellectual considerations of his action than by the simple impetuous fulfillment of revenge, as Laertes is, in contrast.
Hamlet, by virtue of his temperament, is unable to act, and thus the tragedy, not only of Hamlet, but the state of Denmark.
Night By DOUG SMITH '63 Each night Brings with it A cool east breeze To heap the darkness Around my house, In my field And on my trees.
But I like that time When day is done And shadows come Telling me That night's begun.
After two meetings and considerable discussion, the amendments were framed and sent to the Extra-Curricular Committee, which was to decide on the merit of the proposed change.
Board, elected in March, discussed the proposals, with special attention to the questions raised by the ExtraCurric Committee.
Board voted unanimously in support of these amendments and recommended that ExtraCurric follow suit.
If the business and editorial aspects are to be kept separate, it makes little difference that their terms of office are the same.
That these amendments are essential to the efficient functioning of the STUDENT is obvious to those involved with this newspaper.
Yet, the Extra-Curric Committee vetoed the second and more important amendment.
The business and editorial staffs are to be separate entities, and in instances of conflict or decision, the P A. will act.
But because it is a weekly newspaper, and therefore demands that instances which involve both business and editorial decisions be resolved quickly, the P A. thirteen member Board cannot function in this manner.
The Mirror, which is published but once a year, does not have this bifurcation of responsibility.
That the P A. wished to have the two publications on the same basis, was another reason for amending the constitution.
The notion that the Publishing Association can be ""ultimately responsible"" for this newspaper is fallacious on two counts.
Secondly, it is the Editor who, in practice, must assume such responsibility, but is restrained by the absence of constitutional sanction.
Feature Editor Russell Henderson '65 Sports Editor Nicholas Basbanes '65 Sports Editor Robert Lanz '65 Business Manager Steve Talbot '64 Photography Editor Don Frese '64 Editorial Assistant John Bart '64 Editorial Assistant Sally O Smyth '65 Editorial Assistant Perry Bruder '65 Editorial Assistant Pamela Ball '64 Editorial Assistant NEWS STAFF Herb Mosher '65, Editor; Linda Mitchell '66, Assistant; Nancy Lester '64, Kent Taylor '64, Ralph Bartholomew '64, Martha Webb '66, Judy Marden '66, Judy Norris '65, Phyllis Schender '66, Allen Cummings '66, Jeff Kendall '66, David Williams '65.
FEATURE STAFF Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Robert Borland '66.
Dennis Hill '66, Granville Bowie '66, Richard Derby '66, Jennifer Wingate '64, Carole Cooper '66, Charles E Smith '63, Priscilla Clark '66, Janet McEachern '66, Doug Wakefield '64, Tarn Neville '66, Doug Smith '63.
As Alumni Secretary, I speak with numerous alumni groups around the country each year.
In these talks I usually include facts about the composition of the Bates student body.
Mr Clifford Goodall '65, in his article in the Bates STUDENT of April 17, 1963 could have used some of these facts.
Applications for admission to the Bates freshman class numbered 1610 for the current freshman class, while for the class which will enter in September of 1963 the number of applications is 1359.
Due to a temporary lag in the college age population growth, all selective colleges have experienced fewer applications in recent years.
Last year, while other selective colleges were experiencing a decline in their number of applications.
In no small measure I think that this increase can be attributed to the fact that two Bates College Bowl teams scored seven victories on nation-wide television and aroused the interest of students all over the country.
In recent years the College has also published a profile showing the high quality of students admitted to Bates.
This profile has discouraged substandard (for Bates) applications in that a student with low College Board scores naturally does not wish to apply to an institution where he has little chance of admission.
Guidance counselors also discourage weak candidates from applying to Bates.
The quality of the freshman class entering in 1963 will be higher than that of the class which entered in 1962, even though chosen from fewer applicants.
I hope these figures will be of assistance to all who wish to discuss Mr Goodall's expressions of concern on a factual basis.
I am feeling so grateful for the advice offered by Mr Mills in this week's STUDENT, on how to avoid the blues.
I cannot cease to express my gratitude for the wonderful philosophy he has deigned to impart on us poor dumb critters.
Last week's sincerely sweet reminder to us of the old folks back home has stirred my heart all week.
The spiritual guidance this week and especially the appended reading list and political advice has served to treble twice over my great admiration of dear Malcolm.
I am hardly able to contain my eagerness until next week when we shall receive edifying thoughts on the eternal truth.
I certainly hope that Malcolm will not keep his light under a bushel basket (he should use a trash can) but will continue to poison another man's mind while keeping the Bates studentry on the Right track.
The only thing which I can find of any worth in Malcolm Mills's column appearing in the April 17 STUDENT, is the supreme self confidence with which he closes.
Perhaps there are those who will read his future observations, but I am not among them.
While I object not at all to personal outpourings, individual confessions, and self-psychoanalyses (if, of course, they happen to be wellwritten), I am firmly convinced that such things have no place in a student newspaper.
I also object to the complete negativism expressed in Mills's writings; not only is he blind to optimism, happiness, and satisfaction on the Bates campus and elsewhere, but seeing only the bad, he refrains from helping or proposing changes.
Margery Zimmerman '64 paper, all relevant comments are considered and welcome.
The subject of most of the derogatory conversation on this campus is the Monday and Friday Chapel Assembly Program.
The purpose of the program is to inform students about various subjects and events which would not ordinarily be covered in their regular classes.
This purpose is basically good, but it is not being accomplished under the present system.
There are two problems which must be overcome in order for Chapel Assemblies to be worthwhile.
First, only about one in every three or four programs is effective, or says something worthwhile.
For one thing, students tend to react against anything that is compulsory.
But more than that, when the students are forced to hear two or three poor programs for each good one, a point is reached where they are not even able to get anything out of the one good program.
First, reduce the frequency of the assemblies to, for example, once every two weeks.
With fewer and better programs the students will come of their own accord.
The result of this change would be the accomplishment of the purpose of Chapel Assembly.
Sincerely, Evelyn Breck '65 An editorial in the March 6 issue of the STUDENT stated ""the Bates STUDENT is a weekly paper that contains articles in various fields.
Malcolm Mills, in his column, and Misses Berman, Zimmerman, and Breck in their letters, are expressing their opinions.
In determining the policy of this SPRING RAIN By DOUG SMITH '63 My feet With only the stream for shoes Wade.
Who knows What secrets they keep Of wet green grass Of white clean snows.
Early in the morning We must wake with the friendly rain Our canoe will drift Like a tiny patch of fog Across the lake Going nowhere, saying nothing We can be Two old turtles Drifting in the fog — Humming funny tunes On an old rotten log.
Each spring rain Brings with her Small laughing children And little grey cats To play upon my roof.
But day always arrives To sweep away With her bright broom These small laughing children And little gray cats That play upon my roof.
WCBB, a non-profit organization which originated in the fall of 1961, is designed to serve the educational institutions and the general viewing public of southwestern Maine.
Educational television is a definitely painless way of doing certain assignments, research work, or just improving your mind; no page turning, card catalogues, or books to carry.
Economics students might be interested in the daily lectures on the American economy.
Government students may also find help watching THE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT also telecast daily.
And French students can soothe their foreign tongues with FRENCH THROUGH TELEVISION twice a week.
Wednesday nighl, April 24 7:30 ALEXANDER SCHREINER AT THE TABERNACLE ORGAN — Beginning a three-program series with discussion and performance by Dr.
ERNST VON DOHNANYI — Maestro Dohnanyi and his guests discuss his days as a composer in Vienna.
Again, intrigue and murder mark the scene, as Warwick and the Duke of Clarence change sides in the bloody War of the Roses.
Television is no longer serving as just a soap opera, gunslinging babysitter.
The poten~ tialities and capabilities of WCBB are great, but they can only be aided and rewarded by continued interest.
When things seem to have squeezed my head so much so that it is only an old lemon rind — too dry even to be bitter anymore — I wonder why the trees were planted in lines.
The graduate fellowships, available under the Fulbright-Hays Act of 1961, are administered by the Institute of International Education as part of the educational exchange program of the Department of State.
United States government full grants; joint U.S.-other government grants; and United States government travel-only grants.
Joint awards are available for study in Boliva, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Rumania and Venezuela.
Travel-only awards are available for study in Austria, Brazil, Denmark, France, Germany, Israel, Italy and the Netherlands.
Opportunities Vary The Institute calls special attention to the opportunities available in Ceylon, Iceland, Iran, Pakistan, Poland, Rumania, Turkey and the United Arab Republic.
Special opportunities are also available to graduate students who are interested in teaching English as a foreign language at universities in India, and to those interested in teaching American language and literature, history, philosophy or law at Italian universities.
United States citizenship (at the time of application), a bachelor's degree or its equivalent before the beginning date of the grant, language proficiency sufficient to carry out the proposed study project and for general communication, and good health.
A good academic record and demonstrated capacity for independent study are also necessary.
Preference is given to applicants under 35 years of age who have not previously lived or studied abroad.
Students now enrolled in a PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS Graymont Comments On Plans, Education, College By GRANVILLE BOWIE '66 Miss Graymont has been on the Bates College campus as an instructor in history, filling in for Dr.
In another of the STUDENT interviews with faculty members, she answered the following questions.
G Yes, I am very interested in linguistics and in the study of the American Indian, which is my major field of research.
G Well, of course Bates is a four year college and Packer was a unior college.
Bates has a high academic standard in what it requires of its students.
A student who does well here can do well at any of the large universities in the country.
All requests for application forms must be postmarked by October 15, 1963.
At-large applicants must submit their completed applications to HE by November 1, 1963.
Enrolled students must submit applications to the campus Fulbright Adviser by the respective campus closing date.
HE Encourages Exchange Since the academic year 194849, approximately 12,000 American graduate students have studied abroad under the programs which are now covered by the new Fulbright-Hays Act.
The Institute of International Education seeks to encourage international understanding and educational development through programs of international educational exchange.
When it will be finished will depend, of course, on how soon I can get the research completed.
I still have a number of libraries to consult and I have to go to Clinton College to refer to their manuscripts.
R As you know, there has been a lot of controversy concerning the social life at Bates.
I don't think that most of the students come from large cities and would expect much more than is available to them here.
I think these students can find more at the college in the cultural areas than they could at home.
Bates is small and it is difficult to get well-known performers to come to Maine.
The type of entertainers the students want are too expensive for a school of this size.
The lesser known entertainers don't attract much of an attendance and it is embarrassing for them, and for the college, to face a practically empty house.
The faculty is rather upset that there isn't much of an attendance at the Lecture Series Many students complain that there is too much work and they just can't find the time to attend these lectures.
Yet, it seems that the attendance at basketball games doesn't suffer because of a heavy work load on the students.
I don't see much of it except between home and the office and between the office and commons.
The State Series, perhaps the state of Maine's greatest annual claim to athletic renown, has been dealt its dying death knell by this act.
For although Bates and Colby have themselves done nothing official in this matter as of yet, the probable results will likely see such action taken by the two schools.
Lloyd Lux. commented that the decision of Bowdoin to drop Maine will not affect Bates' plans at present.
With our schedules drawn up a few years in advance, he continued, it is difficult to predict and disclose an immediate change.
But Bates, with a total male enrollment of about five hundred men, had previously been considered to make the initial break.
Even though the three small colleges will continue to play each other, the dent left by Maine's absence will remove the excitement and ardor of a long-standing four-way rivalry in Series play.
The act, though unfortunate in breaking tradition, must be acknowledged as practical and well-taken.
Bates, Bowdoin, and Colby are rediculously outclassed as far as facilities and personnel depth are concerned.
An objective observer would most certainly regard the match as a gross mis-match.
It is remotely probable that schools of our relative size can consistently field a team capable of overwhelming the likes of Maine.
Last fall's Garnet eleven, conisdered by many to be the best team fielded by Bates in years, was unable to contain the mediocre Maine squad which was winless outside of Series play.
The best possible move, therefore, is one toward relations with similar-sized schools.
Perhaps, as Coach Hatch has recommended, more games could be played between the three smaller schools.
Tradition must of necessity be sacrificed for reason and practicability.
Whether or not this is the best move, whether Bates and Colby will follow, can not be determined now.
These speculations, as well as the advent of new traditions and rivalries, can only be vindicated by the course of time.
The fact that the Huskies' indoor version of the same sport handily upended our Garnet challengers this past fall is little reason to feel that they would have repeated outdoors.
For though the meet had an abbreviated finish, the Bobcats had a fine edge on points at the time of the unprecedented retreat.
Perhaps the Huskies felt that they were behind in places where they shouldn't have been, and that the idea of facing a confident and talented group of runners on their home track added to the forfeit decision.
For the track wasn't impossible to run on, as the Jayvees and Waltham found little trouble finishing their meet on the same track.
State Series baseball opens today at Colby with our Bobcats sending ace pitcher Thorn Freeman to the mound against the confident Mules.
Today's results should be interesting as the emerging victor will have a good claim on ultimate state honors.
Colby, though win-starved in the south, has been getting fat up north, so the game should be decently matched.
Although the field was soggy and surface water stood in puddles on the track, the referees' decision, was to hold the meet as scheduled.
Northeastern coach Jerry Tatton, who was in Boston at the time, considered conditions unsafe to continue and the Huskies quit the field as an electric drainage pump whisked away surface water under sunny skies.
Ref's OK Meet Whenever field conditions warrant the cancellation of an athletic contest, the decision is made by the referees on jointly by the referees and officials of the home team.
Never is the visiting team left with the decision of calling off competition.
A team can not be forced to compete and Northeastern just picked up their starting blocks and went home.
The two assistant coaches were in disagreement as to what should be done and finally phoned ailing head coach Tatton in Boston for the forfeit decision.
One can only wonder why the decision came not at the time of the downpour, but halfway through the meet with Bates in the lead, why the referees decided to continue, and why Waltham High School coach Lee Gould had no qualms about finishing the JV meet.
Bowditch led a Bates sweep in the event with Paul Williams and Dave Johnson tying for second place.
Northeastern swept the shot put, Wallin breaking the field record with a 53' 5W throw.
Corsetti of Northeastern broke the meet hammer record with a 171' throw.
The final score of the meet including forfeited points was Bates 93 and Northeastern 24.
Paul Savello, Dave Harkness, and Harry Mossman combined in the broad jump for the single Bobcat sweep.
Harkness added a second in the high hurdles for a total of 16 points in the meet.
Mossman also took a third in the high jump and a second in the shot put.
Fulenwider took a second in the 440, while John Meyn placed second in the mile, Bill Davis a third in the shot', Dick Traiser a third in the 220, Dave Bachner a third in the javelin, and Larry Brown a third in the discus.
Dash Javelin Shot Put First Bowditch Corsetti Kramer Williams Curtiss Wallin Second Williams & Lidback Silva Planchon Loler O'Neil Third Johnson Curtiss Hiller Ullian Cohen Miller Time-Dist. 6' 2y 4 "" 171' 12' 10.
ATTEND SUMMER SESSIONS at the Combine summer study and recreation in the stimulating climate of one of our country's finest vacation regions.
TWELVE-WEEK SUMMER SESSION IN 1963 THREE-WEEK SESSION, June 17 — July 5 SIX-WEEK SESSION, July 8 — Aug. entertainment.
L 9-3 By DON DELMORE '64 The Bobcats continued their winning ways with an 8-7 victory over highly regarded M.I.T. last Saturday, followed by an easier 9-3 decision over Lowell Tech on Monday.
The record now stands at five wins and only one loss thus far with the future looking very bright for another State Series crown.
The 'Cats journeyed to Cambridge on Saturday to play in what must have been the worst possible conditions.
The wind was so strong that even Thorn Freeman, given the starting assignment, had difficulty in breaking off his usually brilliant curve.
The 'Cats added one in the fourth on a sacrifice by Bud Spector, scoring Ron Taylor from third.
A pinch-hit double by Bill MacNevin in the seventh scored Freeman to give the Bobcats a 4-2 lead.
Meanwhile, Freeman tightened up and despite the unfavorable weather conditions allowed M.I.T. only three hits from the third inning through the seventh.
Red Vandersea led off the eighth inning by drilling a solid double to left center.
Bud took second on the throw to the plate and advanced to third by virtue of an error.
The highlight of the game came when Spector stole home, a feat very rarely seen, giving the 'Cats a 6-2 lead.
Falls However wildness troubled Freeman in the home half of the eighth as three bases on balls plus three singles accounted for four runs and pushed M.I.T. into a 6-6 tie.
The 'Cats added the two deciding runs in the top of the ninth, set up by Bill Davis, Al Cruickshank, and Vandersea all being hit by pitched balls.
The score stood at 8-6 with M.I.T. coming to bat in the last half of the ninth.
They added a single run to close the margin to one but Freeman struck out his opposing pitcher, Bob Yanos, to end the game.
He struck out ten, gave up six walks, and only five of the seven runs were earned.
Garcelon Opener A surprisingly good crowd of baseball fanatics sat through a freezing wind to witness the excellent six hit pitching of Bob Lanz, and the slugging of slick fielding shortstop Paul Holt, as they led the 'Cats to a 9-3 victory over Lowell Tech in a game played Monday at Garcelon Field.
Lowell scored three unearned runs in the first inning after which Lanz settled down and blanked the visitors for the remaining eight innings, scattering only six hits.
The 'Cats got to the Lowell starting pitcher, Barry Eldridge, in the bottom of the fourth by coming up with three runs to knot the score.
A leadoff double by Ron Taylor followed by a long triple to left center by Holt gave Bates their first run of the afternoon.
A perfectly placed bunt by Bob Lanz scored Holt, with Lanz taking second on a throwing error by Lowell's catcher.
Holt Stars Bates exploded for three more in the bottom of the fifth to grab a 6-3 lead.
A single by Vandersea, a triple by Taylor, a single by Holt, and a double by Lanz were the big blows moving the 'Cats ahead.
A long double by Archie Lanza in the sixth scored John Yuskis, and another Lanza double in the eighth scored the final two runs to give the Bobcats their 9-3 victory.
Holt led the 'Cats with a single, double, and triple in four times at bat, Taylor and Lanza contributing two hits apiece.
Lanz pitched a beautiful game, scattering six hits and not giving up an earned run.
Rambler prices start real low and you won't go barefoot to keep one running.
But only ten of those thirty-four could realize the position for which all were striving.
Picking those ten was a difficult job, for the talent displayed was certainly outstanding.
The judges making the decisions were the retiring senior squad, Coach Hatch, Mrs.
Hinman, and the president of Stu-C and Stu-G, Bob Ahem and Alice Winter.
This group must be commended for such a fine job of picking what appears to be an excellent, attractive and peppy squad for next year.
Much Preparation As stated by ""Texie"" Ritter in a recent article, ""cheerleading is no easy task"" and the girls chosen had worked many hours practicing the cheers, perfecting jumps and strengthening vocal power.
A group of sophomores tried out and the three of last year's squad, Andy Buck, Jerry Watson and Lynn Avery were kept on the squad.
Freshmen also honored were Kathy Lysaght, Betty Bogdanski, Karen Hastie, Judy Lanning, Judy Gray, Chris Faulk and Nancy Muzio.
Kathy Lysaght, an economics major from Pine Point, Maine, displayed much flexibility and enthusiasm.
Betty Bogdanski of Meridan, Conn., showed one of the highest and ""best-arched"" jumps of all the competitors.
A cheerleader in high school, it was difficult for her to change her old style of cheering to the Bates method, but finally managed to do so.
She has an ex-j tremely powerful voice that so well stimulates those crowds in the grandstands.
Karen Hastie certainly demonstrated the poise and alluring smile necessary for a cheerleader.
Judy Laming, seen playing tennis with the ""greats"" of the men's teams, was very impressive in the tryouts.
Judy Gray, another young lady with a beautiful smile, exhibited grace, coordination, poise and talent.
She leaped and yelled with the best of them and is from Braintree, Mass.
Nancy Muzio, a chemistry major from Stafford, Conn., when asked what she thought of the new squad, replied, ""Great, I guess,"" but she feels, however, that the squad has unending potential and will be initiating changes in the old cheers.
Chris Faulk, a substitute for the new squad, is from Wethersr field, Conn., and was a strong competitor for her high school squad — very graceful in an extremely high jump, and very spirited in her movements.
Congratulations and thanks are also in order for the other girls attending all practices, and the seniors for spending their time competently and patiently trying to teach the cheers.
Lynn Avery, chosen captain of the squad, feels that great things are in store for the new year.
Ping-Pong Moves Fast Also fast and furious this past week has been play in the pingpong tourney.
Ability has been shown that no one could possibly have thought existed.
Coming through to the 3rd and 4th rounds as victorious were Wendell, Potter, Tupper, Cary and Messenger.
In two matches the 'Cats compiled an awesome record of 17 wins and 1 loss.
Open in Lowell The team opened up with the Lowell Tech squad on Shedd Park's city courts.
They had little trouble disposing of the Lowell boys, scoring a perfect 9 to 0 shutout.
All of the Bates performers played well and had little trouble winning.
Among the more impressive victories were Jim Dodd's 6-0, 6-0 victory and 6-1, 6-1 wins by both George Bee be and Al Williams.
Freshman Bob Thompson was impressive in his debut and should prove to be an asset to this year's squad.
Sweep Doubles In doubles competition, Captain Jim Corey teamed with George Beebe to win the second doubles match easily by a 6-0, 6-0 score.
The number one player, Jim Wallach paired with Bob Thompson to win 6-2, 6-1 while sophomores Jim Dodds and Dick ""Tiger"" Danosky were matching that score against their opponents.
The 'Cats were unable to continue their shutout record but dumped the Hawks by an 8 to 1 score.
Captain Corey showed the way for his teammates with a 6-0, 6-0 singles victory.
In doubles competition the 'Cats won all three matches easily to complete a successful trip.
Ullom Pleased Coach Ullom was pleased with the early season play of the swatters.
On both days the weather was poor with excessively high winds, making it difficult to control the ball.
He was unable to single out any one player due to the remarkable play of the entire squad.
The Bobcats easily disposed of Clark as Chuck and Wally Lasher, Captain Thorn Brown, Lynn Simpson, Willy Farrington, John Schatz and Lloyd Bunten posted victories.
At Colonial country club in Lynnfield, Mass., the Bobcats engaged Tufts and Bowdoin in a tri-meet.
An excellent Tufts team led by New England collegiate champion Barry Bruce proved too strong for Bates and downed them 5-2.
Against Bowdoin the Garnet was more fortunate as they posted a 4-3 victory.
Brown, Farrington, Phil King and Lynn Simpson nailed Chuck Lashers' power Golf leads Cats' sweep. — Farrington Photo down the victories for Bates in this encounter.
Lasher Tops The Vesper course in Lowell was in fine playing condition for this time of the year.
Against Bowdoin, the Bobcats found their previous day's victories reversed as the Polar Bears took a 5-2 victory.
Dual FUter makes the difference DUAL FILTER INdM # Jm jjlm l mi J mfmm fly w i y -jfcrfim fa a <*» r er Tareyton ■tiitur mMle mm tit 7 ft Lasher and frosh Lynn Simpson posted the victories for Bates.
Chuck Lasher, Brown, Simpson, Farrington, Schatz and King posted victories for Bates.
Individually for Bates, Chuck Lasher playing in the number one position was consistently the low scorer.
Brown and two freshmen, Lynn Simpson and Willy Farrington led Bates with four victories and only one defeat, while Chuck Lasher had a three and two record in this department.
Their performance has shown that Bates definitely has the potential to make their presence felt in both the state series and in the state tournament at Augusta on May 21.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK For this week's selection of Bobcat of the Week the STUDENT sports staff has turned to Coach Vern Ullom's netmen and selected senior Capt.
Jim led his teammates to victories over Lowell Tech and Saint Anselms as the 'Cats journeyed to the home courts of each opponent in securing their wins.
Corey appeared in midsummer form as he lashed his Saint A's opponent 6-0, 6-0 in singles competition.
The previous day he had combined with doubles partner George Beale to shut out a Lowell pair 6-0, 6-0 in a doubles match.
Coach Vern Ullom was high on his Captain's consistent play and lauded Jim's flashy form plus his winning touch.
LEWISTON, MAINE, MAY 1, 1963 By Subscription College Aid Might Decrease Next Year Federal aid to Bates College, manifested in the form of Student Loans, is due for a drastic revision by the present session of Congress, Dean Walter Boyce stated in his weekly notes to the students of the college.
The present Federal aid program has been an accumulative one in that each year the funds available to colleges across the nation has reached a ceiling in the present school year.
Thus, unless corrective measures are taken by the present Congress in the form of a bill now pending before the legislative body, the funds made available by the ceiling mentioned above will merely be divided up among the applicants resulting in a decrease all around.
Release Indicates Cut The following release by the United States Chamber of Commerce dated April 1, 1963, pertinent to the immediate problem, is indicative of a trend in the thinking of some of Washington's pressure groups.
But we spent 6 per cent of our national income on schools, compared with 2. per cent in 1913.
This was the largest single public bequest contained in his will, which disposed of an estate estimated at $1,500,000.
Lane, who was Treasurer of Bates and served on the Board of Trustees, was a banker, financier and private philanthropist.
Although there were no restrictions mentioned as to the use of the money, the will suggested that it be used for the construction of an administration building.
The National College Champions will perform in the Chase Hall Ballroom May 4.
Tickets are $1.25 apiece and may be purchased in the dinner lines at Hand and Commons. education say will be needed.
But 70 per cent of our youths complete high school; half go to college, and most of these graduate.
Subsidies Frowned On ""But if the history of federal subsidies in other fields (agriculture for example) were repeated, the hand-out route would prove no route to perfection.
Westminster Choir To Give Concert Tonight The Westminster Choir will perform in the Lewiston High School Auditorium this evening at 8:15m.
The concert will include works ranging from Thirteenth Century France to Twentieth Century America, and representing such composers as Palestrina, Mozart, Debussy, Vaughn Williams, and Copland.
Two Indoor Art Shows Herald Spring's Arrival The coming of spring is annually heralded by the emergence of sandals, sunglasses, and Bermuda shorts at outdoor art shows.
Perhaps it is because spring's arrival in Maine is so uncertain that the two local art displays now being featured are indoors.
One of the displays by six Ogunquit artists associated with the Pinetree Designs Gallery in Ogunquit, lines the walls above racks of dresses on the second floor of Ward's on Lisbon Street.
Among the best of the artists represented there is Edward Hergelroth, who shows some rather ethereal watercolor scenes.
One of these, appropriately titled ""Desolate Country"", beautifully captures the sparse, flat greyness of early winter.
George Kunkel produces abstracts, variously with polymer and lacquer, such as his ""Weeds and Sea"", that might better be used in cotton prints.
Peggy Bacon's etchings are of distinctive style, her "" old-fashtioned"" embroidered valentines are charming.
Renoir Originals Selections from private collections in the Maine area are being displayed through May 9 at the Temple Beth El in Portland.
The exhibit is open to the public every day except Friday from 2:00-4:00 and from 5:00-7:00.
Contributions to the display include originals by Renoir, Cezanne, and Claudel and a number of sculptures.
Integrity Cited By Loomer As Central To Individual's Education ""Education should help the individual to move towards integrity,"" said Dr.
Speaking on ""Religious Understanding of Higher Education,"" he stated that religious leaders are most concerned with four major goals of higher education; integrity, freedom, the academic community, and intellectual —be it philosophical, theological, Loomer defined integrity as a sense of wholeness and unity.
The person of integrity remains the same person, conscious of his unique identity, regardless of circumstances or location.
The movement towards integrity entails a constantly increasing ability to think systematically and relationally in awareness of the differences and similarities between areas of experience.
Without a systematic coherence between experiences of his life, the thinker becomes fragmented, less than ""one self"" in a related universe.
Know Your Values Integrity also leads to selfconsciousness, knowledge of one's values and purposes, an awareness of one's intellectual strengths and weaknesses, and a greater trust in one's own reactions and judgments.
In any society based on the democratic ideal, where ""the truth is in the people"", it is the duty of higher education to give rise to individuals who know their values and whose decisions rest on selfconfidence and self-respect.
The studen^ must realize that every system economic, or political — is based on a small cluster of ideas which are self-supporting.
This foundation constitutes the individual's integrity and is his perspective on life.
He must also recognize that there are other integrities; the unique perspective which he has achieved is but one among many.
The inability to accept others may be measured by the inability to accept oneself.
Education should develop intellectual creativity and should lead to a release from personal weaknesses through awareness of such weaknesses.
One must be willing to relate ideas and concepts to emotions, recognizing that the ""conceptual feeling"" and the ""emotional feeling"" are interdependent.
A third point of academic em► The Westminster Choir of forty voices is the touring concert unit of Westminster Choir College in Princeton, New Jersey.
The Choir has performed since 1921 and is now one of the best known choral groups in the world.
For over 30 years it was conducted by its founder, John Finley Williamson.
Its present conductor, Warren Martin, is a graduate of the college and a former member of the Choir.
Warren Martin Conducts In 1950, when he returned to join the the faculty, Martin taught theory, composition and conducting, and subsequently became Director of Graduate Studies.
He was appointed Musical Director of the college in 1958, and presently holds this position.
As conductor of the Westminster Touring Choir, he has directed the group in numerous performances.
This performance is one in the series of Concerts presented by the LewistonAuburn Community Concert Association, and is the final program in the Bates College Concert and Lecture Series.
Bates students will be admitted upon presentation of I.D. cards at the entrance on the campus side of the chapel. phasis is the community in which the education occurs.
Each individual is socially related; his language, his experience, his identity, and his uniqueness depend on others.
To accept oneself fully, one must acknowledge all of the elements within himself.
Our stature as human beings is measured by the depth of our r/6 TWO BATES STUDENT, MAY 1, 1963 Bates Breaks Even In Novice Debate Tourney Four freshman debaters participated in a novice tourney at Dartmouth this past weekend.
Max Steinheimer and Roy Horowitz on the affirmative won from Westport and Union and lost to Dartmouth, LaSalle and Rhode Island.
Since they were host, the trophy was awarded to Brandeis who scored the second greatest number of wins.
Although Bates finished with five wins and five losses, the team was defeated four times by one point.
W A A Plans Banquet For Monday Night Plans are now well underway for the annual Women's Athletic Association Awards Banquet which will be held next Monday at 5:30 in Fiske Dining Hall.
Those women who have earned at least twenty credit hours have been invited, as well as several guests.
The main purpose of the Awards Banquet is to recognize those women who have shown active participation in various athletic and recreational events.
At this dinner the basketball trophy will also be presented to the winner of the interdorm competition.
The climax of the 'evening will be the annual awarding of the senior trophy to an outstanding senior selected by the Board.
To Preview Commencement Concert Commencement exercises will feature a concert presented by the music department under the direction of Professor Smith.
Underclassmen will have the opportunity to hear the performance Thursday, May 9, at 8:00 m. in the chapel.
Other groups performing include a brass choir, cello duo and the Deansmen.
The concert involves a number of solos on the clarinet, the French horn and a piano solo played by Yoko Hirasawa '65.
There are openings for Counselor-in-Training Director, Village Director and general counselors.
SENIOR CAREER OPPORTUNITIES The Maine State Personnel Department has announced that there are still vacancies for college graduates.
More detailed information and a further listing of vacancies is available in the Placement Office.
The YWCA National Board has sent the Placement Office a list of vacancies which are either currently open or will be open in September, 1963.
The vacancy list of job openings throughout the United States is available in the Placement Office.
SUMMER EMPLOYMENT The Oak Grove Hotel in Boothbay Harbor, Maine, hopes to employ a bookkeeper office assistant from early June through Labor Day.
The probable compensation would be room and board plus $40.00 per week.
Anyone interested should write to Mr Walter Jacob, Oak Grove Hotel, Boothbay Harbor, Maine.
The John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company has an excellent opportunity for men interested in the life insurance business and desiring summer employment.
The Summer Management Training Program is open to college undergraduates or graduate students.
The program provides a liberal starting salary — $60 for freshmen, $65 for sophomores, $70 for juniors and $80 for seniors entering graduate study.
Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS The Chapel last Sunday morning.
Nineteen Foreign Students Visit Bates For Weekend From May 3 to May 5, the Bates student body will be increased by nineteen.
During this time, foreign exchange students sponsored by the American Field Service Exchange Student Program, will attend classes, stay in dormitories, eat in dining halls and participate in Bates social life.
False love is a movement towards the other for the sake of oneself, regarding the other as a means of fulfillment of a personal end.
Respecting and behaving in accordance with the nature of the object, the latter is approached through discipline; the discipline of intellectual love is truth.
The student must try to love not only those ideas with which he agrees, but also those with which he does not agree, by which he may become hurt and confused.
Loomer concluded with a warning that an educational experience is worthwhile only when risk and the possibility of change are involved.
After having spent the year in Maine high schools, these students are visiting Bates to see what an American college is like.
A special attempt will be made to make these students feel at home in the college.
A private buffet supper will be held in their honor at the Women's Union, and on Sunday the students will be guests in the homes of several professors.
The American Field Service would like this type of visit to be a yearly event but this depends largely on their reception by the Bates student body.
If any Bates student is particularly interested in working with the service to help plan fu ture visits, he should contact members of this year's committee — Jane Potter '63, Elaine Kenseth '65, Carol Sue Stutz man '66, and David Fullerwider '66.
Notes From Underground The following minutes were taken at last week's Student Council meeting.
Inter-Gov. — Dobson reported that the Freshman Orientation Committee report is being ooked over by Dean Lindholm.
Senate — Dobson reported that a Campus referendum will be held on May 6th, in Lower Chase Hall, to determine the acceptance of the Senate Constitution by the student body.
On Saturday, May 4th, the Tradewinds, a folksinging group from UNH, will be in Chase Hall.
Councilman Extraordinaire, moved that the Council adjourn, James M Aikman, Sec.-Treas.
JACKIE GLEASON » As ""GIGOT"" ""Gleason has a gift of mimicrythat verges on j genius."" i -TIME Magazine j CHUCK WACOM 7 v Drive In-Restauront *~ r g| WED. thru SAT. d Academy Award Winner H Anne Bancroft in ""The ■ MIRACLE WORKERIS FrankSinatra, JanetLeigh SB ""Manchurian Candidate"" I Sun.-Mon.-Tues.
Augusta, Maine i 1 BATES STUDENT, MAY 1, 1963 THREE Another Man's Poison By MALCOLM MILLS '65 Gentlemen of the Symparanekromenoi, I am planning to address you with great enthusiasm and I suggest that you take notes because I am going to give a final exam on what I say.
With the score obtained from this exam I am going to calculate your qpr — your life qpr.
I note that none of you are listening to me and that all of you are questioning my authority — perhaps because I am not yet listed in an encyclopedia.
Because I am as insignificant as you are and I recognize my insignificance.
I have no dignity — no self-imposed beautiful lie to make my existence bearable.
I am absurd and I believe this and so are all of you, but your vital lie prevents you from believing it.
When you sing me the songs of the weight of your individual crosses I laugh.
You can always look them up in a book somewhere — it saves a lot of time that otherwise would be wasted on thinking.
We are sinners — each of us — if we give in to something so dead as our present situation Of course, I cannot name it — we will deal with generalizations today, gentlemen — let our earthly professors know the specifics.
May your records all be broadway musicals — may all your books be heavily underlined.
May your life be a survey course — perhaps you can spend two days on each sensation. . . . maybe only one day on love because specialization is dangerous to a liberal education.
Eliot — he tends to be too biographical — and personal polemics are dangerous to free thought.
Unto each of you I will a Chevrolet Biscayne ' sedan — green, metallic prickly pear — or maybe the color of a 1949 Hudson Hornet.
To each of you I give a place on the social register — we need morally outstanding people there to keep the masses in line.
This will be the last time that we shall get together here — I see the group disintegrating.
Ita missa est. . . . k FIN DE PARTIE Hamlet Brought To Knees But No One Cries 'Uncle' By JAMES KIERNAN '63 In attempting to produce Hamlet Miss Schaeffer took a great gamble; last Thursday night she broke even.
Shakespeare is difficult to produce well because the greatness of the bard's poetry outshines any antics of mortal players.
He is a character who has been subject to more interpretations than one would care to count.
It is a part for a giant, and mortal men do not fare well tugging with its lines.
The most gigantic characters Shakespeare created were men — only God and he did it.
Every man has his own Hamlet, and mine is not a whiny, weepy, adolescent.
Tod Lloyd's Hamlet was weakened because his anger and frustration sometimes seemed more like a child's tantrum than a man's passion.
At times he was so sombre that he cast a pale shadow on his more playful scenes with Polonius or the players.
His scenes with Ophelia resounded more with angered mockery and sullenness than with tender pity.
Our sympathy deepens for him with every attempt he makes to control and direct his fate, with every perceptive thought, with every character he draws out.
Hamlet is a man gifted with great powers of observation, who can attune his diction and his imagery to the situation and to the person to whom he is speaking.
Lloyd's playing Hamlet overwrought with grief and as anguished as Lear dispossessed this adaptability.
Phone KI 7-8600 HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET characters, including himself, as he plays the recorder.
Lloyd's Hamlet had grace, power and charm; he did well wrestling with the giant.
But the potential majesty and power of this tragic prince was not revealed to us, for Lloyd's Hamlet remained irresolute and moody, gritting his teeth and dulling his own performance.
An actress whose exuberance of personality illuminates the stage with just her entrance, whose words fall as rose petals or hammers on a still-struck audience, whose grace and command of position on stage makes every action and reaction seem effortless and real — such an actress possesses stage presence and such an actress is Judith Mossman.
After four years of searching, I've found someone who can equal Jane Damour.
Polonius , advisor to the king was an enjoyable and most magnificent ass.
Horatio was played with unusual spirit by John Strassburger; and Chris Chambers, majestic as the Ghost, turned in an excellent performance.
The queen while not as deep and excitable a character as I would have liked to have seen, was played with skill and warmth.
David Kramer's Laertes was enjoyable if occasionally unconvincing and affected.
The sets and general direction of this production again serve witness to Miss Schaeffer's genius.
She had a large cast and crew to aid her in this Olympian task and their names are too numerous to mention.
Suffice it to say that the production as a whole showed evidence of much hard work, imagination and that all the people on stage and off must be congratulated on a most successful production.
I did not envy Miss Schaeffer the task of producing this prince Air Waves ■ By DOUG WAKEFIELD '64 Last Saturday, WRJR had some major additions to its facilities.
With the new equipment WRJR will be able to set up a recording studio which will raise the standards of the shows on WRJR to an even higher level.
As this is appearing on the opening day of registration, it might be wise to mention that if anyone is interested in working on WRJR, he might consider saving some time for the training program in the fall.
Anyone is welcome to train, and a special invitation goes to anyone who is interested in classical music.
If you have some knowledge of music and are at all interested in having a Masterworks Hour on WRJR, you will be the more welcome to train.
Those of you who are coming back early in the fall will be interested to hear that WRJR is planning to go on the air during the evenings of Freshman Week.
This is hoped to serve a dual purpose, one being to help the freshmen with information on the events of that week, and the other to relate some interesting data on the incoming class, such as the percentage from different states and where the furthest one hails from.
It is true that I did not and still do not believe today's Robinson Players capable of capturing and controlling this giant.
Not only is this topic of the greatest importance to those involved in teaching and learning, but Loomer's thesis and approach to the problems of education in our day is alive and vital.
He offers hope and direction to a system of higher education which, in this country today, finds itself growing increasingly stultified.
If this college and others are to return to the mainstream of intellectual pursuit, and become once again vibrant communities in the vanguard of education, a new direction is needed.
This new direction — this turn toward vitality — was indicated by Bernard Loomer.
Out of a community of men and women ""devoted to education,"" a handful come to learn and ponder a new perspective on education.
From a studentry ""striving for personal growth,"" come 37 to learn and grow.
A faculty which ""delights in the adventures of intellectual curiosity,"" produces two members to take part in intellectual discussion.
The poor attendance last week is not the disease, but merely a symptom.
We must recognize this and other symptoms — they must be seen and interpreted correctly and boldly.
Now is not the time for weakness, for timidity, for taking refuge in the past, for hiding our eyes and minds from the present, for letting someone else make decisions.
This, it will be said, is to attempt the impossible — the impossible which Dostoyevsky calls the stone wall.
But we cannot subside in the face of the impossible — we cannot be reconciled to it.
Nature does not ask your permission, she has nothing to do with your wishes, and whether you like her laws or dislikes them, you are bound to accept her as she is, and consequently all her conclusions.
The Student Senate The three constitutions — Senate, Men's Council and Women's Council — which appear on pages five and six, are the only official copies which will be distributed to the students.
It is this governmental structure which you shall be asked to approve or reject next Monday.
Editorial Assistant John Bart '64 Editorial Assistant Sally O Smyth '65 Editorial Assistant Perry Bruder '65 Editorial Assistant Pamela Ball '64 Editorial Assistant David A Nelson Faculty Advisor Published weekly at Ohase Hall.
I heartily agree with your editorial of last week contemning the Extra-Curricular Committee's failure to approve the amendment to the P A. constitution recommending that the editor be given ultimate responsibility in matters pertaining to the paper as a whole.
As the past editor of the STUDENT I was partially responsible for the initiation of the amendments.
Ideally, no conflict should arise in the operation of the two major branches of the paper, the editorial and the business; the two are relatively autonomous.
The photography department, for example, has a budget, and is responsible to the business manager for it; yet the editorial staff assigns the pictures.
Last semester the business manager refused to release funds for expenses incurred while taking pictures of the fallout shelter, failing to realize that the responsibility for the content of the paper lay with the editor-in-chief.
Thus the two offices do occasionally conflict; when they do, and only then, is it necessary for someone to make a decision affecting both.
Few businessmen, requiring an immediate decision, or any decision, on something involving their business would consider asking someone unfamiliar with the business to make the decision; few businesses could survive with two presidents.
Decisions have to be made, and someone must ultimately be held responsible for making them.
In the case of the STUDENT, I was held responsible by subscribers who were not receiving their papers, and by the faculty who failed to get copies delivered to them; and yet I was unable to rectify these mistakes because I was not authorized to invade the sanctity of the business section.
This, however, would set a precedent for faculty control of student organizations.
I could have requested special meetings of the P A., (perhaps two or three a week), which would usually aggravate the problem.
Neither the faculty nor the majority of the P A. know much about the daily running of the STUDENT, nor should they.
And large boards are notoriously inefficient when it comes to making decisions.
I suggest not that the editorin-chief be made a dictator but merely that on matters involving both the business and editorial sections the editor be given the responsibility, since, I believe, the paper which reaches the students, not the Wall Street rating, is most significant.
The Extra-Curricular Committee did not query me on the practical operation of the paper.
The Extra-CurricuStudent Senate To Institute Integration Of Government By JANET McEACHERN '66 As Bates enters its 100th year as New England's first coeducational college, students will next Monday have the opportunity at last to make a truly coeducational bond between the two sides of campus by voting in the long proposed Stuent Senate.
The proposed proctor councils would be concerned with only the specific problems and requirements of the men's and women's sides of campus.
The Student Senate would relieve these two bodies of matters concerning the entire student body so that each organization could function more effectively in its own particular area.
Red Tape Prevails At the present time, a fantastic amount of red tape is envolved in making any decisions which would affect all-student functions.
Countless linkage meetings, and repetitious discussions in Stu-G and Stu-C drain away the effectiveness of each body.
In this editorial it was stated that both the past and present business managers of the STUDENT supported the proposed amendment to the Publishing Association Constitution.
This amendment was discussed for several weeks among the P.A. members, the STUDENT staff, and the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee.
At no time during this period did I say that I was in favor of this amendment.
On the contrary in several meetings with Dean Boyce, Mr Nelson, and Mr Ross, I informed them that I was strongly opposed to the amendment.
It was, therefore, a false assumption on the Editor's part when he stated that I was in favor of the amendment.
In my opinion the proposed amendment was not the solution to a more efficiently run organization.
The original P.A. constitution purposely avoided giving ""ultimate responsibility"" to the editor.
The fact that a personality conflict arose this past year involving editor and business manager does not merit a revision of the constitution.
The P.A. permitted this conflict to get out of hand instead of taking steps to correct it.
In the future it would appear that the P.A. should have authority to meet the responsibility of solving such an issue rather than propose amendments.
Robert J Lanz '65 lar Committee might have an idea of how they would like to see the STUDENT organized; apparently they do not know how it has been run, and how it may best be run.
If the ExtraCurricular Committee had questioned the past and present ediing between both sides of campus would hopefully be increased.
Betty Anne Little, outgoing president of Stu-G, has expressed the opinion that the differing views of these two organizations would have to compromise in order to do the best thing for the campus.
This would also give more students an opportunity to participate in student government affairs.
It has been pointed out that much talent is wasted on the women's side of campus.
Some girls may have a sincere interest in how student affairs are handled and would actively participate in Student Senate, but they would rather not spend a major part of their time in Stu-G supporting the Honor System which they may or may not agree with.
The Student Senate can be only as valuable as next year's students make it.
Some see it only as a merging of an equal number of men and women, working on all-campus activities and concerns.
Yet it has been expressed that if the students want changes and are willing to work hard for them, things can be accomplished.
The administration and faculty, by supporting the Student Senate, have proven their concern with student attitudes of all kinds.
Those students who claim Bates's students are apathetic will have a golden opportunity to be disproven, stated one strong supporter.
But this success will necessitate active interest by the entire campus which can an dshould be shown through activities, student opinion polls, student publications, and personal initiative.
Student Support Essential If students do want the Student Senate they should be willing to support it.
If they don't want it, don't care about it, or don't want to support it, they should not vote for it because this would only mean failure.
A great deal of time has been spent in preparing the Student Senate for the student body — a great deal of effort which cannot be overlooked or wasted because of lack of support.
For the last three years members of the Intergovernment Committee have been working over the possibilities of the Student Senate, a senate whose success lies with the students themselves. tors (in addition to asking the business manager what he wanted?), their decision might have been more enlightened.
John R Wilson '63 BATES STUDENT, MAY 1, 1963 Student Senate Following are the official Constitutions of the proposed Student Senate, and Men's and Women's Councils.
It is obvious thai replacement of outmoded machinery will improve the system — efficiency and coordination are certainly to be gained from the campus-wide government.
But we emphasize thai however good the machinery, the system will fail without fuel.
Life in a college is not a product of its buildings, budget, or machinery of its government — though these are important, their efficacy rests on those who occupy the buildings, use the budget, and operate the machinery.
The institution of the Student Senate is by all means a step forward, but we must not forget that it is we who make the step, and we must continue to walk. — Peter d'Errico '65.
STUDENT SENATE CONSTITUTION We, the students of , Bates College, in order to encourage the formulaton of responsible opinion, foster and organize an active__ and constructive social life, promote a spirit of cooperation among the students, the faculty and the administration and work for the best interests of the College and its students, establish this Constitution.
Article I Name The name of this organization shall be the Bates College Student Senate.
Sophomore class, one man and one woman from the Freshman class, and the Chairmen of the Men's and Women's Councils as voting members.
To encourage the development of a campus attitude which stimulates intellectual freedom and concern; To seek effective communication among members of the college community; To seek for all students justice and the enjoyment of individual rights, and to encourage acceptance by students of their individual responsibilities to other members of the college community.
To strive to implement its purposes; To hold at least one meeting of the Senate each month of the college year; To have the responsibility for the allotment of its funds; To appoint a student to fill any vacancy in its membership which may arise; To attempt to coordinate the decisions of the Men's and Women's Councils in their representative functions which may affect the entire campus; To supervise AllCampus Eelections.
The Senate shall not have the power to alter, add, or void any section of the Women's Honor System.
Shall confer with the Dean of Men, the Dean of Women, faculty advisers, faculty members and administration offiicials on appropriate matters.
Shall represent student opinion and act in the best interest of the students with consideration for the general policy of the college.
The Senate in cooperation with the four classes (and such All-Campus organizations as may elect to be included) shall secure each year nominations for the All-College Election.
Nominees for the Senate will be those students who present a petition of forty signatures on an official form secured at the office of the Dean of Men.
In the primaries, a maximum of eight senior women, six junior women, and four sophomore women receiving the highest number of votes, shall be selected as candidates by the women.
The Senate, the four classes (and such All-Campus organizations as may elect to be included) shall conduct each year on the Monday before Spring Vacation a general college election for the ensuing year.
One week from the date of return to campus after Spring Vacation, an election of President and Vice-President shall be conducted by the outgoing Senate.
All registered students of Bates College may vote for the President of the Senate.
During the interim period, those Senators desiring to be elected to the Presidency shall campaign.
Before final action is taken by either committee, the student shall have the opportunity to be heard by the committee.
Any decisions or recommendations reached by either of these two standing committees shall be presented to the Committee on Student Conduct by the chairman of the committee involved.
No evidence presented before either of the Senate judicial committees or the Committee on Student Conduct shall be reported outside these bodies.
Article VII Funds of the Senate Dues of $.75 per semester shall be collected from each student as part bf the Student Activities Fee.
A referendum shall be initiated by a vote of twothirds approval of the Senate members or a petition signed by one-tenth of the Student Body.
A referendum shall require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of the registered Student Body to be binding on the Senate.
A question for a referendum must be appropriately posted at least five days before the Student Body is asked to vote.
Amendments shall be initiated by a vote of twothirds approval of the Senate members or a petition signed by one-tenth of the Student Body.
An amendment shall require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of the registered Student Body to become effective.
Amendments must be appropriately posted at least five days before the Student Body is asked to vote.
Amendments to Article VII are subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, The proctors of the dormitory in which the student resides shall be asked to serve as non-voting members of the Judicial Committee.
The President, with the approval of the Senate, may appoint such other committees as are deemed necessary.
The Senate may approve any registered student for membership on standing or special committees.
Faculty advisors shall be designated by the Senate with the approval of the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee.
The Dean of Men and the Dean of Women shall be faculty advisors, ex-officio.
Article II Rules of Order ""Robert's Rules of Order, Revised"" shall be the parliamentary guide of the Senate.
Article III Amendments Amendments to the By-Laws shall require a vote of twothirds approval of the Senate members.
MEN'S COUNCIL CONSTITUTION Preamble We, the men of Bates College, in order to act in the interest of the men of Bates College, and to in f FIVE aid in establishing an atmosphere conducive to the development of each student, do establish this Constitution.
This Constitution shall concern the Council members only as representatives of the men, and does not include those duties for which the Council members, acting as proctors in the men's dormitories, are responsible to the administration of the College.
Article I Name The name of this organization shall be the Men's Council of Bates College.
Dues of $.25 per semester shall be collected from each man as part of the Student Activities Fee.
The Council shall also have the responsibility of helping the Freshmen adjust themselves to their new environment and to explain the relation that they have to the College and the upperclassmen.
To meet at appropriate intervals, or at the request of the Chairman, or at the request of the Student Senate, To have the power to act in all matters pertaining solely to the interests of the men.
Duties of the officers, The Chairman shall preside at all meetings; appoint committees as the need arises, be a voting member of the Student Senate, and preside as chairman of the Men's Judiciary Committee, The Vice-Chairman shall assume the duties of the Chairman in his absence, The Secretary Treasurer shall be responsible for the budget and for all financial transactions, keep a record of all proceedings, and shall submit a copy of the Council minutes to the Student Senate.
The men of the Student Senate (including the Chairman of the Men's Council) shall comprise the Men's Proctor Selection Committee of the Student Senate.
After the mid-term vacation in the second semester, this committee shall secure applications for proctorships.
Rec. ommendations for proctor appointments will be made to the Dean of Men not later than May SIX BATES STUDENT, MAY 1, 1963 Men's Council first and final appointments will be made by the Dean.
Men's Proctor Selection Committee, shall be candidates for the office of Chairman of the Men's Council.
An election committee ap pointed by the president of the Student Senate will be respon sible for conducting the election prior to the beginning of the fi nal examination period at the end of the spring term.
Mem bers of this committee will be selected from the male membership of the student Senate.
The candidate receiving the largest number of votes cast by the registered male students shall be the Chairman and the runner-up shall be Vice-Chairman.
The Secretary Treasurer shall be elected by majority vote of the incoming proctors and this elec tion shall take place prior to the beginning of the final examination period following selection of proctors for the ensuing year.
A referendum shall be initiated by a vote of twothirds approval of the Men's Council or a petition signed by one-tenth of the men students.
A referendum shall require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of the men students to be binding on the Council.
A question for referendum must be appropriately posted at least five days before the men are asked to vote.
Amendments shall be initiated by a vote of two-thirds approval of the Men's Council or a petition signed by one-tenth of the men students, An amendment shall require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of the men students to become effective, Amendments must be appropriately posted at least five days before the men are asked to vote.
No amendment shall be made to the Men's Council Constitution which shall alter the Council's relationship to the Student Senate.
WOMEN'S COUNCIL CONSTITUTION Preamble We, the women of Bates College, hereby establish this constitution as a basis of maintaining certain standards of conduct which will help us individually and collectively to foster the ideals of Bates College and to develop wide-spread responsibility in each individual.
The Honor System provides a common ground for the organization of corporate living to the mutual advantage of students and faculty.
Knowing that Bates relies upon us to obey the fundamental rules for our own welfare and protection, we pledge our full efforts to make ourselves active participants in this organization and to avail ourselves of the opportunities and privileges granted herein.
Article I Name The name of this organization shall be the Women's Council of Bates College.
Article II Membership and Funds Section I Membership, The Women's Council shall consist of a Chairman, the presidents of the women's dormitories and the president of the Women's Uniorv and the first vice-president of Page Hall.
Members of the Women's Council shall take office on the fourth Wednesday following All-College elections and shall serve for one year.
Funds, Dues of $1.25 per semester shall be collected from each woman as part of Student Activity Fees.
The Women's Council shall be responsible for the allotment of its funds.
Additional meetings shall be called at the discretion of the Chairman or at the request of four Council members.
To act as chairman of the Women's Judiciary Committee of the Student Senate.
The Vice-Chairman shall assume the duties of the Chairman in her absence.
To submit a copy of the Women's Council minutes to the Student Senate and the Women's Council advisors.
Article V Selection of Proctors and Officers There shall be a Nominating Committee of eight women consisting of the Chairman of the Women's Council, ex-officio; a representative from the Senior class; a representative from the Freshman class; two representatives from the Junior class; three representatives from the Sophomore class, one to be elected from each of the three campus sections, designated as Page; Cheney, Milliken, Whittier, and Mitchell; and Frye Street.
These class representatives shall be elected by their own class members after two Seniors, four Juniors, six Sophomores, and two Freshmen have been nominated by means of a primary ballot.
Names of these nominees shall be posted at least one week in advance of the date of the final election, The Nominating Committee shall appoint the House Presidents and VicePresidents who shall serve as proctors in their respective dorms, The Nominating Committee shall nominate for the Chairmanship two incoming Seniors who have served as members of the Women's Council during their junior year.
To manage all financial business in her dormitory with the approval of the House President.
The House President shall call a general meeting once a week at which time information from the Women's Council shall be presented and dormitory business discussed, Each student is allowed two unexcused ab sences a semester from House Meetings.
The third and each succeeding unexcused absence within a semester should be re ported to House Council by the woman involved.
I Each House Council, except those housing senior women only, shall be composed of a Chairman who is the House President; a VicePresident; a Vice-Chairman who is the other proctor; one representative from the junior class; and one representative from the sophomore class.
At the first House Meeting the women shall be asked to consider possible House Council Representatives in their class.
A formal vote shall be taken two days later to determine House Council membership, The women shall elect their class representatives by means of rating sheets.
The qualifications for House Council membership shall be drawn up in each dormitory by the women.
Election to and representation on House Council in senior dormitories shall be approved by the Women's Council.
Combine summer study and recreation in the stimulating climate of one of our country's finest vacation regions.
To keep records of each meeting for purposes of efficiency and to destory these records at the end of each semester.
A woman incurs a case for infringement of any rule enumerated in the By-Laws.
She may state her case in writing and give it to any one of the House Council members.
She may state her reason for breaking the rule if she wishes and whether or not she would like a reminder.
She must indicate how she will take care of her case if she does not request a reminder, She may come before the entire House Council and state her case and explain her reasons fully if she wishes.
In the event of a frequent or flagrant offender the proctors may intervene.
Give a firm warning to the woman, Request that she come before the House Council for disciplinary action, Discuss the problem with the Dean of Women and/or the Women's Council.
Women's Council or a petition signed by one-tenth of all registered women students.
A referendum shall require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of all registered women students to be binding on the Council.
Decisions of disciplinary cases are not subject to appeal. .j Section 3.
A question for referendum must be appropriately posted at least five days before, the women are asked to vote.
Amendments shall be initiated by vote of two-thirds approval of the Women's Council or a petition signed by one-tenth of all registered women students., An amendment shall require a vote by secret ballot of threefifths of all registered women students to become effective, Amendments shall be appropriately posted at least five days before the women students arc asked to vote.
The By-Laws shall be amended by a vote of twothirds approval of the Womens Council.
No amendment shall be made to the Women's Council Constitution which shall alter the Council's relationship to the Student Senate.
Phila., Pa. i BATES STUDENT, MAY 1, 1963 SEVEN Garnet Nine Slams Black Bears, 4-0 Suffolk Falls 9-2 While Bobcats SPORTING S \ By RUSS HENDERSON V 4 Speculating sports, or to coin the more systematic boosters of the arts, analyzing the game, is a passion as universal as people.
Being of the latter term myself, I find this characteristic as much at home in me as the appreciation of a cold beer.
The art of crystalball gazing, in regard to athletes and such, is based on optimism, hope and the last name in that most famous of all double play combinations, Chance.
With wonderful summer just around the corner and another college year Tripping out the door, the thoughts of next year's sports fortunes in Garnetland are conversation pieces wherever Batesmen gather.
On behalf of the graduating senior athletes we of the STUDENT Sports Staff have several wishes for Bates athletics and their respected coaches.
Football — A fall surprise package in the persons of two six foot plus, two hundred and thirty pound tackles who are transfers from a junior college.
Track — The use of Coach Hatch's Goliaths as weight men coupled with the return to the Lewiston campus of Mike Gregus.
Baseball — The luck of the Irish in replacing an entire outfield plus the two big ones at first and on the mound.
Tennis — Bobby Thompson arrived but Oh for another slammer for Jimmy Wallach's crew.
Spotlighting the recent action on the Bates sporting scene has been junior tennis star, Jim Wallach.
Thorn Freeman, Garnet mound ace, reversed his dismal Colby showing in a fantastic three hit shut out over Maine in which he failed to walk a man.
Lose State Opener 7-2 At Colby By LEIGH CAMPBELL '64 The Bates Bobcats won their first State Series game in two tries Monday afternoon, with a 4-0 victory over Maine at Garcelon Field.
They had opened competition in the Series chase with a frustrating 7-2 loss to Colby at Waterville, Thursday.
State Series standings find only two games played, and Colby leading with a 1-0 record, Bates wih 1-1, and Maine 0-1.
Shoddy defense and a lack of timely hitting spelled the Garnets' doom against Colby.
Thorn Freeman started on the hill for Bates, and while not having one of his better days, might have come through with better support.
Bill Davis hit a drive which was dropped in deep center field for a two-base error.
Bud Spector's bunt sacrificed him to third, and John Yuskis' fly to right drove Davis home.
Colby came right back in their half of the first when cleanup hitter Charlie Carey singled home two runs.
Mule Grand Slam The roof fell in on Freeman in the second, when a walk, passed ball, a single by Colby pitcher Ken Stone, and a Bates error loaded the bases with one out.
Bruce Waldman then lofted a 3-2 pitch over the left-center field fence for a grand slam homer, and Colby led 6-1.
Twice they loaded the bases with no one out, but these two threats resulted in only one run.
Their second run scored when Howie Vandersea's hard ground ball with the bases loaded in the fifth was turned into a double play by the Colby shortstop.
Freeman was removed for a pinchhitter in he seventh, and Ted Krzynowek and Ted Beal held Colby scoreless in their relief jobs, but Big Thorn was never in serious trouble as he struck out ten of the Black Bears and walked none.
The game was a fine pitchers' duel until the Bates half of the eighth inning.
The Bobcats had scored an unearned marker off Maine pitcher Dck Dolloff in the second.
Vandersea's bunt was fumbled by Dolloff for an error, putting men on first and third.
After a strike out and a popup, Paul Holt worked Dolloff for a run-scoring base on balls.
A power plant that has the message, plus saving ways with a tank of gas.
Muffler and tailpipe designed to last at least as many years as the original buyer owns the car.
Bates could never break through the pitching of Stone, also a Bobcat nemesis in basketball.
Drop Suffolk On Saturday, Bob Lanz, Krzynowek, and Ron Taylor, the latter making his first mound appearance of the season, combined to give Bates an easy win over Suffolk.
Suffolk opened the scoring with a run in the second, but the Bobcats got four in their half.
The doors opened when an error in a double play attempt let in two runs.
In the third, Yuskis scored on an error, and catcher Steve Egbert's triple drove in Archie Lanza to give Bates a 6-1 lead.
Doubles by Spector and Taylor scored the final three runs >in the fourth.
Suffolk's other run was a solo homer by Ray Connerty off Krzynowek in the sixth.
Freeman was back in top form Monday, twirling a masterful three-hit shutout for a 4-0 win.
Maine got a man to second in the fourth on a single and wild pitch, but Thorn struck out Dave Gaw to retire the side.
With two out in the fifth an error and single put two Maine runners on, but Yuskis made a good play on a grounder to end the inning.
With one out, singles by Lanza and Vandersea and an error put runners on second and third.
Vandersea scored on a wild pitch, and Spector's single drove in MacNevin.
Lanza led the 'Cats with three hits, including a broken bat grounder which traveled a shorter distance than one piece of the bat.
The large Bates crowd was kept warm in the sunny but windy weather with some caustic comments from the back rows aimed at the visiting players.
Bates plays at Bowdoin Thursday, and tackles Northeastern at Garcelon Field Saturday.
EIGHT BATES STUDENT, MAY 1, 1963 Golfers 2-1 In Series; Brown, Simpson Lead By AL HARVIE '65 The Bates College golf team is off to a blistering pace under the handling of Coach Robert Hatch.
Seven of Bates' linksmen have combined to compile a six win, three loss record, including two wins in three outings in state series competition.
Last week saw the team win matches over Colby, Babson, and Bowdoin, all by the identical score of four to three.
Tom Brown, from Houlton, Maine, has the best win-loss record, winning five while only dropping one.
Close behind with a four-two record is frosh Lynn Simpson from Bristol, Conn.
Representing the team as numbers one and two men are two brothers from Statford on Avon, Conn., ""Chuck"" and Walt Lasher, both with three-three records.
Playing in the fifth and sixth spots are ""Willy"" Farrington and John Schatz.
Besides Schatz, Walt Lasher, Tom Brown, Lynn Simpson, and Lloyd Bunten also have two wins in state series.
Scorecard wise, five members of the team have dipped below the eighty mark on the par seventy-two Martindale Country Club course.
The first four men, C Lasher, W Lasher, T Brown, and L Simpson have all subeightied the course more than once with Lloyd Bunten turning in a below eighty score against U of Maine in a losing effort.
With the course drying out and the greens getting faster, the scores should be going down and the Bates win column going up.
Not that there is necessarily any connection between the greens on the golf course with the green felts on a billiard table, but both Chuck Lasher and Tom Brown remain in competition in the current pool tournament.
Chuck is in the finals in the billiard tourney with Tom in the semi-finals in the billiards.
Trackmen Humble 3 Opponents; Williams Takes Three Big Wins By BOB SEGERSTEN '63 Well, this week there actually isn't much to write about, but to keep the wild Greek of the Aegean happy, I will write a few words concerning intramurals.
Hard To Get Scores The various Chase Hall tournaments (i.e. chess, bridge, pingpong, etc.) are still in a very confused state; however, the finalists ought to be decided upon some time next week.
It seems that many of the games have been played off-campus at Lou's Place and it is very difficult for me to obtain the scores, for I make it a point not to frequent such establishments.
The pool tournament seems to be quickly drawing to a close with Tom Brown making the finals.
The winner of the GillespiePequegnot match and the winner of the Strassburger-Kramer match will play each other for the privilege of facing Mr Brown.
Mis-Organization Before I start to cover the softball games, I would like to make a few comments on the The bell that rang Saturday afternoon included in its chimes a winning chant for the victorious track squad, who easily succeeded in defeating Colby, Brandeis, and Norwich at Colby by posting 97% points.
Struggling in the wake, Colby managed to obtain 31% points, Brandeis 27% points, and Norwich 19% points.
This leaves the Garnet thinclads unbeaten so far this spring in two outings.
Not satisfied with three wins, Paul conceded to a third in the high jump, which Tom Bowditch handily won.
Wilhelmsen Sets Two The untiring gate of Finn Wilhelmsen carried him to not only two first places, but to a pair of new track records.
Breaking the old record by one second, Wilhelmsen snapped the tape in the one mile run in 4:31.8.
A little later he smashed the established two mile track record by 14 seconds as he pranced across the finish line in 9:46.2.
His cohort, Eric Silverberg, placed fourth in the mile and second in the two mile.
Harvie managed to tie the track record in the high hurdles with a time of 15. seconds.
Curiiss Stars In the weight events it was senior strongman John Curtiss.
Curtiss then entered an event he had previously never competed in, the hop, step and jump, and placed fourth.
Trailing Curtiss in the hammer were Dave Harrison and Wayne Pangburn who placed third and fourth respectively.
Although the Bobcats were favored in this tri-meet, it wasn't expected that they would crush their opponents by such a margin.
All in all, the 'Cats showed a great deal of strength, and their performance against the U of Mass., Tufts, and Northeastern next week will be something to watch.
Some individuals have still to play their second round of competition, while others have advanced to the fourth and fifth rounds.
This might be due to my second complaint, some of the preliminary matches seem to be advancing at a very slow rate.
The boys from East Parker forfeited their A league game to J.B.; too many conflicting events.
The highlight of the game was the amazing inefficiency of one Nick Basbanes, who made 2 errors in left field that let in four runs for the opposition.
Also, Stu Solomon, sometimes referred to as the ""Lion of J.B.,"" was exceedingly poor on the mound.
The score was 5 to 4 in favor of W.P., but it could have been anybody's game.
If all the games are as good as this one was, however, the A league should prove to be very exciting.
The netmen, however, lost a 7-2 verdict to the Bowdoin Polar Bear and eliminated a chance of anything but a tie for the state series title.
Junior Jim Wallach, the only undefeated man on the Bobcats, has been pacing the team, both in singles and doubles.
He defeated quite convincingly the Bowdoin captain, Sam Ladd, by the scores of 9-7; 4-6; 6-1.
Then Wallach teamed with freshman Bob Thompson to defeat the tandem of Ladd and MacDonald in three sets 4-6; 6-4; 6-2.
The best any other Bates player could do was Thompson's three set loss to Norm Tom as Bowdoin swept the remaining seven points.
Wallach Shows Way Wallach won the number 1 singles against Babson handily, defeating Gary Rottenberg 6-2; 7-5.
The Wallach Thompson team smashed the Babson team off the court 6-0, 6-2 in doubles.
The Bobcats had another comparatively easy match against Colby in Waterville on Saturday.
George Beebe, playing well both at the net and from the base line, won in straight sets 6-2, 6-1.
Jim Wallach didn't remove his warm-up jacket in his straight set win, 6-2, 6-1.
Jim Wallach, playing ""his toughest match of the year"" won in three sets 6-3, 6-8, 6-2 from Bill Deering.
Bob Thompson lost and Jim Corey was extended to three sets before winning.
George Beebe turned in another 6-2, 6-1 performance and Todd ""Hamlet"" Lloyd made his return to the Bates line-up with an easy 6-2, 6-2 win.
The next imporant matches on the Bobcat schedule are Bowdoin, Friday, May 3, and Tufts the following day.
Although rated underdogs, the Bobcats, bolstered by the return of Todd Lloyd, must be given a chance to defeat the proud Polar Bear.
STate 2-3771 Bobcat Of Week Paul Williams In a week full of great achievements, the competitor who stands out to receive the traditional olive wreath of athletic acclaim is versatile junior Paul Williams.
Williams, a biology major from Rutherford, New Jersey, displayed his potential by scoring 17 points at Colby Saturday in a four-way meet with Brandeis, Colby, and Norwich.
Constantly hampered in the past by injuries, Williams took the field in top condition.
Rounding out his day's endeavors, Williams tied for second in the high jump behind winner Tom Bowditch.
It is needless to say more than we are pleased to have ""Willy"" back in top condition, and sending out a warning to the upcoming Garnet foes to beware.
And to demonstrate, emphasize and cele brate the happy event, the Chase Hall Dance Committee, the Class of 1964 and the Outing Club have banded together to present Spring Weekend, 1963.
These ""rites of spring"" will be kept on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, May 10 to 12 Throughout the week-end the* Bates Art Association will be presenting an exhibit of student work.
Weather permitting the works will be exhibited on a snowfence along the walks facing Coram Library and if not the show will be held in Hathorn Hall.
The Art Association is pleased to announce that students from Colby College will be contributing to the exhibit.
In all likelihood this will be the first intercollegiate art exhibit that has been held at the college.
The different media represented will include water colors, inkwash, block prints, oils and sculpture.
This will be followed by an open air jazz concert from 8:30 to 10:30 on the steps of Coram Library by Tony Agby and his Continentals.
In the afternoon, there will be varsity baseball and tennis with Clark, and Thorncrag cabin will be open all day.
The highlight of the weekend will be the Ivy Hop from 8:00 m. to 11:45.
A spring-like ""kaleidescope"" pattern provides the theme for this semi-formal gala event in the Alumni Gymnasium.
The week-end will be topped off by the clambake on Popham Beach on Sunday.
Committee Omits Student Choice From Registration Procedure Last Wednesday students found that they were not required to make out schedules before registering for next year.
Many advisers were unable to answer questions concerning the omission of the schedules.
Registrar Mabel Libby explained that students will no longer be permitted to choose the instructor or the time of courses offered in multiple sections.
In an effort to discover the reason for the new administrative policy, the STUDENT consulted Prof.
Buschmann explained that ""last year we had to change nearly every student's program.
The professor felt that a phenomenon such as this is the result of the large number of Core Courses students are required to take.
Queried as to whether he felt this new system would tend to make Bates' students nothing more than ""small, friendly, coeducational"" numbers, Buschmann replied that the Committee does not function like an IBM machine.
A Fair Schedule When asked what criteria the Committee will use to design schedules he stated that ""ideally the Committee will try to plan a schedule so that a student has three classes on one day and two on the following day.
Professor Buschmann mentioned that certain students, such as those who work in the dining halls, will be given preference so that their sections do not interfere with their work.
Professor Buschmann explained that the confusion among the advisers concerning the change in procedure was an oversight on the part of the Sectioning Committee.
In debating, oratory and extemporaneous speaking, Bates representatives finished first, and the squad easily won the overall sweepstakes competition.
Robert Ahern '64 and Tom Hall '64, on the negative, defeated Albertus Magnus, St.
Blum's oration was also judged best in that division, and Ahern won the Extemporaneous Speaking Contest.
Both men received an individual trophy, the four debaters received a trophy for their combined efforts and the sweepstake trophy was presented to Bates for their total showing.
Squad Steadily Improves This Conference marked the conclusion of a year of competition which included 70 varsity victories and 35 losses in debates with colleges from across the country.
Of late the varsity had finished third in the MIT tourney and second in the New England.
Kenneth Woodbury '63, a graduate of South Portland High School, acted as moderator of the debate.
With these words the prophet Isaiah described his dream of a peaceful world, and Edward Hicks, a preaching Quaker from Jonitis Will Study Arab World At Utah Dr.
Presently an instructor of Race and Cultural Relations in a World Prospective, Dr.
Jonitis spent the summer of 1959 as the director of a group of college students participating in an educational seminar on Egypt and the Middle East.
He taught in a Quaker school in Jordan during the academic year of 1959-60, and traveled extensively in the Middle East.
He spent the summer of 1962 as a Fulbright Fellow in Taiwan at the First Institute on Chinese Civilization.
NOTICE The Lewision -Auburn Chess Club is now meeting every Wednesday evening at 7:30 at the Auburn Municipal Building, 45 Spring St., Auburn.
Pennsylvania, illustrated these words and this dream in his painting, The Peaceable Kingdom.
This hope of all men has inspired a choral work by Randall Thompson which will be performed as the principle work of the Commencement Concert.
The next two performances will take place during Senior Week at 8:30m. on Friday and Saturday, May 31 and June 1.
Program Varied Other works included in the program are the Entrada Festiva for brass quartet and organ by Flor Peeters.
The Commencement Chorus will sing a selection of light classical works such as Gustav Hoist's Autumn Song.
The English composer Henry Purcell is represented by his Sonata m G Minor for clarinet and piano with Barry Davidson '66 on the clarinet and John Cook '65 at the piano.
Donald Fredenburg '63 will be featured in a performance of Parks Grant's Essay for French Horn and Organ.
The Commencement Concert will be climaxed by the chorus' performance of The Peaceable Kingdom.
Constitutions Passed The Student Senate, Women's Council and Men's Council Constitutions have all been passed by the required two-thirds percentage of registered students.
Seventy-one percent of the studentry voted last Monday and 96% of the voters favored the Senate.
On October 21, the initial election of Senators will take place and the selection of officers will follow a week later.
Salisbury's observations were not based on superficial knowledge of international politics.
Salisbury objects to the distinction commonly made between ""domestic policy"" and ""foreign policy,"" and feels that our political thinking must ""catch up"" with the technological advances which have made these two ""worlds"" inseparable.
Basic Requirements There are several minimum requirements which the United States must consider in dealing with other powers.
In order to do this, we must measure the strengths and assets of the United States American policy must meet the challenge and dangers of opposing systems; thus objective information and analysis are essential.
Held annually at this time, the convention has the primary purpose of providing the opportunity for delegates to work together in coordinating individual chapter activities and in gaining insight into the problems which presently confront education and the future teacher.
The Bates delegation to the conference included Joyce Schilcher '63, Elaine Woodford '63, Ron Stead '64, Dave Zuretti '65, and club advisor, Dr.
The Bates chapter will be privileged this coming year to have one member among the three state officers as Dave Zuretti was elected vice-president.
His duties in this capacity, in addition to filling in for the president when necessary, will be concentrated on publication of the Newsletter. ment on the entire world through the threat or use of force.
But this would be a logical contradiction, for ""Our way is a democratic way,"" and to impress our dictates on other countries by force would actually have destroyed the democratic system.
Today, Russia is our equal in nuclear power, and has achieved ""clear technonogical breakthroughs,"" beginning with the first Sputnik, which gave her an enormous propaganda advantage, particularly in underdeveloped countries.
According to Salisbury, Russia will ""almost certainly"" beat us to the moon, and it is essential to the prestige of the United States that she accelerate her efforts in the space race.
Unlike the United States, he does not neglect non-military means of imposing the Communist viewpoint on other nations.
The United States containment policy advocated after World War II has been ""leap-frogged"" as the Soviets infiltrated nationalist movements in India, Burma, Iraq, and Egypt.
The Soviet challenge in coming years will be consistent in military advances, propaganda, and technology.
But, Salisbury stated, one new phase may dominate — the growing disparities within the Communist world.
With a more forward-looking foreign policy, the United States might have been aware of the split between China and Russia several years earlier.
The SinoRussian rift makes the position of the United States more, not less, difficult.
H Tony Curtis, Yul Brynner mm ""TARA8 HUIiBA"" J^K Burt Lancaster, Shelley Winters, VOUNO SAVAGES Rt.
He served on the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House for four years and in 1960, he joined the State Department as Deputy Under Secretary of State in the Agency for International Development.
Spend or Withdraw In his lecture, Coffin pointed out that the critics of the aid program agree that the United States has spent many billions of dollars in Asia, and that no final victories over Communism have been achieved.
What these critics always fail to mention, however, said Coffin, is the alternative of withdrawal, which would open Asia to the Communist Chinese.
This would lead, in turn, to a Communist threat to Australia, Hawaii, and other presently non-Communist sections of the Pacific Area.
At each step the aid program is reviewed and examined as though it were a new and precedent-shattering proposal.
In summation, Coffin stated that he believed that a consensus on the desirability of foreign aid already exists in this country, and that Congress must realize it.
He called for an end to the constant ""reopening of issues that have been settled before,"" and a true coming of age in this field of foreign policy.
This should have been the answer of our nineteen weekend guests from the American Field Service Exchange Student Program for most of them had a world view that greatly transcended the provincial outlook of the average citizen of any country.
While talking to these guests one was immediately aware of their maturity and astute but fair criticism of the United States.
This is understandable because exchange students are always picked from the top echelon of each country.
Hence, the greater validity and importance of their ideas because they are tomorrow's leaders.
Criticize Stress oiu Sex One of their most interesting criticisms of America concerns our social life.
Most felt that we place too much emphasis on sex and very little on friendship and conversation.
On the positive side most of them enjoy the informal nature of our homes.
They all appreciate the easy and sincere friendship of most Americans excluding dates.
According to most of the guests, the American student generally lacks any appreciation of culture and is immature to his counterpart in other countries.
Freshman activities — Little Brother posters are posted in the men's dorms for those interested in having little brothers for the coming year, reported Cruickshank.
The Council would like to remind those who sign up that there is a good deal of responsibility involved, and only those truly interested should volunteer.
Food and Smoker — Brooks reported that there will be a smoker on May 14th in Lower Chase Hall at which time the tournaments will be finalized.
The remainder of the meeting was taken up with the discussion of proctorships.
Anyone interested in maintaining the bowling alleys in Chase Hall should voice their opinion to Dean Boyce soon.
The Conduct Committee is considering their possible removal;e., the alleys, not those who object.
Anyone interested in a summer job career in the insurance field see Paul Sadlier or the placement office.
James M Aikman, Secretary -Treasurer BIBLE READING CONTEST Although announced as canceled, The Bible Reading Contest was held last Friday night in the Little Theater.
Roberta Mescavage '66, reading from Isaiah, won first prize, and Phyllis Porton '65, reading from Ecclesiastics, secured second prize.
Augusta, Maine i BATES STUDENT, MAY 8, 1963 THREE Like Mills Approves, We Think By MALCOLMMILLS '65 Although some people were disappointed to hear the music of Pierre de la Rue and Palestrina instead of ""The Little Drummer Boy"" and ""Pat-a-pan"", the Westminster choir was, for the most part, very successful.
Illil The proposed Administration Building on which work will be started this summer.
I also would like to be* in a city, that offers plays, concerts, etc.— an atmosphere more cosmopolitan than provincial.
Concerning her reasons for leaving Bates, she said, ""Bates has a tendency to suppress creativity rather than to support it.
There is too much emphasis on memory in the courses — not enough thinking.
Perhaps the professors require memorization because the students expect it — but learning isn't a question of memorization.
I've had enough of a small college atmosphere, and I'll have more opportunities in a larger college.
In addition, the cultural environment of Lewiston is not appealing to me, nor is the cultural and social environment of Bates appealing.
It has all the limitations of a small school in a small city in a small state.
This protracted minor piece seemed more like a lesson in difficult harmonics than a unified composition.
The solo part in this piece was well handled and so the blame for this let-down rests solely with Copland.
The bass section was extremely subtle and gave me the feeling of a great gregorian temple The extreme hollowness and brilliant diction made this piece memorable.
The first finale, de cribed as a ""scene of despair and lamentation"" seemed, to this reviewer, to lack despair and lamentation.
The finale to Act II was very lively and if one shut his eyes, he probably couldn't see.
Most of the other pieces performed were rounds or other inconsequential numbers.
Special plaudits should be extended to the director, Warren Martin and of course to their brilliant accompanist, the wellknown Hadley Yost.
There were times during the program when their music seemed esoteric, but this review er was happy that this group did not pitch their selections down to their audience.
I thought Tod Lloyd's voice, the variety of the tone, was magnificent and that the whole performance was something very vibrant and spiritual.
Lewiston THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE oi ALL TYPES PIPE DREAM By ELAINE KENSETH '65 High on a hill a Thousand daisies feed Dancing unicorns And roaring lions.
This was Professor Tagliabue commenting on the recent Robinson Players' production of ""Hamlet,"" the production which was seen in some quarters as being the efforts of a mediocre group of actors.
Certainly everyone will agree that this was not an attempt to rival any efforts of the Old Vic, or, as Prof.
Shakespeare is difficult to produce, whatever the degree of experience and talent possessed by the performers.
Every actor and actress, as well as each individual member of the audience who has ever read the play, has some preconceived notion as to how the action and the mood should be reproduced.
The great mistake is to take this preconception into the theatre with the thought in mind that one is going to see how well the performers measure up to one's own ideas.
A much better way to review, I feel, is to attend a production with as few preconceived notions as possible and to focus one's attention on the interpreation of the perand criticizing because their interpretation doesn't correspond with one's own.
Using this as a basis for criticism, one can fairly evaluate the performance.
Doctor Chute, for example, found the play highly enjoyable, but was still able to criticize it objectively.
Judy Mossman certainly was not trying to compete with her counterpart in the productions put on in Stratford, England, and yet she turned in a vibrant performance.
The flames of enjoyment or dissatisfaction, whichever the case may be, have cooled somewhat by now, and really the more important issue is whether or not college acting groups should attempt to stage productions of such magnitude.
The performers are not challenged and the audiences are not interested in attending plays which just seem to exude their milk-toasty, mediocre content.
The consensus is that noble efforts well done have their reward in the enjoyment gained by an appreciative audience.
There can be no doubt that the full-house audiences on all three nights enjoyed immensely this most worthwhile endeavor.
Although the Cuban dictator is economically dependent upon Russia, he has been preaching Chinese ideology since last fall, and China has employed Russian defeat in Cuba as a major propaganda weapon.
According to Salisbury, ""Khrushchev is stuck with Castro,"" and probably dislikes him as much as we do, but although Castro is equally disenchanted with Khrushchev's ""support,"" he canB E D A R D ' S 1 MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston, Maine not join China because Cuba requires so much financial aid from Russia.
That there are indications of panic in Moscow is not surprising, since almost every major Communist party in Asia except India and Mongolia has supported China.
Salisbury suggests that the government should be more selective in choosing areas in which to combat Communism.
His plan calls for a ""strong-point policy"" based on areas vital to our defense which can be defended.
India, for instance, ""is the key to Asia today,"" and is essential to its defense.
The Outing Club, in their sale of tickets for this year's Popham Beach Outing, has required that students wishing lunch purchase either clams or lobster.
This policy represents a change from previous years when beach-goers had hamburgers, potato salad, and desert supplied by the Commons without charge.
This year the Commons is again supplying the same free lunch, in lieu of the dinner served to students who remain on campus, but the Outing Club is forcing students to pay at least a dollar for that lunch.
For this dollar the student will receive clams in addition to the Commons lunch.
Yet, when one explains that he wants only hamburgers, the price remains the same.
In requiring students to purchase the Commons lunch that has already been paid for, the Outing Club hopes successfully, if immorally, to finance the outing.
No Time To Relax An editorial in the January 30 issue of the STUDENT noted that many students use the time between semesters not to attend Winter Carnival, but to go home.
To alleviate this situation, an evaluation of Carnival with a possible re-channeling of money and work into another weekend was suggested.
The Outing Club, in its request for dates on next year's social calendar, has asked that Winter Carnival be scheduled during the second term, probably on the weekend of February 8 and 9.
An expression of opinion on the following possible alternatives would be helpful to the Committee.
Examinations at the end of the first term would be rescheduled to run through Saturday afternoon, with the first classes of the second term to begin on the following Monday.
Ostensibly the purpose of the change in dates is to encourage increased attendance at Winter Carnival.
The removal of the semester break, by scheduling final exams through Saturday and beginning the second semester on Monday, would deny many students the opportunity to relax pent-up emotions and frustrations.
With Monday and Tuesday as no-cut days, the second semester would begin with many students not ready to start studying.
And it seems very likely that having been denied a respite between semesters, many students would spend Winter Carnival weekend as they presently do — relaxing at home.
Why a change in the date of Winter Carnival necessitates the extension of first semester finals from Thursday to Saturday is far from clear.
Plan III — Complete first semester finals on Thursday and provide a Rob Players Movie on Friday night and an informal dance on Saturday night for those students who remain on campus.
We realize that there are difficulties involved in this plan, but still think it superior to abolishing the semester break or not changing the weekend for Winter Carnival.
Sports Editor Nicholas Basbanes '65 Sports Editor Robert Lanz '65 Business Manager Steve Talbot '64 Photography Editor Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year.
The Robinson Players, the cast of Hamlet, and the director would like to express their appreciation for the overwhelming support of the Bates student body during the production of Hamlet.
Recent surveys have shown that most college theater groups can expect to draw only 15% of the students at their performances, while more than 50% of the Bates students attended Hamlet.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank the student body for its support of the Robinson Players' film program this year.
It is our hope to continue to bring high quailty American and foreign films to the Bates campus that could not be seen readily otherwise.
And yet I do denounce it, and denounce it wholeheartedly, as one of the most disgusting, tasteless, and thoroughly stupid articles I have seen in the four years I have been at Bates.
For some reason, obscure to me, and I'm sure to most of those who read the review, Jim seems to have forgotten that he saw the play not in the Golden or the Majestic Theatre, but in the Little Theatre at Bates College in Lewiston, Maine.
His article, however, would indicate that he had seen Sir Laurence Olivier's Hamlet the night before he saw Tod's Hamlet, and that he was comparing the two, with the former's performance coming out on top by a substantial margin.
While I do think we would all agree that Tod has a long way to go before he attains the stature of Sir Laurence, I also think that Jim is not quite far enough along to aspire to Walter Kerr.
Finally, and I think most importantly — and unfortunately — Jim's review is the only reaction to the play that most alumni will come in contact with.
It is truly a same that the over-all student opinion is so grossly misrepresented by a single pen; that, to the alumni, Bates' Hamlet is more a Paul Anka-like figure than the fine characterization that the overwhelming majority of Bates students felt Tod portrayed.
Most individuals expect a critical review to express a reasonably common opinion, or at least to be well justified.
For this reason they cannot always be expected to be valid and fair, but at least they should be consistent.
Mr Kier' nan's article on Hamlet which appeared in last week's STUDENT failed to fulfill even this most basic requirement. i The thought and actions of the I character Hamlet are so inti1 mately tied up with the play as a whole that the two cannot be separated without disasterous results.
Either Mr Kiernan's complimentary generalities were platitudes, or the bulk of his partic' ular criticism totally unjustified.
The past week I have heard considerable criticism concerning Jim Kiernan's review of the Robinson Players production of Hamlet.
The common opinion has been that the play was a great success and that Jim's review was unjust, uncalled for, and just plain off base.
In a college of this size, where everybody knows everybody else, all criticism is understood as a personal attack.
I believe that Jim knows this, and it must have taken a degree of courage to write down what he did.
I suffered nothing from the review; my role was comparatively far more simple than that of the leading role.
Hamlet is a great play, and the role of Hamlet is one of the most challenging roles an actor can attempt.
It seems almost inhuman, especially for a college student who is carrying a full load of courses along with it.
But Jim, unfortunately, seems to think that Hamlet, to remain a divine creation (which it most certainly is not), can only be read rather than acted, since to bring it to the level of mortals would be to desacralize it.
I can only say that Shakespeare wrote for the Globe Theatre, not for some kingdom in the skies.
Shakespeare was not only mortal, he was an Englishman; and I am sure Jim will agree with me that nobody has ever put words together as well as Shakespeare, and very likely never will.
As far as the criticism of Hamlet is concerned, Jim ran into a basic problem.
So it seems the time has come to explain my review of Hamlet and my reviews in general.
The part of Hamlet dominates the play so uncompromisingly and in so garganteum proportion that I cringed when Miss Schaeffer just announced that the spring play would be Hamlet.
The Robinson Players are a group of hard working and devoted students, many of whom consistently turn in fine performances.
It would, however, take more than what many of the players possess to master the giant, even if he was somewhat more sensitive than the rest.
I knew from whom Miss Schaeffer had to choose, and her choice surprised me.
But as with most of her casting ""surprises"" in the past, this one testified to her genius — it again displayed her perception of character and her ability to see the possibilities of some person that remain hidden to us.
My point was that Tod Lloyd came very far but robbed himself of a complete victory because he did not lift his Hamlet and lost the full power of his character.
I won't again explain what I felt was lacking in his interpretation — it seems many of my fellow students believed I have already said enough.
Tod Lloyd created (something which at first I believed him incapable) and created well.
My criticism was that he compromised what might have been a most masterful performance.
I felt upset that he had reached so far — but because he wanted his Hamlet sullen — he did not reach any further.
There has never been anything that has held me emotionally and intellectually as much as it has.
I seldom miss an opportunity to see a play no matter what BATES STUDENT, MAY 8, 1963 FIVE Our Readers Write kind of group has produced it.
I have made the assumption that I am more acquainted and more emotionally attached to the theatre than many of my fellow students.
I am an amateur, starved for theatre, who feels a part of their world when I am able to vicariously feel their excitement and write about it.
I haven't one set of standards or several sets to judge a production, only an appreciation of talent and technique.
I pick out what is good and find things that the people themselves (not others, especially not professionals) might do to better their performance.
It is not my purpose to find fault but in a small way to show my appreciation and to help others, possibly, appreciate more what the players have done.
Each person connected with a play becomes emotionally attached to it; as it grows, they grow.
I know how they feel, but I could never feel that way here is a book that is helping us think clearly In these troublesome times it takes some doing to keep one's perspective — to appraise world conditions with intelligence — and to come up with satisfying answers.
This book, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures by Mary Baker Eddy, has helped many of us to do this.
We invite you to come to our meetings and to hear how we are working out our problems through applying the truths of Christian Science.
Steve Browne's letter, as well guided and as sincerely written as his protest for Dr.
Mr Kerr is the theatre critic of the Herald Tribune — once my idol, but now an example for me of a theatre tyrant.
I mention her in reference to Judy Mossman because I was sure the people in the Robinson Players would know of her — and if I write for anyone, I write for and to them.
I have tried to be honest, objective but discreet, and not on any circumstance to attack anyone.
I have tripped along that thin line and have written criticism that I hope celebrated the people and possibly added to the readers' grasp of the play.
It was not just a part, it was a great responsibility. know that Tod Lloyd ate, drank, and lived the part.
As I am not ignorant of these things now — I was not unaware of them last week.
My review stands as my attempt to see and understand just what went on when the Robinson Players produced Hamlet.
You may all disagree— and the more of you who do, intelligently and honestly, the better our understanding will be of Hamlet.
When experts disagree, it is always wise to compare their qualifications.
I would request that the Bates STUDENT publish the qualifications of their drama critic in order to compare the value of his statements with those of other critics.
Brooks Quimby '18 TTTTTTTT7 Arbeitgeber bevorzugen |unge Damen mit einer GIBBS Ausbildung.
Support From Afar I've been following the controversy in the STUDENT over the column of one Malcolm Mills.
While it may be whipping a dead horse to revive the controversy, I would like to offer an outside opinion.
This Mills may be a bit on the morbid side, but his detractors are infantile to quibble with him.
It's all very well and good to object to a column on reasonable grounds, but self-righteous condemnation of ""Another Man's Poison"" on the grounds that the columnist expresses a deviant viewpoint is whimperingly ridiculous.
I wish to commend Malcolm Mills on his last week's column, and to do so sincerely, not with the undeserved sarcasm of the letters two weeks ago.
Though his most recent creation may be poison to some, it was a tangy coke for me.
I cannot fail to admire someone who has the courage to say what he believes, particularly when he knows his is a minority position.
Lewiston Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 the same quality, spirit, and courage that were present in such men as Socrates, Jesus, Galileo, and Bruno.
Schopenhauer once said that nothing arouses antipathy in ordinary men so much as the presence of intelligence in one of their community.
No Edisons any more, only X Research Center; no Jeffersons, but instead, a Department of State.
Don't misunderstand; I don't say this is bad, but just unfortunate in the context of the plight of the individual.
The day they make teamwork out of philosophy and religion is the day I'll think of migrating to Mars.
I think last Friday's chapel exemplified exactly what the students find objectionable in the programs.
The fault lies not so much with the selection of speakers, for the qualifications of Mr Coffin and others we have had are excellent.
If he had been speaking to a high school audience or if on this basis he had gone on to bring out important implications, then the speech would have, perhaps, been worth listening to with some degree of attention.
I wish to comment and express my sincere appreciation to the campus community for the splendid attendance and response to Saturday evening's performance of the TRADEWINDS in Chase Hall.
This was perhaps one of the first, if not THE first sold out performance of anything in that venerable hall.
It was a thrilling sight to see a live, enthusiastic, virile, and warm (in all senses of the term) audience thoroughly enjoying the program.
Too many apologies cannot be offered for the inconvenience caused by the necessity for the rapid ""renovating"", but you will grant, I hope, that the results were more, much more, than union rates as furniture movers.
Such an evening at Bates is a tremendous social and psychological uplift.
It is a pleasant indication that perhaps the campus isn't quite so dead after all.
Much credit for Saturday's success must be rendered the individual members of the CHDC, the advisor, Dr.
In Latin America, where the most active revolutionary movement in the world is centered around Castro, other dictators will arise unless the United States provided immediate economic assistance.
Our failure to plan for the future has been ""a product of our immaturity in foreign affairs,"" and must not be allowed to continue.
In order to meet the Communist challenge, ""America must learn that foreign policy problems are never solved.
The most encouraging yet simultaneously discouraging impression I received from these students was their desire to return to their homes and work for the improvement of man — all men.
I sincerely hope that when they return to their homes that they will keep their world view without forgetting their heritage.
The CHDC is anxious to learn of your reactions, comments, and suggestions with regard to further events of this type.
Thus, we hope to be able to build for the future upon the foundations so well established on Saturday.
In several recent communiques to the student body various members of the administration have corrected the figures that I used in an article criticising the idea of accelerated education at Bates.
I am grateful for these corrections but I do regret that the ideas which I presented were not likewise attacked.
The ideas were subjective due to the nature of the case and were thus open for criticism.
The issue of acceleration is important to our college and only through discussion will the conflict of values be settled.
I hope that my article stimulated some discussion by presenting what I feel to be the shortcomings of academic acceleration.
Huskies Take 8-6 Slugfest SPOR T,N G S % By NICK BASBANES V ' It would appear ihat the days of snow and ice have finally come to a close, giving forth to spring and all the many pleasures that go with it.
Accompanying the semester to its rapidly approaching finish is the springtime segment of State Series activity.
And even though our Bobcat baseballers finish their part of series commitments with Colby here on Monday not in first place, they have a fine opportunity to tie the presently reigning Mules for the Pine Tree laurels.
But they must first vanquish the big bear from the North today at Orono.
It is likely that Maine, once beaten by both Bates and Colby, will throw ace pitcher Tim Thomas, who has thus far defeated Connecticut, Vermont, Massachusetts and Bowdoin.
So the 'Cats and Thorn Freeman won't have a simple matter on their hands.
These two games, in addition to Friday's game with Harry and his Bowdies, are essential wins for our Garnet baseballers in order to remain in contention.
If we win all three, and Colby should later lose to Maine or Bowdoin (the other three play up to May 24), then we would be undisputed title holders.
An essential requisite in the art of winning baseball is tight defense.
At the beginning of the season the Bobcat infield was so tight that a hungry rabbit would in passing have had to make a detour.
But lately it appears that this area of seemingly infallibility has weakened.
This is evidenced by Northeastern's five unearned runs Saturday with which they won the game.
An improvement in this department is therefore necessary for the 'Cats to take their last three in the states.
The annual climax to spring track, the State Track Meet, will be held on May 11 at Waterville.
Our tracksters will be in search of a better showing over last year's defeat at,, Brunswick where they finished a dismal third, topping only lowly Colby.
In closing, we extend congratulations to the pugilist prize winning ""Gaylord"" Farquhar and ""Hawk"" Stewart.
Both previously inexperienced, maybe ""next time"" experience will bring a bigger prize.
By KEITH BOWDEN '64 In weekend baseball action, the Bates nine journeyed to Bowdoin last Friday to pin a 3-0 defeat on the Polar Bears behind a six-hit shutout by Thorn Freeman.
Saturday, the 'Cats dropped a heartbreaking 8-6 decision to a strong Northeastern team before a large home crowd gathering at Garcelon Field.
Against Bowdoin, Thorn Freeman's fine pitching performance spelled the difference.
Besides limiting Bowdoin to only six hits, Freeman struck out eleven and walked only two as he pitched his second consecutive shutout in state series play.
With two men on base and none out, Freeman bore down and retired the side on an infield popup and two strikeouts.
Bowdoin Pitcher Strong Frank Nicolai, the Bowdoin starting pitcher, was stingy with the basehits also.
In that inning Paul Holt walked and wound up on third when Monty Woolson's bunt was booted around.
For instance, the fast-action Twin-Stick Floor Shift option that lets you call the shots as never before.
See your local dealer for some straight talk— such % as why Rambler won Motor Trend Magazine's ""Car of the Year"" Award.
See our fine Se&c* Used Cars y-M'Miiii'y:Ted Krzynowek's pickoff and Red Vandersea's tag keep N E. baserunners close to the bag. vanced on Bud Spector's sacrifice bunt.
Nicolai then dug his own grave by hitting Holt to force in a run and by walking Yuskis for the final Bates tally.
Still in Running Offensively for Bates, Yuskis, MacNevin and Vandersea each collected two safeties, and Paul Holt collected a double for the Bobcats' seven hits.
This win left Bates with a 2-1 record in state series play and kept them in the running for the state crown.
Saturday afternoon saw ""Old Man Weather"" treat the home fans to the first warm day of the season.
Unfortunately, the final score didn't treat the Bobcat nine in a similar fashion as they wound up on the short end of an 8-6 verdict with highly rated Northeastern.
A chamber of horrors display of fielding at inopportune times allowed five unearned runs to score in the first five innings.
Tighter fielding for Bates during this stage of the game might have spelled the difference in the final outcome.
Feen Pinches Homer In the bottom of the fifth, Bates staged a rally when Howie Vandersea singled and Steve Egbert walked.
Dennis Feen stepped up to the plate as a pinchhitter and blasted a threerun homer over the left field fence to make the score 5-3.
Northeastern countered with a two-run homer in the top of the sixth to pull away 7-3.
Bates came back in their half of the sixth when Paul Holt's triple scored Lanza and Spector, and narrowed the score to 7-5.
Both teams failed to score in their next turn at bat and the Bobcats entered the home half of the ninth trailing 8-5.
Egbert then walked, but Spector's fly ball ended the rally and the game.
The Bobcats showed that with tighter defense they can play ball with any team in New England.
BOBCAT OF THE WEEK Ace fireball pitching senior Thorn Freeman has been selected for this week's honor of Bobcat.
Selected this winter for the same prize as a basketball standout, of which team he was captain, Thorn has displayed similar ability on the diamond.
The psychology .major frorfl Arlington, Mass., where he was a two-sport star in basketball and baseball, came to Bates and excelled in the same departments.
Against Maine, Thorn pitched a three-hit shutout, striking out ten and walking nobody.
On Friday, Thorn followed up this fine performance with a six hit shutout against Bowdoin.
For this game he struck out eleven and walked only two as he gained his second straight victory in state series competition.
This brought h i s seasonal . earned run average to date to the figure of 2.08, which is impressive in view of the fact that Thorn gets the toughest pitching assignments of Bates hurlers.
The most amazing fact concerning the ability of righthander Freeman is the amazing control he exhibits.
We feel that he deserves the chance to join its ranks. i i BATES STUDENT, MAY 8, 1963 SEVEN Golfers Crush Colby, Lose To St.
Anselms By AL WILLIAMS '64 Even without number one golfer Chuck Lasher, who was sidelined with a surprise attack of appendicitis, the golf team still managed to break even, posting a .500 record for the week.
On Friday the Bobcat linksters beat Colby 4-3 and then Monday suffered a 5-2 defeat at the hand of St.
Top Colby John Schatz elevated from the lower ranks as a ""sacrificial"""" victim surprised by shooting an 82 and beating Colby's number 2 man one up.
Lynn Simpson took medalist honors with a 75 and a two up win over McNabb.
Phil King made his ""return to the starting six a winning one as he bested Lapides 2 and 1.
Tom Brown took one of his rare defeats at the number three position Wally Lasher Winner St.
Anselm's took the measure of Bates at the Martindale Country Club in a rather onesided match.
Walt ""Whip"" Lasher, beginning to show a little of last year's form, won at the one position 2 and 1.
John Schatz playing the ^role expected of him in the Colby match was routed 7 and 6.
Tom Brown returned to winning ways and kept the best record on the team with a 3 and 2 victory.
At the present time, the linksmen have a 3-1 record in State Series play.
The linksters, to keep in contention, must post a victory, even without the services of their number one veteran.
Coach Brian McCall of Maine rates the state series a toss-up and this certainly leaves the Bobcat a good chance.
The mercury registered 80° when Harvie streaked over the hard-packed cinders to win the highs in 15. seconds and the lows in 24. seconds.
The Bobcats chalked up a total of 38 points in the contest, including three firsts, four seconds, three thirds, and five fourths.
Harvie Hurdle Champ Following Harvie across the finish line, placing second in the high hurdles and third in the lows was Captain Bill LaVallee.
Wilhelmsen clocked his best time so far this season, 9 minutes, 41 seconds, to finish second in the two mile run behind speedy Bronillet of U Mass.
The high jump saw Tom Bowditch in second place with Dave Johnson in third.
John Ford placed third in the quarter mile and Pete Graves fourth in the half mile.
Dave Harrison earned a fourth in the hammer while Eric Silverberg finished fourth in the two mile.
Redmen Tough The Redmen reigned supreme on their home field, showing their power in the distance runs and the field events with plenty of depth all around.
Big Dick Ward, Penn Relay point taker, was nosed out of first spot in the hammer by Corsetti of Northeastern, but went on to win the high jump and discus and picked up a third in the shot for an impressive 15-point afternoon.
Flashy halfback Fred Lewis was back in school to win the broad jump and take points in the dashes.
Bronillet added a first in the mile to his two mile win as U Mass. piled up 60 points in a decisive victory.
Northeastern looked good in the middle distance runs, and in the weight events, collecting a 46-point second place.
Tufts started off well, winning the dashes and the 440, but lacked depth and finished fourth with 21 points.
Stale Meet Saturday With the annual State Meet scheduled at Colby this Saturday, U Maine looms a solid favorite.
Although Bates and Bowdoin may have to harry the Black Bear's heels, some outstanding performances could register an upset in favor of either school.
Maine's McPhee will remain king of the dashes unless an overconfident staff allows him to enter the quarter.
The remaining places should be divided up between Williams, Ford, White of Colby and Rounds of Bowdoin.
The 440, barring McPhee, will see two of his classmates, defending champion Parker and Spruce, up front with Ford and Bowdoin's S 1 o w i k also taking points.
Graves will have to defend his '62 championship against Slowik of Bowdoin and Ellis and Hodges, both of Maine.
LaVallee and Maine's Hicken will be after Harvie's title in the high hurdles.
Bears in Weights Black bears and polar bears will be scrapping for honors in the weights.
Maine's Nason and Bowdoin's Frost will be trying to unseat last year's champion Blood of Maine.
Delaite of Maine will be pressing Frost for shot John Curtiss shows winning javelin form in preparation for state meet. put honors.
Maine's Dean looks good in the pole vault, but no one is ruling out Kramer.
Bowdoin's McDowell will have to defend his broad jump championship against Williams.
Bowditch and Johnson would like to see first and second in tjie high jump but Maine's Lahait will not be giving them any helpful hints.
Curtiss will be chucking his spear alongside of Delaite for javelin fame.
Doom for Mules Whatever the results, the fur will be flying as two bears and a bobcat fight it out in a contest which will feature the burial of a mule in its own back yard.
By STEVE RITTER '65 On Friday, May 3, Lewiston's City Hall was the recipient of an avid crowd of Bates students.
The occasion was the longawaited amateur fights in which three 'Cat gladiators were scheduled to appear.
The fight card was composed of no less than 18 bouts, two of these being graced with the presence of our own pugilists.
Unfortunately, or maybe fortunately, the officials were unable to pair Ron Leblanc with an opponent.
The ""Frenchman"" then paired with Teddy ""The Cut Man"" Davis, and served as a cornerman for the other boys.
Hawk Meets Local t Jl James ""Hawk"" Stewart, one of ""the eight"", was the first of the Bates men to demonstrate his ring savvy.
The ""Hawk"" met up with a tough local boy and held his own until fatigue set in.
Those that witnessed the fight should be aware that Hawk knows the full effects of gravity, which is evident in assessing Hawk's post-fight statement.
He told a reliable source that he didn't realize the gloves were so heavy and that thg canvas was built so close w his trunks.
Gay Lord displayed an ability to ""mix it"", but he too was the victim of the 3rd round fatigue.
Many people in the crowd felt that Grant met up with the classiest fighter on the card.
Well Earned Trophies Although both boys lost decisions, they put on a good show.
The Bates fight crowd should be pleased with their respectable showing.
Gaylord and Hawk are now the proud owners of trophies, which were wellearned.
BASEBALL SUMMARY after ELEVEN GAMES PLAYER AB R H 2B 3B HR BB SB SAC HP SO TB RBI AVE PO A E AVE Beal 1 1 .000 2 1.
Holt 35 5 10 2 3 7 1 1 8 18 9 .286 18 33 3 .945 Krzynowek 10 1 5 1 .100 5 1 .834 Lanz 4 1 1 1 • 1 2 2 2 .250 1 3 1.
Lanza 34 6 11 3 1 1 1 1 1 7 17 4 .324 13 17 4 .883 MacNevin 24 3 5 1 3 2 1 10 8 2 .208 68 2 1.
Vandersea 39 9 8 2 1 8 2 I 8 13 6 .205 80 3 5 .943 Woolson 27 4 4 1 2 1 2 1 10 7 1. .148 10 1.
Their impressive Net ace Jim Wallach shows why he has been beaten only once this year.
Ah Hatttor £>m a Jt By RED VANDERSEA '63 As the Spring Intramural program comes to a close, it looks like Smith South will be the '62-'63 Intramural champions.
A late surge in the Chase Hall Tournaments will pull the Herculean Cult over the top.
Its nearest rival is the Lewiston High Extension located in the general area of Jackie B Congratulations to Don Cellar, who was the individual bowling leader.
It looks like Bill Beiswanger might make baseball practice this Thursday.
Tom Brown is waiting confidently for either Pete Peguinot or Dave Kramer in the finals of the pool tourney.
A get well wish to Chuck Lasher who's in the hospital making a little money on the side.
He'll be in good shape for his championship billiard match with Tom Cameron.
Bill Graham, and Pete Glanz are all finalists in the Ding-Dong Tourney.
Paul Castolene and Pete Glanz have taken time off from their busy study schedule to be in the finals in the Bridge Tournament.
With the pitter-patter of duty sneakers on the green playing fields of Bates College, another successful softball league is being carried out.
A special thanks to Al Francoeur, the very able intramural coordinator, who has done an excellent job this spring.
West Parker took it on the chin last Sunday from their sister clan, East Parker.
After watching Roger Bill play last week I came to the conclusion that they just don't have it.
Hon Stead is the greatest thing to hit the pitching hill since Satchel Page.
Make sure to see the next performance of ""Bad Bobby"" Cheklov at your nearest den.
You have to do something if you can't hitThe senior class leaves to Gaylord Farquar a jar of ""Smidlop Glue"" with which to put his chin back together.
Special note — Smith South will hold an open house May 10th from 4:00-6:00m. to prove to the rest of the campus what a swell bunch of guys they really are.
Wallach Continues The Bobcats downed Bowdoin 7-2 in a match played at Brunswick.
Undefeated Jim Wallach continued his brilliant play by again defeating Bowdoin ace Sam Ladd in three sets.
Freshman Bob Thompson defeated Art MacDonald in straight sets 6-1, 8-6, and Captain Jim Corey downed Norm Tom 6-2, 6-8, 6-2.
George Beebe downed Hugh Hardcastle 6-3, 6-1, to make it five out of six for the 'Cats in the singles competition.
Steve Hecht saved face for the Polar Bears by defeating Jim Dodds in straight sets.
The Wallach and Thompson undefeated doubles team downed the Bowdoin combo of Ladd and MacDonald by the convincing score of 6-4, 6-4.
Beebe teamed with Al Williams to defeat Hardcastle and Schwartz 6-4, 6-0.
Tom and Hecht spoiled* a Bobcat sweep of the doubles by upsetting Corey and Lloyd in straight sets, 6-4, 6-4.
Assured of Tie It was a must win for the 'Cats and they responded to the pressure in fine fashion.
The victory practically assured them of at least a tie for the State Series Crown.
Bates handed Tufts its first setback of the season 6-3 in a match played Saturday on the 'Cats' home courts.
Wallach was defeated for the first time in nine matches as the Jumbos' ace Snider won in straight sets 6-1, 7-5.
Thompson easily downed Schlief 6-0, 6-2, and Corey defeated Trafton 6-1, 6-4.
Dodds and Lloyd won in similar fashion as they were forced to three sets.
Bender came through with the second singles victory for Tufts with a 6-4, 0-6, 6-4 verdict over Beebe.
Two Out of Three The Bobcats won two out of the three doubles contests.
Wallach and Thompson continued their outstanding play and remained undefeated by downing the Tufts' team of Snider and Schlief 6-2, 8-6.
Beebe and Williams again combined for another victory, defeating Bender and Epstein 6-3, 6-2.
Trafton and Wallace prevented a Bates sweep by barely downing Corey and Jack Wilson 6-3, 3-6, 75 in a closely contested match.
By MARCIA FLYNN '65 Amidst summer cottons, sunburns, smiling faces, chattering voices, and a steak dinner, the annual WAA Spring Sports Award Banquet was held in Fiske Dining Hall, Monday night.
Nora Jenson Toastmistress Sitting at the headtable were Dean Randall, Dr.
Milliken-Miichell Champs Nora then introduced Carol Kinney who first explained the system of awards and then made the presentations.
Many girls from all four classes were awarded either numerals, ""B's"" or sweaters.
Carol then presented the basketball trophy, this year having been won by Milliken-Mitchell with a 6 win, no loss record.
Captain of this team, Barb Remick, came forward to receive the trophy which will remain in Milliken until next year.
Two Tie for Award The final and most coveted award to the outstanding senior athlete was then presented by Miss Kinney.
This award is made annually to the senior girl who has won her sweater, competed in interdorm sports, been a member of ""playday"" teams, aided WAA, and has displayed the qualities of sports manship in competition.
This year, a tie could not be broken and two Cheneyites, were honored with trophies, Lou Carey and Judy Warren.
Also, a special thanks goes to WAA for time spent in preparing such a charming affair.
There is fear that we lack understanding of the world challenge, the vision without which freedom will perish.
So spoke R Sargent Shriver as he assumed the directorship of the newly created Peace Corps in the spring of 1961.
Since that time the Peace* Corps has attempted to alleviate home is in Turner Falls, Mass these fears by sending more than 4000 young (and not so young) people into more than forty countries throughout the world.
Often called the silent generation these men and women are serving as surveyors in Tanganyika, farm extension workers in Columbia, rural school teachers in the Philippines, and as community health workers in Costa Rica.
Work in Costa Rica Two members of the present Senior Class have chosen to spend the next two years of their lives working abroad under the auspices of the Peace Corps.
Other tests covered areas of particular pertinence to the candidate's specialized field.
Peter will follow a similar schedule of training as that of Judy Warren.
He hopes to be sent to Colombia to teach English and participate in community health projects.
Tradition Behind Corps Although the term Peace Corps has a new ring to AmerFifteen Earn Department Honors; Phi Beta Kappa Elects Members ""Essential to personality of any institution is the maintenance of certain traditions,"" stated Dean Healy in his Senior Honors Day address last Wednesday.
As spokesman for the college community Healy emphasized Honors Day as an important tradition at Bates, and announced the names of those seniors who had earned recognition as outstanding members of their class.
Lexen Dies From Heart Attack Professor Gesta Ernest Lexen died of a heart attack yesterday at 3:30 at his home at 32 Mountain Avenue.
Haas, the attending physician, said that Lexen, who was forty, suffered a massive coronary.
Lexen, who came to Bates as an instructor in Physics in 1954, has been an Assistant Professor since 1957.
While at Bates, Lexen was an active participant on Faculty teams and a frequent spectator at Bates sporting events. reasons for joining are not especially unique,"" Judy stated ""I just believe in what they're trying to do and think it's a good thing.
She will study language, customs, and geography of Latin America with special emphasis on Costa Rica where she will eventually work as an instructor in health education in conjunction with mobile health units in the area.
Volunteers Tested A sense of adventure, of traveling and meeting people are some of the reasons for Peter Koch's interest in the Peace Corps.
Also a senior, Peter's ican ears the idea behind its creation dates back some fifteen hundred years, when St Benedict led young men from the comfortable society of Rome to work in the underdeveloped areas of nothern Europe.
One of America's greatest proponents of such a movement was William James, who at the turn of the century proposed a ''peace army"" of young men to go to war against nature.
Purpose of Corps The present day Peace Corps, created by President Kennedy in fulfillment of a 1960 presidential campaign pledge is trying to furnish mankind with some of the substitutes.
A world community is struggling to be born, America must be present at the birth, helping to make it successful."" — Sargent Shriver Atlantic Honors Six In Essay Contest Prof.
Whitbeck has announced that several Bates students have gained recognition in the 42nd Annual Creative Writing Contest sponsored by the Atlantic Monthly Magazine.
Dale Hatch Funeral services for Dale Hatch '66, will be held tomorrow, at two o'clock in the Central Square Congregational Church in Bridgewater, Mass.
Flowers or other expressions of sympathy may be sent to the church or Mr and Mrs.
Steve Quattropani '65 is presently recovering in Bath Memorial Hospital.
What appeared to have been bronchial pneumonia has been checked with anti-biotics and his temperature has dropped markedly.
Stetkevych hopes to be able to release Quattropani today or early tomorrow, but said that he will have to wait and see if the fever continues to subside.
A total eclipse of the sun will occur on July 20 and its shadow will cross Maine from Quebec beginning at 5:41m.
The eclipse will last for four minutes andpass into the Atlantic at 5:45.
At any one point on the earth a total eclipse of the sun is visible only about three times in 1.000 years, although in one calendar year two eclipses of the sun must occur and five are possible.
There will be only five total solar eclipses visible from anywhere in North America from now until 2025.
This eclipse of the sun will occur when the moon passes directly between the sun and the earth so that the moon's shadow is cast upon the earth.
This always occurs at new moon, but solar eclipses do not occur each time the moon is new; the moon's shadow passes either above or below the earth.
Solar eclipses may be partial, total, or annular, depending on the size of the shadow cone falling on the earth.
They are visible as total over a very narrow band of the earth at any one time, and may last from a few seconds to eight minutes.
On behalf of the Bates students we would like to express our deepest sympathy to the Hatch and Lexen families.
Carolyn Berg, Howard Blum, William Holt, David Hosford, Nancy Levin, Leslie Nute, Mildred Pruett, Marion Schanz, and Judy Trask.
Carolyn Berg, in physics;' Howard Blum, in government; David Compton, in French; William Dunham, in history; Nancy Levin, in sociology; Lois Payne, in mathematics; Anna Poehler, in biology; Natalie Shober, in biology; George Stone, in economics.
Winning high honors were David Hosford, in history; Leslie Nute, in history; Mildred Pruett, in French; Joyce Schilcher in mathematics.
Highest honors were awarded to William Holt, in chemistry; and Judith Trask, in English.
Neale Schuman and Nancy Levin were honored as the outstanding senior members of the Outing Club.
Elected to the Bates Key Club from the senior class were Carolyn Berg, Elizabeth Davis, Joan Lang, Nancy Levin, Elizabeth Little, Nona Long, Carol Long.
Chosen as College Club members were Howard Blum, Paul Castolene, Thorn Freeman, David Hosford, William Holt, William LaVallee, Douglas Smith, George Stone, Howard Vandersea, Louis Winkler.
Bruce Frost of Bowdoin, with three firsts in the weights, won the Hillman trophy as the meet's most outstanding ahtlete.
Other Garnet points were picked up by Williams, Ford, Wilhelmsen, Harvie, Curtiss, and Bowditch. here is a book that is helping us to get along with others Satisfying human relationships can make a big difference between success and failure in college.
Whether it's a roommate, a professor, your family, or friends, you want to get along well with them.
We are learning a lot about this through our study of the Christian Science textbook, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures by Mary Baker Eddy.
John Wilson and I climbed up to the very top of the mountain, and at the summit met Roland Baldrick the Yodeller.
Baldrick, 27 years old, couldn't have been more pleased to have our company; he gave a recital lasting about a half hour, and in between numbers he told us how he had learned to yodel, and interesting things about the art in general.
Standing atop a rock, outlined by the low-hanging grey clouds Baldrick appeared supremely free and happy.
He became interested in this old form of music (which, we were told, originated when the shepherds and mountaineers wanted to call each other from one mountain peak to another) while in the Army stationed at Frankfurt, Germany.
Whenever he had a leave, he would go up into the mountains and practice with the experts; although he cannot write music, Baldrick remembers almost every new song he hears.
He has appeared with the Grand Ol* Opery, on the Ted Mack Show, and on both the Steve Allen and Ed Sullivan shows.
David; he extended a general invitation to anyone on the campus to come up and listen, and talk, and maybe even learn to yodel.
Finals are coming, true, but if you have just a few minutes, Roland Baldrick i will make your day a much hap pier one.
Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS By DOUG WAKEFIELD '64 WRJR will be leaving the air at midnight on Wednesday, , May 15, and we will resume fall broadcasting activities soon after classes resume.
Then I will be taking you up to midnight with music of a extra tidbits thrown in, so we'd Mediocre Group, Faulty Piano from six-thirty to midnight. ng \Produces Inadequate Concert Taking a look at next year, By DON FRESE '64 WRJR will have the new equip. ment given by station WGAN I **** Friday night I went to installed.
I'm sure that many smile at * U « to the Perversity of Mother this, but all that I can say is, N f ur f' staged > n S P artan ""This time, yes, this time, they'll fP endour of the Chase Hall — i, mu' v ballroom.
In the letter we send to I * w «* /^what cynically, freshmen, we advise them to an wha * r ^ y0nd bring FM radios and this would ""J , W ° rSt f*™' 1 WBBrt that be worth considering for the w "" a was taking place was mu upperclassmen as well.
We plan our time unison head arrangements were botched; entrances by soloists were missed and had to be cov ered over.
The pianist was the only one who escaped, quite frankly because everyone else [was so loud he couldn't be heard.
In passing I would like to say that it is an insult and a [disgrace to ask a professional musician to use the tinny, out of-tune upright piano that graces the ballroom — especially when there are several concert pianos around, including a brand with you in mind.
In its place the Alumni Association is presently compiling a Directory of all alumni.
Anyone who is interested in such a Directory should see Frank Stred, or stop by the Alumni Association Office.
HEADQUARTERS FOR DIAMONDS Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JfWflf Lewiston new one, that seems to be just taking up space in Skelton Lounge, one flight up.
I don't in any way blame the students who brought this group here for the ""big"" spring event; God knows they tried to get some decent music this year.
But you know what happened to those plans — no precedents allowed, for new ideas are a dangerous and troublesome thing.
As a contrast, Bowdoin is having Miles Davis and his sextet for their Ivy Concert this Friday night.
For those of you who may want to go, finals permitting, of course, it is being held in the Sargent Gymnasium from 8:30 to 10:30.
An all male student body makes for more dates, whereas Bates only has half as many men — but here some of the slack will be taken up with people who may be more interested in good music, than in just a date.
I am unaware of the financial situation at Bowdoin, but it would seem it doesn't have much more money than Bates.
In the past two years they have had Duke Ellington, Stan Kenton and Dave Brubeck for big social events.
These musician's names speak for themselves, but also note that they were all financially successful.
One, with sharkskin trousers bloused in whiteskin boots, sprawls, standing up, against the wall and sucks and cups a cigarette While his friend grips her greasy wooden thighs with etiolated hands, his hips worm and thrust and rock her into tender rhythm and the ball slips in and out and in for special scores and she comes in flashing lights, snapping switches, springs released, as the ball is in again, again, and even the indolent, watching one is moved to thin, vicarious grin.
NOTICE Senior pictures will be taken during the first week of school in the fall.
Girls, especially, should remember this, in having their hair cut for the summer. pie will spend money to hear quality performers.
They may cost more, but if they are good, people will pay the extra money to hear them.
As a case in point, the Tradewinds, and what the hard work of the Chase Hall Dance Committee can produce.
The difference in the two campuses seems to be that Bowdoin lets the students take a chance, and it has visibly paid off.
Year in and year out we are flooded with mediocre talent because we have mediocre funds, due to a maze of red tape.
The breakthrough must occur with the refusal to accept mediocre entertainment and also in a broader sense a mediocre world.
The sad and funny thing about accepting the mediocre is after a while you discover that your life has become mediocre.
What I am calling for is rebellion, a nasty word, and it can begin by the utterance of the simple word ""no"" to what is wrong.
The faculty and administration have produced a stifling, unhealthy and unrealistic atmosphere; breathing the air, the student is unable to either assert himself or live the way he must.
This external control is felt most strongly in the fields of both academic work and social life.
The new process of registration, and also the one looked forward to by Professor Buschmann is just one illustration of an administration which curtails and conceals.
The problem underlying the changes made by the Scheduling Committee is one wherein an inordinate number of students try to take a course with one particular member of the faculty.
The Committee, however, does not realize, or wish to realize, the more serious problem which these registration difficulties indicate; the fact that Bates has perhaps more than its share of incompetent and inept professors is all to evident to the students who are forced to suffer through their excruciating classes day after day.
For this reason, some sections are naturally and rightfully more in demand than others.
Under the new and proposed system the privilege of getting the education we are paying for, and studying under men who have earned the right to teach, is revoked.
The penalty for the desire to learn is a deprivation of choice and responsibility.
In the classroom, also, the individual is sadly neglected; he is often not allowed to express his own ideas and opinions, and the critics and commentators assume a primary role in research and in term paper writing.
The voice of the studentry is rarely listened to, and seldom, if ever, heeded.
The Extra-Curricular Committee is not alone on this campus in believing that the students are ill-informed, and lacking in responsibility and judgment.
The individual is constricted and restrained in the area of his social life as well.
Rules which are made for the benefit of a group of people living together are good rules; but rules which dictate to the mature individual are evil in intent and conception.
If the student sees fit to drink, to have women in his room, that is his business and his decision; the outdated set of restrictions we are forced to live under is to be reviled; not only is it provincial and unrealistic, but it imposes external laws on the student under which he does not choose to live.
In an age which is growing ever more aware of the value of the younger generation, of education as a tool which may be used for peace and tolerance, Bates is woefully shortsighted and closeminded.
Tomorrow's hope is not to be found at Academia Batesina Conditiona 1864.
FEATURE STAFF Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Robert Borland '66, Dennis Hill '66, Granville Bowie '66, Richard Derby '66, Jennifer Wingate '64, Carole Cooper '66, Charles E Smith '63, Priscilla Clark '66, Janet McEachern '66, Doug Wakefield '64, Tarn Neville '66, Doug Smith '63.
The only change in policy for this year's Popham Beach Clam Bake is tht the price of hamburgers has been equated with the cost of clams.
There has always been a charge for lunch— whether it included seafood or not.
It providea the soda, fuel for the fires, equipment, paper goods and must pay the cost of renting the parking lot for the day. , We appreciate the help given to us by Mr Steele and the Commons who do so much to help the Clam Bake to be a success.
The hamburgers, potato salad and desert are supplied by the Commons, but the $1.00 is charged to help pay for the other costs mentioned above.
The O C. makes no profit on the Clam Bake and the Council works hard, not for their own benefit, but for the student body's enjoyment.
I am writing to take exception to Mr Kiernan's criticism of the Robinson Players' presentation of Hamlet.
I would be sorry if readers of the STUDENT who are not a part of the college or community, received the impression that his view is shared by the majority of those who were privileged to witness this mighty effort.
Speaking only for myself, I found the whole presentation outstanding, and Mr Lloyd's performance, in particular, both brilliant and sensitive.
I suspect I have not had the opportunities our critic has had to view many productions of the play and so am less able to make comparisons, but I have read and studied it and think his criticism of Mr Lloyd's interpretation unfair.
Miss SchaefTer has given the college and local community twenty-five years of excellent college theatre.
Realizing full well that this letter will probably not weigh in the balance of campus events, I still feel a compunction to set down these thoughts if they are for nothing else but my own satisfaction.
Somehow I do not feel unburdened by not having to select my schedule and desired professors.
In fact, it seems more like a hardship because here was one advantage that Bates held over many other institutions throughout the country and now it is gone.
If Professor Buschmann is correct in intimating that the day is near when the only thing a course will have to recommendt itself is a catalogue number, it will be time to move on.
It is questionable to me whether the decision of a threemember sectioning committee can really hand down an enlightened judgment to ninehundred and some odd faculty and students.
In this process of intellectual automation we are losing one of our most valuable indicators of cerebral depth that was so easily evidenced by how many students signed up for individual professors.
Sincerely yours, Bradford F Andersen '66 Everything Is V-8 Rambler's new Classic V-8 lets you go in style and save like sixty.
From $76 to $195* less than the Sixes offered by the other two best-selling low-priced cars.
Add the low-cost Twin-Stick Floor Shift to this V-8 and driving fun really begins.
Stick-shift command performance and lightning fast kickdown from overdrive to passing gears.
Check out the sleek lines, rich interiors, and ample room for six 6-footers.
And color is merely something our Garnet nine enjoys on leaving our drab Maine background on its spring swing south.
No game in the world is as tidy and dramatically neat as baseball, with cause and effect, crime and punishment, motive and result so clearly denned.
Baseball is a rookie (his experience no bigger than the lump in his throat) trying to begin the fulfillment of his dream.
The search for talent has produced a virtual bonanza for un tested ballplayers who promise the homerun jackpot and the never-never land of the no-hit game.
The genial Mr Boiling is now cast in the role of executive assistant in the minor league system of the Red Sox organization.
In this capacity he regularly views the panorama of area baseball action in search of another Ted Williams or Cy Young.
Milt seemed understandably nonchalant about the current high bonus system reflecting the attitude of his Boston organization.
Commenting on college basball, Milt hoped for an early acceptance by most colleges of a tri-semester plan.
This would of course leave the entire summer season to the college coaches and provide the lengthened season now needed to produce more and better college baseball players.
Personally, Milt felt college was an important step in his' life but he went on to emphasize that the pension system and a high bonus make it an attractive venture for a high schooler to sign a professional baseball contract.
A high school player is sure to benefit from minor league experience and the added incentive of knowing he doesn't have a college diploma to fall back on.
Speaking of right handed Bates hurler Thom Freeman, Milt said, ""The long righty looked very impressive in limiting Colby to four hits.
The pitcher with the blazing ball and the hitter with the quick bat are the prime targets of the big league bonus bankers.
Bates is a loser and over on Mayflower Hill they ought to be wreathed in smiles.
Thirty Graduating Men Leaders Of 9 Successful Garnet Squads By ALAN MARDEN Former Sports Editor 'As the 1962-1963 sports seasons draw to a close the STUDENT Sports Staff looks back and salutes those members of the class of 1963 who played an important part in the successes of the past year's athletic squads.
Fullback Pete Aransky. playing for his first year last fall, anchored the soccer squad's defense.
The rugged East Parker proctor played a big part in the team's 5-3 record.
Four year veteran harrier Ed Belden was a consistent pointgetter for Walt Slovenski's cross country squad.
Golf captain Tom Brown is still actively competing as this edition goes to press and boasts of one of the top individual match records among the '63 linksters.
All-State and All-New England end Paul Castolene was a twoway standout for head mentor Robert Hatch last fall.
The Bristol, Conn., native also was a rugged performer for interim basketball coach Verne Ullom and is heading for a teachercoach career next year.
Captain Jim Corey led his tennis cohorts to a share of the state series title, while posting an outstanding individual record.
Playing football in the fall, Curtiss was a standout fullback in his underclass years before being held to kicking duties this past fall by a junior year injury.
Curtiss also was a consistent pointgetter as a ""whalie"" on the Garnet thinclad squad.
Gridiron quarterback and cocaptain Bill Davis led his teammates to an outstanding 5-3 record last fall.
The fiery little man proved to be an outstand ing backfield ace, having played all four positions in his Bates career.
Diminutive Dick Dolan played an important pinchhitting and reserve infielder role for the Leaheymen this spring.
Harrier Bill Dunham co-captained the '62 cross-country squad to a fine record.
Hard-hitting Dennis Jeen BOBCAT OF THE WEEK For this year's final selection of the Bobcat honor, the STUDENT Sports Staff selects junior COLLEGE PHARMACY, Inc.
Fri., Sat.— ""DIAMOND HEAD"" Charlton Heston Yveite Mimieux ""13 WEST STREET"" | Alan Ladd Rod Steiger Sun., Mon., Tues. — ""BARABBAS"" and ""PIRATES OF BLOOD RIVER"" — Closed Wednesdays — tennis star Jim Wallach.
An economics major from Scarsdale, N Y., Jim has held the elite number one position since his freshman year.
Boasting a seasonal record of nine wins and two losses, and 10-1 in doubles with his partner, Bob Thompson, Jim has amazed followers and opponents alike with his speed and repertoire of shots.
Jim is considered the favorite to win the state tennis championships at U Maine this week.
M-G M p,i ^W^Tlw-M proved to be a valuable pinchhitter, reserve catcher for the Garnet nine this spring.
Feen collected a circuit clout in a pinchhitting role against Northeastern.
In addition, the Arlington, Mass. resident was an outstanding hurler for the past three years, and within the next few weeks will be inking a pro baseball contract.
Rugged Pete Glanz became famous for his performances in the Bowdoin Gym.
The tall blond always came up with his big games while visiting the Polar Bears.
The East Parker resident also garnered varsity letters in tennis and was a three time Chase Hall finalist.
Future Marine Web Harrison proved to be a hardnoser on the Hatch eleven.
Hampered by a leg injury last fall, the Torrington, Conn., native was a four year letterwinner in the Hatch backfield.
Halfback George Hunter developed into a dependable soccer player and was among the senior letter winners last fall.
Indoor and outdoor co-captain Bill LaVallee holds several hurdles records for the Garnet tracksters and developed into an outstanding indoor relayman.
LaVallee was the recipient of numerous track awards because of his ability, dedication and fine leadership.
CHUCK WAGON N Drrve In -Restaurant — tel:M A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind.
Augusta, Maine 22L BATES STUDENT, MAY 15, 1963 r m * Inlramural Softball Champs, the Smith North ""Yankees* By SEG The Intramural season has arrived at its bitter end this week, except for a couple of the Chase Hall tournaments.
Both the softball league and the bowling league have completed their appointed rounds.
The bowling league championship was won bythe West Parker A league team.
Beisswanger was the leader for West Parker, while the very lovely and singularly beautiful Dave Cox led his team to utter defeat.
The softball league was won by Smith North B squad as they defeated all three of J.B 's teams to take the title.
An interesting sidelight to the championship was the uncontrollable happiness of one John Devendoff.
As a psych, major, I personally was very happy to see a 20-year-old regress to the age of six.
Since I have a little space left I will finish my column in the style of Mr Vandersea.
Mr Kiernan, you don't 'have any friends left, unless you find the boat.
Pele Pequognoi should stick to his usual extra-curricular activities and keep away from the pool tables.
More news from Smith South — Al Marden loves the company of Housemothers.
Red Vandersea's latest books — Call of the Wild and The Days of Wine and Roses.
Special note — I went to the Smith South open house but I couldn't get in — the Dean was in the doorway.
Closing note — The ""Herculean Cult"" (a very poetic statement concerning a very unpoetic mob) may not win the intramural championship.
C Bates Nine Tops Colby, Bowdoin To Stay Alive In State Series By KEITH BOWDEN '65 The Bates Bobcat varsity baseball team closed out another successful season by winning weekend encounters from state series rivals Bowdoin and Colby at Garcelon Field.
On Friday afternoon, little south paw Ted Krzynowek foxed the Polar Bears from Bowdoin, and did well by limiting them to two unearned runs.
Although he was in trouble on several occasions, Krzynowek had it in the clutch and escaped any serious damage.
Going the full nine innings, Krzynowek allowed only five hits, while striking out ten and walking three.
Yuskis Homers Offensively, John Yuskis with a fourth inning three-run homer, which put the game on ice, and Archie Lanza, with three singles, were the heroes for the Bobcats.
Monday, in another state series home encounter, the Bobcats prevailed over state leader Colby in a tight 4-3 game as Thorn Freeman bested Ken Stone in a pitcher's duel.
Ace Thorn Freeman survived a shaky first inning in which he surrendered two runs.
A spell of wildness in this inning hurt Freeman as he walked two batters who both scored on a subsequent Colby double.
Freeman remained slightly off form but Colby didn't score again until the fifth when a walk sandwiched between two singles produced Colby's final tally.
Stowe Tires Through the first three innings, Colby's Stone put the Bobcats down in order.
In the fourth inning, Stone began to lose his touch as he walked two batters.
Bates reached him for a single run in the fifth inning on walks to MacNevin and Spector, and a single by Howie Vandersea.
Later in the inning, the 'Cats had the sacks filled with one out, but Stone pitched out of the jam.
From the sixth inning to the ninth, Freeman regained his control and was never better as he retired the side in order in each inning.
Stone and his Colby mates survived until the Bates half of the eighth inning when the roof fell.
Trailing 3-1, Monty Woolsen opened the inning with a walk and Captain Ron Taylor followed with a pretty push bunt single.
Freshman John Yuskis then delivered a two-bagger to rightcenter, scoring Woolsen and putting Taylor on second.
MacNevin's blast into left field, good for the bases, scored Taylor and then Yuskis with the winning run.
Freeman then retired Colby easily in the ninth and the Bobcats prevailed 4-3.
Freeman Fires Freeman was very effective for the most part, especially in the late innings.
He permitted five walks, but compensated by limiting the Mules to four hits while fanning six.
The defeat was Colby's first in state series play and kept alive the Bates hopes for a share in the state series crown should Colby lose again.
The Bobcats finished the state series race with a 4-2 record, insuring them of at least a second place finish.
The win clinched at least a tie for the state series crown pending Bowdoin's last two matches against the U of Maine and Colby.
The win left the Bobcats with an impressive 10-1 record which probably would have been better if the match with Clark had not been snowed out.
In somewhat of a surprise, Bill Deering defeated Bates' ace Jim Wallach in three sets 6-1; 3-6; 6-4.
Deering displayed remarkable ability to return the ball down the sidelines in his win.
Deering teamed Gene Elliot to end the 10-game winning streak of Wallach and freshman Bob Thompson in doubles, 6-3; 6-2.
The Maine tandem were runners-up to the Yankee Conference Doubles champion and seemed to have gained confidence.
Owner-Manager South Casco Maine Clip out this ad and send it home monton in three sets 4-6; 6-1; 6-3.
Jack Wilson and Jim Dodds had an easy time winning at five and six in straight sets.
Jim Corey and Todd Lloyd gained revenge for another earlier setback with a 7-5; 6-4 win.
George Beebe and Al Williams stretched their doubles record to 5-0 with a 6-4; 6-4 win.
Wallach and Thompson tied for runner-up honors with identical 9-2 slates.
George Beebe was 7-2, missing the last two matches of the year because of an injury.
A darkhorse candidate is Bowdoin's Steve Hectt who has gained a lot of experience playing summer tennis.
The Black Bears were practically assured of victory when they handed Bates a 52 defeat Monday afternoon at Bangor's Penobscot Valley Country ^fclub.
Lynn Simpson and Walt Lasher were the two Bobcat golfers to hit pay dirt.
Simpson Pacesetter Simpson shot a blistering 77 while Lasher went 20 holes to defeat Maine ace Gordon Curry on a course that still boasts all the effects of a hard Maine winter.
Black Bears of State U dominate meet. that the championships will be played at Maine, deserve to be ranked number one.
The Wallach Thompson duo with a sparkling 10-1 record is rated an eyelash behind.
The Bowdoin duo of Ladd and Hecht are also very strong if there isn't a clash of temperments.
