Maybe what you want to know is whether or not I’d use reasonable force in the circumstances.
The Barrett probably is right up there with the Accuracy International and McMillan rifles.
The BORS determines the range and that Schmidt-Bender 5-25x56 PM III is a high quality scope.
I have the Leupold Mark IV 8.5-20x56 ER/T on the Super March along with an ACOG I can switch to for Close Quarters.
Range considerations also explain why the scopes are sighted in with Match ammo.
My primary handgun was the Custom TLE II , with laser grip sights and my backup handgun was also a Kimber, the subcompact Ultra Aegis II in 9mm.
I wanted my firearms to work the first time, every time, without a hiccup.
Generally that meant starting with a quality firearm and letting my gunsmith work on anything presenting a problem, like polishing the feed ramp and trigger work, etc.
One example was the M16A3 lower topped by a Bushmaster upper with the gas piston modification.
I had a Surefire suppressor for my Super Match and an Elite Iron for the model 99.
I wasn’t born with a silver spoon in my mouth; it was probably gold or platinum.
It was what they call ‘old money’, dating back to my great grandfather.
My grandfather had quadrupled it and my father had quadrupled it again.
When we met, her name was Janice Sarah Jenkins and we were both majoring in History.
I was only in the top 5% of my graduating class from a private prep school, but my SAT score was around 1,400 and there was all that old money.
We both got Master’s degrees in History and went looking for teaching jobs in any city where we could both work for the same school system.
Next, we asked around and decided that we might like to live a little south along 1-55 and found a location we liked in a small community named Barnhart, population circa 6,000.
A realtor listened to our description of what we wanted to do and directed us to a 40-acre piece of land not that far from the interstate access.
He had several including a regular basement with a separate ‘storm’ shelter, a deeper basement with a reinforced overhead and so forth.
He suggested a separate shelter built under a log cabin style 4stall garage.
He would do it as a turnkey project, if we chose, excluding supplies but including everything else for 6 people.
I’d never given any thought to having a ‘storm shelter’ and asked him to elaborate.
These days, there are more and more people getting into preparedness so come what may, they’re ready.
I’d recommend 30’ deep by 60’ long with a separate door on each of the 5 stalls.
You’re going to need some military style firearms, probably 7.62x51 mm, 5.56x45mm, 9mm, ,45acp and if it wouldn’t present a problem, maybe a .50BMG rifle.
I happen to prefer suppressors on my military arms and they can be had, for a price, although they’re illegal in Missouri.
I also know a very good gunsmith who can do anything needed to convert a firearm from a shooting weapon to a piece of art.
I’d given him 50% down with 40% due at completion and the final 10% due within 30 days.
The shelter access was beside the garage; a long stair with a blast door on the left at the bottom.
There was a separate concrete block structure holding the Kohler generator connected to the shelter with and oval shaped concrete pipe.
The power came underground from the road and went first to the generator room where the ATS was mounted.
My old guns went into the gun safe in the Master bedroom and my new guns into the gun safe in the shelter.
All of the weapons beyond my original firearms I described earlier were acquired during this period along with the supplies of ammunition.
The NFA dealer seemed to be a shady character; he didn’t want to know names or anything.
His only interest was his friend Ben Franklin or gold at the current spot price.
John had helped me get the Super Match with the Leupold Mark IV, the Barrett 99 with the Schmidt and Bender, 2 Raptor 6X night scopes, the Kimbers, the Glock and the shady guy supplied the full auto lowers with John assembling the Ml 6s.
We’d purchased dried firewood for the fireplace and it was stacked on the concrete cover of the stairwell to the shelter.
At John’s suggestion, I purchased two Stihl chainsaws and a hydraulic splitter.
A company name Castlebrook Barns assembled very good barns and would built to suit.
We could have two feeder cattle, some feeder pigs, chickens and so forth.
The old fencing across the front of the building area was left in place and a remotely controlled gate added.
Other improvements had been added during the three years we’d lived here.
We took shooting instruction and became familiar with each of our firearms.
The instruction for the CCWs had to wait until we’d been residents for 6 months.
We were no longer that naive couple who had moved to Missouri from Rhode Island.
We had let John select our initial supplies and had over the course of the 3 years tried them all out.
While we liked some better than others, there wasn’t anything we didn’t like.
The opened cans were finished off and replaced with identical supplies.
We also began to shop Costco and Sam’s Club to fill all those shelves in the basement.
We found that butchering a whole beef and 2 hogs gave us too much beef and insufficient pork.
To compensate for that, we bought boneless pork loins, bacon and Cure 81 hams, some from Costco and some from Sam’s.
Butchering beef became an every other year exercise and we still butchered 2 hogs and added to them.
They got new saddles, bridles, saddlebags, scabbards, pommel bags and lariats.
What we didn’t buy were chickens, electing instead to order a full case from a grocery store each year and wrapping them.
We did the same with small Butterball turkeys, buying the smallest they had.
It was around the time that we bought the horses with the assorted tack that we got into Single Action Shooting.
We didn’t really get fully involved, stopping after acquiring the firearms and ammunition.
We had an assortment of loads, both Cowboy and full power and, as with our other ammo, we had them in quantity.
John didn’t buy radiation equipment from Radmeters4U, electing instead to buy everything from Arrow Tech.
The shelter was also well equipped with medical supplies including OTC drugs and prescription drugs in the sealed manufacturers’ containers.
There were two types of haemostatic bandages, stretch gauze, non-stretch gauze and both adhering and nonadhering gauze pads and tape.
He recommended we take a civilian version of the Combat Lifesaver program and if we did, he’d add to our medical supplies with something to bulk up blood in a true emergency.
The prescription drugs included 2mg ampoules of Dilaudid, Mark I NAAK (Nerve Agent Antidote Kit) and prefilled syringes of diazepam, one for each three Mark Is.
He pointed 7 out that if the sensing strips didn’t indicate a nerve agent, taking the Mark I kit would be fatal.
The M256A1 Chemical Agent Detector Kit is a compact, simple-to-use kit designed to detect blister, nerve and blood agents.
It also determines the type of agent present or confirms the absence of a hazardous concentration of agent.
It is used after a suspected chemical attack to confirm the event and then later to determine if it is safe to unmask or reduce the protective posture level.
This is one of the military's most sensitive devices for detecting Chemical Agents and detects all agents at levels below those that can kill or injure people.
It was used extensively during the 1st Gulf War and is widely deployed with our troops in Iraq today.
You would use the sampler detectors to test for chemical agents in the vapor form.
As its name implies, the M256A1 vapor-sampler is used to test vapors for the presence of nerve agents, blood agents, and blister agents.
When issued, each new M256A1 kit contains 12 of these miniature chemistry sets, each sealed in a plastic laminated foil envelope.
To minimize the chance of error, two persons should conduct a vapor-sampler test; one person reads the instructions and the second person performs the action.
The attack was directed against trains passing through Kasumigaseki and Nagatascho, home to the Japanese government.
With the help of a converted refrigerator truck, members of the cult released a cloud of sarin which floated near the homes of judges who were overseeing a lawsuit concerning a real-estate dispute which was predicted to go against the cult.
Letters containing anthrax spores were mailed to several news media offices and two Democratic United States Senators, killing five people and infecting 17 others.
Anthrax is a gram positive bacillus and may be treated with Penicillin G, Ciprofloxacin or Doxycycline.
If the patient is allergic to those, you may want to use Erythromycin or Chloramphenicol.
I checked our drug supplies in the shelter and found Cipro, Doxy and Erythro.
I thought that up to this point in our marriage, I done rather well by my family.
We were protected against most natural disasters and most manmade disasters.
We had food, water, fuel, shelter, medicine, self-defense and both drove 2008 Suburban’s with the motors replaced with the Cummins 6BT engine, non-electronic.
Both vehicles were fully equipped with hitches, winches, pioneer tools, extra spare tires and long range fuel tanks.
I wanted a son and we agreed to try one more time and give up if we had another daughter.
Admittedly, I didn’t buy gold for $270 an ounce, but I got in under $400.
And we put some of that old money to a new use, guarding the inside of our safe in the shelter.
There was also $3,000 face value each of 90% silver dimes, quarters and halves plus 4,000 Silver Eagles.
Old money is defined as the inherited wealth of established upper-class families or a person, family, or lineage possessing inherited wealth.
The term is typically used to describe families that have been wealthy for multiple generations.
Locations such as Greenwich, CT, Westchester County, NY, and Philadelphia's Maine Line are often associated with old money.
My father had old money but he worked because he wanted to, not because he had to.
The same applied to me; I inherited a substantial amount of money from my grandfather in that generation skipping scheme to beat estate tax.
Dad never told me if it worked, but I had a very comfortable 8 figures tucked away.
In turn, much of what Jan and I earned was put back into the same investments where it came from when we drew on it for our 40 Acres and a Mule.
With each child we had, we added another gelding and tack on their third birthday.
The geldings were mere colts or fillies and would be ready to ride when the children were old enough, say 6.
Plus every time we went shooting, I replaced what we shot up with new ammo.
And, too, with each additional firearm came the acquisition of a ‘standard loadout’ of ammo.
We acquired Bushmaster semi-auto A3 rifles with the conversion and Browning Hi-Power pistols.
The thing I liked about Bushmaster was that if you wanted something specific, like an A3 upper with a 20” barrel and the gas piston conversion installed plus a spare parts kit, you had your dealer call them and you had it in no time.
The AR-15/M-16 with a barrel less than 20” long lost too much velocity, IMHO, and wasn’t worth having.
For someone who learned everything he knew about military firearms during the past four years, I was a quick study.
Considering the amount of money we had invested in firearms and ammo, we couldn’t let them sit around and collect dust.
It would be a real wakeup call if one morning we woke up in the shelter with a group of firearms we didn’t know how to use.
Louis isn’t a bad city by any means, but it does have gang problems like any city of its size.
Every day somebody bustin', somebody shootin', somebody gettin' locked up, somebody done got killed. -St.
I always assumed it would be my luck that she was off on maternity leave when some kid decided to drop a cap on someone in the hallway outside my room.
Speaking of which, the first day when we started, the kids were really confused having two new History teachers both named Adams who turned out to be husband and wife.
Had it been up to the students, I’m sure she’d have had all the boys in her class and I’d have ended up with the girls.
Better call them what they’re supposed to be, young men and young women.
It’s around $700 right now and I think that regardless of who wins a year from November, it’s going to go higher.
Afghanistan I can understand up to a point although I would have limited it to an air war.
The initial Soviet deployment of the 40 th Army in Afghanistan began on December 24, 1979.
The final troop withdrawal began on May 15, 1988, and ended on February 15, 1989.
Due to the interminable nature of the war, the conflict in Afghanistan has often been referred to as the Soviet's Vietnam.
We ignored both our own experience and their experience when we went looking for bin Laden.
We’ve had boots on the ground for about 7 years and haven’t accomplished much.
I’ll contact my broker and have him move ten million into precious metals.
Lucy Morris was a widow from Barnhart whose children were grown, married and moved away from home.
Between what we paid her and what she received from Social Security, she made a living.
The key to the padlock, for the large steel door covering a portion of the stairway, was on our keyboard in the kitchen.
We had spent a fair amount getting to where we were and it would take some time to get back to our previous financial status.
We kept enough in the bank to cover our bills and a little each month went into the gold safe.
I talked to John about what I wanted to do and he suggested a concrete block storage room with a vault door from any of several companies.
Two weeks later, the floor and footing were poured, the block erected and the door installed.
Two days later, he came by and gave me the combination to the vault and we inspected it.
It was a good setup, a room about 10’ square with the outward opening door with 2 rifle racks which could contain 24 rifles/shotguns each and a set of covered shelves for pistols.
I could write a maximum of 3 checks per month before they charged a fee.
After he left I called the dealer and told him I was ready for delivery of our additional gold and silver.
He told me they’d be here in about 3 hours and confirmed the bank wire transferring the funds.
They would unload it at any spot I designated, but it would be up to me to haul it to where I wanted it.
I’d added another $7,000 face value of 90% silver dimes, quarters and halves and the remainder of the 10 million went into gold, 25% in each of the four sizes and 1,000 silver Eagles.
I don’t know if they ever took the cruise, I never talked to him again.
After he left, I unlocked the steel cover to the stairs, grabbed two bags of coins and went down to the open blast door.
It was standing open and I put the bags in the cabinets and went back for more.
Why don’t you go online to Canning Pantry and order 50 cases each of regular mouth quarts and pints plus wide mouth quarts and pints.
Better get jelly jars, pectin, and spices to make pickles and tomato sauces.
They sell spare lids by the case so get two additional seasons worth of lids.
And, another thing since we’re considering worst case scenarios, we should run water to the new building and install a wood burning stove.
I think most of it in our current sizes with a bit extra one size smaller and more one size larger.
I’m think Wrangler brand jeans and shirts; and either Stetson or Resistol hats.
I had called John and he said he’d come by the next day to discuss a large log storage building.
We had quite the assortment including clothing from Australia, the United States and some probably made in China.
We ended up with Resistol hats, but only because we liked the style better than the Stetson’s they had in stock.
He asked if I wanted to approve the plans or should he just get it designed and installed.
I also wrote a check on our money market account for half of his estimated price.
The storage building went in quickly and included a Vz bath, the wood stove, countertops and much more.
The Canning Pantry and Lehman’s orders came in faster than I anticipated and I covered them with plastic in case of rain.
I noticed about halfway through the construction of the storage building, that a second area was being graded.
I got the web address from one of Tired Old Man’s stories and checked it out.
I talked to John about getting it erected and he had a crew with some down time.
One thing more, I’m not going to renew my teaching contract for next year.
I had school tomorrow and made sure when I left that I had the checkbooks for our bank account and our money market account.
I bought everything I wanted at the gun store and what wasn’t in stock would be in within 10 days.
It went faster than I thought and I had time to check with Freightliner about the Unimog.
They had a crane in stock to go with it and I bought that, just in case.
They also had a cherry picker which got me to thinking about apple trees and I bought it too.
We can grow any of about 18 varieties of apple, 9 of pears, 6 of peaches, 3 of the nectarines, 9 kinds of plums, 2 kinds of cherries both sour, 3 kinds of strawberries that include 10 cultivars of the June bearing, 1 of the everbearing and 2 of the dayneutral.
Twelve different kinds of grapes, 2 kinds of early red raspberries, 4 of the late red, 8 of the black, 4 different thornless black, 10 different high bush blueberries.
Nut trees include chestnuts, hickory, pecan, black walnut and English walnut, but apparently almonds don’t do well.
I told him you’d come in to see him and choose what you wanted and he’ll arrange transplanting.
While it may appear that our wealthy couple, has covered all bases, only time will tell.
Once she came home, Lucy cared for the three and Jan limited her activity to nursing Seth.
Lucy and she turned to the greenhouse which was also plumbed with water, had adjustable vents and grow lights.
While I was concerned about getting power to the lights, it probably wouldn’t be a problem due to the PV panels on both the barn and the storage building.
John had installed overhead propane heaters in the greenhouse and the storage building.
I began to notice an increase in our propane consumption and asked if we could increase our storage capacity to double what we had.
He suggested it was overkill but provided a crew, for a fee, to install the new tank and connect the two tanks together.
He had three idle crews at the moment and that postponed laying one off.
Composting toilet, sink with a small water heater and same 4 in one you have.
We found out that this baby is a boy and he will have exactly the same as I have.
I forgot to tell you, I replaced the Benelli Super 90 with a Mossberg 590A1.
Jan even asked me to get those small 9mm Kimber’s as backups for the girls and her.
We went through Jan’s and my armory and added suppressors for every firearm except the .22 rifles and shotguns.
My pay was directly deposited and our purchases were mostly limited to the light bill, groceries and keeping our tanks topped off.
The light bill was all but nonexistent due to our solar panels and wind turbine and frequently was a credit.
Had you asked Jan or me on that day we received our Master’s degrees if we could imagine a time like the present, we’d have suggested you see a shrink.
None of this was brought to our parents’ attention when they flew out to visit.
Jan’s mother Jill was a homemaker and her father Joseph worked for Xerox.
My father Seth and mother Margaret lived in Westchester County as did the Jenkins.
She was busy with her social circles and he was an investment counselor, primarily managing his own investments.
They were all somewhere on the scale called upper class, ranging from lower upper to middle upper although my father considered them to be upper upper.
Not quite, upper upper measures their wealth in billions, not millions.
Before I finished up my last year of teaching, I set about figuring out the new Unimog and assorted accessories.
I got the rototiller mounted and made three passes through the area we’d staked off for a garden, double the size we’d originally planned.
Jan had some of each of the different fruits, but only one cultivar of each.
We also had the nursery plant thorny blackberries all around the inside of the fence enclosing the building area.
John sent plumbers out to run water lines to the orchard and we installed an automatic watering system.
Our well had been one of the first projects on the property back in the beginning.
Access to the wellhead required lifting a manhole cover and slipping down into the concrete enclosed well head.
It was powered by inverted electrical current from batteries kept charged by solar panels.
Although it was a little on the expensive side, the buildings were all oriented with a south facing roof and that roof covered by solar panels.
Other than the exercise cycle, I can’t remember the last time the generator ran.
The PRI products were added to the tanks once a year on July first rather than take a chance of all of that expensive fuel going bad.
As far as the additions to our little armory, the first things out of the gate were the Surefire suppressors with the Fast Attach adapters.
A short time later, the .50 caliber suppressor came in and was installed.
That was followed by the new threaded barrels and 25 Gem Tech suppressors.
The final delivery was the most expensive, 4 crates of M-72s, 2 cases each of every kind of hand grenade excluding less than lethal and 30 cans of Mk211.
I ordered more concussion and fragmentation and counted out 12 of good old Ben, telling him % concussion and % fragmentation.
John asked about locating a singlewide mobile home on the property and I discussed it with Jan, explaining about my offering them space in our shelter.
She said we might as well let them; we didn’t really have room in the house.
He asked about a separate meter and I suggested that should we actually get a light bill instead of a credit, he pay the bill.
I purchased an above ground 3,300-gallon propane tank for the mobile home.
The home was in good condition considering its age which he said was about 30 years.
They furnished it with their old furniture and bought new for their home near Oakville.
From then on, they usually came down once a month and John and I’d drive over to the river.
Although there was about a five year difference in our ages, they being the older, Sally and Jan struck up a great friendship and Sally usually helped Jan can and Lucy watched the kids.
On the subject of livestock, it was agreed to butcher one steer and 4 hogs per year and split the meat.
With the problems in the economy in the latter part of Bush’s term and the early part of Obama’s term, we sat tight on our blue chips.
We might possibly lose a little dividend income but not the value the investments represented.
I was almost tempted to buy more gold, but it was too rich for my blood.
We also bought 2 Angus cows with their calves, one a new born and one a yearling.
Under USDA organic standards, manure must be subjected to proper thermophilic composting and allowed to reach a sterilizing temperature.
I just built a 3x3 bin 20 feet long and dumped in the manure, with a little loam on the bottom and top.
It would be used the following year on the garden and in the greenhouse.
We staggered breeding the cows so we usually had one fresh, giving us our milk.
From each litter of pigs we brought to market weight, we kept four and sold the rest.
We gen26 erally kept four from the second litter so we could have the beef and hogs butchered around the same time.
Massachusetts had adopted a law when Mitt Romney was Governor requiring a special election to fill vacant congressional seats.
That back fired because it meant the Democrats lost their filibuster proof majority in the Senate.
Early in 2009, they didn’t have it because of that fiasco in Minnesota.
Once they got Franken seated, nothing much got done before Kennedy died.
The lower and upper chambers were essentially divided down party lines.
When I quit, I opted out of the COBRA and got us a top notch healthcare package covering optical, dental and medical.
Jan used it for herself in much the same manner and for the kids, most especially the kids.
Trudy would be starting school this coming fall and we had her lined up with a private school.
Trudy would be 5 before the deadline, Sarah would be close in two years and Seth might have to wait a year.
I think some of the private schools are more flexible than others which follow the state guidelines.
Obama was being forced to build our troop strength in Afghanistan as rapidly as he was drawing down Iraq.
Most countries supplying NATO troops to that war wanted to bring their people home.
The Healthcare package was totally bogged down in a Congress that didn’t appear to be able to get a bill on the President’s desk.
Every time one of the Congress critters attended a meeting with his/her constituents, they got two ears and 3 bags full.
Jan drew my attention to a story TOM had written where he discussed 4 th generation warfare.
Any type of insurrection that arose in this country would have the very character of a 4 th generation war, complete with United States trained insurgents.
My take on our new President was that he was more a man of words than deeds.
My emphasis was more on American History than World History and Jan was the opposite.
From the middle of the 20 th Century, America had its domestic problems; first, John then Martin and finally Robert.
But don’t forget the attempt on Ford or the killing of John Lennon and the later shooting of Reagan.
The codename was later changed to Operation Iraqi Freedom, due to the unfortunate acronym.
Since Jan’s emphasis was in world history, she paid more attention to world events than I did.
One of us should see what was coming well in advance and be able to warn the other.
It eventually turned into a dinner time discussion, exchanging the late breaking news.
Fortunately, we were each able to lend a bit of unbiased perspective with that news, something MSM failed to do.
None of our kids would want for help with their homework although we didn’t outright do it for them.
We taught them to think and to reason out the solutions, regardless of the subject.
For those things that were rote memorization, like the name of continents, we taught them word association,g., there is only one continent in the world with south in its name and there is only one continent in the world with north in its name.
Europe and Asia were the east west game and everyone knew where they had Rhinos and everyone knew the largest island nation.
If the ice in the north was the arctic, then the ice in the south must be the Ant arctic.
To enforce a lesson, we could always pull up a satellite link and go to Wiki and look at pictures of penguins, or whatever the subject was.
One of the few things that really were totally rote memorization was the math tables.
There is a long list of Presidents who promised change, it’s one of their favorite campaign promises.
About the only one in recent memory that actually succeeded was Ronald Reagan.
Ike and Patton were the Majors sent by MacArthur against the Bonus Marchers.
Patton getting killed like that was probably the perfect end to his career.
North Korea changes its position almost daily while Iran has one goal, acquiring nuclear weapons to use as veiled threat against Israel.
She zips right through the preparation process and makes sure I know what we’re doing.
We’d need help with the children and she has a skill set beyond anything we might have.
There an empty hole in the storage building where we could store more jars.
I have no proof, but I believe the lids lose their ability to seal by becoming dried out.
Although we do have a large amount of LTS foods, I’m beginning to believe you can’t have too many.
See if they have the bulk chickens on sale and if they do, get a cart full.
Once it starts producing, we’re going to have more food to can than you can imagine.
I might just as well order the jars and lids now before the prices go up further.
We also purchased two additional 30 quart canners bring the total to 4, the limit that would fit on the wood stove.
While a good idea in and of itself, were it not for Lucy, we’d have replaced it with a propane stove.
She taught Jan and Sally the delicate balance to keep just the right amount of wood burning for a canner load, or two or three or four.
The Arabian and Morgan breeds produce horses specially bred for the western disciplines and offer western pleasure classes that draw large numbers of competitors.
Our Morgans were well trained and once Jan and I were trained, everything worked out fine.
We even bought a buggy and a buckboard for when we had them under harness.
We never took the horse drawn vehicles off the forty, limiting our excursions to trips around the pasture.
I asked about alternatives and he recommended Hornady 168gr A-MAX match.
And, it looked bad on both the domestic front and the international front.
Let me describe it, moving from west to east, starting with North Korea.
Kim Jong II died and his selected successor, Kim Jong Un, the so called Brilliant Comrade was in charge.
Speculation was that he died of pancreatic cancer but the rumors remained unconfirmed.
Bypassing the domestic front for the moment, to the East there were several problem areas.
Iran tried the protesters and executed all that were classified as leaders behind the unrest following the election.
While it appeared that Ahmadinejad would continue as President it was obvious that Mousavi had best keep his mouth shut and head down before he lost his head, literally.
A little further east brought us to Afghanistan where the War on Terror was going from bad to worse.
Starting back around June, the American body count started to climb, edging up one or two each succeeding month from the previous month’s level.
Besides all the international concerns, Obama’s promise of change isn’t happening.
It’s business as usual and until the Special Election to fill 33 Kennedy’s seat is certified, the Democrats lack their Super Majority.
She spoke at the California State Republican Convention in February 2009.
Fiorina is said to be considering a run for Senate against Barbara Boxer in 2010.
On August 18, 2009, she announced that she had filed papers to form an exploratory committee to start exploring a candidacy for Boxer's Senate seat.
Diane Feinstein has been reported as considering a run for Governor of California when Republican Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger is term limited.
A private poll in July 2008 showed Feinstein far outpacing Jerry Brown, a former governor, 50 percent to 24 percent, with current Lieutenant Governor John Garamendi at 10 percent.
A February 2009 poll showed that 36 percent of Democrats sampled in the poll said they would support Feinstein if she ran for governor.
Brown earned 14 percent, followed by Gavin Newsom and Antonio Villaraigosa, who both pulled in 9 percent.
The election held in November 2010 saw Feinstein win the Gubernatorial race and Fiorina beat Boxer handily.
The other elections of interest saw Mitt Romney in the Senate seat for the next 6 years and with other swaps the Democrats were down to a bare majority in the Flouse and 53 seats in the Senate.
Harry Reid also lost his seat, but Pelosi retained hers, unfortunately.
You may know the new male Senator from California, he first came to 34 world attention as a body builder and married into the Kennedy family.
Well, that’s why they have Wiki; so you can check the facts for yourself.
When they made Terminator IV without him, I assumed he’d stay in politics.
It takes big ones to erect a tent on the Capital grounds so you can smoke a cigar.
With the change in the makeup of Congress, the President was fit to be tied.
Without the promised change, some of the Fox All Stars wondered aloud if he’d get a second term.
Charles Krauthammer, a perennial contributor to Special Report with Bret Baier (formerly Special Report with Brit Hume), was now a total skeptic concerning Obama’s chances, and Juan Williams was pretty much in agreement.
From my reading of the forums, many authors have a tendency to have their main characters being well prepared by using some device, like an insurance settlement, auto accident, inheritance and what not.
That was not our case, I had old money from my grandfather and my father had more than I did.
So, come the day that mom and dad were gone, Jan and I would probably have 9 figures tucked away not counting what she might get from her parents.
That assumed that everything went as it should and we didn’t experience any natural or manmade disasters.
Even if that happened, we could fall back on our preparations and the contents of the vault addition to the shelter.
I did appreciate one thing about the Patriot Fiction; the authors did 90% of my research for me.
Just because a person has money and spends it as needed doesn’t make them a spendthrift.
An AW-50 is like $13-$14 grand, the M82A about $9 grand plus all those options and the Tac-50 about $9 grand complete.
The Hornady 168gr AMax finally came in and I pretty much filled the vault.
Our haul out of the garden the previous year was substantial, mostly due to doubling the size of the garden.
During spring and summer of 2010, with the compost added and thoroughly mixed in, the haul was even better and the unused portion of the unfinished side of the basement was stacked with case after case of home canned food.
John and Sally kept the temperature in their mobile home between 55°and 60°and about half of their share from the garden was stored there.
As mentioned, they moved all but 6 weeks’ worth of their LTS food to the storage building where we were storing our most recent order.
Since canning wasn’t a once a month 35 endeavor, they came down every weekend to help and Lucy was there watching the kids and asking questions.
At Sally’s suggestion their oldest, Melody, took over baby sitting with her sister Cheryl half helping and half needing a firm hand herself.
I taught him how to milk a cow, but I swear he squirted half of the milk on the floor.
Danny took to riding like a fish to water and we had him riding one of the geldings.
The guns for their three had been acquired but not distributed save the Marlin 1895 Cowboys and the Ruger Vaqueros.
There were three Loaded Ml As and 3 Browning HiPowers for the kids that they were only allowed to use at a range.
He thought long and hard before deciding on 590A1 shotguns for their family.
He confided that the money he made off the various projects he’d done for us had paid for Sally and their kids’ firearms and ammunition.
It was obviously quite a bit if he had purchased 5 of everything to outfit his family.
Ours had all of the improvements, short stoke gas piston, chrome lined chambers and barrels, 3X ACOGs and a lot of magazines.
The BATFE arrested a fella last week who dealt in illegal firearms and ammunition.
The guy didn’t keep any records and denied knowing the names of any of his customers.
If you have any illegal firearms and/or ammunition, you would be well advised to either turn them in or dispose of them.
Have a couple of Barrett’s and some Bushmaster semi-autos and so forth.
Louis for a while, but she stopped with her third pregnancy and I stopped a year later.
My family has some money and I didn’t really have to work so I’ve concentrated on 36 our small 40 acre homestead.
If we actually believed you were the customer he was talking about, I wouldn’t be here by my lonesome.
I gave the Deputy, Rob Simmons, the complete tour of the house including opening my gun safe and showing him the finished portion of the basement.
He asked about the remainder of the basement and I explained that we were into prepping in a big way and it was mostly storage of food.
We have the food stored so we wouldn’t have to be a burden and take food from others who might need it worse.
I store our Unimog U500 and accessories plus our Toolcat 5600 and accessories in there.
We also have spare canning jars, some long term food and a wood burning stove.
John brought that up before the log home was erected because of tornados.
We decided on a separate shelter because the house could fall into the basement.
Why build a shelter and leave out the most important parts like the blast door and air filtration system.
That door over there opens to an oval concrete pipe with the backup generator in a small room at the end.
One of the things John and I had done was move the faraday cage/cabinet to the area in front of the vault door.
If you opened the cabinet and slid a lever to the left, the cabinet was detached from the wall and rolled silently forward against the piano hinge on the right side.
To secure the vault door, the cabinet was returned to its normal location and the lever slid to the right, locking it in place.
You see, bad news spreads fast and 38 we knew about the arrest of Mr Shady almost before the Sheriff.
I had called John the moment I’d heard and he was down within an hour making the modification.
And the faraday cage/cabinet sat on newly installed soft rollers allowing it to move effortlessly.
We could give anyone the tour and except by remote chance, our secrets were safe.
Even if Mr Shady had John and my names written down, they’d have to find the illegal stuff before they could make an arrest.
Apparently he described one of his purchasers as a Cowboy and the Sheriffs office made local inquiries.
The President also lost any chance he had of getting the Assault Weapons Ban reenacted with the results of the 2010 election.
Surprisingly, Arnold said he would support it if it came up, but it didn’t come up because of other, more pressing issues.
Fiorina took an opposite stance, essentially cancelling out Arnold’s vote.
In a last ditch attempt to spur action from Congress on the war in Afghanistan and healthcare reform, Obama decided to address the nation.
I had taken Jan out for dinner to celebrate Valentine’s Day, 2011 and Lucy 39 stayed to see the broadcast.
The President walked down the hallway to the podium and began his address.
My fellow Americans, I come to you tonight with two issues of tremendous importance, the ongoing battle against Al Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan and healthcare reform which remains stalled in Congress.
Our efforts in Afghanistan have become mired by the continued bombings by terrorists.
The Secretary of Defense and I, in consultation with the Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that it will be necessary to once again increase our troops deployed to that country.
Accordingly, five additional combat brigades will be deployed during the next six weeks along with additional support personnel.
It appears that a ground detonation of a large nuclear weapon occurred in the proximity of the White House.
We lost our satellite feed of the broadcast and our Washington Bureau is offline.
At the moment there is no indication if this was a terrorist attack or an act by one of the nuclear powers.
At the moment, I think maybe terrorists finally got their hands on a large warhead.
Yes, only two countries build multi-megaton warheads, China and Russia.
Well, you know there have been allegations that the Russians have lost track of some of their weapons.
Well, if Sally and you think it best, I’ll go turn up the heat in your mobile home.
He seems to be concerned that because of the size of the weapon, Russia and/or China are going to be blamed.
Not only was the President there, so was the Secretary of Defense and all but one of the Joint Chiefs.
There is the twin bed in the girls’ bedroom and some night gowns that will fit in the dresser.
By the time I finished getting them set, Lucy was pulling back in the drive.
When she got out, she set her cat on the ground and pulled a suitcase from the back seat.
About 30 minutes after Lucy returned, John, Sally, Melody, Danny and Cheryl did.
John was pulling a trailer and I opened the door to the storage building so he could back it in.
I gave him the grand tour and with the exception of the vault, he knows what we have.
Anyway the long and short of it is that there are multiple sources of nuclear material available in the world and if a terrorist organization or two or three get their hands on some, they can easily bring a weapon into the country and detonate it.
This maintains continuity of government with regard to presidential succession in the remote possibility of a catastrophic event which might wipe out large portions of the US's federal government, including the entire slate of individuals designated by law in the line of succession to the presidency.
Since United States law does not provide for anyone to assume the office of president if everyone on this list is simultaneously killed, the practice of designating a survivor is intended to effectively eliminate the chance of that happening.
Only cabinet members who are eligible to succeed to the presidency can be chosen as designated survivors.
In addition to serving as a rump legislature in the event that all of their colleagues were killed, a surviving Representative and Senator could ascend to the offices of Speaker of the House and President Pro Tempore of the Senate, offices which immediately follow the 43 Vice President in the line of succession.
If such a legislative survivor were the sitting Speaker or President Pro Tempore as for the 2005, 2006, and 2007 State of the Union addresses, in which President Pro Tempore Ted Stevens or Senator Robert Byrd was also a designated survivor he would take the office of President rather than the surviving Cabinet member.
Let’s wait and see.” ...weapon was determined to be a 2 megaton warhead constructed by the People’s Republic of China specifically for their DF-5 missile.
Apparently a Cabinet Officer, a Representative and a Senator were designated survivors.
I speculated that either Al Qaeda or the Taliban was behind the bombing because of the timing.
Bin Laden has been trying to get his hands on nuclear weapons for about 15 years now.
Locke, the Secretary of Commerce, was sworn in as President at 3am Eastern Time.
Gary Locke is the first Chinese American to be elected as the King County Executive.
He then became the first Chinese American to be elected as Governor of Washington.
On December 4, 2008, the Associated Press reported that Locke was a potential candidate for Secretary of Interior in then President-elect Barack Obama’s cabinet.
Eventually, then Colorado Senator, Ken Salazar, was nominated for that position instead.
On February 25, 2009, Locke was announced as President Barack Obama's choice for Secretary for Commerce.
His nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate by unanimous consent on March 24, 2009.
He is the first Chinese American Secretary of Commerce, and the third Asian American in Obama's cabinet, joining the late Energy Secretary Steven Chu and Veteran Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki, the most of any administration.
Locke will serve out the remainder of Obama’s term and be eligible for two terms of his own because the remaining portion of Obama’s term was less than 2 years as provided by the twenty second Amendment.
However, had Locke not been the Designated Successor, it could have been Chu or Shinseki.
Congress had more members away from Washington than normal and could raise a quorum in both the House and Senate.
Under the circumstances, I felt sure they would confirm most, if not all, of Locke’s Cabinet appointments.
Congress had moved temporarily to the Greenbrier Hotel, although some had suggested Watergate.
For most of its history the hotel was owned by the Chesapeake & Ohio Railway and its successors, currently CSX Corporation.
Following a year of heavy losses, CSX placed the hotel into bankruptcy in 2009.
Local entrepreneur Jim Justice subsequently bought the property and guaranteed all debts, resulting in dismissal of the bankruptcy.
Justice has promised to return the hotel to its former status as a five star resort, and perhaps to introduce “tasteful” gambling for guests as a revenue enhancer.
The Greenbrier is also the site of a massive underground bunker that was meant to serve as an emergency shelter for the United States Congress during the Cold War.
On March 20, 2009, the resort filed for bankruptcy, listing debt of up to $500 million and assets of $100 million.
The Marriott Corporation asserted that it had a valid contract to purchase the hotel, and expected to see that contract honored.
However, Justice ultimately settled with Marriott, and the bankruptcy judge dismissed the case on May 19, 2009, clearing the way for Justice's purchase of the property.
The center was maintained by government workers posing as hotel audiovisual employees, and operated under a dummy company named Forsythe Associates.
Many of these same workers are now employed by the hotel and, for a time, gave guided tours.
The complex is still maintained by The Greenbrier, and the facility remains much as it was in 1992, when the secret was revealed in the national press.
While almost all of the furnishings were removed following the decommissioning of the bunker, the facility now has similar period furnishings to approximate what the bunker looked like while it was still in operation.
Since today is Tuesday, Sally and you ought to consider spending the week, while things get sorted out.
I don’t really know, but I’d imagine accusations are going to be flying every which way until they find someone to blame for the detonation.
They have a lot of information, but unfortunately some of it is conflicting.
The United States called for an immediate meeting of the UN Security Council.
That was probably a delaying action so they could figure out who did what.
There is only the international community, which can only be led by the only remaining superpower, which is the United States.
Our Ambassador complained to the Security Council about a Chinese warhead being used on American soil.
The Chinese Ambassador countered with evidence that it wasn’t the only country with 2mT warheads and that an inventory accounted each and every one of their weapons.
The Russia Ambassador also claimed that its entire stockpile of nukes had been checked and as of an hour before the meeting, none were missing.
He again suggested that Russia and China could prove their claims by permitting an IAEA inspection.
Although reluctant, Russia finally agreed forcing the Chinese to do the same.
Our Ambassador said that in the spirit of international cooperation the IAEA would be allowed to inspect all of our weapons once the Russian and Chinese inspections were completed and a Russian nuclear weapons expert could accompany the IAEA when they inspected ours.
China then agreed to allow a Russian expert and a United States expert to work with the IAEA provided they could provide an expert to join the Russian inspecting the American weapons.
Russia had more than 4,000 weapons spread out over a large territory resulting in a 20 month verification that likewise confirmed their inventory was complete.
The now conventional B-1B had been restored to carry nukes and it took a full year to verify our weapons stockpile.
John and Sally had only stayed until the weekend and then returned home.
This verification process was like waiting for a pot to boil, it seemingly lasted forever with nothing amiss at the end.
Saying that he only intended to serve until the election of 2012, he was a shoe in.
Gary Locke had been reelected twice having done a respectable job working with both parties ironing out healthcare reform.
The weapons signature indicated a thermonuclear warhead,e., a hydrogen weapon.
Our forces remained on DEFCON 4 even though all of our troops had been withdrawn worldwide.
After the last person was withdrawn from the Middle East, the Afghanistan drawdown began and when it was complete, South Korea followed.
President Locke retained such military that reenlisted but recruiting efforts were put on hold.
Even then, the military got a fair number of volunteers and they were accepted as replacements for eventual retirees.
The last troops brought home were those stationed in Germany, during the third year of Locke’s first 48 elected term, about five years after the assassination.
NATO was forced to accept that role and our participation in NATO was limited.
The Senate had a Republican majority and the House a Democratic majority and rarely did the twain meet.
Our children were growing up and Jan and I provided home schooling, both being certified teachers.
The end of the War on Terror saw a sharp increase in supplies of ammunition and one could buy all the Lake City ammo wanted for a fair price.
The economy had recovered in fits and starts and housing prices were finally back to where they had been when the housing bubble burst.
Auto makers had been forced to produce vehicles meeting strict emission and mileage criteria.
Our two Suburban’s had been tweaked about to the limit and could still meet the emissions standards.
I wasn’t sure that would hold, given the compulsory limits for future years.
Twice a year trips to Sam’s and Costco constituted our ‘long distance’ travel.
I believe in my heart that my mother grieved herself to death because she died within a year after he did.
I arranged for the distribution of the clothing and furnishings of the Westchester County home to charity and sold the home.
The attorney handed the estate called and asked me what I wanted to do with the contents of Dad’s safe.
When I asked what was in it, I got the shock of my life, United States Eagles, silver and gold, and a lot of them.
I asked him to arrange secure shipping and send any of the remaining firearms that Dad and Mom may have had.
His combat rifle was an M21 from Springfield Armory and he had a H&K USP tactical with suppressor.
It’s a shame that he didn’t have a Surefire for the M21 or a suppressor for the AS-50.
When she passed, I got what was left after taxes, cementing our place in the low nine figures.
We wouldn’t be on anyone’s list of the richest people, but we were more than comfortable.
Talk to John and explain the problem to him and indicate that price is no object.
I’m beginning to think that we should get those automatic lowers for the Bushmasters and that we should have one apiece.
The lowers weren’t a major problem; the suppressors were described as difficult but doable.
The Mk211 was a whole different matter which he described as extremely difficult.
However, if I had money to burn, he’d get it done, for a consideration.
The consideration was 5 cases of Ml 18LR and 10 cases of Mk211 for his .50.
In the fall of 2016, that ongoing problem over the Kashmir raised its ugly head yet again.
It was turning into a three way battle involving China, Pakistan and India.
The Chinese had started it this time, sending in an overwhelming force and seizing the half claimed by India and the third claimed by Pakistan.
The latter two countries mobilized and actually joined forces to expel China.
MSM announced that they had an agreement that when China was expelled, Pakistan got the territory claimed by China, effectively give each country half of the Kashmir.
We had finished harvesting the outside garden, had Lucy’s new home installed and occupied and John had come through with the needed items.
The ammunition he wanted 50 was stored in their mobile home at our place.
We reactivated our warning system, Delta Echo/Alpha Delta Echo and improved it to include other possibilities.
Tango a threatened tornado and Alpha Sierra for an Asteroid/Comet from Space.
During the course of building the shelter and the homes at the MAG compound, John developed a source that could provide the current DEFCON/THREATCON/LERTCON/ EMERGCONs and Material Conditions of our military.
By opening a single document on my laptop I could review the steps involved in establishing Material Conditions and translate the various Defense/Threat levels and respond appropriately.
In addition, we had established an unscheduled monthly check-in confirming current conditions.
Not only was their education better than all but a fancy Prep school could offer, it kept them home and under our watchful eye.
Jan and I were now of a mind that there was no such thing as being too prepared.
We were careful not to put up more home canned food than could be consumed in one year which meant that our maximum supply before the summer was a one year supply and towards fall approached 21 months.
Add to that the one year supply of commercial food from Costco and Sam’s and it could be as much as 33 months before we were forced to open our LTS food supplies.
Those were rotated on a continuing basis because they needed to be and we actually preferred some of the freeze dried to home canned or store bought.
With Jan being the world history specialist, she kept an eye on the news and we both carried portable NWS SAME radios, just in case.
Her expressed fears was that one of the three nations involved in the Kashmir war would resort to nuclear weapons, and in the process, involve other nations leading to an all-out global thermonuclear war.
When the United States economy crashed in ‘08-‘09, we’d taken other countries with us.
Our recovery took a while but some of the others were still in the recovery phase and bringing our troops home had eliminated a fair number of United States dollars from their economies.
My source seems to think that something is going on behind the scenes although we remain at DEFCON 4 and THREATCON Normal and the Navy is at X-Ray.
United States Army, fought in Iraq one tour and Afghanistan for one tour, but in the other order.
His failing, if any, was insufficient time to practice especially recently when he’d been working on the MAG project.
His rifle had the Night Force NXS 8-32x56 Mil-dot telescopic sight plus a MUNS AN/PVS-27.
Over the years, John had accumulated quite a bit of the ammo and stored it in our armory.
There was a case pending before the Supreme Court challenging the NFA arguing that it violated the 2 nd Amendment.
Successful challenges had already been made to Bush’s EO, the FOPA, the 1968 Gun Control Act and the 1968 Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act.
Only the one left to go and Americans would have their rights back, where permitted by local laws.
That challenge to Bush’s EO was the only the third time an Executive Order had been challenged.
It was during early September and the situation in the Kashmir had continued to heat up.
This was confirmed by the radio, incoming missiles had been detected, but no country of origin was being reported.
Since Jan had her radio, I started to take care of the livestock, ensuring they were housed and fed.
The new barn was connected to the generator room and thereby the shelter.
It was a dome constructed of reinforced concrete and covered with six feet of earth.
I hastily moved the livestock to the barn and activated the heavy duty shutters designed to provide a protection factor about 5,000.
When I finished, I helped Jan, Lucy and the kids with the last load to the shelter.
We entered and I pulled the AMP radiation equipment from the faraday cage/cabinet and hooked it up.
A banging sound on the shelter door a few minutes later indicated we had company.
It was John and his family and they had parked the SUV and trailer in the storage building.
About 5 minutes later, there was pounding on the door a second time, one each Deputy Rob Simmons with wife and two teens.
We soon learned that their children, Maria 15 and Robert 13 we accomplished shooters in their own right and had weapons of their own.
I opened the cabinet, moved the lever to the left and swiveled out the cabinet.
Maria, the mom, was from Mexico originally and it wasn’t uncommon there.
They had perhaps a six month supply of LTS food for four or one year for two.
That was reasonable because we were about 20 nautical or 23 statute miles from St.
When warheads began to rain on Russia, they implemented an all-out attack.
We probably retaliated with our Minuteman III missiles since they were in fixed locations.
No doubt as many bombers as could be were loaded with weapons and moved to a secure location like Groom, Rogers or Rosamond.
That leaves us with a full load of Trident missiles to use as we see fit.
We have most of the by golly gee wiz accessories like night scopes, match ammo and multipurpose ammo.
Ail of our Bushmasters have military A1 lowers and the Bushmaster short stroke gas piston uppers.
Jan and Lucy had started a batch of bread and she said it would be sometime before the cinnamon rolls were finished.
The dough had to rise, be knocked down shaped in loaves and placed in the pans.
The leftover dough was rolled out, topped with butter, sugar and cinnamon and allowed to rise while the bread baked.
However the coffee urn had stopped perking and we had plenty of coffee.
Jan had two Cioer Electric Water Kettles and got water going to tea and hot cocoa.
Mutual assured destruction is a doctrine of military strategy in which a full-scale use of nuclear weapons by two opposing sides would effectively result in the destruction of both the attacker and the defender.
It is based on the theory of deterrence according to which the deployment of strong weapons is essential to threaten the enemy in order to prevent the use of the very same weapons.
The strategy is effectively a form of Nash equilibrium, in which both sides are attempting to avoid their worst possible outcome nuclear annihilation.
Today, all lesser nations are believed to be keenly aware that any use of nuclear weapons, in any context, is the recipe for their annihilation.
Significant nuclear powers, such as the United States, the Russian Federation, and the People’s Republic of China , operate under the deterrent effect of potential retaliation with respect to “first use” in the conduct of brush fire wars and other lesser confrontations.
The US, as possessor of the largest and most deployable stockpile of nuclear weapons, continues to exercise its vast nuclear might as a cornerstone of its foreign policy with regard to rogue states and communist nations that currently or may soon possess nuclear weapons technology.
United States military forces stand on permanent alert in order to deter potential nuclear adversaries.
Likewise, nondemocratic nations cannot use nuclear weapons against the US, or her critical allies without threat of (as United States President John F Kennedy said) a “full retaliatory” response by the United States.
In game theory, Nash equilibrium (named after John Forbes Nash, see A Brilliant Mind, who proposed it) is a solution concept of a game involving two or more players, in which each player is assumed to know the equilibrium strategies of the other players, and no player has anything to gain by changing only his or her own strategy unilaterally.
If each player has chosen a strategy and no player can benefit by changing his or her strategy while the other players keep theirs unchanged, then the current set of strategy choices and the corresponding payoffs constitute a Nash equilibrium.
Stated simply, Amy and Bill are in Nash equilibrium if Amy is making the best decision she can, taking into account Bill’s decision, and Bill is making the best decision he can, taking into account Amy’s decision.
Likewise, many players are in Nash equilibrium if each one is making the best decision that he or she can, taking into account the decisions of the others.
It would be a while before we could extricate ourselves from the shelter, somewhere between 9 and 16 months according to the radiation readings Danny was noting.
The natural decay of the radiation would put it below lOOmR at 9 months and below 50mR at 16 months.
We didn’t really need to go out for much, not with the access we had to the dome barn.
We would want to exit briefly before then to begin the process of removing the radiation around the homes.
Fortunately the camera mounted on the antenna tower survived the EMP and radiation.
Mounted on a standoff, it was a Pan/Tilt Zoom Veilux SVP-F18X Dome Security Camera.
The greatest feature that this auto tracking camera can provide is starting auto tracking from different triggers, for instance start auto tracking when motion is triggered at the home view location of the camera, or start auto tracking after the camera moves to the predefined preset.
A dwell time for auto tracking can also be set to restart auto cruising after motion stops at the present location.
The auto tracking PTZ cameras also come in different day/night mode with extremely low LUX functionality.
The cameras can operate up to 0.01 LUX at dark conditions with the automatic electromechanical infrared cut filter to provide clarity black and white picture at night.
The cut filter provides crisp clear day/night image, filtering out the UV sunlight during the day and clear picture noise filtration during the night.
The cameras also offer enhanced backlight compensation giving providing comparable to a wide dynamic range camera quality.
I decided to invoke the one parent rule, ergo, only one parent of a couple could be suited up and outside the shelter in case we needed to go out.
And, to avoid giving away the shelter location, we would exit from the dome.
This meant that in the near future, someone was going to have to go outside and close the metal stairwell covering and move some of the firewood on it to conceal it.
Initially intended for six, our 1,800ft 2 shelter now held 6+5+4 or 15 souls, reducing the square footage from 200ft 2 per person to 120ft 2 per person.
Had it not been for the four additional guests sleeping in the main shelter area, it wouldn’t have been a problem.
We generally kept a 24 hour watch consisting of two people, one watching the radiation and the other using the camera to survey the scene.
That was the difference from starting into preparedness having money as opposed to not having money.
The other expression was money isn’t the most important thing in the world, but it beat the heck out of whatever is in second place.
I was surrounded by my immediate family and hoped that Jan’s family was ok.
On the other hand, that upscale neighborhood, Westchester County, made it difficult to keep a low profile.
A minor targeting error would wipe out White Plains and Westchester County.
I didn’t plan on driving halfway across the country without a good reason to do so.
When I wrote to TOM to get the spreadsheet, I was curious about him being an auditor for the state of Iowa and asked a few questions.
He dropped two names of companies he’d ‘heard of in the area Xerox and Gulf and Western.
I assumed he couldn’t tell me the names of companies he audited, but was free to mention the names of companies he ‘heard of.
He’s probably there in Palmdale sitting on the fault line with his Ml A in his lap daring the San Andreas to shake.
I paused and checked the hour meter on the generator and it wasn’t due for an oil change.
We continued to the dome and fed the livestock and moved the manure off to one side.
We added our masks, gloves and tape and went outside to close the stairwell cover and move some fire wood.
When we got back, I read the dosimeters and recorded the readings before I zeroed them.
We had received doses of ~1 R Subsequent trips would be shorter and we’d get less until we went out to begin decontamination.
We had a long discussion and agreed to limit our total dosage to 10R, if possible, before we started decontamination.
It was built to raise the number 7 to a power beginning at 7 raised to the 0. power and continuing until 7 was raised to the 10 th power.
Seven represented the number of elapsed hours and of course 7 to the 1 st power is 7 hours.
It really got deceptive between 7 to the 6 th power and the 7 th power.
At the 6 th power, the total time is 13. years and at the 7 th power, the total 58 time is 94 years, a lifetime.
Despite the primary fear during the Cold War coming true 25 years after the Cold War ended, we were ok for the moment.
If the worst that happened was that we were a little crowded, it was ok.
Ok because there is safety in numbers and we had added as many as 4 potential shooters for the bad times sure to come.
We had livestock; hence a source of protein and more of the 40 acres could be turned into garden using the existing equipment.
The existing equipment would work, come what may, I had spares for everything.
Well, when we picked the location, we had the right idea but didn’t go far enough.
We had to let nature and physics work its magic under the 7/10 rule so we could leave the shelter in due course.
As the radiation level fell, the three of us pulled some plywood and 2x4s from the storage building and erected a temporary bedroom for the Simmons.
It was a tight squeeze, but gave the shelter the feel of having more free space despite not really having more space.
It was a full 9 months of shelter time for those that were going to risk going out to decontaminate.
The well could supply sufficient water to the gasoline engine powered fire pump and we had one IV 2 ” line that could reach the enclosed buildings.
We scraped and hosed down the entire area, checked for residual radiation and did it again for spots we missed.
This was November 2016 and there was snow on the ground hampering our efforts.
In May of 2017, we slid back the metal cover over the shelter stairs and everyone was permitted to exit.
We turned out the herd of horses to allow them to run off the accumulated energy.
The cattle, hogs and chickens were transferred from the dome barn to the Castlebrook barn.
We could clean out the dome barn completely and after it aired out, use it for storage.
Until we had a feel for conditions above ground, everyone but our three children would go armed, including Lucy.
That was one new hard rule and would not be relaxed until we had a better feel of the situation.
Maybe Jan and I had read too much Patriot Fiction, but until we knew for sure, that was the way it was.
Rob and his family lived in Hillsboro, the Jefferson County seat which was southwest of Barnhart.
He was practically dying to 59 drive down and check on their home and see if any of the County government was intact.
They were back later the same day; Hillsboro was an abandoned ghost town.
They had loaded the rest of their clothes, his reloading equipment and emptied their pantry.
I guess I could have purchased one of those fancy Dillon Precision progressive loaders and all the supplies.
However, it was easier to just acquire the loaded cartridges and save the brass.
The guy we’re going to see does, he sells reloading equipment in addition to the supplies and reloads himself.
Rob’s friend lived outside of the city and his business was adjacent to his home.
We pulled in and were greeted by an older man and some younger men we took to be his sons.
The sons stood down and Rob explained the purpose of our trip and who we were.
If you have it, I’d like enough powder and primers to reload 5,000 rounds of .50.
I swiveled the fanny pack around until it was in front of my belly and opened it, taking out a tube on one ounce Eagles.
Being in the business I am, I always figured it was when and what, not if.
Powder gets old after a while and I didn’t stock as much as I should have but I still have several pallets full.
I’m not sure, but I think I know someone with a huge supply of the A-MAX bullets.
I doubt those hand grenades hanging off your web gear are the less than lethal variety.
I’m sorry if you think my attitude is cold, but once a long time ago, my wife asked me how far I would go to protect my family.
The next day, I was forced to break my parent’s rule when Jan refused to allow me to go back to Jefferson City/Osage Bend alone.
She had all of the firearms laid out on the kitchen table and the LAWs and hand grenades were in my Suburban.
It was my fathers and I’ve only fired a few rounds through it since I got it.
About an hour after we returned, Rob and John pulled in towing a U-Haul trailer containing his generator and the generator parts were on the back of Rob’s pickup.
He offered two for one and I said that was generous, but no thanks so he went to three to one.
I got to thinking and told him that really wasn’t fair thinking that it was too much.
We hooked up to 2 6x12 enclosed trailers and drove to John and Sally’s.
Once the pantry was emptied, we started on their stored food in the basement and shelter.
It seems that they’d added more LTS food than could fit in a single trailer and had been forced to leave it behind.
I could sort of understand John saying that they’d done their preps in pieces.
By the time everything was unloaded and put away, you had to suck in your gut to move around in the basement.
The next day, we headed to Hillsboro and our first stop was a place that sold plumbing and electrical supplies.
We need electrical cable, cooper water lines, steel gas lines and PVC pipe for sewage.
Their trailer was an older 14x70 like John and Sally’s and the new one on display was a 16x80 and had its wheels on.
We located the trailer hauler and they moved their personal possession to the new trailer.
The furniture in the display model was new junk and was left lying beside where the home had been parked and we moved their furniture to the home.
The trailer was the same manufacturer as Lucy’s and model number 8083, a three bedroom.
As was typical with the singlewide mobile homes, the 2 nd and 3 rd bedrooms were 68 rather small, one being 9’ wide and the other 11’ wide.
It took the full day to accomplish the move and fortunately when we got home, Lucy had prepared a large pot of beef stew using home canned beef and home canned vegetables plus fresh baked bread.
The following day, the ladies went to work in the greenhouse and we began to trench and add lines.
The first connected was the propane followed by the water and late in the day, the line to the septic tank.
By then, it was getting dark and we put off filling the trenches until the next day.
It turned out that not filling the trenches may well have saved our lives.
It was, as they say, oh dark thirty when I heard an automatic weapon go off, sounding as if a full magazine had been fired.
I grabbed my pants, shirt, boots, dressed quickly, grabbed my A3, sliding my arm through the shoulder loops of the ALICE gear.
The idiot in the trench stuck up his head to see what was going down and I added him to my list.
John could see some others and began to walk his fire through their ranks.
We also collected three very nice knives, one Cold Steel Military Classic, one Randall model 1 with a 7” blade and one SOG Creed.
Early the next morning, John and I dumped them in the septic line trench and filled all three trenches.
I think the fact that they had the 9 mils and AKMs tends to support that.
There was a vehicle down the road that we emptied out and shoved into the ditch.
He’d dealt with his share of criminals but times were far different than they were before the war.
He took the morning and helped Maria and the kids get everything arranged and put away.
After lunch he came to the house and asked where to set up the reloading equipment.
While the brass was already sorted by caliber, it wasn’t sorted between primer type or civilian versus military.
The following day, we sorted the .50BMG eliminating the few rounds of Berdan primed.
I didn’t have anything to prove from my viewpoint, it had occurred earlier.
Frankly, until I actually pulled the trigger on the first guy I wasn’t sure myself that I could do it.
I didn’t plan to make a habit out of shooting people unless the circumstances warranted it.
But they had climbed the gate, I suppose; those blackberries should have kept them from coming over the fence and when they did that, all bets were off.
My only complaint about the series was that it failed to recognize the current state of our infrastructure, before the war.
You can imagine what it succumbed to after the war with a total lack of maintenance.
We had bridges, dams, levees and highways that were nearly beyond use before and from the limited travel we’d done in the PAW, they were getting worse as grass began to protrude through cracks in the roads, bridges collapsed and levees failed when the Mississippi and Missouri and to a lesser extend the Ohio flooded.
There was more to the question of how far I would go than shooting someone to protect Jan and our children, or myself for that matter.
Rob highlighted it when he called me judge, jury and executioner, but it went beyond that.
None of us had more than a minimal amount of medical education, just the course John suggested we take.
A gunshot wound by itself was bad enough, but the bullet usually drags trash into the wound path and that path has to be debrided by someone who know what he/she is doing.
Next, repairs to damaged blood vessels and tissue had to be made and an antibiotic selected and administered.
Yes, we had some solutions to be used as blood bulkers, but we weren’t set up for transfusions and no one wore dog tags with the SSN, DOB, blood type and religion.
I got out another pad and began yet another of my obsessive compulsive lists, including, doctor, dentist, nurse, medications, more bandages and so forth.
Hillsboro had been abandoned so we couldn’t find medical personnel there.
We might find a few drugs if the addicts hadn’t cleaned out the drug store.
Louis although any further north than Oakville would probably put us in a higher radiation area that would not be conducive to savaging trips.
I suppose I should tell you what kind of liquor they had in the trunk of their car.
I assume that either they didn’t find any Bud or it was past date and unfit to drink.
I don’t drink stuff like that, my favorite Whiskey is single barrel Jack Daniels, Bombay Sapphire gin, a good blended Scotch, Chivas or better, Marker’s Mark when I want bourbon, Stolichnaya or Absolute vodka and Jose Cuervo 1800 as a basis for a Golden Cadillac.
My idea of a dry martini was 3 oz of gin over ice, tap the mixing glass twice with a bottle of vermouth, stain and serve with three king sized stuffed green olives.
I had lifetime stud services for our Morgan’s presuming I could run down the guy who made the promise.
We’d need to find a boar, a bull and a few roosters so we could maintain or increase the number of livestock.
I think I read somewhere that the average family eats about one chicken a week.
Lucy having her own trailer could work to our advantage if a criminal element made a second appearance.
The bandits would have to assume that there were four families, minimum, and might decide to look for greener pastures.
We decided to allow the garden to lay fallow for one season and limit our harvest to produce grown in the greenhouse.
None of us wanted to accumulate a large dose of radiation regardless of the time frame.
That didn’t mean we were idle, Jan and I could always use more wood for the fireplace and we could do our best to track down future sources of fuel.
Once stabilized, the tankers 72 could be parked behind the garden until needed.
We probably already had a lifetime supply of gasoline, but diesel was like bath tissue, especially when the sun wasn’t shining and the wind fell off.
On the other hand, we were getting enough power during daylight to meet our needs which tended to fall off dramatically after dark when everyone bedded down.
After that, he was going to try his hands at the .50 caliber which would go slowly because the loader wasn’t progressive and he’d have to weigh each powder charge.
Rob was still a bit short with us when the subject of how we handled those uninvited callers came up.
Because there were multiple portions of the Mark Twain National Forest spread out all over Missouri, when we went look for firewood, we did it in section known as Big Piney.
First off, it was the second closest to our location and second off, Big Piney was the home to Fort Leonard Wood and finally, it was pretty much a straight shot down 1-44.
We got the chain saws, axes, treated gas and other things we needed and drove a large tilt bed truck with a winch borrowed from a farm implement dealer down to collect some deadfalls or standing dead trees.
We hauled four truck loads back and dumped them before parking the flatbed and driving back down to check out the Fort.
We drove my Suburban pulling an empty U-Haul and half planned on getting a ten ton cargo truck with ten ton trailer if we found enough to be worth our while.
Fort Leonard Wood and the United States Army Maneuver Support Center is the home of the United States Army Engineer, Military Police and Chemical Corps Schools, the Third Basic Combat Training Brigade, and Joint Training Detachments from the United States Marine Corps, Navy and Air Force.
If I read him right, he was mostly interested in the M240 and either the M2HB or its replacement, the M2A1.
All I was thinking about was some C-4, caps, delayed detonators and some detonation cord.
It would be a challenge because I knew squat about explosives and pyrotechnics.
Rob didn’t find a M2A1, but he found a pair of the old standby Ma Deuce.
He grabbed 4 of the Ma Deuce barrels saying that he would headspace each barrel and tag them.
The barrel for the M240B was pre-headspaced and matched to the machine gun.
The barrel for the M2HB wasn’t and had to be manually headspaced and timing checked.
However, some of the Marines he worked with who used the Ma Deuce would take the spare barrel or barrels and individually set the head space.
They 74 would then write down the number of turns out to achieve the correct headspace.
When we got home that night, he gave me a copy of FM 3-25-65 and said to read up on the machine gun.
I read it alright and you could do that with the headspace, but timing was an entirely different question.
Any barrel that won’t headspace between two clicks out and seven clicks out is discarded.
If the go end of the gauge enters the T-slot freely to the center ring of the gauge, and the no-go end will not enter, headspace is correct.
Timing is the adjustment of the weapon so that firing takes place when the recoiling parts are between .020 and .116 inch out of battery to prevent contact between the front end of the barrel extension and the trunnion block.
Timing is a function the receiver and if it was good before the barrel swap, it should be good after.
Then you back it out 2 more clicks to get it into mid-range and replace the back plate.
We don’t have the gauges and such to do that operation and frankly, I don’t know how.
With no more fuel than you say we’re using, any we find will have to be stabilized and stored.
It seems that ammo is heavy, especially ammo for the big guns like the M256 and the 155mm cannons.
To cover that base, I drove my Suburban pulling the U-Haul trailer for things like the filters and such for the 3 phase generator.
The three phase generator we found didn’t weigh any more than our Koehler’s; it just had a different alternator.
It was diesel too and we’d passed a truck stop or three on our way down.
There was also an empty tanker, a big one, maybe 10,000-gallons per tanker and it had two tanks.
We added the PRI-D, I think that explained the five gallon cans, one per tank, and loaded the tankers.
The one John had installed in our home was the 47"" BIS Tradition High Efficiency Wood Burning Fireplace with Black Doors and Black Fagade made by Security Fireplaces in Ohio.
It would be a bit much for John and Sally’s 14x70 but about right for the larger singlewides.
Rob was driving the Ml 075, John was driving the tanker in the middle and I was tail end Charlie and I let both know about the two pickups.
I moved around him behind John and Rob started weaving slightly back and forth to keep the pickups from passing the trailer and truck.
Out came the A3s and we inserted HE grenades in the M-203s and then waited.
We both fired at the one on the right side and it exploded before rolling over into the ditch.
We quickly reloaded and turned around to see if the other pickup was still in range.
Rob had run it off the road into the left ditch and it was mired down in mud.
Both grenades hit about the same time and we must have hit the fuel tank, there was a huge fireball.
After we were back in our vehicles, we came up on Rob, stopped up 1-44 about a mile wearing an ear to ear grin and holding his carbine.
We went our separate ways and agreed to 78 distribute the fireplaces after spending some time with our families.
I backed the U-Haul trailer into the storage building and went to check on Jan.
Rob and John started to hook up Lucy’s first and I went to the storage building to unload the filters and stack them on empty sets of shelving.
When it was empty, I emptied the items from the Suburban and pulled both out.
I got our large garden cart and filled it with firewood, delivering a cartload to each of the mobile homes before I did the same for us.
With the large truck and trailer which generally hauled palletized loads of cargo and ammunition we could probably haul most anything we would need.
Meanwhile, Rob and I had developed a tempo and the splitting was progressing nicely.
We hadn’t bothered to stack the firewood and when John finished his project, he used the cart to do that.
I hadn’t realized how much firewood those logs contained, all I knew was they were big logs.
It was mixed oak and hickory and piled separately because I wanted hickory to burn in the log home fireplace.
Some of the sections were so heavy we used the Toolcat and a chain to lift them into place in the splitter, slowing us slightly.
The three of us and the teens will probably take turns restocking them” “Let the teens do it, it’s healthy exercise.
When I bought it, I looked at a larger unit that combined a motor, hydraulic pump and splitter.
We’d load a log using the winch, tilt the bed back flat and chain them down.
Not just anyone, you understand, but people willing to work to keep the group fed and protected.
The problem with the .50 was he had to use a powder scale and weigh each charge.
The Castlebrook barn and the storage building each have about 45kw giving us 150kw total.
Our battery bank isn’t as large as it should be and we really could use more charge controllers and inverters.
We could look for fireplaces like the ones we brought back from Springfield too.
After dinner, I took a long hot shower and Jan liberally applied some Icy Hot to my aching back.
I felt a little better the next day, but the stiffness reminded me to discuss involving the teens with John and Rob.
That brings me to the other thing that Jan and I discussed, more people.
The septic system handles 8 and the well would handle 8 without a problem.
We’re going to run into some good folks, some bad folks and some really ugly people in the coming days.
I don’t approve of looting any more than you do Rob, that’s what I’ve been trying to explain.
Looting by my definition is taking something you may or may not need from someone who has it without due compensation.
Scavenging is looking through the trash for discarded items and salvaging is more like saving something from destruction.
Scrounging is looking for a handout and I’d place it before looting, but not do either.
When cops go through your trash on the curb, that’s considered public property and it can be used against you, at least in some jurisdictions.
Abandoned property will waste away unless you salvage and put it to good use, like a ship wreck.
Ok, we salvage the plumbing supplies first and get everything installed for four more trailers.
Plus, we move any of John’s plumbing that needs it for his new trailer.
Then, we locate 5 new 16x80 3 bedroom trailers, haul them here and get them hooked up.
We can use the military truck and trailer to haul new furniture for the trailers and any new furniture anyone here may want.
We’d better plan on getting 84 deep freezers while we’re at it and raid the meat cutting department of a grocery store so we can butcher, cut and wrap our meat.
We’ll need butcher paper and tape plus extra band saw blades, a grinder, a tenderizer and a sheer.
I want to locate a liquor distributor and pick up a few bottles of the good stuff before someone else gets it.
I’ll use the Toolcat to get a bucket load and you can fill the sandbags.
The teens and we had to take turns with the Toolcat, but we were finished with the sandbags first and climbed the dome to decide where to place the fighting positions.
When we were satisfied with the locations we started hauling the dirt bags up two at a time.
After about 6 trips, we took a break for some iced tea and started the next trips.
We went back and forth, hauling and resting until the emplacements were completed and took one final rest before hauling up the 3 machine guns.
We took up five cases for the Mk-19 and 20 cases each of the combat mix and practice mix for the .50s.
The practice mix consists of 4 rounds of ball plus one round of tracer.
I’ll grab a Yellow Pages and check for fireplaces and Mobile home dealers.
Tomorrow, we’ll teach our wives how to operate the M2s and the Mk-19 and then set out for our destinations.
Hot spots were off scale and avoided but we got a Yellow Pages and located the plumbing supplies which was all we intended to get this trip.
While we were at it, we got a few spools of electrical cable from an electrical supplier.
We did check some mobile home dealers and found several 16x80 trailers.
After we got home, we used yellow string and stakes to define the locations for the new trailers.
We also marked where everything should come up to mate with trailer connections and started trenching.
They ended up bringing back all they could find although there were no lOTVs to be had.
They added a wide assortment of pouches and what not for the PALS webbing on the vests.
The teens had managed to work up to a pace matching ours so far as sawing, splitting and stacking the firewood went.
They went one step further than we had gone, laying out a sheet of plywood by the back door of each dwelling and stacking the split wood there.
Electricity was available above ground in a small utility building, where all of the synchronized electricity was available on massive panels.
We had lots of the PVC pipe and ran the electrical cable in separate ‘conduit’ in case of a water leak.
The water was plumbed in using flexible copper pipe and the following day, we refilled the trenches.
I did that the first thing next morning and decided to turn on the radio to see how much amateur traffic there was.
It was very busy considering and I listened for a while before moving on to 40 then 20 Meters.
I was trying to get a feel of what was out there, not announce our presence to the county.
I noted frequencies I wanted to listen to again, and went back to the house to see what was for Sunday dinner.
Potatoes were peeled and soaking for mashed potatoes and she planned on frozen corn on the cob.
The drippings from the hen would be the oil part of the roux to make chicken gravy.
Without having the gun available, it was confusing since the weapon had 8 parts groups.
Tomorrow we’ll go back to Hillsboro and pick up the trailer hauler and start moving the homes.
We can go later for the freezers, meat cutting equipment and additional supplies.
Which reminds me; you need to make up a list of supplies we can salvage from St.
It took all week to move the five trailers, fully equipped with everything except the fireplaces.
We disconnected John and Sally’s old trailer and pulled it out of the way.
We backed the new trailer into position and found we could get by with extending the lines, adding heat tape and insulation.
It was late evening before Sally and the kids finished moving their personal possessions.
Louis and picked up 4 21ft 3 upright freezers, 4 propane dryers and 4 washing machines.
We were worn to a frazzle and I half doubted one day of rest would be enough.
We still had to move the appliances into place and hook them up, probably another full day.
The teens could now lay out more plywood and stack firewood for each of the new homes and John had to move his fireplace from his old home to his new home.
On Monday, we finished up the trailers and helped John with his fireplace.
Only one retailer sold the same model but he had several in stock and rather than return, we took all he had including the flues.
There were Costco stores, Sam’s Club stores, Wai-Mart’s and any number of regular grocery stores.
In order to facilitate storage of the foodstuffs, we emptied all of the implements, Unimog and Toolcat from the storage building and covered them with tarps.
One look told me 88 that we’d need another storage building, maybe something in a prefab steel building we could assemble.
Thus, instead of salvaging food and supplies, we looked in the Yellow Pages for someone who sold steel buildings.
Of the three, only one had a complete building in stock and it was a large building, 60x120, 1. stories high at the roof and a suitable roof pitch for the area.
John said we’d need over 90 yards of concrete for the floor and footings and before we could put in those, we needed to grade a spot level and dig the footings.
It wasn’t like we didn’t have the equipment although it was time consuming.
He lined up 8 12-yard ready mix trucks while we were preparing the spot.
Then we’ll have time to haul that building down here and stack it until the concrete is cured in about 30 days.
We ended up attaching a rope to the center of the long screed and had the kids help pulling it along.
John had washed out the mixers and dumped them into a ditch down the road a ways and we returned them the following day.
The building dealer had a flatbed, and a tractor we got started after treating the fuel and replacing the batteries.
It took us several days to haul the bundled and numbered sections down to the farm.
The final plan would be to store anything related to food or supplies in the new building, excluding the canning operation.
The storage building would be returned to its intended purpose of storing the machinery.
An electrical panel would be mounted on the outside of the building to power the lighting.
During the time we worked to salvage, we accumulated a significant amount of food, bath tissue, paper towels and feminine supplies.
Ever resourceful, John offered one solution while we were working on the second Costco.
When we finish up, we can assemble the shelving inside put in two propane heaters and borrow Costco’s fork lift.
We’ll have to limit the width of the aisles but allow just enough room to get the folk lift in and turned to unload the pallets.
It was pre-wired by the builder leaving one connection of the sections and wiring to make a complete building.
One Sunday afternoon while Rob and I were resting, John went back to St.
The cherry picker and the crane repaid their cost because without them, we would have never been able to do the roof.
In due time, the building was completed and we went back to Costco and began to disassemble and haul the shelving.
Completing one section at a time and bringing one of two forklifts with us, we got the spacing between the shelving as close to minimum as possible.
As we continued with our endeavor, the teens finished splitting firewood and distributing it to each home.
They then turned to moving the goods we brought back together with what was stored in the storage building under the direction of Jan, Sally and Maria.
Our efforts went back and forth between salvaging and adding shelving until there was no more room for shelving.
We stopped and set up an area in the storage building where we could process the meat we butchered.
Rob went back to Jefferson City to see Dave and pick up more components if he had them.
Kansas City had been hit by 3 warheads, one to the west side, a second at the Kansas side of the bridge and the third in Independence near the plant.
Dave had already been there and there and said there was little left to salvage.
Rob had also visited with some possible candidates for residence and could tell us what he knew of them.
If it warranted a trip, they could come to the farm or we could go to see them.
One was a Missouri Highway Patrolman and the other two he knew from the Corps.
One of the Marines worked in the meat department of a grocery store before the war.
He had also worked in a Kansas City slaughterhouse, a separate skill from meat cutting.
The Cop had gained some notoriety over his skill as the sharpshooter on a SWAT team.
That still left one vacancy assuming we invited all three of the men and their families.
We’d do that as soon as we finished up the salvaging and organizing of the goods.
Warren Hershey was in his late 30s, married to Stella with two children in high school, Tammy and Shelia.
He left us with a feeling of belonging and after a quick discussion, we extended an invitation.
He looked at the 4 trailers, picked one and said they’d be back within the week with their possessions.
I explained a thing or two about the defense of the farm and some of the tools available.
Warren said he didn’t have single action firearms, but they’d have them when they came back.
Stella and the kids had 9mm pistols, 5.56 rifles and 20-gauge shotguns.
He had a National Match MIA, a Kimber .45 and police model Remington 870.
His wife Veronica and their three kids ranging in age for 12 to 19 were nearly an instant hit.
In the aftermath of the war, he’d immediately began salvaging to acquire what he thought it would take to make it long term.
He said while it wasn’t his first thought, up arming was close to his top priority, thinking of the safety of his family.
His wife Elaine and their two children, Samantha and Thomas were a bit standoffish.
He explained that she had erected a shell to deal with the aftermath of the war and was emerging, be it slowly.
He felt that if she could be surrounded with women her own age it would draw her out more.
If we could locate her sister and husband and move them here, it would be all it would take; her sister and she were close.
The sister and brother-in-law lived in Springfield and he’d never been able to put together enough fuel to make the trip.
We offered him the fuel, gasoline or diesel, so he could track them down.
When he found them, he should get them to come to the farm so we could meet them.
We don’t have the time or resources to spend on one person and help them get their head unstuck.
I think I speak for all of us when I say that we’re keeping an open mind and waiting to see if her sister can bring her around.
Within two weeks the Hershey and Lake families were in residence and with the weather getting colder, we began to give some thought to butchering.
It was another week before Buddy showed up with his family, Elaine’s sister and brother-in-law.
Elaine was bubbly and the kids were more open now that they were with their cousins.
Elaine’s sister Sharon was an instant hit, much more than Elaine had been.
Air, food, shelter and water may be the most important things, but you may need firearms to keep them.
He didn’t really look like a lawyer, dressed in blue jeans a plaid shirt and wearing a light jacket.
Said he didn’t know much about farming but had proved his learning ability by becoming a lawyer and could be taught to do most anything.
John and Sally, Jan and I got together and decided, without a word to Rob, we’d confront her and see if she was back to her ‘normal’ self or not.
We told Buddy that the four of us wanted to speak with her alone; it would be the deciding factor.
After some hesitation he agreed and we four sat down at the dining room table to have a Q&A with Elaine.
We started off sort of gentle like and moved on to more intense questioning.
We all were nodding our heads indicating a positive outcome when Rob made an appearance.
We’d already decided that the sister and brother-in-law would fit in and so would Buddy.
Buddy agreed that we could visit with her and she never batted an eye at any of our questions.
We’re agreed to invited Buddy and Elaine, James and Sharon and their families.
We knew how you felt and decided that you couldn’t con92 sider the question without a jaundiced eye because of your relationship to Buddy.
Jerry quickly erected a smoke house to smoke the bacon and hams and selected hickory logs.
Around the first of November, we started butchering, hogs first followed by beef.
We butchered 8 hogs, one per family and passed out the wrapped meat as it was cut and wrapped.
The bacon and hams had been brined and were smoking away in the smoke house.
How it was actually distributed would depend on how much empty freezer space each family had.
Ham and bacon would probably be in short supply unless we butchered extra hogs and smoked the hams, bacon, picnics and loins and made the rest into sausage.
After the beef was slaughtered and hanging to age, two more hogs were slaughtered for bacon, ham, smoked picnic, Canadian bacon and sausage.
The beef still needed some aging and we next butchered fryers and baking hens, finally turning to the sides of beef.
While Jerry handled the main cutting, he had us boning out the small pieces of beef being collected in a large pan for ground beef.
He was adding the beef shanks, neck roasts, assorted trimmings and even the flank steaks.
If we wanted anything leaner than ground chuck, we needed boneless beef, aka a dairy cow, or we could forego the Swiss steak cuts and add only the meat.
We left the decisions up to Jerry and he was going out of his way to see that we were getting carefully trimmed cuts.
The first hams and bacon were removed from the smokehouse and the brined meat from the other pair of hogs added.
The sausage had been ground and packaged and he was getting close to finishing the beef.
In the process, we’d located some beef out in a pasture that only needed finishing before being processed.
The guy with the stallion serviced our mares and offered us four more because he couldn’t arrange enough feed.
I didn’t give that a thought; we now had 8 families and could use all of the riding horses we could get.
When I told him that, he offered to let me buy him out, if I could come up with some PMs.
We negotiated for a bit, settled on a price including all tack, saddles, etc., hay and grain.
A small herd of cattle, a larger herd of horses and a boar and 4 sows would be cramped on the remaining 30 acres.
The land to the east was an 80 acre field and we installed a gate and made repairs where needed to the fence.
We got the gate by removing it from the road side of the fence and moving it.
New fencing was installed to replace the gate and we dug out the driveway into the field in an attempt to eliminate temptation.
We had snow by mid-November and actually held Thanksgiving dinner in the log storage building.
The foods for the most part were prepared at home and brought to the building with the wood stove keeping the hot dishes hot and the beverage cooler we’d liberated from a Casey’s keeping the cold food cold.
We had 4 8’ folding tables set up end to end and almost needed radios to communicate from the head of the table to the foot of the table.
Buddy volunteered to say grace and he stood and gave a heart wrenching prayer of Thanksgiving, hope for a brighter future and God’s help in our future struggles to recover from the worst mankind had thrown our way.
We had drawn straws and one person had been fed early and was standing duty at the Mk-19 emplacement.
Jan, have one of the kids put the recording from Rio Bravo on the outside speaker system on continuous play.
I was hoping that even if they couldn’t identify the song at first, when it repeated over and over, they would become disconcerted.
Their force could number anywhere from 20 with 4 per pickup, to 30 with 6 per pickup.
One of the riflemen providing ground support fired a single shot, dropping the person.
It used a Stanley garage door opener with about 10,000 possible settings and had wire mesh/perforated plate to prevent anyone from simply slipping through.
The Mk-19 gunner turned his attention to the pickups and started firing short bursts into the pickups.
Because they had reasonable concealment it took some time to engage the men.
They fell one by one until the last few tried to disengage and began running.
My order of El Deguello served as much to try and frighten the attackers as to remind the defenders of the order.
The attackers didn’t get off more than a dozen poorly aimed shots, while our machine gunners were still on their first belt and all the attackers were down.
It took a few minutes to regain out appetites, but we finished off both hams.
The last of the turkeys were a fading memory leaving us a choice of a standing rib roast or hams.
Except for our choice of meat, it was just like any previous Thanksgiving with ham gravy instead of turkey gravy, stove top stuffing, smashed potatoes, sweet potatoes, various salads and pumpkin pie for desert.
We lingered, not looking forward to what lay ahead, gathering the bodies and disposing of them, pushing the pickups into the ditch, etc.
Our first task was to search the bodies, collecting firearms, ammunition, magazines and then going through their pockets and loading them in the back of Rob’s pickup.
After that, he went into the field across the road and began digging a mass grave.
When he finished, the bodies were tossed into the grave and the hole refilled.
We took the weapons, etc. to the storage building and laid them out on the cleared tables.
The most popular handgun was the Ml 911; a majority of the rifles were 7.62 autoloaders with a few autoloaders in 5.56.
There were an assortment of hunting knives, first aid kits and even 4 M-40 gas masks.
We cleaned the firearms, some only required a bore snake and a touch of CLP, and 95 moved them to the armory.
It was the first time many of the new residents had seen the armory and they were impressed.
He wrote Harry Truman and said, / do not know with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones.
It seems obvious his assumption was WW III would be fought with nuclear weapons, as it was; but only because they’re generally more effective than other weapons of mass destruction.
With Christmas coming and growing teens and younger children, it would mostly be a clothes Christmas.
It would also be the time to advance some of the children from his/her shooting piece to something more adult.
An example might be giving out a 12-gauge to replace a 20-gauge or a larger caliber rifle to replace a rimfire rifle.
It came in all sizes these days and they made things like rain slickers and drovers coats all the way down to children’s’ sizes.
Then there was that important first real hat, a straw hat for summer and a felt hat for winter.
We went two couples at a time with one maintaining security while the other couple shopped.
A family gift is something of practical value for everyday use and should not be confused with a personal gift.
The 21ft 3 were a little short on space so they added a second 21ft 3 to have more room for home frozen foods.
The second freezers left the mobile homes a little crowded and ended up in the storage building with a label denoting which family it belonged to.
I finally had a chance to locate a liquor distributor and carefully selected various cases to store in our basement.
It was all of top quality and ranged from tequila to vodka to gin to whiskey to bourbon to scotch and included many bottles of the after dinner drinks, B&B, Drambuie, etc.
The after dinner drinks were a lifetime supply and I adjusted the other liquors and mixes accordingly.
We all had our own eccentricities and mine was drinking only high quality liquors.
Jan and I seldom drank and before we both quit teach96 ing, we didn’t keep liquor in the house.
There wasn’t that much snow this winter and we drove back to Big Piney and dropped more standing dead trees.
We had brought the Unimog with the crane to set the logs on a flatbed semi-trailer and actually had two trailers running for a while.
After a month of cutting, we called it quits and stayed home sawing, splitting and stacking.
We helped them because with more than 6 of us doing the sawing and splitting, we were tripping over each other’s feet.
We did 40 acres of hay and 10 acres each of crops for our consumption, 2 kinds of wheat, oats, and five acres each of potatoes and sweet corn.
The outside garden was doubled in size and we planted using heirloom seeds for the first time.
We stayed on the farm throughout the summer, only returning after the harvest.
There was a MNG roadblock on 1-55 right around the junction with 1-270.
While I engaged him in conversation, I slipped the Ruger Mark II from my shoulder holster and was holding it just under my jacket.
But the others piled out of their vehicles, weapons in hand and he came to realize that he had a problem.
We were all wearing Interceptor armor and armed far better than his squad.
I gave an innocent waive of my hand and our people spread out into hasty fighting positions.
Pretty soon, two more Hummers appeared and a Staff Sergeant dismounted along with everyone in the vehicles except the gunners.
We made a trip to Springfield and bought and paid for a generator and were attacked on the way home.
The Supreme Court in Heller made two things clear, the right to keep and bear arms is an individual right and a person has a right to self-protection.
I’ll check with the Platoon Commander and if he says so, you can keep your arms.
We already had a plan in mind to overcome the military because they made exceptions.
We were finger printed, photographed and information noted from a driver’s license.
Finally, we were issued with a card that had our photo on back, a signature line and a registration number and identifying data on the front.
After all that, we headed to the stores for more Christmas shopping, but the stores were locked up and guarded.
One of the guards explained that until they had an inventory and determined a value for the goods, there would be no shopping.
Rob dug around and found the Sheriff’s spare badge and enough Deputies badges for all of the adults.
Louis wasn’t available in Hillsboro, replacements for our expired meds.
The CDC stores the medicines in about a dozen locations under the protection of armed guards.
When they’re transferred, the shipments are guarded by United States Marshals.
We must have given them too accurate directions and/or they noted that Rob was a Jefferson County Deputy.
Either way, The Staff Sergeant showed up with his squad not long after.
We responded as one, assuming our defensive positions before we replied.
We had most of our things before the war but have done a little salvaging.
As far as we’ve been able to determine, we’re all the survivors left in Jefferson County.
Later, we made a trip to Springfield to buy or salvage a 3 phase generator and a few other things.
Have your soldiers come in and get a roll and a mug of coffee Sergeant,” Jan suggested.
The Sergeant, whose name tag said Collins, talked briefly to the squad and they lined up, coming in one at a time for a roll and coffee.
Lucy was rolling out enough dough for a second pan of rolls, but they would take a while.
This time, instead of baking the bread first, they baked the rolls first and some of the bread was relegated to more rolls.
The President was airborne when the attack came and managed to get to Peterson.
Communications were totally messed up and when he tried to activate the Guards, the Governors all refused.
We had to get medicines from the SNS, had to parcel out the remaining arms and munitions, and so forth.
I don’t know about the first two, but I do know that epinephrine is only good for a year.
We’re sneaky bastards and know the difference between concealment and cover.
We were, for all intents and purposes, temporary Deputy Sheriff’s and Rob had been elected to be the Sheriff by us.
Louis the population of Hillsboro bolted to get away from the threat of radiation; which meant they’d be back, eventually.
While all nuclear detonations produce EMP, it’s a local condition unless the device is detonated above 10km, about 33,000 feet.
However, that eliminates most of the ground damage and air bursts tend to be below 5,000 feet.
With nuclear weapons, the air burst usually several hundred to a few thousand feet in the air allows the shockwave of the explosion to destroy the largest possible number of buildings, military units or vehicles, etc.
This also minimizes the generation of irradiated soil and other debris by keeping the fireball from touching the ground, limiting the amount of additional debris that is vaporized and drawn up in the radioactive debris cloud.
The County, as a whole, had a much larger population as part of the St.
The loss of life was high, but no more so that other large cities targeted during the war.
When we could, we set about salvaging with a vengeance, securing our long term needs.
After the initial salvaging, we only went when we needed to, like shopping for Christmas presents.
We could pay, provided there was someone there who had legitimate claim to the property we often ended up just taking.
With the MNG here, we expected things would change, both in the near and long term.
An Army medic came down and checked through our medical supplies and asked how we had acquired some of them.
He replaced our epinephrine and said when the saline and D5W expired, they would also be replaced, if they had replacements available.
While the Guard monitored certain amateur frequencies which they made known, their response time left something to be desired.
They didn’t have a go team and when an emergency radio call came in, they had to find a couple of Hummers, or more, round up the troops, check ammo and what not and only then strike out to help.
Like Stinger said in the movie, sometimes an engagement was over almost before it started.
We were always armed with a pistol and had a long arm within arm’s reach.
Any idiot stupid enough to attack us only had the amount of time it took for us to get to the heavy weapons before their goose was cooked.
The Spanish phrase actually referred to throat slitting, but the result was the same in the end and a bullet quicker.
We might not always have time to play the bugle call although by now we didn’t need to for our part.
It was a larger force, 34 by the body count, and the MNG actually arrived while we were administering the Coup de Grace to the last survivor.
How Far Would You Go Epilogue “Listen, Lieutenant, it was good enough for Santa Anna and it’s worked fine for us.
Now if you eliminate these roving bands of criminals we won’t have to kill anyone else.
We argued some and eventually Sergeant Collins, newly promoted to Sergeant First Class, explained the ‘facts of life’ to the butter bar.
Young, inexperienced Lieutenants have a tendency to follow the book a bit too closely.
By the time they’ve advanced to Company Commander, Captain, they have a more realistic outlook and consider other relevant facts.
Then we suggested that a group of soldiers make a trip to New Orleans and bring back a truckload.
Coffee wasn’t considered a critical supply and it took some time to arrange for a group of Louisiana NG to load a truck and transfer it north.
We grew enough of some crops to have trade goods and could trade for things we didn’t have, rice, coffee and salt come to mind.
One of the first was electricity, which we had no need for, although most of the country did.
Gary Locke came out of the mountain and efforts began to arrange for elections since his term was long past.
It would be paper ballots for the first election, a feat unto itself, and no ballot was to be considered spoiled unless both candidates for an office were checked.
The third party was much like the old Libertarian party in its goals and favored strictly construing the Constitution.
The only question that remained was how far they wanted to roll back the Amendments.
In the end, they didn’t roll any back and the Constitution stood as Amended.
The reformed Supreme Court having had ample time to discuss the case before it and having reviewed Miller and other cases determined that the NFA went too far and was, in fact, unconstitutional.
While a state or locality could issue reasonable laws, they couldn’t violate the inalienable rights recognized by the Constitution.
For example, if the state allowed one person to have a CCW, all citizens of the state could have a CCW under Equal Protection.
They made several other examples and one might have thought they had California specifically in mind.
A state couldn’t ban assault weapons because the Militia used assault weapons.
The state couldn’t distinguish a particular firearm if law enforcement could have the firearm, ergo, .50 caliber rifles.
In so ruling, any number of state laws immediately came under the scrutiny of the BATFE who was being forced to work counter purpose of how they had worked for so many years.
The states weren’t prohibited from enacting laws that further penalized persons who used a firearm in the commission of a crime.
A new case was now before the court, third strike laws, specifically as applied in California.
The court had previously reviewed and ruled on the California law, but the makeup of the court was different now and inmates had died in the California prison system for want of care in the days following the war.
Report on the Soviet Arms Buildup in Cuba October 22, 1962 Good evening my fellow citizens: This Government, as promised, has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet Military buildup on the island of Cuba.
The foreign ministers of the OAS, in their communique of October 6, rejected secrecy in such matters in this hemisphere.
I have directed the Armed Forces to prepare for any eventualities; and I trust that in the interest of both the Cuban people and the Soviet technicians at the sites, the hazards to all concerned in continuing this threat will be recognized.
That is why this latest Soviet threat or any other threat which is made independently or in response to our actions this week must and will be met with determination.
My research failed to disclose who wrote the speech, but it set the right tone.
No one will ever know whether or not he would have reversed his position.
