As yet there is only one country which has succeeded in creating this politician’s paradise.” Bertrand Russell, The Impact of Science on Society, 1960.
We have been the victim of constant hostility on the part of the United States.
Kennedy had established a dialogue with Khrushchev on important issues, ""i.e. his policy of a nuclear pact, his policy on Cuba – which they believed was not aggressive enough – a policy that they considered weak,"" and his legislation giving civil rights to African Americans, particularly in the south of the United States.Fidel’s discussion of the theory of the lone gunman was no less insightful.
Even today campaigns around the event are used by elements interested in redirecting suspicions away from those really responsible for the crime and in destroying the Cuban Revolution.The seriousness of the situation has been revealed little by little since then.
He proposed as the only way to avoid certain defeat, in his judgment, a direct military intervention by the United States Armed Forces.The president reminded them that he had stressed to them from the beginning and publicly stated that that would not happen.
Three hours later, the meeting ended without him reversing his decision.But this was only the beginning.
He preferred not to publicly expose the plot in exchange for the general’s resignation.The third round came with the October 1962 Missile Crisis, during which the President found himself virtually alone facing the joint chiefs of staff.
Historians have attributed to Joe Kennedy, United States ambassador in London, the shameful position of having counseled Chamberlain to make concessions in order to pacify Hitler, which provoked President Roosevelt to replace him, even though he had placed Kennedy in London with the idea that his ambassador, being Irish, would not takes sides with the British.No less aggressive was Admiral Anderson.
Admiral Anderson snubbed him by saying that the Navy had known how to manage a naval blockade since the days of the war of independence.Among other challenges, on the civil rights front the situation was no less explosive.
Dozens of police agents were trying to prevent the crime that the crowd was ready to commit.Recognizing that the protection being provided was far too weak to face such a large, angry mob, Kennedy mobilized federal troops.
In reality, troops were being detained by the right-wing General Walter who was inciting the rioters.President Kennedy, outraged as rarely before, had to speak by telephone directly to General Adams in order to have the forces finally arrive, past 2:00 in the morning.
They feared that the Kennedy brothers would attempt to seriously challenge the military-industrial complex and other powerful forces such as the oil companies, starting by ending the war in Vietnam.When the news of the assassination arrived, Fidel was talking with French journalist Jean Daniel who had been charged by JFK with determining the Cuban leader’s reaction to secret meetings that were taking place in Washington to discuss the possibility of normalizing relations with Cuba – another move on the part of the president that had alienated the United States right wing.
According to Daniel, Fidel expressed his total condemnation of the assassination of someone who was becoming, on account of his challenges, the greatest United States president since Lincoln.The Cuban leader’s analysis, based fundamentally on the motives for and methods used in the attack, has been confirmed over the years, most recently by Talbot’s investigation, which revealed that Kennedy sent a message to Soviet leaders letting them know that he and his brother Robert had been victims of an internal conspiracy.
Rupert Murdoch's Tie to a Dubious Assassination Plot South Africa's Covert Networks of Influence Conrad Black vs.
Tohme Tohme, Frank DiLeo, Colony Capital & Anschutz Michael Jackson was Terrified of Dr.
