By Servando Gonzalez December 6, 2016 At the end of Fidel Castro’s long life one has to pass a balance and ask what were his biggest successes and what were his biggest failures.
I think that the Cuban tyrant had several major accomplishments in his life, and just a single, big failure.
One of his main accomplishments was to fool both friends and enemies into thinking that he was a Communist.
Evidence, however, shows that Castro’s ideology — or lack of it — was much more closer to fascism than to communism.
Castro was the son of a rich landlord who sent him to be educated by the Jesuits at the Belén High School in Havana.
At the school he fell under the influence of some reactionary priests, and became an avid reader of works by Mussolini, Hitler and Spanish Fascist Primo de Rivera.
Paradoxically, the ones who over and over have claimed that he was a Communist have been Castro himself and his enemies in Miami.
They were very similar to Hitler’s final words in his own defense at the trial for the frustrated 1923 beer-hall putsch “Condemn me, never mind.
Castro’s words didn’t pass unnoticed to the Cuban Communists, who many times called him a “putchist” — communist lingo for Fascist.
Another of Castro’s accomplishments was his excellent work as a secret agent first for the CIA and later for the CIA’s masters, the CFR globalist conspirators.
Castro’s job was to plant false clues implicating the Colombian communists and the Soviet Union for the riots.
The CFR conspirators blamed the Communists for Bogotazo, and used the fear of communism and the Soviet Union to justify the beginning of a long psychological warfare operation against the American people called the Cold War.
Some years later, in 1956, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had launched his new policy of Peaceful Coexistence.
According to Khrushchev, the competition between the Soviet Union and the United States should continue, but in the commercial, cultural and technological field, not as a military confrontation.
The CFR conspirators saw this as a threat to dismantle the enemy they had artificially created.
So, they called their good agent Castro to help them solve their problem.
As soon as the CFR conspirators allowed Castro to take power in Cuba in 1959, he managed to infiltrate the Soviets.
Nevertheless, to their utter surprise, as soon as they accepted him as part of the Communist Bloc, he began attacking Khrushchev’s doctrine of Peaceful Coexistence.
To this end, he created and bankrolled antiUnited States guerrilla movements in Latin America and terrorist groups all around the world and destroyed the pro-Soviet Communist parties in Latin America.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that Castro was an agent of the most reactionary right, the world leftists saw him as a man of the Left.
Nevertheless, he was extremely successful in fooling the lefties and “progressives” of the world to think that he was a man of the Left who cared for the rights of the poor farmers and workers.
Castro’s second main accomplishment in his life was using Cuba as a successful testing ground for the New World Order.
The New World Order conspirators ensconced at the CFR believe that the world is overpopulated and that we the people consume too much of the world’s resources that, by natural law, belong to them.
Contrary to common belief, before Castro took power in 1959, Cuba was not an underdeveloped country.
The standard of living and mind-set of average Cubans was so close to their American neighbors that, since the early Fifties, many American marketing companies were using the Island as a proving ground to test their products before launching them in the United States Seemingly, the use of Cuba as a testing ground for American products, services and ideas, did not end when Castro took power in 1959.
Actually, Castro’s Cuba became a large-scale experiment in social engineering, a test run of the New World Order before its worldwide implementation by the globalist conspirators.
Less that ten years after he took power, Cuba became one of poorest countries in Latin America.
At the time of his death, in most economic and social indexes Cuba today ranks barely above Haiti.
Because of its intrinsic faults, communism was a social and economic failure.
Castro’s third major accomplishments is having managed to keep having the support and admiration of the American “progressive” Left despite being the main killer of leftist leaders.
There is strong evidence indicating that Castro, acting on behalf of his CFR masters, played a key role in the assassinations of United States President John F Kennedy Chile’s President Salvador Allende and Venezuela’s Hugo Chavez.
Also, he betrayed Che Guevara and allowed for Che’s capture and killing in Bolivia.
Another of Castro’s greatest accomplishments is that, despite his hatred for homosexuals, American gays still love him.
Since Castro took power in Cuba, his regime was particularly repressive toward homosexuals, and imposed a maximum 20 years sentence for public expression of homosexuality.
In 1963 Castro approved Operation P, so called because of a big, black “P” (for prostitutas, pederastas, proxenetas—prostitutes, pederasts, pimps) painted on the uniform of the inmates.
Operation P was a massive dragnet that began with a nation-wide census of effeminate homosexuals.
UMAP inmates were under a regime of hard labor and subject to constant verbal and physical abuse, including open attacks and homosexual harassment from their butch, macho jailers.
I think that Castro’s major failure was his unsuccessful attempt when to destroy the United States and the world in 1962.
Contrary to his wishes, Castro never became the greatest killer in the modern history of mankind.
Neither Hitler nor Stalin ever came as close as Castro to setting off a worldwide nuclear holocaust that would have made the horrors of WWII look pale in comparison.
Their mission was to blow up a big portion of Manhattan, including the Statue of Liberty, Macy’s department store, several subway stations, the 42nd street bus terminal and Grand Central Station, as well as several refineries along the New Jersey shore, including the Humble Oil and Refining Company in Linden.
Had it occurred during the tense days of the crisis it may have been taken for a Russian preemptive attack on the United States and may have triggered a spasm-like retaliatory strike on the Soviet Union, with unpredictable consequences.
This attack, if carried out, would have unleashed a devastating nuclear exchange that would have killed most of the people in the northern hemisphere.
Fortunately, the Soviet leader didn’t pay attention to Castro’s wishes and the world was saved from nuclear Armageddon.
Obviously, Castro’s letter scared Khrushchev, because that same day he began sending conciliatory messages to Kennedy in a desperate effort to put an end to the crisis.
Nevertheless, Castro’s obsession with destroying the United States and the world did not end when he wrote this letter to Khrushchev.
Several explanations, some of them conflicting with each other, have been given to explain that bizarre event, but most people agree that the missile was fired in violation of orders from Khrushchev and the Soviet high command.
Nevertheless, at about 10:00m. of that same Saturday morning, an American U-2 was shot down by a SAM fired from a battery at Los Angeles, near Banes, Oriente province.
Adrián Montoro, former director of Radio Havana Cuba, and Juan Antonio Rodríguez Menier, a senior Cuban intelligence officer who defected in 1987 and was living in the U.S., seem to confirm Ellsberg’s report.
It is evident that, whatever really happened, Castro was trying to precipitate a nuclear confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States.
Strangelove Castro dreaming about pulverizing the United States, and he took strong steps to fulfill his cherished dream.
And don’t be misled by the relatively small size of the island of Cuba when compared with the United States.
Nevertheless, it seems that Castro never forgot his dream of destroying America and the world.
Gen. del Pino said that, in 1968, when a group of Cubans were authorized to recover a MiG-17 taken to the U S. by a defector, Cuban agents secretly made detailed photographs of Homestead Air Force Base in Florida.
So, I think that not being able to become the destroyer of the world was Castro’s main failure in his life.
Well, he may not have a full page dedicated to him, but it is likely that he will get at least one sentence.
My hope is that very soon Henry Kissinger, George Soros and their master David Rockefeller may join Fidel Castro in Hell.
Proof of it is that Celia Sánchez, Castro’s secretary since the guerrilla days and one of the few person he trusted, was a known anticommunist.
For a comparison of Castro’s and Hitler’s words in their own legal defense see “History Will Absolve Me,” in F Castro and R Debray, On Trial , 40, and Konrad Heiden, Der Führer , 206.
Both Castro and the CIA collaborated in destabilizing the Allende government —the CIA by painting him as a radical leftist and Castro by openly criticizing him for not being radical enough.
The most dangerous enemy of the United States is not foreign but domestic.
See Ernesto Betancourt, “Is Castro Planning a Preemptive Strike Against the U.S.?"" , 4.
American liberals and “progressives” claim they are scared because Trump may push the United States to nuclear war, but still love from he bottom of their hearts the monster who has brought the world closer to nuclear Armageddon.
They are nothing but a bunch of hypocrites. ----------------------------Servando Gonzalez, is a Cuban-born American writer, historian, semiologist and intelligence analyst.
Servando's book La CIA, Fidel Castro, el Bogotazo y el Nuevo Orden Mundial, appeared last year, and is available at Amazon.com and other bookstores online.
