Answers Superpower Relations and the Cold War 1941–91 Answers to the EDEXCEL exam-style questions are indicative only and highlight the key things that should be included in your response.
It’s how your answer is written and how it fits with the mark scheme that will determine the quality of your answer.
Tehran: All smiles at Tehran but Stalin demands a second front Yalta: The Big Three look forward to a better post-war world.
Positive: it was offered to the whole of Europe; the aid was desperately needed; it made a positive difference to the countries that received it.
Stalin created Cominform partly to spread propaganda against Marshall Aid.
Both organisations were disliked in the West because they increased the Soviet Union’s control over Eastern Europe.
However it would show that the USA was serious about standing up to the Soviet Union.
Stalin’s fears of a powerful Germany; creation of Bizonia; granting of Marshall Aid to Western Germany.
Truman, the USA’s new leader, hated communism; Stalin felt threatened because the USA had developed the atomic bomb; Britain and the USA were angry that Stalin was not allowing free elections to take place in Eastern Europe.
In reality it was used by the Soviet Union to gain much greater control over the economies of Eastern Europe.
Khrushchev wanted the West out of Berlin mainly because of the refugee crisis.
The loss of so many people was threatening East Germany with economic collapse.
Khrushchev was unhappy at the way West Berlin had been turned into an advert for capitalism.
He also disliked the fact that the West used it as a base from which to spy on East Germany.
It also meant families and friends living on either side of the Wall were seperated.
The Wall became a powerful symbol of the Cold War, which Kennedy highlighted when he visited the city in 1963.
There was no further attempt by the Soviet Union to force the West out of Berlin after the Wall was built.
Kennedy hoped that the Bay of Pigs incident would lead to a popular uprising against Castro and to his removal from power.
The Cuban people saw the Bay of Pigs incident as a hostile invasion and so rallied behind Castro.
This averted the immediate risk of war and provided time to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
This showed that Khrushchev was actively seeking a way to end the crisis.
The Soviet ships were approaching the blockade line on this date and nobody knew what would happen next.
Kennedy had publicly indicated that if the ships did cross the blockade line, war may result.
One possible suggestion is 24 October, when Khrushchev ordered the Soviet ships not to cross the blockade line.
This was a clear sign that Khrushchev did not want the crisis to lead to war.
Dean Rusk, one of the United States advisors, summed it up when he famously said that the other guy had just blinked.
Top Secret Jupiter Missiles are out of Turkey Kennedy promises Cuba – no United States invasion Ban on nuclear tests agreed The moon is off limits to the Cold War 2 This task requires your own personal response.
A U2 spyplane discovered Intermediate range missile sites under construction in Cuba.
After considering all options including invading Cuba, Kennedy decided to blockade the island.
Khrushchev ordered the missile ships heading to Cuba not to cross the blockade line, thereby avoiding direct confrontation.
Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed a solution, with both compromising in some form.
Consequences • Soviet Missile sites were dismantled in Cuba and United States missiles were removed from Turkey.
This message has every letter of the alphabet and all the numbers so was a good test.
Similarities: • Nagy in Hungary and Dubcek in Czechoslovakia wanted to extend basic freedoms to their people, including freedom of speech and assembly.
The pull factors from the West included higher living standards and political freedom.
Romania refused to send troops to join the invasion and Albania withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in protest.
SALT 1 could be seen as a success as it was the first serious attempt to slow the pace of the arms race.
They are all serious problems and so there is no right or wrong answer.
He knew communism had problems but he still believed it was the best political system.
Gorbachev tried to improve communism by extending freedom of speech, reforming the economy, cutting military spending and ending the rigid Soviet control over Eastern Europe.
The United States said it would use military force to protect its interests in the Persian Gulf.
The huge public demonstrations across East Germany, for example, placed the communist government under huge pressure to allow free elections.
In the new world order that followed, the USA was left as the world’s only superpower and NATO expanded into Eastern Europe.
The Soviet Union turned into a much weaker entity called the Commonwealth of Independent States.
He believed that if he allowed the people of Eastern Europe greater freedom and control, they would choose to play a constructive role in improving the communist system.
In Romania there were several weeks of fighting between the government forces and the anti-communist rebels.
This is because the hard-line communist dictator, Ceausescu, did not want to give up power.
In response to the Berlin Blockade, the USA, with the help of Britain, launched an airlift in order to keep the western half of Berlin supplied with food and fuel.
It lasted for 11 months and, by its end, US-Soviet relations had deteriorated significantly.
As a result of the collapse of communist government across Eastern Europe, the Warsaw Pact became pointless.
There was no longer a need for a military alliance between the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and so it was formally dissolved in 1991.
The development of the Cold War, 1947–49 The 1947 Truman Doctrine said the USA would stand up to the Soviet Union around the world and stop any further communist expansion.
The key events of the Prague Spring, 1968 Since the 1950s Czechoslovakia had been ruled by a hardline communist called Novotny, but he was deeply unpopular.
Creation of Soviet satellite states, 1945–48: • The USA was angry that Stalin had failed to hold free elections in Eastern Europe, despite promising to do so at the Yalta Conference.
The Soviets agreed to dismantle the nuclear missiles in Cuba and the United States agreed to move its Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey.
This was further evidence that the Cold War was coming to an end, which led to an improvement in relations.
This angered the Soviet Union and they boycotted the Los Angeles games in 1984.
In a secret CIA programme, the United States supplied the anti-Soviet rebels in Afghanistan with weapons including Stinger Missiles.
Secondly, Brezhnev started a military build-up in Cuba following the incident.
Finally, Truman was made to look foolish for allowing the Bay of Pigs invasion to happen.
As a result, he became more determined to stand up to the USSR to prove himself.
For example, when Soviet missile sites were found on Cuba in 1965 , he was determined to win the crisis, even though it pushed the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Section A 1 Explain two consequences of Gorbachev’s ‘new thinking’ on Eastern Europe.
This gave the people of Eastern Europe the freedom to remove their communist governments in a series of revolutions in 1989.
This led to the resignation of the hardline leader of East Germany, Erich Honecker.
Shortly after, the Berlin Wall was destroyed and the communist system in East Germany fell.
Military cooperation between its members ceased in 1990, and in 1991 it was formally dissolved.
Truman said that the USA would use its economic and military power to contain its spread.
This stated that the USA would supply aid to Europe in order to raise living standards and in so doing make communism less attractive.
Truman could not let West Berlin fall to the communists and so he kept it supplied through the Berlin Airlift.
This came as a surprise to the Americans and meant they had lost their nuclear monopoly.
This contrasted with the previous US President, Roosevelt, who had always tried to get on with Stalin.
Stalin wanted Germany to pay a huge sum in compensation, but this was opposed by Truman.
The West were not happy with the composition of Poland’s provisional government as it was dominated by communists.
Truman wanted free elections to take place in Eastern Europe but Stalin refused to agree.
Stalin was angry that he had not been told about this weapons programme.
The West were angry at the Soviet Union for the brutal way it crushed the uprising, with around 2500 Hungarians killed.
When Khrushchev became leader following Stalin’s death, the West initially saw him as somebody they could work with because he introduced de-Stalinisation and talked of peaceful co-existence.
Despite pleas for help from the Hungarian rebels, the USA did nothing to help.
It did not want to risk war with the Soviet Union, but the USA’s moral authority was damaged.
Its brutal response showed that it would not let any East European country leave the Warsaw Pact.
During the 13-day crisis, the United States military was placed on a very high state of readiness.
If Soviet ships had crossed the blockade line, or the United States had invaded Cuba, war may have resulted.
A hotline was set up to improve communications between the two sides and allow problems to be sorted out far more quickly.
This banned the testing of nuclear weapons in outer space, under water or in the atmosphere.
In 1968 the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was signed to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.
Cuba’s new leader, Castro, took over US-owned businesses and, in response, the United States stopped importing Cuban sugar.
As a result of United States sanctions, Castro asked Khrushchev for help and the Soviet Union started buying Cuban sugar and supplying military aid.
This meant that the Soviet Union would no longer use tanks to crush reform movements, as they had done in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968.
This made the Berlin Wall redundant and it was dismantled in November 1988.
The Warsaw Pact, which was a defensive alliance between the Soviet Union and its communist satellite states, was therefore pointless and it was disbanded in 1991.
This meant that Europe was now divided on military as well as political and economic lines.
This meant that if war broke out with the Soviet Union, NATO would use nuclear weapons.
The founding principle of ‘an attack against one is an attack against all’ possibly deterred Soviet aggression towards Western Europe.
War seemed very close, although the tanks of both sides eventually withdrew.
In 1963 he visited West Berlin and promised the United States would protect them.
This ensured that each superpower remained vulnerable to the other’s nuclear weapons, therefore deterring either side from launching an attack.
Although never ratified, the SALT 2 Treaty of 1979 limited each side to 2400 launchers.
For example, as part of the Helsinki Agreement of 1975, the Soviet Union pledged to respect human rights.
