Svetlana Savranskaya 202/994-7000 or nsarchiv@gwu.edu Anastas Mikoyan discovers Cuba, February 1960.
Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Missiles of November at Amazon.
Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War By Michael Dobbs, June 4, 2008 Mikoyan and Castro, a difficult handshake.
However, the Soviet and the Cuban leadership knew that the most dangerous weapons of the crisis—tactical Lunas and FKRs—were still in Cuba.
They were battlefield weapons, which would have been used against the United States landing forces if the EXCOMM had decided on an invasion, not the quarantine.
The Soviets intended for them to stay in Cuba secretly because they were not part of the Kennedy-Khrushchev understandings, while the Cubans wanted to keep them to defend against another United States invasion.
These revelations come from documents donated to the National Security Archive by our long-time partner, historian and personal secretary of his father, the late Sergo A Mikoyan.
The documents published here today are the first part of the publication of the donated ""Mikoyan archive"" by the National Security Archive.
The new Soviet documents show that Khrushchev decided to place the missiles in Cuba because he was under the impression that a United States invasion was just a question of time, and he was not willing to lose his new Cuban ally, which constituted a forward base of socialism in the Western hemisphere.
He was also concerned by the enormous gap between the United States and Soviet deliverable nuclear firepower.
Fidel Castro objected to a deployment that would have made him look like a Soviet puppet, but was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be in the interests of the entire socialist camp.
Khrushchev's conciliatory letter of October 28 let the world breathe the sigh of relief.
With 42,000 combat personnel, 80 nuclear armed front cruise missiles , 12 nuclear warheads for dual-use Luna launchers, and 6 nuclear bombs for IL-28s still in Cuba and not covered in the exchange of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev, the Soviet leader knew he had a problem.
Castro, who was not consulted or even informed of the deal, was angered by the Soviet betrayal and refused to allow any inspections of the Soviet withdrawal.
The Soviets had to take back the missiles, get the United States to confirm its non-invasion pledge, and—most importantly—keep Cuba as an ally.
There was only one person who could negotiate this resolution—Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan.
While they were prepared to fight a nuclear war and ""die beautifully,"" in the name of the socialist camp, the Soviets were negotiating with the imperialists behind their backs.
Mikoyan tried to explain to the Cubans why they were not apprised of the Soviet decision to withdraw the weapons.
While Mikoyan tried to get Castro to accept some form of inspection in Cuba, the Cuban leader shocked him by not only flatly refusing any inspections but saying emotionally that if the Soviets thought the Cuban position was unreasonable, then ""we would think it more correct to consider the Soviet side free of its obligations and we will resist by ourselves.
No sooner had Mikoyan succeeded in bringing the Cubans back from the brink—by showing respect and empathy and promising that not a single additional concession would be made—the Soviet leadership in Moscow decided that they had to agree to a new United States demand—to withdraw the IL-28 nuclear capable bombers.
Khrushchev sent a long and rambling cable to Mikoyan giving him arguments to use with the Cubans regarding the new concession.
He asked Mikoyan to give the Cubans assurances of lasting Soviet friendship and support, and to try to persuade them that giving up the ILs would actually be in the Cuban interest because then the Soviet Union would be able to extract from the Americans a formal non-invasion pledge.
Castro accepted the concession, but refused to see Mikoyan for two days and in the meantime ordered Cuban forces to shoot at low-flying United States reconnaissance planes, bringing on another crisis within the crisis.
In trying to get Castro to accept the withdrawal of the bombers, Mikoyan once again gave assurances that no further concessions would be made and that the rest of the weapons would stay in Cuba.
But in the course of daily conversations with the Cuban leadership, he began to appreciate the danger tactical nuclear weapons would pose if they were left on the island, especially in Cuban hands.
If the Americans learned about their presence in Cuba, the situation could quickly spiral out of control.
And in the future Cuba was not providing assurance that it would be a cooperative ally as far as foreign policy was concerned.
The final straw came on November 20 when Castro sent instructions to Cuba's representative at the United Nations, Carlos Lechuga, to use references to the tactical nuclear weapons that Cuba had as leverage in negotiations, and also as a way to establish the fact that the weapons were in Cuban possession.
In doing so, he was well aware of the sensitivity of the issue for the Cubans and of their likely reaction to the prospect of the Soviets removing this last means of resistance to United States aggression.
Mikoyan knew that he had to break this unpleasant news to his hosts, and he had to do it in a way that would ensure they remained Soviet allies.
In the most crucial moment of his mission, Anastas Mikoyan and the Cuban leadership had a four-hour conversation on November 22, in which he informed them of the latest decision to withdraw all tactical nuclear weapons.
That was the final blow to the Cuban revolutionaries, after they had, in their eyes, been made to suffer so much.
Castro opened the conversation by saying that he was in a bad mood because Kennedy had stated in his speech that all nuclear weapons had been removed from Cuba.
Castro's understanding was that the tacticals were still on the island.
Mikoyan confirmed this and assured him that ""the Soviet government has not given any promises regarding the removal of the tactical nuclear weapons.
The Soviet government itself, said Mikoyan, not as a result of United States pressure, had decided to take them back.
During their discussions, Castro was very emotional and at times rough with Mikoyan—criticizing the Soviet military for failing to camouflage the missiles, for not using their anti-aircraft launchers to shoot down United States U-2 spy planes, essentially allowing them to photograph the missile sites.
But the Soviets had not treated the Cubans as a partner, Castro complained.
They had caved in under United States pressure, and had not even consulted the Cubans about the withdrawal.
Castro claimed that the situation now was even worse than it had been before the crisis—Cuba was defenseless, and the United States non-invasion assurances did not mean much for the Cubans.
He was concerned that the Soviets were withdrawing all their forces from Cuba.
This ended Cuba's hope of becoming a Latin American nuclear superpower.
Ironically, if the Cubans had been a little more pliant, and a little less independent, if they had been more willing to be Soviet pawns, they would have kept the tactical nuclear weapons on the island.
But he also saw the danger of the situation spinning out control probably better than other leaders in this tense triangle.
