This never ending quest is in service of our ultimate goal of finding and publishing the Arthur Godfrey Doomsday Message, a tape or film that the famed broadcaster reportedly recorded in the 1950s to be played in the event of a nuclear war.
This recording, along with one by President Dwight D Eisenhower, is said to have been stored in a vault at Mount Weather for years.
In June we posted a heavily redacted memo from 1957 entitled “Functions to be Performed at High Point” that was, to put it mildly, something of a letdown.
While the documents presented in this post may have only passing relevance to the search for the Godfrey message, they are completely uncensored and highly entertaining.
Before we proceed, we would like to thank historian David Krugler for sharing these textual gems with us.
Prepared for Nuclear War, you should because it is perhaps the best history of early Cold War Continuity of Government planning available.
The declassified fifteen-page “Interim Standing Operating Procedures for Emergency Use of the Classified Location” reads like the driest of employee handbooks, but it is quite informative.
And because the document is describing a Strangelovian World War III refuge complete with its own censorship department, it transcends its original purpose to become a grand work of unintentional humor.
From these studios programs can be transmitted over a ‘closed circuit’ system which confines the broadcast to the OEP Classified Location, or programs can be transmitted nationwide through hookup with the commercial networks.
The television studio has the necessary facilities for broadcasting 16mm film and 35mm slides.
This section states that only “emergency assignees to the Classified Location with Top Secret Clearance” will be admitted.
In other words, at the time of the missile crisis, J Leo Bourassa must have been a very popular man.
The missile scare had clearly placed a renewed emphasis on the services Mount Weather should be able to provide its occupants for a prolonged stay.
After some old business regarding the leveraging of the Marine Corps Schools, Quantico and the lack of “Chaplains” assigned to Mount Weather, Phillips launches into a detailed description of the new recreational amenities at the site.
Phillips wraps up his memo with the matter-of-fact announcements of separate “detention rooms” being “readied” for men and women and the installation of washers and dryers.
We do not know, but we look forward to finding and sharing more declassified Mount Weather documents and, someday, the Arthur Godfrey Doomsday Message.
Ted Gup, “The Ultimate Congressional Hideaway,” Washington Post, May 31, 1992.
He Kept a Vital Bomb Shelter – and Kept it Secret,” Virginia Pilot, A-1, December 26, 1992.
On December 9, 2010, CONELRAD’s Bill Geerhart spoke with Bourassa’s daughter, Pam Bourassa, who stated that her father never mentioned a pre-recorded “Doomsday” message by Arthur Godfrey or anyone else.
However, she stated that her father rarely spoke about his Mount Weather role.
His reporting suggests that Mount Weather was on high alert if not fully activated.
