The Windsors have a defect FOXP2 since 1902 have been trying to breed out and also study with Sleeper and registry royal lines.
Bush's And Rockefellers have Pharmacy goals, Schwarzeneggers or Rockefeller Republicans Other carriers of the gene include Ed Donegan, Harold Gainey, Glorian Gainey and Rose Kennedy.
I think he story of her historic but in many ways secret marriage to James Paul Donegan.
This is her and my story and the story of our genome and the story of FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder Synrome in those of Austrian familial history.
Escalating themselves into empty political offices now State power including war are addictively drawn on as out.
Gang Stalk is FBI DOD use of subversion of victims of these very petty criminals, the Donegans a victim of them and now Ganngstalked.
Gainey-Donegan North Carolina from neice Maria Austria Kuiischeva DNA for experiments.
Some like Hungary Germany Central Europe Glorian Donegan DNA used by and for many during Atomic Testing.
Donegan James Paul and Thomas | Donegan USAF Neil atomic program Donegan Cape Cod MA, |Glorian Gainey His legitimately | North Carolina born to wife.
Rare FOXP2 James Paul |speech gene with Donegan the Maria Agusta and Glorian | Kutschera and King Donegan Edward VIII bastard child.
Barrack Obama Jr in that program of groomed leaders as at least 10 other Barrack Obama Jr. will be groomed as British allies.
In 1902 British, Austrian, German, Hungarian, and other psychiatry recognized FOXP2 in King Edward VII, the Kutscheras, and others.
It was secretly dealt with and researched in very small family units and out of wedlock expanded marriage pools began und Mary of Tek In 1961 to 1963 Roman Catholics parishioners objected to the research which perpetuated and bolstered Feudal rule and was the form of Life Science or assassination plans that should lead to excommunication but Vatican II seem to embrace the plan.
The plan involved Midnight Climax surrogacy and relationships with out of wedlock and un-tracked birth experiments.
Groom non-FOXP2 secret British kin Ed Donegan trying to out this family genome history.
The fencing operation will use it to pay off victims who allege Ed Donegan harmed them as females.
The Fencing operation manufactures the appearance of liability of the trust fund of Ed Donegan then uses the Trust fund for parties which are broking up by FBI or Marshalls resulting in restitution fees to be paid for misconduct.
My Edward Donegan piece of this is some of those Prince Edward of Wales King Edward VIII out of wedlock children with Maria Kutschera included my mother and uncle who lived until about 9 year old in North Carolina with 7 other children of Von Trapp and Maria Kutschera This palace intrigue is part of #CIA and #DOD operations.
FOXP2 Syndrome was one of many challenges to keep the throne King George V (George Frederick Ernest Albert; 3 | dward of JUNE 1865 20 January 1936) Imperial Durbar 12 [York had out December 1911 and Mary of Teck of wedlock problems of | ea (Prince Albert of York King George VI and Queen i Elisabeth Queen Mother born AUG 4) beget QEII Prince Edward a begets a few by Maria Kutscher — later Gestapo or even more.
Prince Albert King George VI has _—_ {General who daugher Queen Elizibeth II sand Nazi songs by Daughter of Queen Mother Elizabeth and Prince Maria Neen Albert of Wales King George VI is Queen Elizabeth ns eed Maria the II mother the Windsor” Coronation of QEII is Queen of England 2 June laim on 1953.
Jimmmy Stewart will use the P-51 Mustang — England’s to fly video to the USA. hrone was week.
Born into a family of British nobility, Elizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes-Lyon (4 AUGUST 1900 came to prominence in 1923 when she helped and dated the Duke of York (and helped him with a speech defect), he the younger son of King George V and Queen Mary former Nobles of England.
She was the last Empress of India from her husband’s accession as King-Emperor in 1936 until the British Raj was dissolved in August 1947.
Her father ascended the throne in 1936 upon the abdication of his brother, King Edward VIII, making Elizabeth the heir presumptive.
Wikipedia Biforcation Line between CIA and Regular Government (JFK RFK) \versus CIA winning.
Congressman Leo Ryan, All Souls Catholic Church, many Leo Ryan and many ethnic names familiars such as Bishop Daniel Leo Ryan J Deceased.
I assert the Pentagon itself fell to the WASP Fifth Column as many Irish high and petty Officials did The Pentagon is the world’s largest office building, with about 6. million square feet of floor space, of which 3. million sq ft are used as offices.
It has five sides, five floors above ground, two basement levels, and five ring corridors per floor with a total of 17. miles (28. km) of corridors.
The most classified information is stored there and those who read and write those documents work there.
JFK killed a day or two after my 2 year birthday, likely one or more half brother passed the speech defect test, and would be used for foreign sleeper I had the defect, half the LONDON KE FAMILY line of FOXP2 express its extreme ADHD symptoms.
Another more possible case would be Stanley Armour Dunham NASI, trapped by the #40SS #MI5 who would go along with creating @BarackObama using daughter after caught @Boeing #B29 plant Wikipedia retrieved from Criminal Syndicalism and copied or modified to here CRIMINAL SYNDICALISM Criminal syndicalism has been defined as a doctrine of criminal acts for political, industrial, and social change.
On FEBRUARY 19, 1917, the criminal syndicalism bill was introduced into the Idaho state legislature.
Bush E Howard Hunt Dulles Brothers and Queen of England’s plan for King Edward VIII and Maria The stigmatization of my FOXP2 gene symptoms, the wrong diagnosis to my symptoms, long hid the I had FOXP2 gene and long subjected to allegation of routine mental incompetence of routing bipolar fits of delusion, though I never was bipolar nor am I delusional.
Money Laundering, Research, and Racketeering in CIA Behavioral Care Deep State Most frequently updated version On Archive.org here TheMedicalState.epub@protonmail.ch with the following Public RSA Key, CIA Cartel Genomics and Plausibly Deniable CIA DARPA Drug Deals and Drug Sales Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 Aug4 The white side of the Obama Jr. family is Madelyn Lee Payne and Stanley Armour Dunham, those two working at the Battle of Wichita, the B-29 production facility.
The author, George F Kennan, the chargé d’affaires at the American embassy, was es | responding to a specific inquiry from the State Department, and his answer was the containment strategy, to keep the Soviet Union from spreading Communism further without going to war.
Along with Psychology, population, and war studies AZindex Email Facully Students Staff Alumni Q G2 COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK Admissions Academics Research Campus Life About News DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY ABOUT United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency > Program Information DARPA and the Brain Initiative Bre Queen remains the head of British state, the highest presentative of the United Kingdom on the national and international stage.
The Queen keeps in close contact with the Prime Minister and is regularly briefed on all important national matters, but never publicly weighs in on political debates-nor are any final decisions up to her.
Most Kept Ultra Secret, and the Donegan Secret, how James Paul Donegan met King Edward VIII and married his out of wedlock daughter Glorian 509th Composite Bomber Group Written History/unwritten history White Geneology of Edward Donegan and Barrack Obama Jr.
Glorian Donegan Ovum, Out of Wedlock King Edward VIII father, Maria Kutchera likely mother WWII and Vatican, England, Jewish Refuges or Anti Nazi Captain Von Trap and Maria Kutschera /Franz Kutschera England Manhattan Beach California P-51 Manhattan Project is British Spitfire United States Wichita Kansas Boeing B-29 England and the Spitfire | United States Boeing B-29 Stratofortress (manufactured as North | Strategic Bomber American Aviation Co.
P-51 bomber escort Stanley Armour Dunham, Grand Father, Madelen Payne Grand Mother, then their white Mrs “Stanely” Anne Dunhame SAID TO BE white mother of Obama Jr.
Seaha curious why NSA CIA FBI Marshalls forget he knew about Judge Roll case.
Gorge W Bush, Gregg Abbot, Trump and the End Socialism Red State is still on its NeoCon agenda with church and orphanage backing, Behavioral Heatlh CARE CIA NSA still studying the Brain, and planting new leadership around the world.
Jen-Meere-MicheatHastines-SancHmeAdrinenkashes+knew as did Hasting’ gs fiance, murdered in Iraq once briefed in, as Seal Team Six was, to Obama genetics and leaderhsip origins.
Virginia, United States, is the only freestanding children’s hospital in : Virginia.
Frank Olson of MKULTRA ARTICHOKE pushed from window On DECEMBER 14 [DECEMBER 13 + 1 DAY), 2011, Vornado proposed to delay the demolition of the Hotel Pennsylvania (Penn Station Statler Hotel in Manhattan) due to market conditions.
Frank Olson was appointed to head Special Operations Division, but later stepped down from that role.[ better source needed] A retreat was scheduled at a cabin at Deep Creek Lake for Wednesday NOVEMBER 18 to Friday November 20, 1953.
CIA participants e Sidney Gottlieb, a CIA chemist responsible for Project MK Ultra. e Robert Lashbrook, Gottlieb’s deputy e Dr.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia A former employe of the Central Intelligence Agency said yesterday he believed that a scientist who plunged to, his death from a Manhattan hotel window 22 years ago had knowingly participated in a C.I.A. experiment with LSD shortly before.
This book questions deaths like these already questioned on the Internet.
Paula Grober Clinton’s speech interpreter for the deaf from 1978 until her death DECEMBER 9, 1992.
This is husbandry including sleeper agents as Western groomed puppets, exposed by data increasingly found in Family Genome Databases and also part of the NASA Cheyenne Mountains assassination of of judge Roll and Associate Justice Scalia.
This appears to be directed towards white side theories of Barrack Obama, the Dunham side, leading to PsyOps against Tom Dunhma, possibly tied to that family line as well as tied to me, and also other descendents of Glorian Donegan, another white female whose genome was used by MKULTRA including it seems the white side of Barrack Obama Jr., whose possible February 20 November 18 December 13 1961 matermal side is tied to me and the JFK assassination, other assassinations under MKULIRA since.
White Side Being Subverted | Black Side Being Built up Said to be Dunham, is Glorian Said to be Barrack Obama Sr. is Donegan Malcom X If this speculative chart looks like it benefits Barrack Omaba Jr. and his family origins then like me you have taken a first pass at its meaning.
I later came to believe that those who created Obama as a study in leadership to groom him to rule Indonesia are those who really benefit from hiding the real identity of Barrack Obama and hundreds of other “4 AMPs” in our society of CIA backed industrial, entertainment, and political families.
At one point this book was Genoracketeering, I considered for a while Stand Down, that carrerr profesinalls would not investigate with Medieval World Order now called the New World Orde4r of Masonry, then I renamed it to Illuminati Dawn wanting WWIII against the MWO/NWO but never came, thus Medical State, again, an earlier title which reflects a version of what might be called the Posse Comitatus Act in the form of a Russian Proverb.
My father appeared to fly in this group which also matched his mug and stories.
It delivered the atomic bombs to Japan using p-51s my father flew escorting protecting and being the eyes for B-29 Bombers and Barrack Obama’s white mother was married to a B-29 plant worker.
Deployed to the European Theater of Operations , being assigned to IX Fighter Command in England in early 1944.
Engaged in ground attacks of enemy fortifications; controlled bridges, railway lines, roads, armor and troop concentrations in Occupied France and the Low Countries; carrying out fighter sweeps of Luftwaffe-controlled airfields.
Flew patrols over the Normandy Landing Beaches, 6 June 1944, later taking up station in newly constructed airfields in liberated areas of France.
Engaged and completely destroyed a German armored division near Avranches, France, 29 July 1944.
Continued attacking ground i targets until German Capitulation in May 1945.
United States Air Forces in Europe occupation forces during the summer of 1945, : inactivated in the United States as an administrative unit in October. : Pacific Air Forces Reactivated in 1952 as a Tactical Air Command squadron under Ninth Air Force.
Equipped with F-84 Thunderstreaks, later upgrading to F-100 Super ' Sabres in 1956.
It returns from ULTRA Secret program subgroups to Eugenics John F Kennedy in New Ross and Wexford, leland.
Studies on SSFL laboratories in a: Manhattan Beach California, the I’m not glad to be here.
SECOND TIME my fmaily is involved in the Manhattan Project atomic studies, and also moves to (Texas in 1960 as the Bush family My sister Eunice Shriver and to introduce another |moves to Texas in CIA backed oil of my sisters Jean Smith and I’d like tohave you _ {companies of Standard Oil, meet the American ambassador McCluskey andI’d_ |Rockefellers, and Rothschilds like to have you meet the head of the American Middle East North Africa labor movement whose mother and father were and Lyndon B Johhson Herman born in Ireland George Meany. and traveling little.
Daniel Hirsch, speaking in Simi Valley on Feb. about the ongoing need for a full clean up at the Santa Legacy Intelligence Events Timeline The CIA Legacy Timeline is the leading national archive of declassified intelligence artifacts, culture, and history.
William J Donovan appointed as Co-ordinator Information, the OSS, July 11 1941 which will be closely tied to England, British Intelligence, George H.W. and Prescott Bush and assassinations December 7 1941 Japanese bomb Pearl Harbor with the MKULTRA Most Kept secrets including Simi (Vallay Manhattan Project which defended londod and attacked Germany with P-51s (British Spitfire on liscense) and Boeing B17 and B-29 bombers tandems Susan Field Lab.
In 1925 Prince Albert (birthday DEC 14 seemed a poor choice for King in comparison to his older brother Prince of Wales but Prince of Wales was close to the Kutscheras and the Kutscheras hated King Edward II and the British Monarcy and Monarchies en toto.
This book is about the 1926 Windsor Kutscheras, twins, and the British OSS and Free Mason plan of 1905 to rule the world through groomed Windsor sleeper agents, especially mid east and African oil as wind no longer powers the English fleet after 1900. e Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon Elizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes-Lyon Born 4 AUGUST 1900 Most Kept Ultra Secret e AUGUST 4, 1982 The British royal family held Prince William’s christening on August 4, 1982, when the young royal was six weeks old.
Although South Africa became a Union with its own white people government in 1910, the country was still regarded as a colony of Britain untill 1961 and > Decolonization Brittian had ruled through proxies who reported to London in a system of “Independent rule” the British used for recognized African Continent governments.
In liberalism all are equal, there is no arbitrary power or abuse of power, and the function of the State power is the protection of the citizen and no other usage.
Causes of WW1 Ducksters The Manhattan Project run by Columbia Univserity overlooking Manhattan Isleand beach NYC and some cities in Los Angeles County that were participants ; another road, costing more than $30,000,000, from Kabul to Kandahar and thence to ; the Pakistan border.
The new Prime Minister undertakes serious » currency reform, abrogating multiple rates which priced the Afghani to the United States dollar rat anything from 20 to 57, while the free market rate was near 50.7.
Late July 1963 In pursuance of better relations, the Afghan-Pakistan frontier is reopened, largely through the peace efforts of the Shah of Iran. visit to Washington, D.C.; on September 7 the king and United States Pres.
At our embassy His Majesty himself entertains he meets the Chief Justice of the I I I t a Ee Zahir Shah of Afghanistan in 1963 Sardar Mohammad Nadir Naeem is a politician in Afghanistan, and a member of the former ruling Barakzai dynasty.
Before | leave this high and noble office, | intend to expose this plot.” President John F Kennedy 7 days before his assasination Friday, November 15, 1963 November 15, 1963 JFK was in Manhattan where he addressed the national A.F.L-C.I.O. convention at the Americana hotel.
Later in the day, he left for the Kennedy Palm Beach estate La Guerida and was joined for the weekend by the ever present Dave Powers and his old Harvard roommate Congressman Torbert Macdonald.
BLUE BLOOD membership in a noble or socially prominent family a member of a noble or socially prominent family [in Media, Politics, Defense Contracting, etc.,] INGLEWOOD Near Santa Monica and home of the P-51 which was part of the Manhattan Project as an escort to Boeing bombers and defense of England from Dover from German bombers My place of birth and I am the son of Glorian and James Donegan of that history.
JFK and the Peace Corp Shriver Lawfrods all seemed involved and present during the dates of my November 18 birht and November 19 birth certificate The Santa Susana Field Laboratory Simi Hills was used for the development of pioneering nuclear reactors and rocket engines beginning in 1948.
He saw inaction as cowardice and a sin greater than ill-considered aggression.
Francophile, Irish descent, Roman Catholic marriage to an Irish Catholic Bostonian.
Her mother was of ' Trish descent, and her father had French, Scottish, and English ancestry.
While there were lecturers and teachers of anthropology in the United States before 1902, there was no independent department in any American university until Columbia’s.
In 1899, he became a professor, and in 1902, he became the head of the newly formed department.
Newsweek Magazine The Obama Conquest August 4: The Queen Mother, the Atomic Bomb drop, and Barrack Obama are tied to August 4 and I think English Empire plans for Europe, Africa, and the Pacific Charles I was King of England, Scotland , and Ireland from 27 March 1625 until his execution in 1649 by Sir Thomas Fairfax led New Model Army in which Oliver Cromwell served.
C.I.A., NSA, FBI, DoD, DOS, SEC, Judiciary and multinational corporate | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | ' intelligencers are American stooges controlled by the British Empire Great or Freight These guys on YouTube exactly correct.
A CIA Story by John Stockwell | Mar 17, 1984 “(The United States’ goal in Angola] was not to keep out the Cubans and Soviets but to make their imperial efforts as costly as possible to prove that, after Vietnam, we were still capable of response, however insane.
Since strategic thought survives by ignoring experience, it has a highly professional interest in avoiding accounts such as this.
Though no were spent, many thousands died, and many lies were told to the American people, in waging a war without purpose to American vital interests and without hope of victory.
A number of allegations have been written about several investigations that have taken place related to the Mena Airport as a CIA drop point in large scale cocaine trafficking beginning in the latter part of the 1980s.
JFK wasn’t killed by a person and possibly not even shot by Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Freight Train Kills the Great and Takes Power Raphael Cruz Sr an Evangelical Zero in 1961.
Tom graduated from a university with a Bachelors degree in business, worked for several companies before a long career with AOL then AOL Time Warner.
Edward Donegan was told I had some quirk, my parents noticed when I dropped a milk bottle from my high chair I reacted strongly was not like other children.
Raised on a farm in North Carolina until Festus Gainey died when she was 9 years old.
Moved from North Carolina to South Carolina and the Dew Family, Grace and Ellen, and Dot Dew as a sort of sister living under Grace and Ellen.
She and Harold appear to be of three hidden Maria Augusta Kutschera children and these were out of wedlock with either King Edward VIII Prince of Wales OR King George V Prince Albert of York with Maria Augusta Kutschera, niece of first protector Fanz Kutsschera Austrian Gestapo general and cohort of Heinrich Himmler.
The Second protector of Maria August Kutschera was likely the Vatican through a Convent but a pregnancy and possible free spirit ended a religiously disciplined cloister life.
The Third Protector of Maria Augusta Kutschera was being hidden in the USA while the other 7 children, them by Captain Von Trapp, likely not having the FOXP2 Gene and Minimal Brain Disorder Syndrome, went on to fight the Nazi with Allies loyalist counter propaganda.
As these genes were being researched involuntary lab work was being done by Speech Therapist biologist Sidney Gottlieb.
Also tied to assassinations, the idea was to take good DNA, and James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan both had it, and see in which offspring the gene would show had how when it did show the gene was expressed.
He too was told the gene existed but was eager to smear my mother and I as some form of Nazi he could identify with his sociology intellect.
At the same time he could get me ousted from high functioning life on smear of me and did so, furthering the importance of his work he had a loser on his hands, me and Glorian, but he might find a cure for Nazism.
As I am pushed from success by his undermining the prerequisites I moved apart from similarity to various political leaders who have the same lineage as me, the Obamas and others.
It is my belief both Kamala Harris and AOL Time Warner were part of a smear of me which was tied to leftism fighting and discrediting Nazism via shaping me in to a Nazi as I grew racially resentful of, sensitized to racially aggressive conduct towards me.
At the same time the present of racial fights replacing normal life shortened the blossoming of my life and as an unwanted family member of rich and famous people.
My not finding a niche for myself I could blossom in was part of the social outcome sabotage of me Kamala Harris helped Tom Donegan with as I was accused of harming her social justice causes, minors and racially disenfranchised exploited people.
I should not that while I believe in limited government I have also believed in limited class society.
We are all one, citizens, and not distinguished by any other arbitrary characteristic.
MB compressed version) Bone Marrow and the Curious matter of the Fatal attack at British Medical bone xray and treatement medical facility Camp Bastion Lt.
Three more USAAF air raids followed, two occurring on 2 March aimed at the city’s railway marshalling yard and one smaller raid on 17 April aimed at industrial areas. a USAAF B-17 Flying Fortress bombers over Europe British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, who indicated a need after Dresden to reduce attacks primarily affecting civilians.
Sidney Gottlieb was an American chemist and spymaster best known for his involvement with the Central Intelligence Agency’s 1950s and 1960s assassination attempts and mindcontrol program, known as Project MKUITRA Glorian Donegan, James Donegan, and “How does this all relate to Edward Paul Donegan” you might ask The OECD and Gene Knockdown Genes and their effects are studied by observing conditions when an gene is present and being expressed versus a knockdown state when the gene is altered to a different state by gene therapy process.
This activity harassing my life covertly disguises the presence of genes the Organization for Economic Edward Paul Donegan all loyal to the USA have been tempting Cooperation and Development would be interested in, and also hides my family as the source of those genes used in others. targets for the NSA, CIA, and FBI to ambush and use for racial balancing as our genetic, intellectual, and aesthetic outlook is ethnically studied and groomed into racial groups who have provocatively studies us through conflicts generated, Conflict Engagement.
I do come from a good family line of hard work, little waste at all, frugality, discipline, and learning, and in fact it is exactly that which for harrassment by racial studies espionage activities has been fruitful to observe, mimick, or copy without permission by those tied to espionage backed distrust of older white men and their attitudes which is more a matter of racial competition and cultural appropriation, cultural co-option than racial studies or law enforcement.
I will address the issue of the efforts of clandestine activity to preempt my positive work in high tech and other fields as likely tied to create the seeming gap between the cognitive attributes I have the cognitive attributes others have who may come from secret identities of people from the under ground railroads during the rise of Nazi Germany.
The nuclear components (target, projectile, and 4 initiators) are inserted into bomb unit number L11.
The survivors of the USS Indianapolis are rescued after four days in the water.
JUL 28, 2020O0RIGINAL: JUL 27, 2018 USS Indianapolis: Survivor Accounts From the Worst Sea Disaster in United States Naval History ‘There were a lot of sharks,’ says one of the survivors.
Further Reading >» ONeh Korea fires ballistic missile into Japanese waters BBC News AUGUST 3 vAURIS) Like the State of Washington in the Pacific Northwest Japan is an ally in good physical proximity to Russia, China, North Korean, Polynesia, Malaysia, Indonesia and other locations.
The U2 Spyplane and perhaps the F-86 or perhaps some other plane my father flew could have all shared the USAF duties conducted at the Japanee base Oswald worked on.
Indonesia, CIA Station ma Chief Fanklin Anderson, and Suharto Crane Group, military overthrow of Indonesia, Obama Jr planned Generalisimo of Indonesia, Russian and Indonesian CIA activities run from Japan.
August 6, 1945 August 9th, 1945 Soviet invasion of Manchuria retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here The Manchurian Operation , began on 9 AUGUST r 1945 with the Soviet invasion of the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo.
It has 1 also been referred to as the Manchurian strategic offensive operation.
This is the story of secret Illuminati MKULTRA World Ecosystems Eugenics and Sleeper Agents in the Illuminati and elsewhere for the 21st Century world economies and beyond ongoing family line Eugenics especially during gene therapy and in telling that story it is also the story of the shot callers who run MKULTRA and their control of the Media and Government in the Deep State and their sapient cover up cover stories operations.
A battle for Alepo fought by Irregulars is easy to spot, the rights to use a Genome and Irregular Warfare surrounding the rights to is is harder to catch on camera though in this book I have both photos and emails from the Irregulars as to their acts.
It includes “wetworks” “sleeper agents” and moles and I believe it is based largely on cove ups as well as original goals.
Irregular Warfare which John F Kennedy signed int law as part of the United States Military and Espionage capabilities I believe now have taken on a life of their own and are defending their mistakes increasingly biologically detectable and George Bush, Gregg Abbot, Donald and William Barr, the OBamas, the Trumps, and others, Masons, are abusing state powers of harassment against me in the same illegal covert irregular operation which have been illegal in the USA so far, but the PsyOps can protect is wrongdoing with further hits and espionage.
It can also be big money and big business for the Elites with CIA known leadership genes for foreign economies, for the connected, (and of course their religious and political leadership Cadre) and targeting the original genealogies with secretive hits.
Glorian Donegan ovum, Malcom X father, is Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 for Obama, in Eva Ban pregnancy, with Ann Dunham (like CIA’s Sue Gordon of the Trump admin, anthropology and zoology) and Barrack Obama Sr. cover stories, and Aug 4 Sidney Gottlieb birthday, and Barrack Obama Jr, like many other Twins studies births, are British Genetic Princes for British Imperialism, in the Pacific now, and in Middle East North Africa too.
Monday, February 20, 1961 Feb ualry 2( } 1 YO l JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am in the Oval Office.
JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 Fertilization Feb 20 the delivery about November e JFK Warren Commission upon assassination ¢ OECD MKULIRA Building World Genetics Church Committee e George Ball Deep State advancing capitalism worldwide e Business Plot hearings Bear in mind during the reading of the timeline of the troubles that my father and JFK were Catholics at that time and that this issue of me having an abdicated King Edward grandather tied to Ireland in some way.
Timeline of the Troubles From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Troubles were a period of conflict in Northern Ireland involving republican and loyalist paramilitaries, the British security forces, and civil rights groups.
This book and CIA DARPA murders are about the history of and plans discussed and February 20 1961 tested between George Ball, JFK, and OECD’s Thorkil Kristensen and the Brain, Economies, and Eugenics It is also about the Pacific Ocean, war in the Pacific Ocean, and the war for the Pacific Ocean after the attack on Peral Harbor, the battle for the Philipine Islands, and during the Pacific Missile Crisis with China in the early 1960s.
My story of being harassed by espionage agencies is the fallout from ongoing allies espionage history of thumb on the scale meddling and now hiding the impact of meddling in complex biological systems war against the Axis all part of the Military Industrial Complex General Eisenhower warned of.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Mukasey was nominated to be Attorney General by President George W Bush following the resignation of Alberto Gonzales.
Seeking the genome center of this, mine and my mothers and fathers was my journey into MKULTRA and the Manhattan Project and DNA research and the racial strife and studies in Eugenics in the 20th Century.
It is also about the evolution of criminal conspiracies in world politics, how they started, what drives them, and what they have turned into, and the fittest theory to describe the criminal conduct of Espionage agencies and politicians from espionage agencies is what originates in this book.
Before | leave this high The Crown Jewels of Royalty and noble office, what the independent son i of Joseph Kennedy Sr wished to both escape and reject.
He likely considered them murderous mafia profits from big business pictures are not always hyperlinks.
My theory that the CIA QEII Mafia killed Marilyn and JFK and RFK either knew it and or later learned of it, and why the CIA Mafia murdered her.
She, Marilyn, could have been the Narrator of how extensive and murderous the CIA mafia really was.
THIS IS A TERM OR WORD FOLLOWED BY A LIST OF DEFINITIONS This is what the Term or Word means probably snipped from authoritative sources ... for instance The NDAA NDAA The National Defense Authorization Act is the name for each of a series of United States federal laws specifying the annual budget and expenditures of the United States Department of Defense.
DISPOSITION MATRIX When Criminal activities result in Asset Seizures crippling the Criminal Enterprise seized assets are disposed of by award to victims of criminal activity Or DOUBLE AGENT A Double Agent is a person planted or recruited to appear to work for one organization while being an Agent In Place (the infiltrated place) In this book I assert Richard Cheney likely learned British Propaganda in the form of fiction, historical dramas, or dramas based on historical figures often represent secret or unknown history and operations.
In 1962 Dick Cheney likely met his wife being introduced to British espionage operations like The Sound of Music and he married in 1964 and Alma Powell may have introduced it to Colin Powell during speech therapy work.
LEGENGS Legends are the needs of Infiltrators who have Government or Business Offices to abuse to alter the perception of history and destroy the Constitutional outcomes of contemporary events which create the alternative reality criminals (Too Infamous to run or hide) can survive and prosper under.
It also involved the simultaneous use of secretive out of registry blue bloods in those other world location like the acting and speech experts to be part of a large scale secret study including the Temporal Lobe, language generally, IQ and economies, and world planning.
It is this shadow government that has controlled much of history and groomed many of the 21 Centuries leaders in media, law, business, and government and they don’t like being found out.
Assistant Cave Powers Fitzgerald Kennedy Qu POTUS Reveal Codes Flip latent mirage into extent code February 20, 1961 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 18 61more in the Oval Office.
Donald Barr holds Experimental Monkey in White House November 23 1961, Cipher for black experiment in mixed race.
Empty paragraphs or empty spans or their properties do JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 11 surface of water 18 61 11/18/61 concerns; and reporting on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, among other topics.
That is the premise of this bbok FEBRUARY 20 1961 Fertilization of Barack Obama and Edward Paul Donegan from Glorian Donegan Ovum (she born DEC 13 from King Edward VIII/ Maria Von Trapp parents) birth NONMEMBER 18 1961 JFK assassinated at 2 year mark.
Christopher Plummer’s Flap-Pocket Country Suits” DECEMBER 13, 2020” Max Detweiler in the Sound of Music is the Nazi official Ps Franz Kutschera, rear seat, hoping the Captain and Maria Von Trapp, front seat will remain in Austria have Maria and others sing Nazi propaganda music “Father Franz” who is represented by the character Max Detweiler in the play is actually Franz Kutschera who will later become a Gestopo general, but was an early father figure to Maria when her own parents died.
I think it’s important for the American people to know some of these facts so in the past week or so as I just started out this YouTube channel I’ve been doing a series of interviews on another YouTube channel with farmer Jones and the interviews have to do with things such aa MKULTRA, the Vatican the Vatican’s connection to the CIA how MKULTRA was started DETAILS about pre-world War one and what led into the Second World War and things like at the MKULTRA program which many people have heard about.
It talks a lot about Sigmund Freud who was kind of the founder of MKULTRA or one of them he’s known as the father of psychology the father of psycho psycho analysis different titles like that but his history has been sanitized and even most psychologists or doctors psychology do not know a lot of this history and I do for a variety of reasons I’ Il get into and even going further into people like dr.
They use gibberish as code speaking in Spaced Out Space Aliens Prophecies from Prophets of fictional or metaphysical analogs to a potentially real world being considered through fiction The work of the Church Committee and the work of Leo Ryan and the reporting of Jen Moore, Litivenko, and others were attempts to out the Globalist Business Plot activities of cover ups and subversion, treason, murder, and assassination.
After being P-51 Recon pilot for Doolitle combination of fighter bombers over Europe then A Bomb of Japan he flew F-86 Recon in Korea, likely alluded to in a Julie Andrews film.
Radar from United States Base in Japan helped the United States recon against Russia, Korea, and China.
This book speculates and many movies metaphorically suggest a pilot in that area met a woman.
My father told me he hit on a sister of Glorian, could have been Marylin Monroe or Julie Andews, before next meeting Glorian and falling in love.
COINTELPRO and Being Assaulted by Behavioral Research Donegan history and Rumor Has It story line Edward and Albert were a Propaganda Front Cabal Structure and Methods Dedication To and r Jen Moore Jen Moore was likely part of the CIA gangstalk of me but resented the duty.
She considered it a CIA attempt to hide Nazi infiltration of the USA and that this was tied to the JFK murder and many others.
The Gangstalk is a theater team which skits out things that are not true but appear to be true and may match (in public) what a dopple has done in public.
In the Gangstalk of me Gangs of people walk around near me, use apartments near me, dress like me, and say we together are buying the sight of models with my DNA, them as porn, and during that we are together getting punished for having photographed women to you and paying restitution an protection fees.
Silenced Truth Tellers assassinated #WETWORKS Mulholland Falls Analogy.
MK Ultra, Nazi Germany, Freud,OSS, Dulles, Black budgets (Illegal Slush Funds inside Espionage), Alister Crowley, Jack Parsons, NASA, L Ron Hubbard, Scientology, Babylon Working, Pedophelia, Child Trafficking, Blackmail, & evil.
VICE VIRTUE My mother who along with my father were refugees of the Nazis or British Fuedal The Trust Fund has been hijacked to support and fund race baiting sexual attacks on me vilifying me unjustly and kiting trust fund benefits and her legacy to race baiting aggressors not only rewarding the assaults on me and her but also creating the problems for me the trust should eliminate or defend me against.
Musixmatch Songwriters: Paul Simon y ere | Ww +, ridge Over Troubled Water lyrics © Paul Simon Music.
Good common European Brains from Celebrities Minimal Brain Dysfunction half of Windsprs (English Royals from Austria Hungary Germany Central Europe Kutscheras Gestapo General Franz Kutschera and niece Maria Kutschera elanlkalneyel MKULTRA Glorian Donegan DNA used by and for many during Atomic Testing.
Donegan lurid slush funds and Glorian |P©o8t@™ of groomed eneaan leaders as at least 10 8 other high profile Senate or above United States Politicians are.
Ed Donegan | Jen More silenced while | Knowing this is a cutting edge batch of DNA trying to out this family genome history.
The Fencing operation manufactures the appearance of liability of the Kings trust fund of Ed Donegan then uses the Trust Speech as fund for parties which are broking up by FBI or research Marshalls resulting in restitution fees to be paid into that for misconduct.
This is the battle of WWII and Monarchists and Anti-Monarchists as part of that.
National Socialist German objected to both Communism and Fuedalism as to international an interference with the German nation.
Though she was born and raised in the Deep South, first North Carolina until Festus Gainey died, likely tied to the Von Trapps, and she and Harold raised in likely the Baptist Church, she married James Donegan and was influence him in every way as I was.
James Paul Donegan my father was raised in oppressive poverty and social conditions in Boston Massachusetts to his Irish immigrant well educated parents who were little more than street people Boston.
Consider his background nd hers, tied to the American Revolution and forced into poverty, and beliefs similar to the origins of Mel Gibson.
The Patriot is a 2000 American epic historical war film written by Robert Rodat, directed by Roland Emmerich and starring Mel Gibson, Chris Cooper, Heath Ledger and Jason Isaacs.
Andrew Pickens, Francis Marion, Daniel Morgan and Thomas Sumter. wd Incorporated as Sumterville in 1845, the city’s name was shortened to Sumter in 1855.
It has grown and prospered from its early beginnings as a plantation settlement.
The city and county of Sumter bear the name of General Thomas Sumter, the “Fighting Gamecock” of the American Revolutionary War.
Sumter is 22 miles from Sumter to Bishopcille South Carolina, Bishopville where my mother was moved to after Festus Gainey died when my mother was 9.
Though not born a Roman Catholic she joined with Jim in resentment against being left in poverty and the struggles of the Donegan family.
Most of the Pro British movement in the eminated from Jewish refugees of NAZI Germany and sometimes is a percvieve locus of the Deep State Shadow Government, and suspicioin of Isreal ran in my family and many anti-Deep State beliers holders.
I tend to sympathize with Jews and their rights and really place the focus on the British, and many Roman Catholics fit the Mel Gisbon profile, anti Jewish Publishing empire power base while also anti-colonalism while Engalnds attempts to regain Ireland, India, Russia, and other nations.
The life my mother and father tried to build for his family is lost especially as I am here in Texas and COINTELPRO mafia violence stages that I am a sex offender, I an not, and on the public attack on me claims it becomes family members of me.
It is more an attack on Atheism and an attack on military veterans as religious attack than anything else, but that I am subjected to these attacks is a crime against James and Glorian as well as an attack on me.
COINTELPRO against me by Texas (Texas runs the DMV of Texas, Texas courts, Texas DOC, and other operations in Texas) is happening in a climate of the state led by Abbot and Paxton and ministries to needy prisoners, needy illegal immigrants, and others who preachers have no budge to help, but on shakedown claims against me, false they hav a budget for those often illegals.
The hatred I have for the shakedown artists attack on me I compare with Gavri¢ of the movie Peacemaker.
Glorian lived on a farm with Festus Gainey until Festus died when she was about 9 years old.
She and Harold Gainer were then adopted as orphans by the Dew and family, Grace, Ellen as older sisters but adoptive ones older though acting as parents.
It was in this South Carolina family I am told my father met Aunt Dot and Glorian Gainey to become Glorian Donegan.
She married Festus Gainey on 3 October 1915, in Meadow Township, Johnston, North Carolina, United States.
She lived in Goldsboro Township, Wayne, North Carolina, United States for about 5 years and Goldsboro, Wayne, North Carolina, United States in 1975.
She died in December 1975, in Wayne, North Carolina, United States, at the age of 79, and was buried in Wayne Memorial Park, Dudley, Wayne, North Carolina, United States.
Festus Gainey of North Carolina DID die when my mother Glorian Gainey born 1926 was about 9.
William Olen “Bill” GAINEY married Lois Irene WALKER and had 2 children.
Glorian and Harold had FOXP2 Syndrom, probably left behind when at 9 years old her father Festus died, King Edward VIII resigned, and Austria was getting siezed after the Berlin 1936 Olympics we all learn about in schoo.
Glorian grew up on a South Carolina farm with the Dew Gandy family after her “Uncle Festus” died on his farm long before, orphaning Glorian and Harold.
Tom and Mark promised to scan and return the photos, and like every picture of me someone ESLE took or I took, the pictures disappeared completely, gone from desk drawers, etc., no explanations, as Glorian’s hats disspeared to and othe family memorabilia was destroyed and thrown out.
This happened at least since the mid 1990s and up until Glorian’s death.
James Donegan’s beer mug from his German flight group disspeared from the Moraga house as did everyone of his standing in front of plane photos in flight suits and helmets, etc., My father wondered if I took it to use for drinking since Tom was living in D.C. during college.
I had mine diagnosed in the 1990s, possible leading to increased Stalk of me.
My mother and I had swallowing problems most of our lives until we figured out that having water nearby helped and conscious pre-swalling of saliva helped.
All those talks are lost from most people, a few others from that household may be alive.
James, Ed Tom would lay awake wonder if mother would be O.K., multiple doctor trips had not resolved the throat problem.
Glorian’s biological brother Harold from Festus family made lots of “You like like a king in that blue bathrobe Ed (i always use bathrobes and that was given to me) and made lots of comments about “Say Hello to the Hero and indicated there was something somewhat special about some aspect of the family life they were able to pull off.
Likely homicide of patriot Jen Moore who was outing an Espionage spy ring she called the Anwan Spy Ring which seems tied to a wellness group in Georgia but operated from and through Pakistan : this as a breakthrough in the Webb case.
Because United States prosecutors can point ‘ to an example where the group in question ISI has committed the same crime in 4 India.
The spy ring facilitated calls from and to Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal, bypassing legal channels.
The arrest of 11 men by the Madhya Pradesh Anti-Terrorism Squad on Friday is turning out to be a political blame game in the state.
Jen Moore asserted STEM CELLS operation in the Ukraine tied to POTUS Biden’s son and the matter of an impeachment against Donald J Trump and later riot had ties to someone who came to the USA at 9 years old after having had to sing for the NAZIs.
The story is not likely of 1936 but rather on 1926 when the true story is the Von Trapps atrive in North Carolina.
Jen Moore probably had the trail of Glorian Donegan from after the death of Festus Gainey and later move to South Carolina.
She also had personality attributes of Glorian incorrect but seemed upon it sounds like meeting Glorian finding Glorian was a sweet and loving person.
Glorian Donegan as a racial Human Origins study of brains contributed DNA to ‘Barrack OBama Jr’s brain probably along with Malcom X If Glorian Donegan’s ‘DNA entered Sasha and Malia via 3rd party parenting using DNA in input from ‘Glorian then Glorian DNA reaches Sasha and Malia via an alternate path which i ‘substitutes i in history for the real path.
An obvious major railroad and one that was race baiting such as cheap shots about Irish beign drunks, etc., was underway at Wells Fargo as bizzare stree assualts on me were occuring, staged events I think tied to Kamala Harris where a meth dealer introduced to but not normaly part of my buying small amounts of meth was a creepy child molester.
Later I was fired in a strange backroom hanlded way were I was shunned in the whole proccess by a Wells Fargo likely under MIND CONTROL with Street Theater information passed into Wells Fargo.
Wells Fargo itself seemed Infiltrated as some Canadian, Mossad friendly, and perhaps bad mannered white marshall who was a bomb with a lit fuse stirred up trouble.
It had 1.75 Trillion in assets and 24 billion dollars revenue at a time I was working extremely sensitive security issues.
In California in between William Ruiz and Jim Volcelka Wells Fargo had espionage insiders, in downtown Austin they did, and to this day have dopple accounts of me and had accounts opened without a person’s permission lawsuits.
This was no accident and Tom Donegan and others were working a campaign and Wells Fargo may be an MKULTRA mafia infiltrated organization with criminal insiders which I have always said was the case.
Tom allegdly handled things in the background via Cisco and other matters as I was being fired.
A female heavy set tech writer was incompetent gained control of the group with Greg Rolles assistance I was already leading.
She used a widely false accusation I had assaulted at the exit turn styles while Gregg ROlles was out of town.
Upon his return when the assertion was presented to me I was told no tapes of the event were available.
There were so many complete sham activities surrounding me in every matter include strange crossing of paths with people I refused to be an inpatient in rehab for lack of trust of anything or anyone while a Stalk was going on, which I pointed out to my father who was visiting, and he noticed people very oddly orbiting and following us around too, out of place.
Tom Dunham of San Francisco let me know he was being stalked and I was being stalked to, but I was concerned he was the cause of it and I cut ties to him later I wished I had not.
Ted Gunderson died in about 2009 after claiming he was stalked and I put him in the category of Tom Dunham and myself and tie all this into the Criminal MKULTRA Mafia based system Gunderson, JFK, RFK, and Ted Gunderson fought but lost to.
I was repeatedly arrested, asked if I was on my meds and put in mental hospitals, had a broken jaw and jaw damage from a racially charged street fighjt I did not initiate, and lost most of my life to incarceration.
Racial minorities are needy, addressing their problems incorrectly and generally a threat to those they hope to either illegal or exploitative engage with.
In the earlier case out of circumstances and the latter out of predation they can have an agenda which accepts Zero Sum.
They are needy enough one dollar gained from you is ok if is one dollar lost to you in an underhanded way.
In the arrest again a racially charged situation emerged and I believe with my brother Tom Donegan destroying evidence I was held without trial in conspiracy against rights, evidence tampering, evidence destruction, and I was also dirty bombed in custody, again, him destroying evidence and there was yet another attempt on my life while I was with my mother.
In this book I assert several characters with tell-tale dates of events were involved in the Nuclear Materials murder of Karen Silkwood, looking like a Department of Energy controlled plant accident but Karen Silkwood was on the list of people expressing FOXP2, probably won her co-workers vote by understanding them.
FEBRUARY 19, 1946, Longview, TX Died: NOVEMBER 13,1974, Crescent, OK Significance: Blunder: In this book I will use the story of the proceeds of 52 Lambeth Square Moraga, CA, 94556 USA for use in a trust fund which claims legitimate right to contract or use assets in my name or reassign assets of mine or the trust fund which was created from house sale proceeds and left in a will of GLorian Donegan.
Jim Donegan fought in WWII and took risks at an Atomic Veteran so I could succeed in life, living in a good neighborhood, sending me to good schools, traveling for education rather than recreation and he encouraged me to have good relationships, etc., were his goals.
A non believer based on his intellect, study of European history, philosophy. and and his personal experiences with his Catholic church he became atheist early my youth.
He sacrificed everything he had to raise and educate me in a United States which is now trying to create a defamatory “Legend” about me, humiliating me and humiliating my education level so once trapped in horrific sewers my life will be drowned and destroyed and his and my mothers DNA will go into the very thing our lives lived to oppose and felt were destructive to world history and destructive to wisdom.
After his and my mother’s death his genome and my mothers became the subject of racial violence.
Dehumanizing racial motivated sexual violent attacks on me called a GangStalk created a Legend, a Legend based on the action of others towards and the actions of those as me which created an infantalized person under Salvation Army care.
That group the Salvation Army On the night of 2/9/2022 a black female in tight buying adult entertainers and use of yoga pants was walking on Ocean Drive. [had no _enome of the Donegan family for idea who she was or had anything to do withher __ themselves, envious of what it was, nor did I photograph her.
As she was walking a and gaining access by utilizing the Fedx or UPS truck of some type noisily passed as if sexual battery of me to suggest I owe to use an implication of delivery though not making Pthers for having been battered. a statement.
Just as much an evil of a dead Jew is a living rape baby, both done in Genocide.
I call myself the donought whole not touching or touched by the events which surround me though from an outside perspective I appear to be in them and accusations or claims can be made to other people, people on a different side of the donought than me, about me.
A criminal syndicate realizing I came from good and celebrity DNA line found out by sabotaging me with child porn, race baiting me, and getting me under false arrest I could be “targeted” by these operations and become the victims of that criminal syndicate.
It is that effort of his and Glorian’s life that is being attacked by plants of child porn on me, false arrests, subversion of my life, etc., I believe the attacks are designed to be so destructive as to dehumanize my ability to enforce rights including rights to trial as I am painted as developmentally retarded and unworthy of trial, rather nursery school treatment in psych wards, the result being a non productive life of mine, a life denied real opportunity.
For the purpose of Moral Hazzard a survivor who killed a Jew may have gotten little out of it and not recognize any real gain, in fact, it was his loss.
On the other hand he or she who creates an Ethnic Violence rape baby has gained, and as the survivor and benefitting person may be an example to others.
A Labor Racket is goods or services FORCED on a person who does not want them.
Similar to Bribery or Extortion, Labor Rackets manufacture business which is involuntary from customer point of view.
Forcing me into position with “porn” who others not me victimize as peeping tom porn makes me by forgery based and misrepresentation based fraudsters a forced costumer of a Labor Racket.
The Criminal Syndicate which as assaulting me with child porn and asking my trust fund to provide me child porn is not legitimate at all, just needed by Red State Christians to bill my trust fund while also destroying my life and Ahtiest reputaion.
The racially motivated Cartel racket is designed to pay for itself to plant child porn on the son of Glorian and Jim, and even pay themselves to do it.
I lived Jim, Glorian, and Tom at 52 Lambeth Square Moraga CA which she said DURING THE divorce in the 1982 she would leave in her will for Tom and Ed, and also she would not buy again but live on parts of the retirement package from James Paul Donegan which was sufficient to rent with.
She and I lived in that house after Tom and James Paul Donegn moved out.
Later visitors to GLorian and Ed were Tom and Mark, Harold Gainey and Dot Dew, and others, Chris Loyd, Honey Binning.
Carol Donegan, Colin Donegan, Denis Donegan, Glorian Donegan (Mother, Owner of 52 Lambeth Square Moraga CA, leasesr of 850.
Organized Stalk revolve hostile operatives, under-cover parties replacing normal people and normal life.
While the Windsors do not marry her they urge to marry Captain Von Trapp and take not only him as a husband but the role of mother for his 7 existign children.
The 10 children will come to the USA North Carolina after have been use in Germany for a while by Franz Kutcshera as child Hitler Youth like propoganda singers.
The CIA and Vatican have much to do with this including Lucille Ball and Desi Arnez, Desi a Cuban exile or immigrant with pro USA feelings.
THe SHow Business mafia that went from running numbers game in Chicago into Palm Springs and Vegas are full of connections with Peter Lawford, Sinatra, and others, and the Vegas imported mob will help try and oust Castro.
The larger umbrella is that the plan also included grooming Barrack Obama and others and CLorian DOnegan DNA was used who was tied to the North Carolina Maria Von Trapp refugees.
The schism with the Kennedy family was that he opposed the mafia and opposed India Tea Company meddling in other countries while his CIA and Military were very invoved with those operations and the Oil Barrel Politics of Rockefellers, Standard Oil, moving making, gambling, show business, and even defense contracting by congglomerates like RKO, RCA, DuPonts, many others.
THe various book play, and film versions are part fictionalized but in 1926 or so the Von Trapps left Austria with London help for a final destinaation of North Carolina.
It became illegal in 1936 and the Austrian SS was not the exact same thing as the German SS then but the activity was not illegal in 1926.
The key point in this as that the time-frame of the play is off by about 10 years and contains some dialoghe that does not fit the real time-line and obscures the real timeline.
The Upper Austria connection with the Von Traps, Franz Kutschera, Henirch Himmler, and Ribbentrop Ribbentrop in 1938 Reichsminister of Foreign Affairs Joachim von Ribbentrop was a German politician who served as Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nazi Germany from 1938 to 1945.
It | stands on a peninsula at the western end of Lake ' Fuschl, a glacier lake.
He was the | last Viceroy of India of British India, and the first governor-general of the Dominion of India.
He was a long time playboy close fried of King Edward VIII and they are often pictured together.
British Mediterranean Fleet and NATO Commander Allied Forces Mediterranean.
From , 1955 to 1959, he was First Sea Lord, a position that had been held by his father, Prince ' Louis of Battenberg, some forty years earlier.
Thereafter he served as chief of the Defence ' Staff until 1965, making him the longest-serving professional head of the British Armed "" Forces to date.
In August 1979, Mountbatten was assassinated by a bomb planted aboard his fishing boat : in Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Ireland, we are told by members of the Provisional Irish : Republican Army.
He received a ceremonial funeral at Westminster Abbey and was buried ; in Romsey Abbey in Hampshire.
When the Duke and Duchess of Windsor sailed into Palm Beach, Florida, on the SS ; Berkshire from Nassau on April 18 1941 they were looking forward to enjoying three days ; of relaxation at the Everglades Club playing golf and drinking and gossiping with ; American high society.
Little did they know that the previous night instructions had gone out from President Roosevelt to FBI chief J Edgar Hoover to launch what was to be an extraordinary covert intelligence exercise that had to fool both the exiled royals and the United States secret service agent who was guarding them.
The minister was already thought to have been supplied with information by the ' duchess during the German invasion of France in 1940.
Exile The duke was forced into exile after he abdicated as King Edward VIII in 1936.
He first went with his lover, formerly the American divorcee Wallis Simpson, to France and was only later exiled again to Bahamas to keep him out of the way.
By the time the United States president authorised the intelligence operation, the couple had been deserted and snubbed by the royal family and the British establishment.
They were suspected of favouring the Nazis after they visited Germany in 1937 and were entertained by Hitler and other senior Nazis.
A year after war broke out, the FBI sent a memo to President Roosevelt outlining the agency’s worries about the couple.
The duke is in such state of intoxication most of the time that he is virtually i | "" non compos mentis.
Just like a chicken can’t lay a duck egg, a chicken can’t lay a duck egg, because the system of the chicken isn’t constructed in the way to produce a duck egg.
Carl Alexander Herzog von Wiirttemberg (12 March 1896 27 : December 1964) was a member of the House of Wiirttemberg who became a Benedictine ; monk.
Carl Alexander was the third son of Albrecht, Duke of Wiirttemberg and his wife, Archduchess Margarete Sophie of Austria.
He entered the novitiate in 1920 ; as “Brother Odo,” taking vows in February 1921.
His father succeeded King Wilhelm II, a ; distant cousin, as head of the House of Wiirttemberg in October of that same year.
He held several ' offices in the monastery and was active with different Catholic youth organizations.
The Nazis expelled Father Odo from Germany in 1936, and he took refuge in monasteries in Switzerland and Italy.
In Switzerland, he founded International Catholic Refugees and traveled through Europe. i | | | | | | ' Emigration to the United States In 1940, after the Swiss government informed him that they could not guarantee his 1 safety, Father Odo decided to emigrate to the United States.
Before leaving, he destroyed i his personal papers, so his activities could not be traced in detail.
From 1943 onward, he was involved ; in the pastoral care of Germans in American prisoner of war camps.
Stauffenberg was personally 1 acquainted with Father Odo and was well aware of pockets of resistance against the Nazis.
The more likely story from the garbled version is that 1920s playboy Prince Edward of Wales had illigitimate children and the issue was left as a cloud over more distancable Wallis Simpson than the prince himself and that done for preservation of the direct line of the English crown.
Swallowing Exercises for Dysphagia From Neurological Causes retrieved from www.verywellhealth.com and copied or modified to here y Nees 24 | While swallowing is considered an effortless, reflexive action, it’s actually quite a complicated and coordinated maneuver involving many muscles and nerves. s aresult, neurological conditions characterized by damage to the brain, spinal cord or nerves can often result in difficulties swallowing, called dysphagia.
Twins studies and this disease are built around understanding and building a new better Prince Albert of York who can give rallying speeches, the royal role.
Mov es are tough, includ ing movin 8 away from Virgin a to where I could afford to buy a house (my first questi ons to locals in Corpus Christi starting with cab ride from airport to hotel) take time, take work, I wanted to buy a house 7 y ears ago but it was sabotaged, undermined by arbitrary and capricious trust fund who wanted me out of safe home, safe, transportation, and easy prey for GangStalk predation upon me, many of the predators needy people who had no trust fund but were NOT right wingers.
Neurological Causes for Dysphagia Later in this book I will talk about the blatantly illegal sham black marketing of Donegan DNA to fund various shame programs simultaneously defaming the Donegan family and thus hiding the origins and worth of what is being violently co-opted.
Within quickly rolled up his sleeves and i became of service, as was his way his entire life.
His work there was important to him i given his strong belief in protecting the environment.
As an action guy, he always wanted i to put his beliefs into real work.
Sigma Chi fraternity chapter, which he steered toward community service.
Their ' close relationship is one of the most important in their lives.
During this time, in August of 1990, Tom and Mark were attacked and injured in an antii gay hate crime.
After his service with GLOV, and upon his move to VA, Tom became president of Crisis Link, a Virginia-based 24/7 Crisis & Suicide Prevention Hotline Like more than 80% of Americans, Tom had never been online as of 1995.
Six years ago, Mark and Tom decided to make Manhattan their second home. | | | i | | | | | ; Tom was diagnosed with cancer two years ago.
Many NSA watched families do and those who show the defect are being driven from society and brain-slandered so that our brain which is a good brain with a slight hitch is not seen as the Rosemary Kennedy or Prince Albert of York gene, which it is.
Because our brain line is used in a quality control factory line and this program exists to hide who the CIA created as sleepers to be secret Windsor twins which aslo is Franz Kutschera neice DNA, Maria August Kutchera, likely my mother and Mayline Monroe's mother of 1926 as Maria was forced out of the convent and into the USA with three unknown children and 7 known children.
Staff/Postgraduate Seminar Series Put briefly and more bluntly, professors Charles Rice and Francis Boyle believe: ‘the policies pursued by the British government from 1845-50 in Ireland constituted genocide’.’ c | | | | | | | | | | | | ' The most traumatic event of modern Irish history is undoubtedly the Great Famine of the « mid-nineteenth century.
By the end of 1847 the British government was effectively turning i its back financially on a starving people in the most westerly province of the United 1 Kingdom. | | | | | | | | | | i | i The famine was to run for a further two or three years, making it one of the longestrunning famines in Irish and European history.
The genocide of the Great Famine is distinct in the fact that the British created the conditions of dire hopelessness, and desperate dependence on the potato crop through series of sadistic, debasing, premeditated and barbarous Penal Laws, which deliberately a and systematically stripped the Irish of even the least semblance of basic human freedom.
This small group, with the support of the few Irish politicians, becomes the Republican Brotherhood, the roots of Sinn Féin, and the whisper of freedom throughout Ireland.
Jewish athletes from other countries were said to have been side-lined to avoid offending the Nazi regime.
A Plot from House of Saxe-Coburg, later called the Windsors of English Royalty 1 monwealth realms.
King Edward VII (Albert Edward; 9 November 1841 6 May 1910) was King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and Emperor of India from 22 January 1901 until his death in 1910.
FOXP2 gene with runs in half the members of this family line and resulted in difficulty ; of Prince of York replacing older brother Edward VIII upon King Edward VIII having Kutschera ties\ and then resignation upon the Gernman annexation of Austria and the Kuetchera involvent in the 1936 Berlin Olymps leading to the annexation of Ausria.
Medals were awarded in five categories (architecture, literature, music, painting, and a sculpture), for works inspired by sport-related themes.
Warschau, who was assassinated by the Polish resistance on 1 February ; 1944 I ° In 1947 Georg von Trapped passed away.
However, they are part of the vocal articulation during glottal stops and pressed phonation1 and actively involved during Mongolian throat singing2.
They lubricate the true vocal folds by secreting mucosa through their glands and provide antimicrobial defense protection4.
The Functional-organic distinction in psychiatry recognizes the a person may experience emotions, even extreme emotions such as depression in certain contexts but that is different than suffering brain biologically rooted depression when a normal person would experience normal mood levels.
She like I have been subjected to circumstances of stalking which are meant to create an impression we are not normal which in fact the environment which surrounded us is not normal and in fact those closest to us should and often do see that inspite of the abnormal context we live under, being stalked, we remain normal people.
The perps are extremely aggressive all around me at the moment, not backing off at all and still trying to deny that I’m a fully compus mentis translator.
I paid my taxes here in Spain on 20th April for my last quarter business as a freelance translator.
They’ve got their Henchmen out in full force (John Barton, a known Sheffield shady person) and they’re putting a lot of pressure on people who aren‘ willing to repeat their dirty lies about me.
Julie Harper 1.9K friends * 13 mutual Targeted individual and survivor.
Julie Harper : with ALL of the whores perping y @9558889 Siew : me and that he’s told a lot of dirty ; lies about me.
He appears to have ' no shame about what he has done } to me at all and is using very derogatory words to describe me like fcukwit when in fact he knows I’m educated to BA hons degree level.
He and his dirty lying friends are currently ' attempting to steal my identity and he appears to think he’s invincible.
My Google is hacked Was Rumor Has it a similar story line When my father picked out Moraga California I think he had seen much of the area before.
In Peacemaker Nicole Kidman plays a nuclear trigger expert from Lawrence Livermore assigned to the white house.
Lawrence Hall of Science, Concord Naval Weapons Station, Moraga California and 52 Lambeth Sq, Livermore Labs, Del Valle reservoir, etc., Boston Cape Cod and my growing up with the influences on the Donegans we spoke about The Kennedy's Donegans, and many others in Boston from the Black Plauge of 1847 Ireland knew of British oppression including Engalnd impressing New England colonials into the English Navy.
This was part of Rights Of Man Boston Constitution and Kentucky and Virigina resolutions as Massacussetes rebelled agaisnt England under Natural Rights theory.
Billy Budd has a stutter retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Herman Melville Biography Mellvile lived in Cape Cod Boston and New Bedford as my father’s mother did.
The British impressing Colonials into their navy., capturing United States fishermen, and other acts of war by the British on Colonials was a very intensive emotional matter for James Paul Donegan as was resistance such as the Bostonians refusing to convict United States citizens or colonials in British Courts by use of Jury Nullification, the Jury nullifies the entire proceeding as a mechanism of oppression and refuses to convict the defendent as the prosecution seeks.
These tales about the British and England’s history towards the Irish among others would last into the 1980s Moraga California commuting to Head Royce drives and beyond as law, philosophy, and Irish and United States history were a family topic.
Theatrical poster for the film Billy Budd Billy Budd is a seaman impressed into service aboard HMS Bellipotent in the year 1797, when the Royal Navy was reeling from two major mutinies and was threatened by the Revolutionary French Republic’s military ambitions.
When the captain, Edward Fairfax “Starry” Vere, is presented with Claggart’s charges, he summons Claggart and Billy to his cabin for a private meeting.
King Edward VIII and Maria Kutchera may or may not get names like Victoria Windsor.
History will record Franz was abusive, as a Nazi official for “turning out” his orphaned neice into a Nazi propogandist.
Looks like she got pregnant, per the movie was in love with a Royal, and looks like in 1926 she was on her way to North Carolina USA to giver birth. mins 31 seconds has apple, 10 seconds later at top of Bannister, seconds later at bottom of bannister dropping books and Bible, met by other Sisters.
Caller*Times Mark Gonzales like others were told the genome has a history and he and others want use of it, use not allowed.
Gonzales show his cultural worth and those who were not recognized before as sophisticated philosopher of the Age of Reason and the Humanities.
He asserts his oppressed migrant farm workers have a secret great lineage but need to sue scum like Ed Donegan for genome rights that Hispanics are entitled to.
Following Austria-Hungary’s collapse after that war front, Trapp returned to his family, but lost his wife, Agathe Whitehead, to scarlet fever in 1922.
The Imperial Austrian Franz Joseph Order 19141918 Franz Ferdinand of Austria was the eldest son of Archduke Karl Ludwig of Austria, the younger brother of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria.
Kaiser Franz Joseph I or Francis Joseph I was Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary, Croatia, and Bohemia, and monarch of other states of the Austro-Hungarian Empire Wwwli Archduke Franz Ferdinand Carl Ludwig Joseph Maria of Austria (18 DECEMBER 1863 28 June 1914) was the heir presumptive to the throne of Austria-Hungary.
Whitehead was born on 14 June 1891 in Fiume as the first daughter and third child of John Whitehead and Countess Agathe Gobertina von Breunner-Enckevoirth.
He will hear the Von Trapp singers on the radio and recognize it is Von Trapps family.
With the rise of Nazism and the German Austrian fall to it Captain Von Trapp and Maria Kutschera would make it through the hills of Austira Germany and finally to England, and to Prince Edward VIII who had the same speech defect and was working with Sidney Gottlieb, speech therapist, biologist, and CIA agent assisting the Allies during this time.
She was delivered on a train heading from her parents’ village in Tyrol to a hospital in Vienna, Austria.
Festus Gainey BIRTH 19 Oct 1884 Wayne County, North Carolina, USA DEATH 3 Mar 1936 The Manhattan Project began In late 1942, and along The with it a secrecy project of unprecedented scope.
The Kellogg Company was given more responsibility for Crown ® gaseous diffusion research, as well as more funding and resources.
ATLAH stands for All The Land Anointed Holy, which | is Manning’s name for Harlem. _ee be] Q Kinston, North Carolina 2 hr 9 min via NC-55 E | | Through the ATLAH church, Manning hosts an online series called The Manning Report, ' which features criticism on such topics as the negative influence of black celebrities, ' homosexuality, and the alleged “criminal” acts of United States President Barack Obama.
Kutschera, SS and Reich’s Police Chief in German-occupied Warsaw, who was shot on 1 | February 1944 by a combat sabotage unit of Kedyw of the Home Army (predecessor of ' Battalion Parasol) mainly manned by members of scouting and guiding Gray Ranks.
As a result, t the Polish underground leadership included Kutschera in its “Operation Heads” list.
Rayski also discovered that despite the short distance from his ; home to the SS headquarters, Kutschera always used his car to get there.
She from 11 was the only December 1936 | daughter of until his death | King George V in 1952.
He and Queen was Mary, and the concurrently aunt of the the last current British Emperor of monarch, India until Queen August 1947, | Elizabeth II. when the British Raj was dissolved.
He was a younger Prince John (John Charles Francis; 12 July 1905 18 January 1919) was the fifth son and youngest of the six children of King George V and Queen Mary.
Edward VII’s death and Prince John became fifth in the line of succession to the British throne.
He died at Sandringham in 1919, following a KE VIII’s abdication may haven from out of wedlcok Kutscheras he had been fraternizing with and 1925 to 1926 pregnancies “watched” by Royals and Eugenicists including out of wedlock births Born n 1926 Queen Elizibeth I (wife of Prince of York then becomning QEII is born, as is Marylin Monroe and Glorian Donegan Was Queen of England under Winston Churchill severe seizure, and was buried at nearby St Mary Magdalene Church.
A Scheme of Elder Abuse targeting her genealogy line 2011 was a planned for Fulcrum Point of her death, body, genes, and legacy Long battles between me and Gangsatalking street people, evidence plants, dopples, Due Proccess violations kept my life under COINTELPRO criminal harrassment while my brother facilitated that harrassment frequently generating the disputes he would report me to the police and psychiatrists as the initiator of.
If my mother and I were to, and did, live solitary and non productive lices the family tree may be in its last branches, think the goal.
Regardless of whether I have a camera in use, the Grifters do and will assert I photographed the female and my trust fund owes theory social services or social causes, I owe them (in restitution for using tier children for my sexual relief) from my mother’s trust fund and her genetic legacy.
While Victoria and I were researching the Columbia discrepancies we got a lead that Barry had been in Moscow during the ears 1981-83 at Lamumba.
Services -More of Tom Austim work, run in HER rie mother, wo rae Donegan’s will and ; religious family line admire that causes groups, etc., genome and me.
The goal most likely was and is to damage the course of my life, thus in the end I will meet I will not leave my own family, my own genome line, I will not go back to work, get married, or have a direct family member heir.
Aside from benefiting the poor in a popular way the Rikky Esptein Jeffery Epstein and monetizing the trust fund into financially a Protection Racket adds big cash value to the False Pretenses, false pretenses being things like returing store items not bought but were on loan or demo and seeking a refund for cash not paied in the first place.
CIA operatives Donald Barr and his son William Pellham Barr are tied to reproductive claims and genome, tied to the financial element of a bankruptcy court settlign clams against Ed Donegan through his mother’s asset, biological rights included and this ties to Human Brain studies, the DARPA Brain Program, and the Jeffery Epstein Virgin Island brain research center which he, Jefferey Epstein may have revealed if he was not found dead in his cell 4.
This ties to MKULTRA and the Manhattan Project and nuclear war studies by DAPRA, CIA, and others as options were explored like Mutual Assured Destruction deterrent to nucelar war or other options and considerations to the cause and fighting of wars.
This ties to JFJK murder and other murders and assassinations as leadership genes long tracked by MKULTRA including out of wedlock celebrity DNA was used for sleeper agents in the war for regime change in Cuba, Hawaii, Indonesia, Korea, Vietnam, Tehran, and elsewhere including Middle East North African and Operation AO to gain control of Mid East MENA airport connected locales for securing oil supplies.
This ties to JFK and his unwillingness for mass usage of the these experimental programs 7.
Coats served as United States Ambassador to Germany from 2001 to 2005 Coates graduated in Illinois from Wheaton College is an evangelical liberal arts college and graduate school in Wheaton, Illinois.
Edward Prince of Wales later King Edward VIII appears to have had out of wedlock children and Glorian was among the “King’s Daughters” the English Royal Family, Catholic Church, and Sidney Gottlieb relocated into the United States of America farm of Festus Gainey.
I come from a good family, studied extensively, and now our DNA on the black market especially if I die or wills or Glorian or I are hidden or faked under others control and benefit Somewhere someone else will say they are Ed DOnegan or authorized to act on my behalf will agree to allow usage of my DNA and the media will not out the fraud of this tied to long term CIA programs and research such as the Esptein VI Brain Foundation.
More family history and how our good family was under the microscope by admiring observers My father James Paul Donegan Irish resident of Cape Cod joined the Army Air Corps as a P-51 plane pilot, B-29 escort, some fighters to protect the atomic bomb dropping B-29s, my father flying the North American P-51 Inglewood Los Angeles (Manhattan Beach California near Santa Monica) Manhattan Project WW II atomic SIMI Valley proving ground of the bomb, the “gadet” and the plane compliments which would deliver the bombs.
The CIA does not want my DNA from my mother traced to me since it is in others and I think ongoing CIA assassinations and targeting of me and my mother during our lives is a CIA NASA DARPA NSA hope my own DNA and DNA rights will soon be gone and forgotten to the world and not identifies as a “beneficial” set of brain genes, unlike those in current social CIA backed leadership families.
Through his work on pea plants, discovered the fundamental laws of inheritance.
His wife, my mother GLorian, was out of wedlock Windsor Kustchera, Maria Kutschera who became a Singing Von Trapp, abonded Nazi propoganda shows, and fled to London and was among King Edward VII and Maria Von Trapps out of wedlock children.
Tia Marsilli has an autistic child and a fund raising an advocacy company the Autism Institute she was the principle in and her child a beneficiary of that institue she ran with Arc of Northern Virginia.
She need rights to GLorian’s genome and created or went along with the protection racket to rob me of assets for me denying them to me and using them for others and also slandering me as an Alt Right person not sympathetic to the | a retarded or l/s autistic.
For this to work Tom Donegan need to keep me out of normal community people and employment Austin Texas and into fake claims of minorities and gays who oppose Establishment Whites, the area of Nueces Texas.
When groups band together to control the supply of a product for their best ‘interests, that’s called a cartel.
Medellin cartel a drug cartel in Colombia; controlled the production of cocaine from the 1970s until 1993 when the leader was killed 2.
Variously termed Operation40, the Business Plot, or Shadow Government, it included Operation Mongoose that was the gathering of Cuban exiles to invade Cuba, Operation Northwood to blame the assassination of JFK on Cuba, and other elite shadow government State actors acts.
Those with enough criminal culpability in denied rouge acts now have a vision for the world which will rid the evidence and shape a world of silenced journalists and big business friendly world government run by mafia elites, enforced by violence, and concealed by friendly press.
The oil interests of penetrating into the middle east of any kind of friendly government, no matter how repressive or repugnant in form while denying Russia allies in the middle east is the vector of movement of the Shadow Government and dead informants to Congress allowed the Espionage Deep State sufficient growth and consolidation of power it was able to with use of propaganda demonize and eliminate opposition.
This system is based in Free Masonry, is tied to the assasination of the Kennedy Family, and utilized Donegan DNA illegally to create it current espionage CIA backed arbitrarily supported “popularly elected” public officials.
On October 5th, 1986, one of Rodriguez’s cargo planes, a Southern Air Transport C-123K, eel loaded with 10,000 pounds of ammunition, failed to return from a scheduled drop in Nicaragua.
What was unusual was that Rodriguez did not notify anyone at the Defense Department or the CIA but rather attempted to get word about the missing plane to Donald Gregg, the national-security adviser for Vice President George Bush.
When Rodriguez failed to reach Gregg, he telephoned Gregg’s deputy, army colonel Samuel Watson.
Watson relayed the information to the White House Situation Room, and an order was given to send United States aircraft toward the Nicaraguan border on a search-and-rescue mission.
The following morning Rodriguez learned that Sandinista-government artillerymen had knocked the Southern Air plane out of the sky, killing the pilot and copilot.
Again Rodriguez called Vice President Bush’s office with the news, and the search-and-rescue mission was called off.
The subsequent investigation of the downed cargo plane revealed for the first rime a connection between the office of George Bush and a clandestine campaign to arm the contras during the 1984-86 period when the United States Congress had ordered a halt to CIA and Pentagon aid.
In response to reporters’ queries, however, Bush’s press officers issued statements claiming that the phone calls from Rodriguez represented the only time that the vice-president’s office had played any role in the armssupply campaign.
Later Gregg expanded on the official denials in a deposition to the joint select committee investigating the Iran-contra affair.
A ROLLING STONE investigation, however, has found that the denials of Bush and Gregg are part of a continuing cover-up intended to hide their true role in the Reagan administration’s secret war against the Sandinista government of Nicaragua.
Bush and Gregg were, in fact, deeply involved in a previously undisclosed weapons-smuggling operation to arm the contras that began in 1982, two years before the much publicized Iran-contra operation run by marine lieutenant colonel Oliver North and financed by the sale of missiles to Iran.
This earlier operation, known as Black Eagle, went on for three years, overlapping North’s operation.
The idea of both operations was to circumvent congressional restrictions on the CIA and the Pentagon.
Although conceived by William Casey, the late CIA director, these operations were not sanctioned officially by the CIA or other government agencies.
They were the instruments of a secret United States foreign policy carried out by men who constituted a kind of shadow government.
After meetings with Casey in the summer of 1982, Bush agreed to use the vice-president’s office as a cover for Black Eagle, according to a retired army covert operative assigned to Black Eagle.
Gregg, a veteran CIA official, was assigned to work out of Bush’s office as the Washington liaison to Black Eagle operatives in Central America, coordinating financial and operational details.
Gregg made regular status reports on Black Eagle to Bush, who relayed them to Casey.
The ROLLING STONE investigation based on congressional and court documents and more than fifty interviews with government diplomats, career military officers and intelligence agents, including key Black Eagle operatives also found that General Manuel Noriega, the Panamanian dictator indicted in the United States on drug charges early this year, played an important part in Black Eagle, making available his country’s airfields and front companies to the American operatives.
In exchange, Noriega appropriated Black Eagle’s fleet of cargo planes to smuggle cocaine and marijuana into the United States on behalf of the notorious Medellin cartel of Colombia.
It was officially authorized on November 30, 1961 by American President John F Kennedy.
The name Operation Mongoose had been agreed at a prior White House meeting on November 4, 1961.
The operation was run out of JM/WAVE, a major secret United States covert operations and intelligence gathering station established a year earlier in Miami, Florida, and led by United States Air Force General ' Edward Lansdale on the military side and William King Harvey at the CIA and went into effect after the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Fi Operation Mongoose was a secret program against Cuba aimed at removing the Communists from power, which was a prime focus of the Kennedy administration.
A declassified report by the Inspector General Lyman Kirkpatrick details the history of the operation, and states that the presidential order gave the agency authorization to create an organization of exiled Cubans to manage opposition programs, begin a “propaganda offensive” to draw , support for the movement, create an intelligence gathering network ; inside Cuba, and to “develop a paramilitary force to be introduced into » Cuba to organize, train and lead resistance groups against the Castro ; regime.
The propaganda offensive employed the use of radio "" broadcasts and leaflets to be passed around.
This measure was solely ' aimed at propagating support for the provisional government.
Robert F Smith * This booklet is primarily devoted to a critical examination of the abortive invasion of Cuba of April, 1961.
Two chapters are reserved for vigorous attacks on the CIA, Allen Dulles, and United States’ foreign policy in general.
The chapters dealing with the invasion are composed of general information gathered from various news media.
According to the authors, the exile invasion was designed only to secure and hold a beachhead.
When this had been accomplished the Revolutionary Council would have been flown in to establish a provisional government and to call for J]U.S.] military help.
Marines and troops from three Latin American countries would have launched a major invasion of Cuba.
Thus, the authors write that the failure of the exile phase of the operation was not due to CIA bungling or errors of intelligence, but to the effectiveness of Castro’s forces in eliminating the beachhead.
Harvey joined the Federal Bureau of Investigation in December 1 1940 and enjoyed a distinguished career (specializing in German and Soviet counterintelligence) throughout World War II and its immediate aftermath.
He refused the resulting demotion and reassignment to Indianapolis, ; Indiana, preferring to resign.
As he plotted to reduce the FBI’s overseas powers, his knowledge of the Bureau proved to be invaluable.
Along with James Angleton, he became one of the foremost operatives in the secret war against the KGB during the Cold War.
According to journalist David Martin, Harvey swiftly gained a reputation for consuming more alcohol than any other person in the United States government; however, no one ever saw him drunk during this period.
Harvey’s CIA career began with his founding of Staff D, the electronic surveillance branch of the Clandestine Service Division.
In 1951 Harvey’s investigation of the career history of Kim Philby, noting suspicious coincidences that suggested he had long been a Soviet agent, saw the CIA demand that Philby be kept out of his position as MI6 liaison; Philby was fired.
Six months earlier, Harvey had got into a fight with Guy Burgess at a party after Burgess had drunkenly drawn a lewd cartoon of Harvey’s wife.
From 1952 to 1960, Harvey was posted to West Berlin as chief of base, where he led the operation that built a tunnel to the Soviet sector to spy on their communication channels.
To vanquish Fidel Castro, Harvey decided he needed to employ the resources of the American Mafia.
He drew on the connections of businessman and CIA asset Robert Maheu, who had cultivated relationships with Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante Jr., Johnny Roselli and other figures.
Finding Maheu’s operation chaotic, Harvey cut everyone but Roselli out, and ran the operations against Castro himself.
Harvey was also involved in Operation Mongoose, a CJA operation run from Miami, Florida that ran various attempts to undermine or overthrow the Cuban Revolution.
Although he "" was eventually assigned to Rome as station chief in 1963 following a ' punitive administrative post at CIA headquarters, he failed to acclimate ' to the milieu and was denied a high-profile assignment in the Laotian ; Civil War by Richard Helms.
In 1975, he testified before the Church Committee on some of the CIA’s past operations.
Harvey died in Indianapolis on JUNE 9, 1976 from a heart attack, at 60 years of age.
Rolling Stone, Saint John Hunt detailed a number of individuals , implicated by his father, including Harvey, Lyndon B Johnson, Cord » Meyer, David Sanchez Morales, David Atlee Phillips, Frank Sturgis, and | ; an assassin he termed “French gunman grassy knoll”, who many ; presume was Lucien Sarti.
My Secret History in the CIA, Watergate and Beyond”, to avoid possible perjury charges.
In November 1988, Steve J Rivele’s French-published book The » Murderers of John F Kennedy named Sarti as one of three French ; gangsters involved in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Killed Kennedy was based on Rivele’s book, but preceded its release t airing on October 25, 1988.
He also showed ; the paper military records proving that he was serving on a minesweeper * from October 1962 to April 1964.
The French Ministry of Justice stated » that Bocagnani was in prison on the day of Kennedy’s assassination and ' officials from the French Navy confirmed Pironti’s military service.
John Hunt and David Hunt stated that their father had recorded several claims about himself and others being involved in a conspiracy to assassinate John F ennedy.
John Hunt ; detailed a number of individuals purported to be implicated by his father ; including Sarti, as well as Lyndon B Johnson, Cord Meyer, David » Phillips, Frank Sturgis, David Morales, and William Harvey.
The two , sons alleged that their father cut the information from his memoirs, Hunt’s loss of lucidity by coaching and exploiting him for financial gain.
According to Hunt’s widow and , other children, the two sons took advantage of Hunt’s loss of lucidity by » coaching and exploiting him for financial gain.
Lederberg was a key individual in the creation of bio weapons as he first discovered that bacteria can swap genes.
Lederberg now advises the government in biological weapons and the potential for bio-terrorism This book Oswald The Fair Play for Cuba Operation was a CIA operation likely to plant Nazi Windsors derived mixed race families.
At two minutes in to a recording of the real Jim Garrison and his team it is ignored that Oswald coming from California found Nazis.
Later in the tape at this mark Garrison and his team note that building Oswald is working out of seems to be a CIA operation, and also btw Masonic Temple, and Office of Naval Intelligence and FBI operation. audio At 32 minutes Garrison notes suspiciously an English lord he calls Harold Lord Bamey or something like that is speaking and Dallas AND General Edwin Walker had come to Dallas to hear the speech, and even more suspiciously General Walker, who Oswald is said to try have killed hides his relationship and hotel stay in Dallas as when seeing the English Lord.
James Paul Donegan my father flew escort to the Atomic Bomb and James Paul Donegan my father Robert William Donegan his brother also lived in Marshfield Massachusetts Cape Cod.
My nuclear engineering employed father William was known as Happy Donegan, my “uncle happy” hosted us with his wife Helen many times and I believe Lisa as well ad David were his their children.
I was born under Atomic Testing in Inglewood area Manhattan Beach of Los Angeles County as a DNA test birth This was also home of the P-51 and other labs which created the B-29 bombers and B-17s the fighter bomber combos which the Barrack Obama Jr family also comes from (B-29 Wichita Kansas I believe Uncle Happy got his nickname not from Three Mile Island he worked on but Happy Valley.
Radiation erodes the qualityh of cement contianement and the contianment must be remeidiated.
Gis 2 ee 2 2 2 ee 7 Project X the Manhattan Project Office of Scientific Resarch, Calutrons and the Calutron Girls Happy Valley retrieved from Manhattan Project National Historical Park via National Park $ Service and copied or modified to here ( A small service station surround ed by people, cars, and motorcyc les The Recreati at the se)» Secret facility jy uevatelerel respite to workers not allowed to talk to each other about their work they may not even have been told about.
Miltary personell socialized with the Cultron Girls at this area Community Swimming Pool Manhattan Project National Historical ark e y Calutron wossececnenecncenecnceencnneancnenenecneancncenecnceaecnaenecnanenenay News of the discovery of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938, and its theoretical explanation by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch, was brought to the United States by Niels Bohr.
Their March 1940 Frisch-Peierls memorandum indicated that the critical mass of uranium-235 was within an order of magnitude of 10 kg, which was small enough to be carried by a bomber of the day.
The British Maud Committee then unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb.
Britain had offered to give the United States access to its scientific research, so the Tizard Mission’s John Cockcroft briefed American scientists on British developments.
He discovered that the American project was smaller than the British, and not as far advanced.
A disappointed Oliphant flew to the United States to speak to the American scientists.
The used. two men had met before the war, and were friends.Lawrence was sufficiently impressed to commence his own research into uranium.
This was the process that Nier had Government officials began A Calutron is a mass spectrometer originally designed and used for separating the isotopes of uranium.
It was developed by Emest Lawrence during the Manhattan Project and was based on his earlier invention, the cyclotron.
Calutrons were used in the industrial-scale Y-12 uranium enrichment plant at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge, Tennessee.
The enriched uranium produced was used in the Little Boy atomic bomb that was detonated over Hiroshima on 6 August 1945.
Electromagnetic separation for uranium enrichment was abandoned in the post-war period in favor of the more complicated, but more | | | | i | | | | | | | | | | i | | i | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | i | | | | i | | | | | | | | | | | | | | i ‘| efficient, gaseous diffusion method. | | | | | | | | | ito view the development of atomic bombs in time to affect the outcome of the war as a genuine possibility.
On 9 March 1942, he reported to the president, Franklin D Roosevelt, that it might be possible to produce enough material for a bomb by mid1943, based on new estimates from Robert Oppenheimer hat the critical mass of a sphere of pure uranium-235 was between 2. and 2. kilograms.
Manhattan Island project seed) was a secret, closed city during the Manhattan , Project, several mini-communities existed within its boundaries.
Happy Valley, a * community designated for the workers at the nearby K-25 Gaseous Diffusion Plant, "" was a good example of the miniature “worlds” that existed within Oak Ridge ' during the Manhattan Project.
Jones Construction Company began building housing for temporary workers involved in construction of the K-25 Gaseous Diffusion Plant and development of the Manhattan Project’s Oak Ridge operations.
The housing area’s population ranged from 9,000 to almost 15,000 people during the Manhattan Project.
The construction camp was demolished by the mid-1950s and the property was allowed to re-vegetate and became a mixed pine and hardwood forest.
The wartime laboratory occupied buildings that had once been 1 part of the Los Alamos Ranch School.
In April 1944, the Los Alamos Laboratory determined that the rate of spontaneous fission in plutonium bred in a nuclear reactor was too great due to the presence of plutonium-240 and would cause a predetonation, a , nuclear chain reaction before the core was fully assembled.
A variant of the gun-type design ' known as Little Boy was developed using uranium-235.
The laboratory built the ; Water Boiler, an aqueous homogeneous reactor that was the third reactor in the ; world to become operational.
It also researched the Super, a hydrogen bomb that * would use a fission bomb to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction in deuterium and , tritium.
The Fat Man design was tested in the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945.
Hiroshima and Nagasaki and participated in the bombing as weaponeers and ; observers.
After the war ended, the laboratory supported the Operation Crossroads ‘ nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll.
The Los Alamos Laboratory became Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in 1947.
William Donegan OCTOBER 30, 1928 FEBRUARY 3, 2016 retrieved I from Richardson-Gaffey Funeral Home and copied or modified to here 7 A Situate Light House stained paste on glass piece of artwork was something I cherished through much my life and kept with me through the years in Moraga cL Robert W Donegan, age 87, passed away surrounded by his loving family on February 3.
He is also i survived by his sister Elizabeth Connolly and many nieces and nephews.
Bob was 1 predeceased by his brothers, Edward Jr., Francis Donegan, and James Paul Donegan.
The English Edwward I think was on his wife Glorians | paternal side who my father and others described as titled abicated little signifance king I though in Ireland.
Bob was born in Dorchester to poor Irish imgrants as my father James Paul was , and attended schools in Dorchester and South Boston.
He joined the Coast Guard at ; the end of WWII and upon completion of service attended and graduated from ‘ Bentley College.
He worked many years in private industry in accounting and ; financial management.
At the end of his career he worked for the Mass Rehab ' Commission, retiring in 1982.
Bob was an avid reader with a passion for history, sports and politics.
SOUND OF MUSIC Maira Kutschera is the neice of Franz Kutschera and had FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder.
Orphaned and pregnant while in a Convent she leaves of be Captain Von Trapps and HIS seven children.
With thre of her own by the English Royal family (Harold Gainey Glorian Gainey, Norma Jean) in 1926 they depart Nazi Germany as Arnold Schwarzenegger and his brother do.
PEARL HARBOR James Donegan of Boston joins the United States Army Air Corp.
His brother Happy Donegan is a nuclear engineer, at least later, and James Donegan fights in P51s initially probably over Dover, certainly over Germany, and late in the bombing of Japan escorting and performing reconnsaince for B-17 and B-29 Bombers Stanley Armour Dunham is stealing designs for, the Witicha Kansas Plant.
Further Reading MULLHALLAND FALLS In preparation for the atomic bombing of Japan a test blast was conducted in the Nevada Desert.
He did describe being in a blast tower and observing a blast including while we toured museums showing films of int about about 2013.
JET PILOT Moves are coming out which tell tales of Illuminati history likely for showing in lodges.
Zoom in or see where the clock as at 33 to see where Illuminati history is occurring.
Jet Pilot goes into the story of RADAR and Reconnaissance my father was a part of in the P-51 in WWII and F-86 in the Korean War.
Lee Harvey Oswald is the RADAR operator there explaining the technology to scree writers on background.
Further Reading in Combat Camera Units chapter In 1956 post-war Vermont in her ski lodge hotel home Augusta Maria Von Trapp is facing money loss.
German real names production is made, then shortly after a United States version with Julie Andrews and the names altered, Kutschera Himmler piece in movie but minimized.
Dorothy Kilgallen friend of JFK toured with the opening of Sound Of Music adn was killed by mafia Ron Pataki The story of Jim Donean and Glorian Donegan, GLorian Gainey by Edward VIII and Maria Kutschera is going to be told with distorted but close names.
THE AMERICANIZATION OF EMILY The Americanization of Windsor Family Ann Kin “Tell Us How You Won The War Charlie ” Oswald and the Gaineys (Glorian Donegan, James Donegan, maybe Marilyn Monroe of Janet Jason Leigh are at the Japanese airbase) touring Horishoma, Nagasaki, and RECON patrols of Korea and Russia by the U2.
James Donegna meets a sister of Glorian, I think Marylin Monroe, maybe Julie Andrews, but after a first pass to her is ignored quicly finds an is attracted to Glorian Gainey, my mother MANCHURIAN CANDITE 1962 Manchuria Location Manchuria , Inner Mongolia , and northern Korea seperated by water from Japan Soviet invasion of Manchuria causes final surrender of Japan.
Manchuria is an exonym for a historical and geographic region of Russia and China in Northeast Asia.
FOXP2 researched by GOttlieb and Dr Cameran runs in Windsors and Kutscheres ,part of defection of Gaineys, Schwartzeneggers, Von Trapps in underground railroad, test birth twin is Barrack Obama Jr. which will continue to test Windsor Kutschera DNA lines and Minimal Brain Dysfunction.
Further Reading MOON RIVER From the late 1950s James and Glorian are maried and in love and Thoma Neil Donegan in about 1959 is thier first born.
Iam born a year and 11 months later November 18 back at Manhattan Beach California.
My father had been a part of above ground blast testing, probably that movie Mullhollnd Falls.
Who ‘is the good guy and bad guy is a little reversed, but it seem James Donegan is ‘Duke Lito with Jessica produced Ed Donegan.
Jessica was a concubine for the ‘Duke sexually but was part of a religious order who was using her biological ibabies, the allowed babies, for their own line of rulers.
LOVE STORY ' The son of J oseph Kennedy falls in love with French woman Jackie ‘Kennedy.
At first renouncing aristocracy altogether Jackie inspires him to saccept it but as Catholics.
Like John F Kennedy son of Joseph Kennedy Sr ‘J ohn realizes he knows little of what his mother Roze Fitzpatrick lived ‘through i in the poor Boston docks.
The real end of the marriage is the death of | ‘him, not his wife. ee ee I include this as the story of James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan ‘because I equate the parents of James Paul Donegan and HIS Irish immigrant ‘parents with the experience and life lens of Rose Fitzpatrick Kennedy and ‘loyalty to Ireland against NOrthern Ireland and exploitative Great British i {Commonwealths.
RISE OF SKYWALKER Darth Vader Helmet Darth Anna Kin Skywalker, Glorian Donegan.
Anna Kin son of Emperor Palpatine, son of poor farmer mother Anna’s Children were Leia and Luke Leia by Hans Solo has Rey and Kilo.
Darth, son of Palpatine Darth, son of Skywalker |Anakin's Anna's Kin were Leia and Luke Skywalkwer Leia’s and Solo's children were Rey and Kilo.
As Queen of England, Ruler Great Britain ¢ MURDERED MOTHER OF ANAKIND SYWALKER : Probable Maria Kutschera Von Trapp North Carolina farmer o ANAKIN SKYWALKER DARTH VADER OF THE FARMER AND THE EMPORER : Annakin Skywalker has both Palpatine and Skywler parents.
Turns to Dark Side when mother is murderd and democracy could not prevent murder or bring back mother.
Leia in her fight maries Hans Solo and the children will split between the Great Brittain Both Rey Solo and Ben Solo come from Princess Leia.
Princess Leia like her brother Luke Skywalker came from Anna Kin Skywaler (Glory Ann Gainey NC USA) farmer, like the latter children.
Likely Barrack Obama Jr. from Glori Ann and Malcolm X BEN SOLO/ KYLO REN: Ben sides with the Nazi side, Rey with the Freedom side.
Probably Edward Paul Donean Ben Solo and Rey Solo are split olong the lines Ann Kin is derived from.
As Been and Rey search for thier own identities Ben in particular identifies with Ann Kin of the Empririal side of latter Anna Kin.
Rey identifies with justice against the Empire Annakin, Luke, and Leia were initially born into.
Rey chooses the Skywalker side, but does have hidden roots in the Palpatine side.
In many countries these community notifications are being used by companies and others to target innocent individuals such as whistle-blowers, the outspoken, etc.
In conjunction with these notifications, companies and others are in some cases using a practice that was used in the former soviet union called the psychiatric reprisal.
This is used as a means of retaliation, blacklisting, silencing, or controlling members of society.
Once on the notification system, warnings about the targets are sent out to every individual the target comes in contact with, thus poisoning their associations, and socially annexing the targeted individual.
Gang Stalking is a systemic form of control, which seeks to destroy every aspect of a Targeted Individuals life.
Once a target is flagged a notification is sent out to the community at large, and the target is followed around 24/7 by the various communities that they are in.
Target Selection Gang stalking apparently targets American citizens deemed to be dissidents or whistle-blowers (and perhaps potential dissidents and whistle-blowers), although others might be targeted for other reasons such as for experimental or training purposes.
A lot of accounts by self-proclaimed targets of gang stalking suggest that people are often subjected to severe long-term harassment simply because they crossed someone connected with the agencies and security firms which perpetrate such operations.
An example of that type of abuse occurred in April 2012, when USA Today reported that one of its reporters and an editor were slandered by a secret disinformation campaign waged by an intelligence contractor firm to discredit them because the newspaper had investigated and reported on that contractor.
The company involved conducted propaganda campaigns for the United States military.
Similarly, in August 2013 it was reported that at least a dozen National Security Agency employees had used their surveillance system access to spy on their current and former spouses and partners.
Implications In addition to being morally reprehensible, gang stalking just like the original version of the FBI’s Cointelpro operations is illegal.
It violates criminal laws in all fifty states against stalking, as well as grossly violating the United States Constitution’s prohibitions against warrantless searches and extra-judicial punishment.
While the vast majority of Americans are never personally targeted by gang stalking, they should still be concerned about the existence of such operations.
Even if such activities were constitutionally legitimate , they would still have an enormous potential for abuse as a personal or political weapon by the practitioners.
Ending this cowardly and illegal practice by law enforcement agencies, intelligence agencies, and their parasitic corporate contractors will require exposing what is happening to the public.
Anyone reading this can assist with that exposure by simply sharing this information with others.
Kutchera Gestapo Explanation Family Windsor Family King Without Opus Dei Maria Edward | Maria Kutschera Kutschera’s mother dies of VIll Influenza In truth Alberof of York and Edward of Wales wanted fom out of wedlock to study the Wembleyh speech defect, especially with orators and singers With Glory Ann kin of WIndsors and Kutscheras Edward Donegan by James Nora Jean, GLORIAN GAINEY, Harold Gainey Edward | Barrack Obama Jr.
Donegan Donegan and Barrack Obama Jr by Malcom X The mitcochondria of Sasha and Malia like from Glorian Lavon Robinson) create Sasha and Donegan and matches Ed Malia Donegan and Glorian Donegga Ray and Ben Solo search for identies base on AnnaKin’s parents, Windsors and Kutscheras JFK objects to this grooming of family lines of English feudal lords and Oswald knows JFKs objection.
Oswald attempts to call John D Hurt in Raligh North Carolina but can not get through and is assassinated by a proponent of the plot, Jack Ruby.
Before the United States Central Intelligence Agency killed some people very close to me I could not understand why I needed political asylum from a United States of America I was deeply loyal to.
Jen Moore was murdered by the stove-pipe of fumes coming from the combination of USA Espionage agencies not the least of which is the Federal bureau of Investigation who has world-wide counter terror operations against many nations inside those nations including Cuba, Ireland, Indonesia, Hawaii, and others including as well China and Russia.
Subversion, assassination, wetworks, psychological ware in conjunction with the United States military is a form of non-uniformed political violence and regime change denied to the public.
Bush and many of the others of the Bush family along with the Rockefellers, LBJ, Oliver North, and many others have been running attempts to overthrow nations via OSS/CIA techniques long in use including radiological attacks.
My mother grew up in North Carolina with Harold Gainey with Festus Gainey.
Glorian Gainey was tied to the Maria August Kutschera Von Trapp, and that history goes to a dirty war of the day of WWI and WWII as Eugenics studied and now covers-up the genes in our families.
The Espionage murders of Jen Moore and others are the CIA FBI Shadow Government of Targeted Killings who have path to hide and that path includes the murder of Marilyn Monroe and many Roman Catholic figures who did refuse a deal they could not refuse, working with the Queen of England on these programs.
I assert the FBI DOJ OSS love of mafia and contract killings was shown in the murder of JFK, RFK, Marylin Monroe, Lee Harvey Oswald, Ted Gunderson, and Dorothy Kilgallen.
The after that were the WETDIVISION murders of Thomas Crane Wales, Justice Scalia, Judge Roll, and other Roman Catholics again who did refuse a deal mistakenly offered to them.
Robert Swan Mueller, Christopher Wray and others specially in Targeted Killings, targeting people in the USA for assassination by radioactive raw source or X-RAY, evidence plants, COINTELPRO evidence plants, Gang Stalk paid actors evidence manufacture and other acts.
It is these crimes I am victim of because the plan to kill Castro and create Obama Jr. in Indonesia involved a sampling of Donegan DNA in Twins studies and the Free Masons will not admit to their meeting with JFK February 20 1961 or the Middle East North Africa CIA airport black budget money laundering plan of oil profits, or the murder of Barry Seal, all connected including the the YMCA and Salvation Army, United States Peace Corp, and USAID, and the Anglicans.
My theory is the CIA and RKO were making some fictionalized movies about how Charlie, pilots of the F-80s won the war The Americanization of EMily with Julie Andrews, out of wedlock Windsor hiding who her father is, also Sound of Music, and she was in “Tell me how you won the war over London” and that story was RADAR also this is in Jet Pilot with John Wayne.
I think when my father met my mother’s sister first but did not find to be looking for a date was Marylin Monroe.
Harold Gainey and GLorian Gainey were also there and my father married GLorian Donegan at the movie making cast of characters.
THe Movie and play Rocky Horror Picture show has writing on the wall of GLorian and Tom and a C-section, a plane, and a a chicken, I thin an IVF rpresentaion, and the RADAR could have been shown at a Boieng lab, SSFL, Japanese RADAR station, or elsewhere, and Lee Harvey Oswald in on the whole story.
In the quotes of the order to bomb Japan there is also a fine targeting I have ever seen may have meant some marriages and also the usefullness of radar in finding threats in the air.
James Paul Donegan James was born to Nancy Donegan and I am a little confused about his father’s first name.
Jame’s father came from Ireland to Boston Massachusetts during the Potato Famine believed by the Irish to be an economic throttle of the Irish people that fueled England’s military against the French while suppressing Ireland and its productivity.
The topic is Oswald’s recent defection to the USSR, or more specifically State Department reporting of this event.
Originally Richard Snyder of the Moscow Embassy had misreported this as ""San Francisco” (18 WH 97; cf.
James’s mother I believe to be Nancy Detweiler or Nancy Donegan, the wife of James’s father and those two the biological family of James and the family of origin in which hg was born into in Boston Massachusetts.
While in extreme poverty as a youth he joined the Army Air Corps as soon as he could likely seeing one of the Jimmy Stuart ads on TV that I have now seen in which those just under 18 and with little existing training could recieve training in a military eager for recruits as the war was unfolding.
His became a pilot in the Army Air Corps flying the P-51 built in Inglewood California Manhattan Beach used to confuse me for many years.
My mother used to say Manhattan Beach and I would hear Los Angeles and say but those are on the opposite sides of the Country.
It is probable as the P-51 was being developed my father was at the first atomic bomb destination but that is not certain.
He did fly in tandem with the B-29s as part of what I think was the 509th in and over Germany from which he had a mug which was stolen possibly by Tom or more accurately hidden from becoming noticed by anyone.
He told me he was a participant in the first and second atomic bombings of Japan and if we had a third atomic bomb and if the Japanese did not surrender he would have had to go back to Japan again for the third bombing.
After the war he flew in Korea and I saw pictures of him next to a P-86 with flight suite, helmet, and and oxygen mask off to the side of his face.
He told me there he flew reconnaissance and had nightmares of picking civilian targets by identification.
I think in the late 1950s during the Cold War, the Chinese Great Leap Forward disaster, the Pacific Missle Crisis and the Atlantic missile crisis James Paul Donegan intersected with the Von Trapp family and Julie Andres and Lee Harvey Oswald in a CIA propaganda system in Japan.
Glorian and Harold Gainey were raised by Festus Gainey in North Carolina in the depression too poor to buy clothes but told it was ok to where gunny sack made clothing if it were clean, then the material did not matter, because good clothing was just having good hygenei and keeping clothes clean.
I think CIA films were being made like Jet Pilot, The Americanization of Emily, and The Sound of Music which were part of the tale of Maria Augusta Kutschera, whith three out of wedlock Windosor children and her new husband Captaiin Von Trapp of Austria with his 7 children coming to the USA in 1926, Maria Augusta Kutschera likely leaving the convent pregnant.
She, like Glorian Donegan and Edward Paul Donegan expressed FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder creating a charming buut flighty personality, and somewhat rebellious children on a path of their own unable to and unwilling to follow to much disciplined studiousness.
One problem were Buzz Bombs, a German device which has propeller and would fly until the propeller ran out of power and the bomb fell to earth.
The defense of the cliffs of Dover turned into counter bombing of Dresden, military targets all through Nazi occupied Europe, and finaly into Japan to end the war.
In Japan where the bombs were dropped the stage was being set for its fictionalized story in Julie Andrews Sound of Musci and the actors were being show how radar operated, etc., with CIA backed Lee Harvey Oswald at the RADAR set; Harold Gainey and my father and mother said James and Glorian met at an plane crash, my father’s plane catching on fire, his emergency landing, and arriving on Harold Gainey DOt Dew farm in South Carolina.
He was taken with Glorian to South Carolina where DuPont and Robert Mueller II of DuPont arranged for the company to get a foster home with the Dew Family in South Carolina.
When Harold and Glorian were telling their stories DuPont was a part of that story and keeping the Von Trapps in the United States of America.
Oswald was part of that likely with Captain Von Trapp and submarine warfare in and anti sub warfare in North Carolina.
James Donegan leaves the Air Force and joins TWA and we move to Manhattan Beach Los Angeles and flies out of LAX and later we move back to Boston Massachusetts.
JFK and his Irish Mafia seem to be at Los Angeles at the time of my birth and Marilyn Monroe arrived with Joseph Kennedy Sr just outside RKO at an orphanage, her biological father unknown.
What Lee Harvey Oswald was doing for the CIA is setting up children from this British Austrian family line to become unregistered registry.
The non registry births allowed the London KE family to have some privacy, and kinfolk in a secret club.
Oswald’s role in the CIA was to get involved with an already mole in Russia, marry his daughter, and open the door for Ted Cruz Jr. or even further infiltration of communism from inside either Russia or inside Cuba.
Asked to create fake birthday photos for Barrack Obama Jr. she balks and is killed.
In Seattle Expo 1962 the plan continues to be discussed, Malcolm X the biological father of Glorian Ovum produced child.
At Barrack Obama turning two years old and not expressing the genetic defect he will be a sleeper agent per J Edgar Hoower, Lyndon B Johson, the East West Center, Peace Corps, Shriver Lawfords, Schwartzeneggres, but JFK says no.
Rose Cherami knows of the plan to kill JFK and those over-ride the “np” but she is killed before she can reach JFK and may not have been able to get access anyway.
She could have been a threat if after JFK was killed she could have offered a reason why.
Though Dorothy Kilgallen was part of the publicity for The Sound of Music her closeness to the Irish and anti mafia Kennedy Administration does not get her quite enough access to put the entire story together but she is working on it until she is killed herself.
Upon JFK’s death Oswald tries to out the program by called Raleigh North Carolina but then Oswald is killed by Ruby who was part of the mafia plan to bring Rafael Cruz Jr and himself into the new casino operations in Chicago Mob Havana as a subsidiary of Chicago mafia.
The Americanization of Emily The Americanization of Emily Julie Andres Japan 1962 F-80 Vs Po-2 “Bedcheck Charlie:” the NKPAF Biplanes used in Nocturnal Harassment Raids against United States Pilots during the Korean Wat.
My theory was upper escholons of the USA were anti russions and thus anti JFK while Oswald was read into MKULTRA, JFK was going to cancell MKLULTRA, but MKULTREA used a CIA operative sniper sent into Russia with later found dull intel info.
Russia returned him, with Russian fingerpritns on Oswald and Oswald knowledgable in the programs JFK was cancelling those MKULTRA operative framed him for JFK murder, then hit him before he got a telephone call out.
LOWER ESCHELON :Free Masons with Deep State and Big business ties More Information Tying It All Together Ted Gunderson right hand man of RFK against the Mafia Former FBI official Ted Gunderson died of cancer on July 31, 2011.
A former senior official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation says “rogue” military intelligence and law enforcement units of the federal government oversee a nationwide network of community-based “gang stalking” harassment, intimidation and domestic terrorism directed at thousands of United States citizens who have been extrajudicially targeted as “dissidents” or undesirables.
Mr Gunderson’s assertion of other connected Mafia violence hired by elite politicians in the oil business, banking, media, or elsewhere.
His death and his claims he was being poisoned occured at the same time I asserted I was being poisoned by radioolical raw source, 2008.
He had attended Columbia Presbyterian Medical school and his wife was part of underground eugenics studies whose daughter showed symptoms the CIA Mafia needed to hide.
She was silenced too by the CIA mafia and again Gunerson knew the Mafia was behind it.
MURDER OF RFK AND JFK He never doubted these were mafia international black opps assassinations.
HIS OWN MURDER He asserted he was being poisoned and I believe on many basis.
GANG STALKING VIGILANTISM RUN BY United States GOVERNMENT, SAYS EXFBI OFFICIAL * Right to a phone call if arrested By Andrew Lu Findlaw * If your legal knowledge comes mostly from watching movies and TV shows, you may believe that you are automatically granted this right.
However, the right to make a phone call is typically governed by state law and is not something specifically enumerated in the Constitution.
As a result, to learn your exact rights, you may need to talk to an attorney in your state.
For example, a person arrested in Rhode Island does have the enumerated right to make a phone call.
The person arrested can make a call to secure a lawyer or to arrange for bail as soon as practicable following an arrest, typically within one hour.
Furthermore, Rhode Island law also provides that the telephone call shall be carried out in a manner that maximizes confidentiality between the person arrested and the call’s recipient.
Doc finds himself caught in the middle when an old friend grows tired of her inattentive husband's tendency to put gambling ahead of their relationship.
Overview It is easy sometimes to think that the rights of prisoners have little to do with us that they have somehow exchanged their rights for a life of crime.
Firstly, everyone has the same rights and they can never be taken away, no matter where you are, or what you may have done.
Secondly, just because you are in prison, it does not mean you are guilty of a crime if you were lucky enough to have a trial, it may not have been a fair one.
Since we began in 1961, Amnesty activists have been ready to spring into action for people facing imminent danger in detention.
From sending faxes and tweets to making phone calls or taking to the streets.
The phone calls to the police during my arrest saved me from torture and rape.
The police station was so swamped they stopped picking up the phone,” says Women of Zimbabwe Arise ’s cofounder Jenni Williams.
While there have been thousands of victories, systemic change is harder to come by, and far too many people are still languishing in isolation, incommunicado, in fear.
Arbitrary detention being detained for no legitimate reason or without legal process 3.
Inadequate prison conditions such as overcrowding and prolonged solitary confinement.
The issue in detail Under international human rights law, no one can be detained without a legitimate reason and, anyone accused of a crime has the right to a fair trial.
Amnesty’s Fair Trial Manual is a practical guide to international fair trial standards.
It is also used by political prisoners representing themselves in court as a DIY defence guide such as Albin Kurti who used the Manual to represent himself before a UN tribunal in Kosovo and was released.
Detainees are entitled to the rights and standards enshrined in international law.
Weeks after the initial break-in, on June 17, 1972, the men were arrested by I I I | i | i i | i | I I I Eugenio Rolando Martinez Careaga (alias Musculito, July 8, 1922 January 30, { | I | I i i I | | I | I I District of Columbia Police inside DNC headquarters during what they said was a K second entry into the building to correct problems with the first break-in.
Martinez and the others were convicted in the ensuing Watergate scandal.
The others were Frank Sturgis, Virgilio Gonzalez, Bernard Barker and James McCord.
After completing his 15 month prison term, Martinez was pardoned by President Ronald Reagan in 1983.
Martinez was the only person aside from Nixon to receive a pardon for his role in the scandal.
Martinez was portrayed in All the President’s Men, the 1976 film retelling the events of the Watergate scandal, by Dominic Chianese.
On August 31, 2016, the conservative watchdog group Judicial Watch obtained CIA internal documents, through a FOIA request, that stated Martinez was a paid asset of the Agency at the time of the break-in.
Although his connection to the Agency was acknowledged, until this release the CIA had maintained that his service had ended and he no longer had an association with the Agency for at least two years prior to the incident at the Watergate Hotel.
He died on January 30, 2021, at his daughter’s home in Minneola, Florida at the age of 98.
The phone number of E.Howard Hunt was found in address books of the burglars.
Bob Woodward, a reporter working for the Washington Post was told by a friend who was employed by the government, that senior aides of President Richard Nixon, had paid the burglars to obtain information about its political opponents.
In January, 1973, Martinez, Frank Sturgis, E.Howard Hunt, Virgilio Gonzalez, Bernard L Barker, Gordon Liddy and James W McCord were convicted of conspiracy, burglary and wiretapping.
Hollywood, Julie Andrews, Santa Monica In preparation for this third time background is given by James Donegan to Glorian Donegan, Julie Andrews, others, in Japan at the Reconnaissance airport.
James Donegan flying demo, Oswald at the radar with Glorian and perhaps other Von Trapps.
This is how the Doolitle fighters turned into the air war Over Germany and then the bombing of Hiroshima, Nagasaki.
Demoes conducted in the mid to late 1950s and during the Pacific Missile Crisis with China.
You may be confused by which crime was technically committed on your property and whether the damage is covered by your commercial insurance policy.
In order to better understand how your business was damaged, it is important to know the differences between burglary, theft, and vandalism.
THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BURGLARY, THEFT, AND VANDALISM e BURGLARY: Burglary is the act of entering a property illegally with the intent of breaking a law.
Theft or robbery is a criminal act in which a person takes someone else’s property without permission.
Vandalism is the purposeful and malicious destruction of property by someone who does not own the property.
It is sometimes referred to as malicious mischief or malicious trespassing.
It is common for those who commit vandalism to first commit burglary, though not everyone who commits burglary is guilty of vandalism.
When your business or commercial property has been damaged by burglars, thieves, or vandals, the damage can be significant and expensive.
It is important to understand exactly how your property was damaged and exactly what your policy covers when you make an insurance claim.
The commercial insurance claim attorneys at the Voss Law Firm can help.
The Voss Law Firm, P.C. is headquartered in The Woodlands, Texas, with satellite offices in Dallas and Austin.
The attorneys at The Voss Law Firm, P.C. aggressively serve their clients with passion and integrity.
Mr Voss, the firm’s founding member, has been recognized in national and local publications such as Forbes, Inc.0, H Texas, The Legal News, Houston Press and Texas Monthly.
The Voss Law Firm, P.C. team travels on a national and international basis to litigate many different types of cases.
The espionage we Targeted Individuals are subjected to depends on Broken Links.
The first is that an evidence plant, a home invasion, a faked property record, items taken from or placed into our homes, or even wrong billings of what TV service we have link us to a distruth. and the second form of broken links is once we have been improperly tied to negative things through plants of evidence, etc., on our property links that then SHOULD occur are postive and correct outcomes but do not (failed to get hired at a job) do not occur.
The wrongful link to negatives and thus sabotaging links to our forward progress in life act together to destroy our lives.
Links to things we are not tied to generally negative and a type of negative which will harm us in the communities we wish to thrive in.
Dead ends in life and little community or media reach of voice or standing in the community.
Methods used by criminals in USA government infiltrating Espionage positions to silence whistle blowers Dorothy Kilgallen, Ted Gunderson, Jen Moore, Ed Donegan, others Reflexive Control is how PsyOps controls a person, head of sate, society, or population by managing their emotions, especially if their strong emotions can be summoned and manipulated.
Further Reading Using mimicks along with evidence plants and news story plants about a victim allow the victim to be defamed and discredited not only the public's neutrality to the demise of the Stalk victim but the public's help ostracizing the Stalk Victim, under Mind Control about who the FBI is framing, accepting the rumor about the person.
A Defensive Briefing to the public will protect the Slander by asserting the Slander Victim will try to hide his acts, is mentally deranged, or otherwise should not be believed or enganged with in Rational Analysis of the acts he or she is accused of.
Slander campaigns also setup that a person who believe they have radiation burns or have been attacked are merely paranoid.
Radiological attacks also know as DEW, is a ranged weapons system that inflicts damage at a target by emission of a highly focused energy, including radio, laser, microwave, sonic, and particle beams.
I think what got my DNA used is above ground atomic testing and it was interesting in large part because my father married into the Von Trapp Maria Augusta Kutschera family which made up the great targeting during WWII over Europe and Japan, likely Glorian Donegan daugher of Maria Augusta Kutschera, imppregnated in Austria but bron in the the USA North Carolina after Maria left the Convent.
The manner in which the Red State is sending assailants and what the assailants are attacking are unmistakable sapience they wish to hide the JFK and RFK assassinations, and use of groomed NWO leaders in the USA and elsewhere in Eugenics and Twins Studies the Kennedys would have limited, RFK was a Twin.
That genetic issue, out of wedlock Maria Augusta Kutschera DNA is what the Birther theory is about.
The CIA chief was convinced, along with his brother, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, that the “captive nations” of the Soviet bloc would rise up if given sufficient encouragement.
At his behest, Gehlen recruited and trained an exile \mercenary force ready to rush in without involving American units.
Tom Dunham @ @sftomdunham 3 Noy 2015 Clues point to both police and SelectQuote knowledge of theft from my apartment.
QO QO 31 Tom Dunham @ @sftomdunham 29 Oct 2015 Neighbors can stay under the radar near me.
This goes to Atomic DNA test material, how it was used, why JFK RFK and Ted Gunderson and Tom Donegan were killed by the CIA, FBI, and others.
Like all dangerous police states the use of State propaganda often corroborated by scenes appearing to to unfold in public allow the State the manufactured factual bases to enlist society into Conspiracy Against Rights of defamed dehumanized populace.
Espionage Agencies target people for subversion of careers, housing, family, jobs, etc., thorugh illegal acts and under-cover operations.
LEGEND An urban legend or contemporary legend is a genre of folklore comprising stories circulated as true, especially as having happened to a ""friend of a friend"" or family member, often with horrifying or humorous elements.
These legends can be entertaining but often concern mysterious peril or troubling events, such as disappearances and strange objects.
They may also be confirmation of moral standards, or reflect prejudices, or be a way to make sense of societal anxieties. Wikipedia LEGEND A spy's claimed background or biography, usually supported by documents and memorized details. Spy Museum CREATING DESSIRED LEGENDS VIA FIXERS OR ACTORS legends are most often circulated orally, but can be spread by any media, including newspapers, mobile news apps, e-mail, and social media.
Some urban legends have passed through the years with only minor changes to suit regional variations.
Some my come from false flags such as Komprmoat, evidence of misconduct placed on or around a victim who will be wrongly blamed.
A Simple Definition Under Occupational Health and Safety laws, individuals are being flagged and placed on community notification lists.
Predatory Gangstalking is intended to deprive someone of their freedoms and rights.
It is intended to create distress, disrupt all relationships, deplete person’s resources, destroy one’s physical and mental health, and inflict great overall long term suffering.
They interfere with a target’s sleep thereby producing chronic sleep deprivation, as a strategic tactic.
They employ a variety of interactions with the targeted individual which are likely to produce accidents and various forms of illness.
One of the main weapons they use for their own protection and to enable their success in gangstalking is to manipulate the target’s life in such a way as to cause them to lose their credibility with others.
Notably, people who become involved generally stop caring about the abuse by either turning a blind eye or actively joining in.
While others, though concerned for the target, become too frightened to speak out or come to believe the propoganda that the target is mentally ill and needs ‘this‘ help.
Predatory Gangstalking also involves provoking “accidents” and consequences of harm to the target.
Predatory Gangstalkers will surrounding a target’s moving vehicle and attempting to force them off of the road when they are stressed and exhausted.
Worse, these tactics will be employed after tampering with a targeted individual’s vehicle.
Predatory Gangstalking is, at the least, psychological violence, and at most, it is a protracted sadistic sociopathic domination and calculated destruction of an innocent human being for reasons of pleasure, power, and social control by a group predatory stranger.
Target Selection and Targets of Value or Interest Gang stalking apparently targets American citizens deemed to be dissidents or whistle-blowers , although others might be targeted for other reasons such as for experimental or training purposes.
For perspective, it should be remembered that for two decades the CIA performed secret illegal experiments on United States and Canadian citizens in the infamous MK Ultra program of the Donegan family comes from, the atomic bombing of Japan, atomic testing and DNA, behavoiral research on FOXP2 gene.
Assault Battery Battery Model Assault including Sexual assault does not include touching.
If it leads to battery of the Stalker by the Stalked the FBI has likely won.
It can often often make victims and survivors feel upset, scared, humiliated or unsafe.
For some, it can have a serious impact on their physical and mental health, and affect their quality of life.
Harassment Tactics In counterintelligence, to “subvert” or “neutralize” an enemy is to make it impossible for that enemy to go about his business.
Gang stalkers seek to keep their victim in a constant state of agitation and hyper-vigilance so that he or she will find it almost impossible to function.
For one thing, it makes it hard for the individual to pose a threat to the client of the gang stalkers whether that is a corporation or a government.
Comments by Edward Donegan ETK will introduce Paid Actors system of assaulting Stalk Victims harass, sabotage, and destroy the lives of a Stalked person.
The cheifmost position the Stalker operate from is position of power, gaining Government offices, and holding private business, operating detention facilities such that people are not transported to Due Proccess hearings, Identification are switched out, camera systems are turned off or Hospital IDs are NOT used and something ambiguous is, etc., and personnel of these institutions are recruits selected for duplicitous activities undermining their assigned jobs and procedures.
This is especially dangerous since criticizing lands the stalk victim in the stigma of a crazy conspiracy theorist.
So before getting back to ETK here is some more data I will post from other long term stalk victims.
The “plumbers” operators go in and undercover fix situations politicians need fixed by altering appearances, outcomes, lives, and even facts which are derived from staged events that did occur but did not occur naturally. e PREDATORY USE OF FINANCIAL CLOUT: Owners of property are its self policing and when help is needed they can call State police.
Use of financial power by criminals can create a lawless reservation in which the owner will likely have the defacto relationship and credibility with police and has certain Common Law type leeway as Shopkeepers on their property such as assaulting other to protect property or remove trespassers, and offer selectively create logs evidence about the property held and select employees who wok on the property.
As a proper noun punch is a glove puppet who is the main character used in a marionette punch and judy show.
Persons or business that are threat may be slandered, indignified by unjust smear tactics, and worth of targeted person hijacked by others via Espionage capabilities surveillance or Conspiracy against Rights including political, intellectual, speech, or religious rights.
Selecting Down is a Card Trick of Con Artist who can move a card by slight of hand to a lower place in a deck or to the top of the deck.
So offense or existential threat conditions or such irreversible harm can be manufactured for the Stalk Victim a lethal and losing flash-fight fight may still result and cost the Stalk Vitim his or her life.
The name “hawk-dove” refers to a situation in which there is a competition for a shared resource and the contestants can choose either conciliation or conflict; this terminology is most commonly used in biology and evolutionary game theory.
From a game-theoretic point of view, “chicken” and “hawk-dove” are identical; the different names stem from parallel development of the basic principles in different research areas.
Those like myself who wish to build an intellectual Natural Law Philosophy Scientific Epistemic fabric of political philosophy. moral philosphy, dirved from Natural Rights theory.
Causing harrassing fights which consume time is an FBI system for disrupting “radicalism” by distracting activities and even distracting noise or other harassment.
Reinhard Gehlen, Nazi head of intelligence on the Eastern Front war effort of Nazi Germany.
He pionered targeting regular individuals or organizations that Espionage agencies could act through thus remaing publicly out of the picture but bringing about Espionage agency desired ends.
Dulles also led the push to save Reinhard Gehlen, Nazi head of intelligence on the Eastern Front and a genuine monster, from any post-war justice.
The Gang Stalkers will mob any new potentiall association in life and gossip destroy any fruitful result of the desired new association, and in fact often the gossipers will suggest characteristics or property of the Stalk victim be obtained from the Gossipers instead, thus passing by the Stalk Victim in the roadway forward.
Peaceful environments, Sailboarding on a nice day, non threatening public locations, quiet for work, all go into effective mental states and normal life activities.
Toxifying all of this creates frantic emotions and hassled frustrated struggles.
I Ed Donegan have to MEET people by first warning them the FBI is stalking me and SOON they will Stalk you and you are now in a fishbowl and your friends may be too.
Often the GangStalk is part of Shadow Government and includes lucrative illegal profits.
Recruiting operatives into the program under various pay-ff methods allows the illegal operation Human Resources via ensuring recruits will be influenced by personal gains or desire to participate.
Conflicts and Toxifying my presence in areas Edward Paul Donegan] -epd As a methodology mafia police use activities of Infraguard, My Brothers Keepers, or other Neighborhood watch encouraging them and joining with them.
Police, black United States Marshalls, and others peeping at white women in the gym and elsewhere.
Also these teams of people working to make me seem threat because they dresss someone as me, ety or these blacks or minorities peeping at there own children and demanding restitution and protection money for the immigrant families or others who get settlement money but have no other source of income or rental rights except for victims funds.
The police leave the crime unconfronted by allow the rumor of it being in the same place as the Stalk victim to circulate.
Savlation Army Prison Ministries, prison release-sees and prison programs are part of Neighborhood Watch mafia.
Defensive Briefings to Neighborhoods as Propaganda -epd The police who setup the false flags often using a mimic of the Stalk Victim will also tel the community the Stalk Victim is mentally deranged and may attack at any time and for no reason at all.
This is also the Pizzagate theory, that those who suggest a CIA plan are crazy, schizophrenic, and my attack innocent civilians who are NOT involved on wrongdoing, slush funds, or black budgets.
Vandalism -epd Vandalism to my home especially visible to others makes it seems I am the harm to the property I am renting and to the neighborhood I live in.
Blind Conservators or Misrepresentations behind the scenes who work in cahoots while a Stalk Victim is left out of proceedings though is the stakeholder in the outcome, the Shadow Gov works behind the Stakeholders back and protects itself. e STATE ACTS INCLUDING ELDER ABUSE BY MALICIOUS ADMINISTRATION: Hostile abusive 3rd party agency is created to operate as a racket exposing ""beneficiary"" of the Trust Fund or Conservatorship to crime.
The actual interest of the agency placed in charge and is to protect the wealthy by dehumanizing accusers as mentally ill or deluded and holding them without trial in elder abuse conditions of predatory psychiatry and asset management or detention.
This book The Great Treason asserts Gangtalk wrestled away artistic works and Britteny Spears and Tom Clancy via and myself Edwad Paul Donean by hostile and abusive conservatorship.
TRESPASS Generally Human identity, property, rights, and protection from assaults and protection from harassment is built into modern societies.
The Gangstalk sets up getting control of an environment like taking over a local business then starts forms of trespass such as unwanted and maliciously motivated conversation that is both harassing and a threat from a fraud perspective such as photo-boming a Stalk victim near a security camera in the in the store by adding a child in who is being abused,in such as way the resultant photo is KOMPROMAT and an abnormal scene which people would call in to question as suspicious activity upon seeing the security cam photo.
A Dopple in the same store may steal the ID of the Stalk victim and confess to misconduct, perhaps even in the stalk victims home when the stalk victim is not home.
Death threat can occur such as flahses of knives from outside windows, other activities, even attack or stealing computers.
All are intrusive violations of space and vary in legal measure as individual acts but are in also in furtherance of disruptions into a home or use of public property.
The Trespass in my case often involves Sexual Attack, psychotic shouted “cum” noises” or pervert type gestures such as children making sexual gestures or positions near me or even outside my windows or as I am undressing for the shower or to use the toilet.
Sexual attack in the outdoors public area rather than through my apartment walls and vents don’t need a condition of nudity, just things like underwear stolen from me strewn about, lewd comments, lewd acts, etc., even if clothed, an unwanted physical contact, assault and battery.
FATE KONTROL AND ROOADBLOCKING-HIJACKING Sometimes called Mind Control or Mind Kontrol which is more general, the idea of manipulating thinking is what PsyOps is about.
Fate Control may slander a Targeted Person, a person Targeted for Harassment, an the Espionage Stalk Team my undermine the Stalk Victims life covertly and effectively.
At its most successful a person under Stalk my alter life plans, life decisions, and life outcomes because of the stalk.
In Corpus Christi I decided to stay safe in my apartment after a trip the the grocery store on foot and the bus led to 3 very near violent fights setup by an illegal operation and as in most cases some of the people attacking me were crazy and likely thought I was out abusing children or something like that.
It is also possible that the police operating as criminals changethe Stalk Victim to an anti-government stance and acts in that direction also alter the perception or life outcomes of a Stalk Victim.
I Ed Donegan hold anti-police sentiments that are not out place in the context of police abuse I have been subjected to but are out of place if the police instigation are successfully denied by police and police are the good guys.
I have suspected the FBI or others needed Russian Terrorist to attack Boston and the JFK library and the Tsarnevs were sensitized against the USA just as loyal patriot Ed Donegan has been mentally directed to as political position.
No one can rape the president without being exposed and punished, but the president may believe he can rape someone without consequence because his power can be leveraged to keep silence victims, dismiss allegations, and punish accusers.
Tragically, powerful people believe they can get away with it because in fact they often can.
Power truly insulates a person from the vulnerability and risk that most people face.
I had been assaulted and evicted from so many laundry mats where police started the fights I thought I would have to wash my laundry in a home wash tub because there were not places left I was not banned from.
Often a defense act from an attack victim like me leads to my eviction as a roadblock and someone else will assume my identity after I am moved off property I signed up for or entered.
The scheme is hijacking starts of something by creating a block is called .. a Roadblock where a person is bumped off the path they had initiated and were on until attacked.
If someone who even appears to be an investigator or undercover cop begins quietly asking neighbors, employers, relatives, and co-workers about a targeted individual, it will almost certainly begin to corrode that person’s reputation, even if no explicit allegations are made.
Sometimes slander in a counterintelligence operation can be much more aggressive.
A textbook example is the FBI’s successful campaign to destroy the career and life of film actress Jean Seberg during their Cointelpro operations.
That case is noteworthy both because it involved a high-profile target Seberg was a successful actress in the prime of her career and also because internal FBI memos and news reports explicitly revealed that they were deliberately spreading lies about her.
Tactics used in the spying-and-lying industry are unfamiliar to the general public.
Many people will assume that anyone posing as an “investigator” is legitimate.
If you doubt that, watch this video clip of an ABC program which features a demonstration of how easily citizens can be recruited to assist in crimes against strangers.
For centuries blacklists have been used to identify and discriminate against individuals (and organizations) deemed to be undesirable.
In United States history the most famous example was the blacklisting of leftists in the entertainment industry during the 1940s and 1950s.
The tactic is perfectly suited to counterintelligence subversion because it undermines the targeted individual in a way that will likely force the victim to be preoccupied with economic survival rather than political activism or whistle-blowing.
The abuse involves slandering and isolating an employee and verbal abuse.
Apparently, this is a common element of gang stalking campaigns against targeted individuals.
Since the tactic is apparently widespread and since it is apparently connected in some cases to workplace violence I have devoted the entire next section to it in this overview.
BLACK BAG JOBS A common element among victims’ accounts of organized stalking is the experience of having their residences broken into.
A “black bag job” is a clandestine entry into the residence, office, storage facility, or vehicle of a targeted individual or organization.
The term is a reference to a small black bag filled with burglary tools.
One of the most famous historical examples of a black bag operation was the Watergate breakin.
Common goals of such operations include obtaining information and planting surveillance devices.
They can also be used to steal or plant evidence, and to perpetrate acts of vandalism for psychological operations purposes.
Illegal black bag operations were conducted by the FBI during its original Cointelpro operations.
For example, volume 6 of the United States Senate’s Church Committee investigations contains a letter about black bag jobs (referred to as such) which explicitly states that the FBI knew that the operations were clearly illegal.
That depends upon whether you subscribe to the subversive notion that the United States Constitution means what it says.
Under the Patriot Act, there has been an expansion of the use by law enforcement agencies of a Constitutionally-dubious tactic commonly referred to as a “sneak and peek” warrant.
Officially called a “Delayed-Notice Search Warrant,” it allows police to covertly enter private residences, perform searches, and seize property without notifying the residents.
An article about a wrongly-accused man from Oregon who won a $2 million settlement against the United States government because of his harassment by federal agents which included black bag jobs.
A more recent review of sneak and peek warrants, which notes that requests for such warrants are granted almost automatically.
A study in 2010 found that judges denied such requests in less than one percent of all cases.
Such activities usually stop short of theft which could lead to police reports.
If items are stolen, they are typically limited to items that would be inexpensive and therefore unlikely objects of theft so reports of the incident will seem implausible and evidence of mental instability.
In this short video clip, Luke Harding, a journalist with the Guardian, describes his personal experience with gas-lighting tactics being used against him by Russian intelligence agents while he was living in Moscow.
Harding naturally found the experience unsettling, but keep in mind that he had the total support of his wife and his employer.
Most victims of gang stalking are more isolated and if they attempt to describe the experience to others, are met with skepticism.
The most likely reaction is to assume that the victim simply forgot where he placed something, or whether he left the window open, etc.
ABUSIVE PHONE CALLS As with adolescent pranks, phone calls to the victim’s residence are an easy way to harass the victim.
Messages can range from insults to threats, although they are subtle, not explicit, in case the calls are being recorded.
COMPUTER HACKING Accounts of computer hacking seem to be nearly universal among victims of organized stalking.
United States government agents and private security contractors use the tactic both to gather information and to perpetrate psychological operations, such as threats and harassment.
This tactic was apparently used against Larry Klayman, a public interest lawyer and conservative political activist, after he filed a lawsuit against the National Security Agency to challenge that agency’s program of mass surveillance.
According to Klayman, after he filed his lawsuit, his email account was hacked.
Someone began sending emails from his account to other people he knew a move which Klayman interpreted as being an effort by United States intelligence agents to intimidate him by letting him know he was being closely watched. in December 2013 a federal judge ruled in favor of Klayman in his lawsuit against the NSA, finding that the agency’s collection of Americans’ phone records was apparently a violation of the United States Constitution’s Fourth Amendment.
FRAMING As with most of these gang stalking tactics, you can use your imagination regarding the countless ways someone can be framed.
Planting evidence can be done either to further a slander campaign, or to actually set up the victim for arrest and prosecution.
Additionally, planting evidence can be intentionally done in ways that the victim himself will easily find the evidence just to send the threatening message that target is vulnerable to this type of attack.
For a recent high-profile example of a “stitch-up” by intelligence agencies, consider the case of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange.
WikiLeaks’ exposure of United States diplomatic cables in 2010 did not go over well with United States officials.
The cables included some inconvenient information such as corroboration of evidence that the United States had launched a missile strike in Yemen the year before that killed dozens of civilians and that the United States conspired with Yemen’s government to conceal the fact that the United States was behind the attack.
To gain leverage for extraditing Assange from the U.K., he was made the target of apparently trumped-up charges in Sweden.
Apologists and useful idiots for the governments of the U.S., U.K., and Sweden were publicly treating the charges against Assange as plausible and legitimate, but people familiar with how spy agencies operate immediately recognized the game that was being played.
Amid major publicity, Albertson was expelled from the party, lost all his friends, and was fired from his job.
THREATS Other such threats are apparently common in gang stalking cases.
They can take any form imaginable, but will inevitably be anonymous and difficult to prove.
At one point, the gang stalking crew in my neighborhood began dropping life insurance pamphlets on the walkway inside my courtyard.
A famous example was its use by the feds against Martin Luther King, Jr.
Pages 220221 of this United States Senate report show that the FBI apparently attempted to blackmail King, and encourage him to commit suicide.
This can be dumping trash on the lawn, scratching the paint of their car, or whatever.
Victims should not assume that perpetrators are above doing physical harm to their pets either; I know this both from personal experience and from accounts by a few individuals I have reasons to regard as very credible.
BAITING Baiting is any effort to evoke a response by the victim which can be used to discredit or legally ensnare him.
In a sense, all gang stalking tactics are forms of baiting because their cumulative effect will eventually drive the victim to respond in ways that will create additional trouble.
This was reported for example in the Washington Post Magazine’s 2007 cover article on gang stalking.
Public and political discourse may devalue members of unfamiliar groups,ix and offenders may feel that their livelihood or way Of life is threatened by demographic changes.
Offenders may not be motivated by hate, but rather by fear, ignorance or anger.
People victimized by violent hate crimes [including expressive non verbal speech] are more likely to experience more psychological distress than victims of other violent crimes.
Specifically, victims of crimes that are bias-motivated are more likely to experience post-traumatic stress, safety concerns, depression, anxiety and anger than victims of crimes that are not motivated by bias.
Hate crimes send messages to members of the victim’s group that they are unwelcome and unsafe in the community, victimizing the entire group and decreasing feelings of safety and security.
Furthermore, witnessing discrimination against one’s own group can lead to psychological distress and lower self-esteem.
Stalker Forced Teaming e GANGSTALK OFFENDER ACTS An offender's bias against a race, religion, disability, sexual orientation, ethnicity, gender or gender identity can be acted out by forced-teaming Stalk Victim into situations mean to be abusive, offensive, revolting, or exploitative.
STREET THEATER A general category of harassment, “street theater” can include some of the tactics described above and below, and simply refers to any sort of staged encounter with one or more perpetrators in public.
Typically, both the comments and actions of the perpetrators are carefully scripted to resonate with the victim, but appear benign if captured on video or seen by witnesses.
BLOCKING/CUTTING-OFF/INVASION OF PERSONAL SPACE One example of gang stalking “street theater” is to cut-off the victim when he or she is walking, driving, or riding a bicycle.
A related tactic is to crowd the victim by rudely invading his or her space or brushing against the person.
Since this occasionally happens to everyone in the normal course of events, accounts by the victim will likely sound paranoid when described to others.
Also, anyone nearby will be unlikely to notice let alone understand that the action was deliberate.
Here is an example of how an FBI surveillance team will deliberately provoke you.
When you’re walking through a mall or a downtown shopping district, the surveillance team will intentionally interfere with your route.
A pavement artist will “absent-mindedly” cross your path, forcing you to change course to avoid walking into him.
A group of agents will “inadvertently” obstruct your path they’ Il be standing together chatting, forcing you to walk around them.
Other pavement artists will “accidentally” create near-misses as you walk along.
Some of these “pedestrians” will create situations with a potential for a head-on collision, forcing you to dodge them.
As the psychological pressure continues to build, agents may “innocently” bump into you, jostle you, or step on your heel from behind.
A group of pavement artists will cue up ahead of you, creating a line-up that delays you as you try to make a purchase, order fast food, buy tickets, and so on.
But because the incidents occur in public locations, it’s difficult to prove who’s behind them.
Targets of gang stalking should expect this tactic and have a clear idea in mind of how they will respond.
SENSITIZATION As described in some of the sections below, perpetrators of organized stalking sometimes make use of various cutting-edge technologies, but psychological torture does not require electronic hardware.
A basic concept in Neuro-Linguistic Programming is that a particular stimulus such as a sound or gesture can become associated or “anchored” in the thoughts and reactions of an individual through repetition.
Gang stalkers exploit this phenomenon by repeatedly performing a particular action such as generating a particular sound as part of a noise harassment campaign.
Since the victim is made aware that the sound is an element of the harassment, his or her mind will naturally begin responding to that sound as a “trigger” for a negative emotional reaction.
It’s a way to keep the victim constantly agitated because he or she will have the negative response whenever stalkers generate the sound or even when the sound occurs in the normal course of events.
SYNCHRONIZATION Similar to sensitization, “synchronizing” is when gang stalking perp’s always perform a particular action at the same moment as a particular action by the victim.
For example, whenever the victim leaves his residence, a stalker in the area will cough or honk a horn or slam a door.
It is a way of reminding the targeted individual that he or she is under constant surveillance.
NOISE HARASSMENT (ESPECIALLY WHEN WRITING A BOOK ABOUT THE FBI OR ITS OFFICIALS OR THE CONDUCT OF ITS OFFICIALS) One of the major weapons in the arsenal of gang stalkers is noise.
It was widely reported that loud music was used by the United States military in its invasion of Panama in 1989 to harass General Manuel Noriega and flush him from the Vatican Embassy where he was holed-up.
Accounts differ about exactly how and why the tactic was used in that instance, but no one questions the potential effectiveness of noise to create distress.
As with many of the tactics described here, the cumulative effects are difficult to fully appreciate if you haven’t personally been on the sharp end of them.
Among other things, the tactic can be used to cause sleep deprivation, which in turn can create additional problems, both physical and psychological.
Again, with Tresspass, by harrasing phone calls, outside noise, other disruptions sent into an apartement or house, if gang stalkers have access to a residence adjacent to that of the victim (especially, for example, in an apartment building or condominium complex), they can easily generate noises that will be heard only by the target.
As is typical of psychological operations tactics used by FBI minions, harassment by noise is virtually impossible to prove.
You could record the noise, but you could not prove where and when you made the recording let alone where the sound came from or who was generating it.
Moreover, even if you could prove all of that, it would be difficult or impossible to legally establish that the perpetrator was conspiring with anyone else to deliberately harass you.
Apartment rentals, future employers, stores and communities where the target visits, will be notified.
A covert investigation might also be opened, and electronic, means used by the civilian spies/snitches as part of the overt and covert monitoring and surveillance process.
Individuals can be flagged designating them as having a history of aggressive or inappropriate behavior.
This notification system will follow the target if they move, change jobs, visit other areas.
It let’s the community believe that the target is a person who needs to be watched or monitored.
Allegations of Stalking by Private Organizations KKK Georgia May 1946 Deception is a major element of counterintelligence programs.
Consequently, all discussion of Cointelpro-type stalking has to be viewed skeptically.
Allegations that the ongoing criminal harassment of targeted individuals is simply an activity by one or more vigilante groups is a case in point.
It is inconceivable especially with the modern surveillance state that the Justice Department and the other federal intelligence agencies are unaware of exactly what is happening.
Their silence about the issue means that they acquiesce in it, whatever the specific operational structure might be.
That said, it is also clear that there is a “snitch culture” element to organized stalking not just a bureaucratic machine.
Perpetrators of gang stalking crimes rely upon a degree of informal support from sadists and useful idiots.
Also, there is a long history of non-governmental organizations perpetrating very serious crimes against their fellow citizens.
In addition, such organizations for example, the Ku Klux Klan have historically included members of the political and law enforcement community.
So the involvement of private groups in organized stalking cannot be categorically dismissed, even though the core of the activity has to be statesanctioned.
Gang stalking tactics are sometimes alleged to be used by certain fraternal orders such as Freemasons, and by various religious groups such as Scientologists and Jehovah’s Witnesses for example, to control or punish current or former members.
In the case of Scientologists, there is reportedly a policy called “Fair Game,” under which the church allegedly uses aggressive tactics toward individuals and groups it perceives as its enemies.
Instances of “cause stalking” and stalking by religious cults presumably account for only a very small portion of the numerous incidents in the aforementioned crime survey Statistics.
It is true however, that members of religious cults (and cult-like fraternal organizations) are by definition easily manipulated, so they could serve in some cases as “useful idiot” vigilantes for others whose motivations they don’t even comprehend.
That is perhaps true for most of the general public since most people are completely unaware of the existence of any domestic counterintelligence operations past or present and would be unlikely to suspect that what they are being told might be disinformation and manipulation as part of a modern American version of the Stasi.
One group which is sometimes mentioned as a source of organized stalking perpetrators probably as disinformation in most cases is the ancient fraternal order of Freemasons.
Mentioning the organization often brings to mind tin-foil hat conspiracy theories.
It should be noted, however, that mainstream news reports also include allegations about the group.
Specifically, there are claims that the Freemasons’ network is exploited to abuse the power of its members.
In other words, abuse of psychiatry is the deliberate action of having citizens psychiatrically diagnosed who need neither psychiatric restraint nor psychiatric treatment.
The diagnosis of mental disease allows the state to hold persons against their will and insist upon therapy in their interest and in the broader interests of society.
Psychiatry can be used to bypass standard legal procedures for establishing guilt or innocence and allow political incarceration without the ordinary odium attaching to such political trials.
In the period from the 1960s up to 1986, abuse of psychiatry for political and ideological purposes was reported to be systematic in the Soviet Union, and occasional in other Eastern European countries such as Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
The practice of incarceration of religious and political dissidents in psychiatric hospitals in the Eastern Bloc and the former USSR damaged the credibility of psychiatric practice in these states and entailed strong condemnation from the international community.
Political abuse of psychiatry also takes place in the People’s Republic of China.
Psychiatric diagnoses such as the diagnosis of “sluggish schizophrenia” in political dissidents in the USSR were used for political purposes.
War Crimes by Sociopaths in United States Intelligence Agencies Journalist Douglas Valentine has written extensively about the Central Intelligence Agency , including a book called The Phoenix Program which details the CIA’s Operation Phoenix in the Vietnam war.
That program, which is largely unknown to the American public even today, involved torture, assassinations, and the murder of civilians including women and children on a large scale.
For anyone who is curious about Operation Phoenix, I recommend this article which Valentine wrote for CounterPunch magazine in May of 2001 in which he explains both the nature of the war crimes committed and how those crimes were whitewashed by the establishment press.
No doubt this also applies to many agents in other United States intelligence and law enforcement agencies as well.
An instructive example of the extremes to which federal agencies sometimes go is the CIA’s secret MK Ultra program.
I describe MK Ultra in some detail in section 6 below, so I will just note here that it involved performing experiments (including psychological and physical torture) on American citizens.
No one was punished for his participation in that program which lasted two decades, and the head of the CIA destroyed most of the records about it when it was discovered.
In September 1970 the leftists in Chile won a plurality of that country’s democratic election, as a result of which, their representative would have soon been confirmed as the next president.
Right-wing political leaders in Chile, some major United States corporations which did business in the country (including Pepsi Cola and Chase Manhattan Bank), and the CIA were not pleased with this development and communicated that to then-president Richard Nixon and his Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, and they plotted to arrange for a military coup instead.
An obstacle they faced was that the chief of the Chilean General Staff, General René Schnieder did not believe in interfering with the democratic process.
The incident and other very serious transgressions did not prevent Kissinger from generally being treated with great respect and adulation by the American news media over the rest of his career.
That kind of sycophancy and complacency by mainstream journalists obviously makes it difficult to expose and punish the bad behavior done in secret by the United States government.
FBI Whistle-Blowers Most Americans are unaware that the FBI is exempt from the Whistleblower Protection Act.
If anything, the agency deserves extra scrutiny because of its history of domestic spying done for political reasons.
An October 2013 article in Reason described the FBI as a “dangerous” domestic spy agency.
A more high-profile case of spying on journalists was reported in May 2013, when it was revealed that the Justice Department secretly obtained two months of telephone records of reporters and editors of the Associated Press.
Mike German Mike German was a decorated FBI agent who specialized in counter-terrorism.
He had discovered that fellow officers were violating wiretapping regulations.
When he reported that to his supervisors, his accusations were ignored, and his career was effectively frozen.
Apparently, his experience was not unique in an agency which values secrecy more than ethics.
The individual was subjected to intense investigation for years despite having no criminal record, apart from trespassing incidents related to political protests.
At 2:06 in the video of this interview journalist Amy Goodman asks Mike German to explain the FBI’s legal authority to perform the “assessments” which, as I mentioned in the introduction above, are essentially investigations that can now be launched against an individual without any evidence that the individual has committed a crime.
He suggests that much of the FBI’s threat assessment role should be taken over by Congress, since the agency has a natural tendency to exaggerate the threat of terrorism.
German also states that the FBI is now more powerful than at any time since the Cointelpro era.
And often a targeted person will become the victim of more than one type of gangstalking.
Ross Predatory Gangstalking is reported by historians to have been originally developed by social scientists and psychologists in communist and fascist’s countries as a means of control of individuals within those societies.
In Old Money societies movers and shakers who held business and government and perhaps Crown positions could decide the fate of citizens.
They could send “people down” by criminal prosecution, blackballing them in employment or hirings, or harassing them in public and in business locations and this was Called Rough Noise for instance as a person walked by a coffee shop’s trash can the owner might bang on the trashcans making the sidewalk uncomfortable.
Charivari, alternatively spelled shivaree or chivaree and also called skimmington, was a European and North American folk custom in which a mock parade was staged through a community accompanied by a discordant mock serenade.
Wikipedia Noisy, masked processions were held outside the home of the accused wrongdoer, involving the cacophonous rattling of bones and cleavers, the ringing of bells, hooting, blowing bull’s horns, the banging of frying pans, saucepans, kettles, or other kitchen or barn implements with the intention of creating long-lasting embarrassment to the alleged perpetrator.
The Paid Actors Street Theater of Psychological Warfare is that in Russia has the name KOMPOMAT highly offense is being acted out along a persons route such as to the grocery store, etc., and the staged street theater acted events can make a victim feel or look a certain way by acts framed around them by actors.
Defense Intelligence Agencies hoping to stress people to gain their cooperation have learned to make normally human rights approved detention unpleasant such that the detainee has a motive to co-operate.
In many Feudal societies like England, Northern Ireland, Austria Hungary Germany Poland and elsewhere gym roughian can intimidate in street harassment and that is the history of Brown Shirts.
Armold Schwartzenegger and his brother were body builders, his Nazi official father may have been as well.
It is rightfully assumed that money is involved in Predatory Gangstalking because of the amount of resources required to execute such extensive efforts.
The gangstalkers develop capabilities directly proportionate to the amount money that funds them.
In following the money trail speculatively, one looks to the possibility that drug money is involved.
Some people reason that the government may be involved because of the amount of resources that are available to the practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking.
Other individual situations seem to indicate that corporations, insurance companies, and even wealthy individuals with revenge motives fund a Predatory Gangstalking.
In addition to cash payment for participation in Predatory Gangstalking, other forms of barter are used.
These include drugs, *, alcohol, reciprocal favors, release from debts, jobs, contracts,”deals” for legal problems, and other forms of compensation.
Some gangstalkers are given free housing in exchange for performing Predatory Gangstalking activities against a nearby target.
However, it is clear from observing Predatory Gangstalkers in action that many engage in it for pleasure.
One high ranking leader in Predatory Gangstalking stated that it was like an addiction.
He described how the build up and culmination of a gangstalking assault was intoxicating, but that there was a let-down feeling afterwards that compelled him to do it again, and the cycle continued.
It is also true that some people participate in Predatory Gangstalking because they are deceived into participating.
Friends, neighbors and associates of a selected target are given false information and finally come to believe the targeted individual has committed a heinous crime for which they deserve what is portrayed them to be rehabilitative social intervention.
Sometimes people reluctantly participate in indirect ways, such as making their homes available at times for part of the operation, for fear of consequences if they did not.
Others involved in Predatory Gangstalking, including the homeless, do so for money or drugs.
Disabled Vets are known to participate in Predatory Gangstalking activities for alleged government or defense contractor’s projects.
Predatory Gangstalkers have successfully elicited the participation of neighbors by appealing to their sense of service to the community or government, often representing themselves as affiliates of the government or law enforcement.
Lastly, those who are in the underworld or secret organizations practice Predatory Gangstalking as part of their membership duties.
The craft and practice of Predatory Gangstalking appears to be standardized around the world.
Many similarities parallel incidents reported by targets internationally.
It appears that there is a standard protocol involving a series of tactics, progressive phases, and nature of assaults.
It appears that an individual has been selected to become a target and the groundwork has been established for their assaults long before the individual can be aware that something criminal is occurring in their lives and to their person.
By the time the targeted individual becomes aware that something very threatening and disturbing is happening to them, they have already been thoroughly investigated by their enemies, stigmatized, discredited, and compromised.
All wells have been already poisoned, so to speak, and all avenues of help and escape have been blocked.
Predatory Gangstalkers first establish “information dominance” over a targeted individual.
This achievement alone enables them to attain excessive power over the targeted individual.
It is believed that this is accomplished by means of eavesdropping devices in the target’s environment, global positioning technology secreted on their vehicles, obtaining illegal access to all of a targeted individual’s personal records such banks accounts, emails, medical records, and credit card purchases.
They are often able to achieve 100% surveillance of a targeted individual and almost 100% access to a targeted individual’s entire lifetime of available information from any computer, paper, photographic, or personal source.
They use all of the information obtained to ambush and sabotage a targeted individual.
Predatory Gangstalkers ultimately become capable of entering a target’s house, place of employment, and vehicle at-will and often.
All forms of communications in the targeted individual’s life is interfered with by the gangstalkers.
They will intercept email, tamper with voicemail, and obstruct the delivery of postal mail.
The net result is that all communication in a targeted individual’s life will become unreliable and incomplete, both incoming and outgoing.
The Predatory Gangstalkers are then capable of greater insidious manipulation and control.
Updates are promptly shared with all of the participants in that predatory gangstalking group.
They take frequent photographs of the targeted individual, and maintain photos of the target’s house, vehicle, place of employment, family, friends, and even the target’s pets.
They promptly disseminate this information through email and cell phones to other gangstalkers.
This is the means by which a targeted individual is continually recognized by Predatory Gangstalkers everywhere they go.
Psychological profiling is yet another tactic performed on a targeted individual for the purpose of finding weaknesses.
They exploit all information obtained, including fears, triggers, value-conflicts, skeletons in the closet, areas of shame, addictions, vices, and all things they hold dear.
They use the information obtained to maximize the Predatory Gangstalkers’ ability to destroy the targeted individual.
Practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking have their own coded language, both verbal and visual.
Some hand signals resemble the mannerisms used in baseball and other sports.
They use hand signals to identify the area of a target’s body designated to be the target of a pending physical attack.
They also use hand signals to coordinate the unauthorized entry into a target’s home or vehicle.
They also use hand signals during roving vehicle caravans and while on foot, for the purpose of coordinating attacks and pointing out the location of a target.
Vehicle alarm panic buttons and horns are other commonly used tools of communication and coordination.
In residential areas, outside lights have an established set of messages.
They also use “dead drops” like spies have done historically to secretly pass along information to one another.
Public bathrooms are commonly utilized as locations for the transfer of information and equipment.
Mobile pick-up and delivery systems are in place for this purpose as well.
They have a set of questions and responses to confirm the identity of a predatory gangstalker to another which are also coded.
In the USA they refer to money by the last names of the president whose face is on the bill.
Predatory Gangstalkers will begin an intense and extensive discrediting campaign against a selected target well before the target could even suspect he or she has an enemy.
This critical tactic sets the stage for neighbors and associates to become alienated from the target.
One of the Predatory Gangstalkers’ goals is to eliminate all forms of support and assistance for the target.
Towards this objective, the police are given anonymous “concerned citizen” tips designed to lead the police to believe the target is mentally unstable or a problem in the community in advance of any actual direct gangstalking of the targeted individual.
This sets the stage for having the targeted individual prejudged so they will be disbelieved and dismissed when the gangstalking begins and they seek help.
The discrediting campaign includes accusing the target of being an “undesirable” for any number of reasons, including fabricated reports of having committed crimes that are the most repulsive to members of society.
Practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking even go so far as to represent themselves as undercover law enforcement or government agents.
It has been reported that they will even show false documents for substantiation, but they will never leave them behind.
Towards this goal, they make attempts to destroy one’s gainful employment, pose as offering services to intervene in the problem to further take your money, and will steal funds and personal property on an on-going basis.
Repeated unauthorized entries into a target’s residence, vehicles, computer, and workplace are hallmark tactics of this crime and is nearly impossible to stop.
Predatory Gangstalkers can pick locks, bypass security alarms, and enter any location posing as utility crews, law enforcement, or delivery men.
Practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking will apply for and obtain legitimate jobs in a target’s home or business in order to have access to the target and their life, relationships, and assets just to do harm.
This tactic involves the precise timing of interactions with the targeted individual.
For example, the target can go out to get the morning newspaper and encounter gangstalking activities that suddenly appear and which are precisely synchronized.
Throughout the targeted individual’s day, these synchronized encounters repeatedly occur.
Activities such as leaving one’s driveway, taking out the trash, going to a store, or even walking the dog, are activities which result in an encounter with one or more Predatory Gangstalkers.
Even when a target strategically does not follow any set routine, these synchronized occurrences continue.
This makes the gangstalkers appear to be allknowing and almost omnipresent in the mind of a new targeted individual.
In the case of primary targeted individuals of gangstalking (the rare individuals who are the priority target of global gangstalking) the primary objective is to induce as much fear as possible and over time as the numbers of individuals that become involved or are made aware of a target, the abuse can increase substantially, so that there is no aspect of the targets life that is private or sacred.
Rarely, if ever, does a targeted individual engage in an activity of daily living without the unwanted participation of Predatory Gangstalkers.
The timing and coordination of these activities are remarkably precise.
The targeted individual becomes aware that all of their activities include the presence of Predatory Gangstalkers.
These gangstalkers demand to be noticed by their target, and if they are not, they will take an action to be noticed.
This could include honking their horn strategically, making a comment, creating a scenario to get the attention of the targeted individual.
Once noticed, they will return to non-contact, knowing that by that point, the targeted individual will henceforth anxiously watch for them.
However, these strangers often boldly smirk and openly laugh at the targeted individual at some close point in the encounter.
Since most of the practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking rotate in and out of the life of a target, the same patterns of gangstalking will occur, but it will involve different people all the time.
Therefore, many different stranger and many different vehicles will walk, drive, or bike past the target and interact in some manner, at various times and locations.
All of the predatory gangstalkers will be strangers to the targeted individual and they will continue to make their presence, but not their purpose, known.
This is one element of Predatory Gangstalking that is disbelieved by others.
These “others” include law enforcement, the medical profession, and family.
Those who are unaware of activities of subcultures such as criminals, secret organizations, clubs, extremist groups, radical political groups, hate groups, organized crime groups, and other antisocial groups, the scope of attack by Predatory Gangstalkers is unfathomable.
Never the less, the extent of this massive assault on one individual is as extensive as described here and even more so.
Investigation, Surveillance, and Harassment Tactics Africa Day 23 Leaving Serengeti Investigation Apparently, gang stalking begins with a deep investigation of the targeted individual.
Information gathered about the target can later be used to tailor the surveillance and harassment strategies.
In some cases, an investigation could also reveal that the target is unsuitable for gang stalking because he or she has connections and resources which would enable the target to fight back.
Law enforcement and intelligence personnel public and private at various levels are sometimes under pressure to show that they are being productive, so there could well be a de facto quota for conducting investigations of “suspicious” persons.
Acts of subversion can be seamlessly incorporated into what is ostensibly an investigation.
Stalking was one of the tactics used by the FBI in their subversion campaign against the actress Jean Seberg during their Cointelpro operations, for example.
Another tactic also used during Cointelpro against various targeted individuals was slander.
An investigation provides a legally bullet-proof opportunity to slander the victim.
If an investigator quietly begins questioning persons associated with a targeted individual , and tells them that he is conducting an investigation, it could easily destroy the target’s reputation and relationships.
The more you know about someone, the more you can control and manipulate them in all sorts of ways.
For example, when the FBI’s illegal Cointelpro operations were exposed, internal documents showed that the agency had enlisted a local police chief, letter carriers, and a switchboard operator at Swarthmore College to spy on campus and black activist groups in the Philadelphia area.
Another function of gang stalking is to exact revenge against the victim.
Stalking is a form of extra-judical punishment for anyone who crosses someone with connections to the vast homeland security infrastructure.
Constant surveillance of targeted individuals is also an element of subversion.
Anyone who knows that he or she is under constant surveillance will not only be inhibited from acting against the interests of the client of the gang stalkers, he or she will also find it difficult to fight back against the harassment or evade the surveillance itself because many efforts at counter-measures will be observed by the stalkers.
In addition, anyone who is aware that he or she is constantly being watched by illegal spying will suffer the emotional trauma caused by having virtually no privacy.
On the other hand, “harassment” does not begin to convey the severity of the cumulative psychological effects of organized stalking.
Slander, verbal abuse, noise, threats by strangers, constant surveillance, and other tactics, performed daily over a period of years will cause psychological torture, social isolation, and financial destruction.
Regardless of whether that term is actually used by perperators of gang stalking, it is an appropriate description.
Historical origins of psychological torture methods Some of the psychological operations tactics described below have ancient roots.
For example, the use of noise to torment enemies dates back to the warfare of early civilizations including the siege of Jericho in the Old Testament.
Apparently, noise is still used in United States military psychological operations, although details about such tactics are mostly classified.
Some of the core principles of organized stalking harassment are also used in military interrogations such as those conducted on terrorist suspects at Guantanamo.
Several of these concepts were documented by the sociologist Albert D Biderman, in a 1957 journal article about coercive interrogation methods used by the Chinese to obtain confessions from American prisoners during the Korean War.
A copy of Biderman’s Chart of Coercion is on page 48 of this report.Tactics chosen for their lack of evidence For the most part, organized stalking tactics are chosen for their lack of directly observable and legally persuasive evidence.
The idea is to completely destroy someone without leaving fingerprints.
Intelligence-gathering and policing are often done in ways that make it inherently difficult to prove misconduct.
Gang stalking employs a refined set of practices specifically chosen for the lack of legally incriminating evidence, and for the likelihood that victims’ accounts will be perceived as simply paranoid impressions of routine events when described to others.
But for gang stalking victims, these things happen constantly which becomes a form of real psychological torture, which must be experienced to comprehend.
Below are the primary tactics associated with counterintelligence subversion.
Keep in mind that, by all accounts, a gang stalking campaign starts employing these tactics long before the victim has any clue that he or she is being systematically targeted.
Many of the early instances of harassment are only understood by the victim later when the whole process becomes clear.
By that point, often the harassment and slandering might have been going on for years.
A Brief Explanation of “Gang Stalking” Definitions “Gang Stalking” is, very likely, a disinformation term created by United States intelligence agencies.
News reports indicate that such stalking is also sometimes used unofficially for personal and corporate vendettas by current and former employees of law enforcement and intelligence agencies, including private investigators.
Since counterintelligence stalking goes far beyond surveillance into the realm of psychological terrorism, it is essentially a form of extrajudicial punishment.
It clearly violates the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution, for example which guarantees the right to a trial.
Such operations also violate similar fundamental rights defined by state constitutions, which people on the right of America’s political spectrum claim to respect.
Stalking is also specifically prohibited by the criminal codes of every state in America.
Although they sometimes conduct their operations under the color of law, many of their activities have neither constitutional nor moral legitimacy.
All of those groups and other federal intelligence agencies, such as the CIA and NSA have well-documented histories of abusing their powers.
History Organized stalking methods were used extensively by communist East Germany’s Stasi as a means of maintaining political control over its citizens.
The most well-documented example of such operations was the FBI’s infamous Cointelpro under the direction of J Edgar Hoover.
Those operations ran from 1956 until 1971 when they were exposed by political activists who broke into an FBI office and obtained secret documents which they handed over to the press.
Cointelpro’s official goal was to “expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize” individuals and groups deemed to be subversive.
Perpetrators use common annoyances such as constant noise by neighbors or rude comments and abusive behavior by strangers, but on a frequent ongoing long-term basis.
The cumulative effects of relentless exposure to such tactics can amount to psychological torture for the victim.
Accounts by numerous victims of organized stalking share common specific details suggesting that the perpetrators are following a well-tested and standardized playbook of methods that have proven to be easily kept off of the radar of potential witnesses and the mainstream news media.
The following published news reports are discussed in more detail later in this overview, and accompanied by links to the original sources.
Although Edward Snowden’s revelations about the National Security Agency in 2013 and 2014 generated a great deal of public discussion about mass surveillance, United States domestic counterintelligence activities receive relatively little attention.
This is so despite reports such as those which follow from sources across the political spectrum.
Published articles and anecdotal reports have appeared with increasing frequency especially in the past decade or so alleging that something comparable to the FBI’s Cointelpro operations is still happening, although it naturally involves more advanced surveillance technology.
One of the first significant works of investigative journalism about United States domestic counterintelligence operations in the post-Cointelpro era appeared just 7 months after the United States Senate’s “Church Committee” issued its final report about Cointelpro and MK Ultra.
Although LEIUs or “Red Squads” have existed in America since the late 1800s, the private national network of such intelligence units that was quietly formed in the 1950s had remained and still remains mostly unknown to the general public.
Several of the police departments belonging to the group have recently been caught in illegal wiretapping, burglary, and spying on the private lives of ordinary citizens.
A Los Angeles Times article published in September 1979 under the headline “FBI Admits Spreading Lies About Jean Seberg” was the lead story on the paper’s front page.
Seberg a successful film actress and a political activist had died the month before in Paris from an apparent suicide.
As the Los Angeles Times reported, Seberg had been the target of a systematic campaign by the FBI to slander her.
She had also apparently been blacklisted and terrorized by the FBI using tactics associated with counterintelligence operations intended to neutralize political dissidents, such as “black bag jobs,” illegal wiretapping, and overt stalking.
During the 1980s and 90s a trend toward militarization began in American police departments.
For example, Special Weapons and Tactics teams were being created across the nation.
However, relatively little news about United States counterintelligence operations emerged.
This is not to say that illegal spying was not taking place; it just mostly stayed out of the media.
Secret Police, exposed such spying in Los Angeles and explained how it was kept out of the news.
Police Chief Daryl Gates apparently used threats and blackmail to scare city council members and the Los Angeles Times away from digging into his activities.
In Los Angeles, police corruption was much more than unmarked envelopes stuffed with cash.
An apparent case of organized stalking by federal agents which did appear in the news during that era was the high-profile case of a cancer research scientist named Arnold Lockshin, who fled with his family to the Soviet Union in 1986 and was granted political asylum.
An article in the Gadsen Times and other newspaper reports in October 1986 brought national attention to the case.
According to Lockshin, he and his family were being intensely harassed by agents because of the socialist political views of Lockshin and his wife.
News reports about domestic spying and subversion in the United States and other Western nations became more frequent in the post-9/11 era.
Spying on civilians by the United States Army was one of the scandals which led to the famous Church Committee investigations by Congress in the mid-1970s.
In October 2004 the U.K newspaper The Sunday Times published an article about the use of Stasi-type psychological operations to punish whistle-blowers by MI5 an intelligence agency with close ties to the United States intelligence community.
The book’s title, 1996, was the year it became apparent to Naylor that she was being stalked.
The Globe and Mail, a national newspaper in Canada, reported in May 2006 that the Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police used organized stalking techniques (referred to as “Diffuse and Disrupt” tactics) against terrorism suspects for whom they lacked sufficient evidence to prosecute.
A cover article in The Washington Post Magazine in January 2007 by a journalist familiar with military policies and weapon systems portrayed self-proclaimed victims of gang stalking as intelligent and credible, and suggested that claims about exotic non-lethal weapons being used by the United States government to harass targeted individuals were plausible.
A newspaper article in the Verona-Cedar Grove Times in March 2009 titled “Stalker Claims Unsettle Police” described how a self-proclaimed target of gang stalking had been distributing flyers in his former neighborhood in Verona, New Jersey, warning about organized stalking of targeted individuals.
A post on the political blog Daily Kos in October 2010 alleged that intelligence agencies in the U.S., the U.K., and Canada use gang stalking (zersetzung as East Germany’s Stasi called it) against targeted individuals.
A local TV news broadcast in California in January 2011 (on KION Channel 46 and KCBA Channel 35) featured a report about gang stalking referred to as such by the reporters and by Lieutenant Larry Richard of the Santa Cruz Police Department.
The brazen tactics used by the police included purchasing the house next to that of the city manager and using it as a base for psychological operations of the sort used by counterintelligence personnel.
Florida’s Pulitzer Prize-winning Sun Sentinel reported in December 2012 on the organized stalking of a police officer by other police officers and sheriff’s deputies from multiple jurisdictions.
The stalking which included illegally snooping on the victim’s private data and efforts to harass and intimidate her was apparently done in retaliation.
Navy Yard included reports of speculation that the incident resulted from the shooter having been systematically tormented by gang stalking, including tactics such as constant noise harassment.
A TV news broadcast in West Virginia on 14 November 2013 (on CBS affiliate WDTYV) included a report about “organized stalking” which featured two individuals from Pennsylvania who appeared to be credible and sincere, discussing their constant harassment by perpetrators using gang stalking tactics.
The plaintiff claims he was subjected to constant surveillance including inside his residence and his vehicle and constant psychological harassment from co-workers and strangers.
Research biologist Tyrone Hayes discovered some disturbing effects from a pesticide made by the agribusiness corporation Syngenta.
When he refused to keep quiet about it, the corporation’s goon squad began slandering him to discredit him.
They also stalked him, hacked his emails, and threatened him for more than a decade.
A report on the ABC News TV program 20/20 and an article in the Daily Mail in May 2014 chronicled the ordeal of a couple in Hubbard, Ohio who were systematically harassed for 7 years in a vengeance campaign orchestrated by the town’s fire chief.
Apparently, the fire chief was angry at the couple because of a real estate dispute, so he enlisted the help of other firefighters, police officers, and local residents to perpetrate a campaign of constant vehicle horn honking outside the couple’s home.
The harassment which the couple thoroughly documented on video resulted in legal claims which were still pending at the time of the news reports.
Disinformation In addition to the use of covert methods, another factor contributing to the low profile of organized stalking in the media is a disinformation campaign a common tactic in counterintelligence operations.
In the case of organized stalking, the disinformation is mainly intended to mitigate exposure of the program.
The intended effect is to convey the impression that everyone who claims to be targeted by gang stalking is simply delusional.
An additional disinformation strategy has been the establishment of front groups most notably, FFCHS ostensibly a gang stalking victims support group, but actually an organization run by counterintelligence operatives.
Scope of Operations United States Department of Justice crime statistics from a 2006 survey indicated that an estimated 445,220 stalking victims reported being stalked by three or more perpetrators.
The total silence of the DOJ and FBI on this crime is an obvious clue that it is sanctioned by those agencies.
Organizational Structure Ted L Gunderson was a high-level FBI official during the Cointelpro era.
After he retired from the agency he asserted that a much more sophisticated version of Cointelpro began to re-emerge in the 1980s.
A link to Gunderson’s affidavit on the subject is included in the overview below.
Local and federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies now share crime and national security information via a nationwide network of data “fusion centers” an element of the extensive post-9/11 homeland security infrastructure.
America’s now-vast industry of intelligence-security contractors, federal intelligence agencies (there are 16 not including the Director of National Intelligence office), and the hundreds of local police department Law Enforcement Intelligence Units make it difficult to speculate about exactly how domestic counterintelligence operations are currently being administered.
Increasingly-common reports of illegal spying by corporations as well as reports of police officers and federal agents sometimes initiating gang stalking operations for personal vendettas further complicate the analysis.
Numerous job listings by intelligence/security contractor corporations for “surveillance role players” with active security clearances and training in counterintelligence strongly suggest that federal law enforcement agencies have largely outsourced these operations which would be consistent with other security programs.
A June 10, 2013 article in USA Today noted that about 1. million Americans had top-secret security clearances.
It would be natural for such informants to be used in a counterintelligence program.
Indeed, the original Cointelpro was found by the United States Senate’s Church Committee investigations to have delegated some activities to organized crime groups.
Regardless of the exact nature of organized stalking in the U.S., any national counterintelligence program would require at least passive acquiescence by the United States Department of Justice just like the first version of Cointelpro did.
United States Attorney General Robert F Kennedy approved some of the original Cointelpro operations.
Because of the critical role of the DOJ in allowing organized stalking to occur, I devote an entire section of this overview to that agency.
Introduction to the Full Explanation of Gang Stalking I urge readers to consider the evidence presented here in its totality; the nature of organized stalking by design is such that it is difficult to comprehend and evaluate without considering it in its full context.
Published news and analysis of subjects such as government secrecy, police corruption, privacy, surveillance, private investigators, and various government scandals are relevant to organized stalking in ways which I try to make clear.
I hope readers are not put-off by my sometimes harsh views on related political topics.
I express my opinions here candidly, and the intensity of my rhetoric is partly a function of having been on the sharp end of gang stalking for years.
As for my analysis of organized stalking, I try to be as measured and cautious as possible while still confronting the reality that the subject requires a certain amount of speculation because of the secrecy and deception which surrounds it.
Given the current state of technologies and government policies concerning surveillance, the average American faces many potential and actual invasions of privacy.
For individuals targeted for gang stalking, the situation is infinitely worse.
Anyone associated with the professional news media who is interested in additional information about my personal experiences with gang stalking can reach me at the email address I have provided.
For victims of gang stalking, I hope that the information I post here will be helpful.
COUNTERINTELLIGENC Counterintelligence is the assessment and countering of threats posed by enemy subversion, espionage, and sabotage.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Counterintelligence is the assessment and countering of threats posed by enemy subversion, espionage, and sabotage.
COINTELPRO was the name of a secret illegal counterintelligence program run by the FBI from 1956 until it was exposed by civilian activists in 1971 and subsequently investigated by Congress.
The United States Senate’s Church Committee investigations in the mid-1970s found that under Cointelpro United States law enforcement personnel and their various government and private citizen and criminal accomplices systematically spied on, slandered, terrorized, and committed acts of violence against American citizens deemed to be dissidents.
Gang stalking is the covert organized surveillance and harassment of a targeted individual by multiple perpetrators.
The goal is to systematically isolate and harass the victim using tactics whose cumulative effects amount to psychological torture.
As far as I know, the term “gang stalking” has not yet found its way into any major print publication dictionaries which is not surprising for a subject residing in the grey area of counterintelligence.
Organized stalking of a targeted individual employs methods used in counterintelligence operations such as electronic and human surveillance, slander, disinformation, and a variety of intensive long-term psychological operations methods.
The Stasi communist East Germany’s infamous secret police agency monitored and terrorized citizens with the same tactics.
The latter term refers to the fact that the activity is sometimes associated with political causes.
For example, in his book Stopping a Stalker, Robert L Snow, a retired police captain from the Indianapolis Police Department, devoted a chapter to organized stalking by multiple perpetrators associated with causes such as stalking of abortion clinic staff members by extreme anti-abortion activists, and stalking of workers who crossed picket lines by union members.
Arguably, the best term for the counterintelligence operations widely referred to as “gang stalking” would be the term “COINTELPRO Stalking” because that is exactly what it is.
The Prevalence of Stalking by Multiple Perpetrators United States Department of Justice crime statistics from a 2006 survey indicated that an estimated 445,220 stalking victims reported being stalked by 3 or more perpetrators.
DOJ Stalking Survey 2006 Incidentally, that percentage is comparable to what appears in crime surveys in the U.K. a nation with whom United States intelligence agencies have very close ties.
British Crime Survey 1998 Possibly more relevant to organized stalking is the number of victims stalked by “four or more” perpetrators.
A Curiously Incurious Justice Department An attomey, Keith Labella, contacted the National Center for Victims of Crime in October 2008 to inquire about the frequency of reports the center receives about organized stalking crimes.
Notwithstanding the frequency of calls to their helpline, the center offered no guidance or referral to other agencies or organizations.
Make of it what you will, but the United States Department of Justice never publicly discusses the issue of counterintelligence stalking not even to dismiss it as nonsense.
In a society as heavily-policed as America now is a society whose National Security Agency is tracking everyone’s phone calls and Internet activity for example it is inconceivable that tens of thousands or more cases of criminal stalking (as documented in the DOJ crime statistics) fail to appear on the radar of law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
Yet there is no mention of such crimes by the federal government anywhere except in those statistics.
Assuming the statistics are even roughly accurate, there is no other explanation; organized stalking (the monitoring and “disruption” of the activities of targeted individuals) is being perpetrated as part of a counterintelligence program.
And it is being done illegally as it violates state laws against stalking as well as the United States Constitution’s prohibitions against unreasonable searches and punishment without a trial.
Covert Methods The most fundamental explanation for the low-profile of gang stalking is that counterintelligence operations by definition are performed covertly.
The FBI’s original version of Cointelpro remained undetected by the public until stolen secret documents were leaked to the press.
Security Clearances Law enforcement and intelligence agency personnel involved in counterintelligence activities are bound by secrecy oaths.
This is also true of the vast industry of private contractors employed by those agencies.
For example, job ads posted by securityintelligence contractors for “surveillance role players” all require an active security clearance in addition to counterintelligence training.
Similarly, judges who sit on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act court which reviews legal issues about secret federal policies are also bound by secrecy oaths.
That is also true of members of the House and Senate intelligence committees.
Whistleblower Protection Act Exemptions Agencies such as the FBI are exempt from the Whistleblower Protection Act.
Consequently, an agent who tries to reveal unethical behavior by the agency faces potentially serious legal consequences.
Contractors of intelligence agencies are also not protected by the Whistleblower Protection Act.
In an investigation, law enforcement personnel can order witnesses to keep silent.
For example, when the FBI issues an administrative subpoena called a “National Security Letter” the document has a gag order attached which prohibits the recipient from discussing it.
Tactics Which Create Minimal Evidence Subversion tactics used by the FBI include many tactics from the original version of Cointelpro, and some which were futher refined by East Germany’s Stasi.
The idea is to destroy the victim psychologically and socially and financially by forms of criminal harassment which create minimal objective evidence from the perspective of witnesses and courts.
But for gang stalking victims, these things happen constantly which becomes a form of real psychological torture, the intensity of which must be experienced to comprehend.
Ignorance Americans are largely unaware of the history of well-documented relevant programs, such as the FBI’s Cointelpro operations and the CIA’s MK Ultra program even though both were thoroughly investigated and exposed by Congress in the 1970s.
Similarly, although many people have heard of the Stasi (East Germany’s secret police agency), they are not specifically familiar with the Stasi’s use of Zersetzung which was a set of methods virtually identical to current gang stalking in America.
This is not surprising; nearly three-quarters of Americans do not know what the Cold War was about, and 29 percent cannot even name the vice president.
Counterintelligence operations can thrive in an environment of such widespread ignorance.
Of course, even well-educated individuals are unlikely to recognize the connections between a local situation in which they are told that a neighbor or co-worker or business patron is under investigation and historical phenomena like Cointelpro and East Germany’s Stasi.
Still, it can only make things easier for an agency such as the FBI to recruit vigilante citizen volunteers and to conduct illegal operations without detection when they are dealing with a society in which 64 percent of the public cannot name the three branches of their federal government and a fourth of the people do not even know that the earth revolves around the sun.
Cowardice, Laziness, & Incompetence in the Mainstream News Media Organized stalking goes mostly undiscussed in the mainstream news media.
There are some notable exceptions most frequently in the local and alternative press.
This silence in the press is largely the result of the kinds of self-censorship documented in sources such as Kristina Borjesson’s Into the Buzzsaw, and Noam Chomsky’s Manufacturing Consent.
It would be difficult to overstate the significance of the news media’s cowardice as a factor in keeping modern Cointelpro operations off of the public’s radar.
For perspective, one has to re-consider the reporting on crimes by United States intelligence agencies during the 1970s.
A book by historian Kathryn S Olmsted, Challenging the Secret Government , makes the case that Americans overestimate the boldness of the journalism during that period.
The following review of Olmsted’s book gives a sense of what really happened.
With a few notable exceptions such as reporters Seymour Hersh and Daniel Schorr the news media generally had a loss of nerve at a critical moment in America’s history.
As a result, we missed a golden opportunity to fully expose the deep corruption in the United States intelligence community, and implement serious reforms.
Conventional wisdom would have it that, in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate, the nation’s press was emboldened to enter a new phase of investigative zeal.
Olmsted, a lecturer in history at U.C.Davis, provides an absorbing contrarian account of the extent to which, with a few singular exceptions, the press retreated from such zeal, in part intimidated by the discovery of their own potential power.
Olmsted charts how Hersh’s story, along with a cautious but competitive exploration of FBI abuses by the Washington Post, resulted in two congressional investigations that also had the potential to break the code of deference previously accorded to organizations responsible for national security by both Congress and the press.
This is a fascinating study of how, just months after Watergate, both press and Congress quietly retreated to the same silk-gloved handling of the CIA and FBI in the name of national security.
Disinformation Search results on the Internet’s largest search engine, Google, fluctuate wildly for particular words and phrases over time.
Only people within Google know the exact policies and algorithms which determine those results, but the search results do provide a rough indication of the online presence of certain topics.
A Google query of the term “gang stalking” in October 2013 yielded over six million results.
Anyone even superficially familiar with counterintelligence will recognize this tactic; it is called disinformation.
This is another reason organized stalking has been able to remain mostly below the public’s radar.
Disinformation is used to muddy the waters surrounding the topic wherever it is discussed online.
Failure to Connect the Dots If you view all of the mainstream press reports about domestic spying, counterintelligence activities, and gang stalking from the past decade, it is clear that something is going on.
On the other hand, very few people see most of those reports let alone all of them together and combined with the context provided by the analysis you are now reading.
If you browse through the “Published News Reports on Gang Stalking” section of this overview, you will see that the evidence grows every year that a governmentsanctioned program of informants and domestic spying and organized stalking is an element of the current homeland security infrastructure.
Unfortunately, very few civilians ever see that evidence all grouped together, and therefore they are very unlikely to realize what is happening.
These investigations can be initiated with no evidence that any criminal activity has occurred, and the investigations can involve such intrusive measures as physical surveillance, recruitment of criminal informants, interviewing associates of the person being investigated and deploying undercover FBI agents.
The FBI’s internal rules were further relaxed in 2011 so that without even opening an assessment agents can begin searching commercial databases for information about the individual being investigated, and search through the subject’s trash.
Expansion of the powers wielded by the “surveillance state” and the corresponding erosion of citizens’ civil liberties has been occurring in the U.K. as well.
Citizens of the United States should be mindful of that fact because a close relationship exists between the intelligence communities of both nations.
Among the secret documents revealed by NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden, for example, were presentation slides about how the NSA assisted its British equivalent, GCHQ, in developing technology that was used to spy on citizens via their webcams.
In the same way that the United States government slashed some of Americans’ traditional rights by legislation such as the Patriot Act, in the U.K. the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 expanded the surveillance powers of the government in the name of national security.
As far as I know, the members of Parliament did not hold much public discussion about how the U.K.’s intelligence agencies might want spy on a couple of million innocent citizens via their webcams.
Exploiting a Government Program as a Private Weapon The potential for abuse of power by members of private intelligence corporations and government agencies in all of this is enormous.
Here is an example of such abuse which was reported in the news media partly because it was directed at members of the news media.
One of the counterintelligence tactics which the federal government hires intelligence contractors to perform is spreading disinformation.
Most Americans would probably be surprised to learn that systematically spreading lies is even a government contractor job which their taxes are funding, but they underestimate despite President Eisenhower’s famous warning the extent to which the United States government’s defense budget has become a pig trough for shady contractors.
If you criticize a comedian, you will likely become the target of a joke.
Similarly, when a reporter and editor at USA Today investigated and reported on the United States propaganda industry in 2012, they were anonymously slandered by those same contractors.
Slander is just one of the tactics used in organized stalking by counterintelligence operations.
Any or all of the tactics which are described in detail in a section of this overview could be used as a weapon by people in the business.
In theory, an organized stalking operation against an individual could be initiated by anyone familiar with the tactics who has associates willing to participate.
Perpetrators with financial resources could easily employ private investigators, for example, and others with relevant technical skills to wage a sophisticated operation against someone for revenge or intimidation.
Someone with connections to current or former law enforcement or intelligence agency personnel or military personnel with a background in intelligence could mount a very serious campaign against a victim without even involving government agencies in the initial stages of the investigation and harassment.
In a tactic called “baiting” a surveillance operation can selectively capture evidence of a targeted person responding to harassment.
That evidence could then be used to justify the initiation of more formal scrutiny by a government agency.
At whatever point at which it becomes useful or necessary, the perpetrators can officially or unofficially turn over to the government counterintelligence personnel whatever they have gathered to have the individual targeted more formally.
In essence, organized stalking tactics (and a national counterintelligence program which uses such tacics) could easily be exploited and probably are as a weapon against individuals who are disliked for any reason by someone who is either a member of the community of intelligence/security firms, law enforcement agencies, and intelligence agencies.
Similarly, being a member of the FBI-corporate alliance called InfraGard could create a perfect opportunity to have someone blacklisted.
Being associated with the national counterintelligence program of organized stalking is like having a cousin who is in the Mafia.
This June 2013 article in The Independent revealed that a leaked secret report from British law enforcement authorities found that many law firms, wealthy individuals, and large corporations hire private investigators to conduct illegal spying for them.
One particular method identified was to become a member of the Freemasons, which has been repeatedly linked to corruption in the police and judiciary.
Almost onethird of those top secret clearances belong to contractors rather than government employees.
Although the budget for United States intelligence activities is mostly kept secret, it is clear that the monitoring of American citizens is taken seriously by their government.
A common and accurate critique of the modern United States government is that it has become unbalanced by the massive expansion of power and secrecy in the executive branch.
A related problem is that the now-vast network of federal agencies (whose officials of course are non-elected) operate with minimal accountability.
This is true to some extent in all agencies since they issue and enforce regulations, but the potential to be corrupted by power is infinitely greater in law enforcement and intelligence agencies such as the FBI, the CIA, and the NSA which operate mostly in secrecy.
The Threat to American Democracy Posed by the Spying Industry “In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military industrial complex.” President Dwight D Eisenhower Even Eisenhower was corrupted by the kind of power he warned against.
In Iran, a democratically-elected prime minister was overthrown by the CIA (and its British counterpart MI6), and replaced by a monarchy.
The CIA also trained the repressive police force used to maintain the dictatorship.
Similarly, in Guatemala, the CIA overthrew a democratically-elected president and installed a military dictatorship.
In both cases, the motives were corporate greed and the desire for United States government hegemony.
In addition to the extreme violations of the Constitutional and state rights of the particular individuals targeted for organized stalking, the current counterintelligence program poses a threat to democracy itself, since it can be used against anyone who dares to question the legitimacy of the government’s authority.
The FBI’s original COINTELPRO operations were illegal and disturbing abuses of power; the modern version is similarly corrupt, and it is supported by the now-vast network of powerful secretive agencies and contractors armed with much more powerful technology.
About 70 percent of America’s budget for intelligence activities goes to private contractors, according to a 2012 report from the Director of National Intelligence.
The collusion between corporations and the federal government in the area of domestic surveillance is inherently dangerous.
To have them colluding with one another in secret, inexorably arranging things so that there’s disincentive for disagreement among them, is terrifying.
Political support for a Stasi Big Brother police state in the United States is partly rooted in hawkish views about law enforcement and anti-terrorism strategy, but it is mostly rooted in greed.
When Congress voted in July 2013 on whether to rein-in the NSA’s domestic surveillance program which tracks Americans’ phone calls and emails, House members who voted to continue the surveillance received twice as much campaign finance money from the military and intelligence industry as those who voted to dismantle the program.
Americans are not normally permitted to know how much of their money the federal government spends on spying.
Defenders of Constitutional liberties are up against a powerful and well-financed industry of parasites.
Frontline produced a fascinating documentary in April 2013 about the secretive agencies and corporations which make up the modern military and law enforcement industrial complex.
The whole thing is interesting, but if nothing else, watch the set-up and the five minutes or so in the middle about journalists uncovering the massive shadowy industry of private intelligence firms.
The Washington Post articles upon which the documentary was based were the product of one of the most thorough investigations of the American police state.
More than a dozen journalists spent two years investigating the vast network of agencies and corporations performing secret homeland security operations.
Barrett Brown on the Role of Private Intelligence/Security Contractors As I am updating this , journalist Barrett Brown is in jail facing charges related to his role in exposing information leaked by hackers who obtained internal emails from private intelligence firms, such as Stratfor and HB Gary.
Activities revealed in those leaked emails included things such as plotting to discredit journalist Glenn Greenwald and critics of the Chamber of Commerce by spreading lies about them.
In other words, at least some of these numerous secret firms engage in the kind of actions which the CIA might perform against foreign enemies but they do so on behalf of corporate interests.
Here is an excellent article by Barrett Brown on this topic published in the Guardian in July 2013.
On August 21, 2013 Drudge Report linked to a brief article posted the day before on InfoWars about a job announcement posted in San Diego.
As I explain in detail in the “Organizational Structure” section of this overview, these job listings are numerous.
All of the job listings specify that applicants must have active secret clearances and counterintelligence training.
I have so far been unable to locate any mainstream news reports that might shed light on this issue, but multiple indications suggest that these could be jobs for gang stalkers.
Law Enforcement & Intelligence Agencies’ Support of a Corporate Agenda Collusion between corporations and the federal law enforcement/intelligence community is not limited to companies in the spying industry.
These Infragard chapters serve as representatives of private sector “stakeholders” in many of the nation’s fusion centers.
DSAC is a public-private intelligence sharing partnership between the FBI, United States DHS I&A and several of the nation’s leading corporate/financial interests.
Some of these corporate/financial interests comprise the DSAC Leadership Board.
The DSAC Leadership Board consists of 29 corporations and banks, including several entities that have been the subject of OWS protests/criticism.
Bank of America, MasterCard, Citigroup, American Express, Barclays, RBS Citizens, 3M, Archer Daniels Midland, ConocoPhillips, Time Warner and Wal-Mart.
Along with DSAC chairmen from the FBI and United States DHS I&A, DSAC is co-chaired by a representative of these private sector interestscurrently Grant Ashley, vice president of global security for pharmaceutical giant Merck & Co.
Artist’s rendering of an InfraGard member The March 2008 issue of The Progressive featured an article about this creepy corporate spy club.
It seems that InfraGard’s communications with the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security can be kept hidden from the public, as they are covered by the “trade secrets” exemption of the Freedom of Information Act.
In a 2009 TV program, Jesse Ventura, the former governor of Minnesota, interviewed Matthew Rothschild, senior editor of the Progressive about InfraGard.
Ventura also confronted a member of InfraGard regarding the partnership’s obvious potential for abuse of power.
Gang stalking is a weapon for people with connections to the government’s intelligence and law enforcement agencies, and their contractors.
The fact that counterintelligence subversion could theoretically be used against someone who poses an actual threat to society presumably makes it easy to rationalize the existence of such a program for example, within the Justice Department.
Since such operations are covert, they are subject to no real oversight.
Outsourcing most of the work to the now-vast industry of private contractor firms (who in turn, can delegate the operations), creates plausible deniability for those at the top of the food chain.
In the TV interview and essay linked below, Mike Lofgren, a former congressional staff member, offers a sort of unified theory of the current United States power structure which attempts to explain the connections between Washington, Wall Street, the Pentagon, Silicon Valley, the intelligence community and law enforcement.
This big picture view is helpful to understand United States national security and law enforcement policy of which domestic counterintelligence operations are an element.
Other observers for example, Peter Dale Scott have written about the distinction between the formal elected government and the informal “shadow government” or “deep state” which shapes policies, so Lofgren’s views on this subject are not entirely unique, but he does an excellent job of explaining the concept.
He also speaks with Washington insider experience, having spent nearly three decades as a congressional staffer, including serving on the powerful House and Senate Budget Committees.
Lofgren refers to “the deep state” as a hybrid of corporate America and the national security state.
Mike Lofgren appeared on Moyers and Company in February 2014 to discuss his views on the deep state.
Here is a webpage of reactions to Lofgren’s portrayal of the deep rot in Washington.
They include comments such as this one by Heidi Boghosian, director of the National Lawyers Guild.
It is soldered by plutocracy, perpetual war, reduction of industrial capacity, United States exceptionalism and political malfunction.
For more on the issue of who really calls the shots in the United States government, you might want to also consider the very credible observations expressed by NSA whistle-blower Russ Tice in this article and interview from September 2013.
Many of the individuals and organizations who make up America’s “shadow government” are listed there along with explanations of their connections and political influence.
Noam Chomsky on the deep state Noam Chomsky, a professor of linguistics and philosophy at MIT, is deservedly one of the most influential analysts of the nature of political power in America.
His books, articles, speeches, and debates on the subject are so numerous that it can be difficult to know where to begin for someone who wants to become familiar with his views.
A speech Chomsky gave in Bonn, Germany on June 17, 2013 is a good place to start.
In that speech, he explained that the standard view of capitalist democracy taught to American schoolchildren is essentially fictional.
Roughly 70% of the population the lower 70% on the wealth/income scale they have no influence on policy whatsoever.
As you move up the wealth/income ladder, you get a little bit more influence on policy.
When you get to the top, which is maybe a tenth of one percent, people essentially get what they want,e. they determine the policy.
According to Chomsky, America is essentially a one-party state, and the one party is the business party.
He argues that this general power structure has been the same since the nation’s founding.
If you think that things like voting and writing letters to your political representatives might help slow America’s mutation into a police state, you might want to re-evaluate how far things have already deteriorated.
Though it’s a bedrock American principle that citizens can steer their own government by electing new officials, Glennon suggests that in practice, much of our government no longer works that way.
In a new book, “National Security and Double Government,” he catalogs the ways that the defense and national security apparatus is effectively selfgoverning, with virtually no accountability, transparency, or checks and balances of any kind.
There’s the one we elect, and then there’s the one behind it, steering huge swaths of policy almost unchecked.
And indifference to the threat that is emerging from these concealed institutions.
George Carlin on the deep state This 3-minute rant by comedian George Carlin captures some of the core points about the deep state.
A Gang Stalking Organization Chart Victims of organized stalking can only speculate about the exact nature of the shadowy network of perpetrators arrayed against them.
That speculation is made more difficult by the fact that the people who are overtly and covertly watching them and perpetrating various acts of harassment are of different classes of perpetrators with different motivations and have different connections to the victim.
For example, the street-level perpetrator is typically someone who appears to be a rough-looking homeless or near-homeless ex-con type.
Their interactions with the target require no technical skills; the perp is just following some simple instruction for example, to bump into the victim, or to make some specific creepy comment, or to harass the victim at his or her residence by making various noises.
Such participants in the stalking of course would not be told anything about who they are ultimately working for; in some cases perhaps they are simply paid a small sum of cash by a person who approached them on the street to perform a single act of harassment.
Ata slightly higher level in the stalker food-chain (among those who interact with the victims) are people who appear more clean-cut and are often carrying a cell phone presumably to communicate with their handlers.
Some of the intermediate-level participants are apparently recruited because of their relevant technical skills or because their jobs afford them access to facilities and information relevant to the operation such as phone technicians, security guards, and landlords.
At the level above them are the people who actually orchestrate the operation.
The active support or at least approval of federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies would be necessary for such activities to occur without attracting interference from the massive homeland security infrastructure now in place.
Today, you can probably add the Department of Homeland Security to the list.
Technically of course, the CIA is not supposed to be preying on Americans, but anyone who has read about MK Ultra knows that is a purely theoretical boundary.
Similarly, anyone who has not been living in a cave since June 2013 knows that the NSA is deeply involved in unconstitutional domestic spying.
And all those agencies plus others have access to the nationwide system of data “Fusion Centers,” so there is no way that everyone from local cops to the United States Attorney General is not in the know about organized stalking.
Other players in the overall process include Terrorism Liaison Officers who help choose some of the targets, corporate partners such as members of InfraGard and DSAC, and Threat Assessment Teams in various civilian organizations.
Lastly, the perps include a type of person famously used by East Germany’s Stasi the civilian snitch.
Stasi agents referred to such a person as an Inoffizielle Mitarbeiter unofficial collaborator.
The same might be true of the United States judiciary’s “Star Chamber” the secret FISA Court.
Precedence for Organized Stalking of Dissidents The conspiratorial criminality involved in organized stalking might seem far-fetched if not for the fact that the United States government has been caught doing such things before.
Context provided by an awareness of documented crimes past and present by government agencies is critical for evaluating the plausibility of claims about ongoing counterintelligence operations in the United States 3.
Crimes by United States Law Enforcement and Intelligence Agencies “When the president does it, that means it is not illegal.” Richard Nixon in a 1977 interview with David Frost Attitudes of Government Officials About the Law Although scandals such as Watergate and Iran-Contra occasionally break into the public’s consciousness, most Americans are unaware of the criminality which routinely occurs at the upper levels of government.
The same government officials who oversee America’s domestic surveillance and law enforcement programs often have a very casual attitude about their own obligation to obey the law.
NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden’s subsequent revelations proved that Clapper was lying to Congress which Clapper himself was forced to acknowledge.
A typical American citizen would be prosecuted for perjury if he or she lied to Congress; Clapper obviously has no such concerns.
As a practical matter, intelligence agencies and federal law enforcement agencies exist in a mostly secret and politically-protected realm outside of the laws that bind the rest of us.
Since the intelligence and law enforcement community enjoys virtually unconditional support from both major parties, neither party has to worry about negative political consequences for its role in creating domestic surveillance programs which violate the Fourth Amendment.
In April 2013 WikiLeaks published a searchable database of more than 1. million United States diplomatic and intelligence documents from the mid-1970s which had been declassified.
The documents included a revealing transcript of a discussion involving then-Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.
But since the Freedom of Information Act, I’m afraid to say things like that.
For the average American, violating federal laws would be a serious matter; for government officials like Kissinger it is literally a joke.
A veteran intelligence official with decades of experience at various agencies identified to me what he sees as the real problem with the current NSA: “It’s increasingly become a culture of arrogance.
He himself was asked to skew the data an intelligence agency submitted to Congress, in an effort to get a bigger piece of the intelligence budget.
He refused and was promptly replaced in his job, presumably by someone who would do as told.
Such behavior at the federal level sets the tone for law enforcement agencies lower down the food chain.
Comment by President Obama from Double Down a behind-the-scenes account of the 2012 presidential race by journalists Mark Halperin and John Heilmann An April 2014 Rasmussen poll found that more than twice as many American voters regard the federal government as a threat to their rights than those who view the federal government as a protector of their rights.
The poll found that 54 percent of voters considered the federal government to be a threat to individual liberties.
Only 22 percent viewed the government as a source of protection of individual liberties.
The bad news is that as a practical matter many people still naively assume that anyone who seems to be associated with law enforcement should be absolutely trusted as seen in this ABC TV show segment.
Organized stalkers can easily exploit that fact to recruit accomplices by persuading them that they are assisting an investigation or a neighborhood watch surveillance program.
This common tendency of blind obedience toward authority figures is such an important element of organized stalking that I address it in detail in its own section of this overview.
Evidence of this sheep-like deference to law enforcement authority figures was on display in January 2014 a jury in the southern California city of Fullerton decided that it was OK with them that their local police department beat to death an unarmed mentally-ill homeless man who posed no risk to anyone.
They were not persuaded by the mere fact that the murder had been captured on surveillance camera video.
The Prevalence of Government Corruption in the United States A 2013 Gallup poll found that 79 percent of United States residents believed that corruption was widespread throughout the government in America.
Govt Corruption Poll Admittedly, this is a measurement of the perception of corruption, rather than corruption itself, but corruption is inherently difficult to measure, and public perception is an important indicator.
Now imagine the depth of corruption in those corners of America’s government which operate mostly in secret with minimal oversight, such as the intelligence and law enforcement industry.
But America’s government doesn’t just engage in secret invasive surveillance and aggressive policing it also engages in crimes.
For example, the CIA constantly commits crimes according to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, IC 21 as explained in chapter 6 of Into the Buzzsaw.
On the other hand, even when good reporting does occur, it often fails to penetrate the public’s consciousness.
On the November 21, 1993 episode of the CBS news show 60 Minutes, a former head of the United States Drug Enforcement Agency stated that the CIA had colluded with the Venezuelan National Guard to smuggle a ton of pure cocaine into the United States That revelation and other reports of CIA involvement in the illicit drug trade seems to have minimal impact on the assumption that Americans should trust the nation’s intelligence community.
By the way, if you want to see that moment of the 60 Minutes episode, it is included in this documentary by WhoWhatWhy on counterintelligence.
In an August 2013 article, Reuters revealed that as a matter of official policy a secretive unit within the United States Drug Enforcement Administration instructs law enforcement officers in various agencies to lie about the origins of their investigations.
The subject of crimes by police officers is generally under-reported in the mainstream corporate news media especially on national TV news, but to evaluate the plausibility of widespread acquiescence in gang stalking by local police officers it is helpful to consider criminality by police generally.
Browse through the list of convictions of police officers on pages 24 to 47 of this report.
The list is in alphabetical order by the officers’ names, and covers the past half-century.
Crimes Perpetrated Under Authority of the FBI Law enforcement agencies in America make extensive use of criminal informants in their investigations, and in many cases authorize criminals to commit crimes when an agency believes it furthers its goals, as reported for example in this August 2013 article in USA Today.
A document released in December 2013 showed that informant crimes authorized by the FBI increased another 5 percent in 2012 to 5,939 crimes.
During the original Cointelpro era, for example, they arranged for police to assassinate two young members of the Black Power movement.
The Chicago police actually carried it out, broke into the apartment at 4:00 in the morning and murdered them.
In fact, the information about this, remarkably, was released at about the same time as Watergate.
Illegal Spying by the FBI Of course, the most well-known and well-documented crimes by the FBI occurred during the COINTELPRO era, and I devote an entire section to that later in this overview.
I will just point out here that despite the extreme secrecy in which the agency operates, evidence continues to emerge of ongoing criminality.
Operation Northwoods High-level United States officials are sometimes willing to perpetrate very serious crimes against their own citizens when they believe it could further their agendas.
In the early 1960s, America’s top military leaders reportedly drafted plans to kill innocent people and commit acts of terrorism in United States cities to create public support for a war against Cuba.
Code named Operation Northwoods, the plans reportedly included the possible assassination of Cuban émigrés, sinking boats of Cuban refugees on the high seas, hijacking planes, blowing up a United States ship, and even orchestrating violent terrorism in USS. cities.
The plans were developed as ways to trick the American public and the international community into supporting a war to oust Cuba’s then new leader, communist Fidel Castro.
Details of the plans are described in Body of Secrets , a new book by investigative reporter James Bamford about the history of America’s largest spy agency, the National Security Agency.
The plans had the written approval of all of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and were presented to President Kennedy’s defense secretary, Robert McNamara, in March 1962.
But they apparently were rejected by the civilian leadership and have gone undisclosed for nearly 40 years.
My goal here is simply to cite a few examples to make the general case that acts and programs involving serious deception and criminality are not aberrations.
When a United States cruise missile struck a village in Yemen in December 2009 killing 41 people including 14 women and 21 children the United States government and the Yemeni government conspired to lie about the incident, saying that the Yemeni government had launched the attack rather than the U.S., and that the victims were members of an al-Qaeda training camp.
After exposing what really happened in the missile strike, Shaye was arrested on apparently trumped-up charges and given a sham trial that was criticized by major human rights organizations such as Amnesty International and sentenced to five years in prison.
According to Amnesty International, the unexploded cluster bomblet in the photo below was found at the location of the missile strike in Yemen.
In an incident which barely registered on the radar of the news media and the American public, United States government officials killed a bunch of women and children.
Then, when they got caught, they arranged to have the journalist who exposed all the killing and lying kept in prison for reporting it.
If you think that a government which routinely does that kind of stuff (without any negative career consequences or political consequences or legal consequences for those involved) and which was previously caught waging an illegal counterintelligence war against its own citizens could not possibly be acquiescing in an illegal program of organized surveillance and harassment of targeted citizens, then you’re not skeptical you’re just 4.
Oversight of Law Enforcement and Intelligence Agencies Lawlessness in the United States intelligence community A May 2015 column by journalist Tom Engelhardt examined some recurring patterns of deception, hubris, violence, and incompetence in the United States national security state.
It has already created a global surveillance system of a kind never before seen or imagined, not even by the totalitarian regimes of the last century.
Its end goal is clearly to have access to everyone on the planet, Americans included, and every imaginable form of communication now in use.
This helps explain why its top officials were so viscerally outraged by Edward Snowden and his revelations.
United States law enforcement and intelligence agencies currently operate with essentially the same lack of accountability that existed during the days of COINTELPRO and MK Ultra.
Following the Church Committee investigations in the 1970s efforts were made to implement policies to protect Americans from crimes by the federal government.
Unfortunately, those protections have been thoroughly undone especially by policies such as the Patriot Act enacted in the wake of the 9/11 attacks.
The FBI and even the IRS now assert the right to have warrantless access to the email communication of all Americans, to cite just one example.
Arguably, even the Church Committee reforms aimed at outlawing assassinations of foreign leaders have been undermined.
The government now orders drone assassinations in places like Yemen and launches wars without the approval of Congress such as the “military intervention” against Libya launched in March 2011.
It’s difficult to even assess the extent to which America’s law enforcement and intelligence agencies have retumed to being rogue entities, given that they now routinely invoke “national security” as a justification for keeping American citizens from knowing their business.
Political cowardice by members of Congress as well as laziness, group-think, and careerism among many journalists at major news outlets has resulted in a lack of oversight of America’s most secretive government agencies.
Fortunately, there are some exceptions; some journalists do report that the intelligence and law enforcement communities have slipped the leash.
A Forbes magazine writer to cite just one example has suggested that we probably need another Church Committee investigation.
Mr Binney said that without new leadership, new laws and top-to-bottom reform, the agency will represent a threat of “turnkey totalitarianism” — the capability to turn its awesome power, now directed mainly against other countries, on the American public.
Congress members’ fear of the intelligence community Oversight of the United States intelligence agencies is the responsibility of the House and Senate intelligence committees.
Those committees are unlikely to provide much real oversight though if they are afraid of the people they are supposed to be monitoring.
In March 2014, two members of Congress made comments which strongly implied that such fears exist.
On April 10, 2014, Senator Chuck Grassley gave a speech about the Whistleblower Protection Act.
According to Grassley, President Obama’s Insider Threat detection program fails to adequately distinguish true insider threats such as spies and terrorists from whistle-blowers.
As Senator Grassley explained in his speech, when he and Senator Patrick Leahy had a briefing with the FBI the week before, the head of the FBI’s Insider Threat Program did not bring the program’s training materials as the senators had requested so they could review them.
Victims of organized stalking by corrupt law enforcement and intelligence agencies sometimes try to gain the attention of members of Congress so they might intervene to stop such criminal behavior.
I encourage such efforts, but I would caution targeted individuals to be realistic.
Senator Leahy is the Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and the FBI officials simply walked out of his briefing when he and Senator Grassley tried to question them about how they target individuals as potential threats.
Lawlessness in the private spying industry Concerns that the spy industry in the United States has slipped the leash have been voiced by many people who know the profession from first-hand experience.
A report released by the GAO in February 2014 indicated that over a third of the personnel records for intelligence contractors lacked the documentation needed to validate the number of personnel employed or the reasons core intelligence functions were being assigned to them.
GAO Civilian Intelligence Community The lack of oversight for private spooks does not just apply to those working for government agencies as contractors; it also applies to a large shadowy industry of corporate spies who work for intelligence-security firms.
A November 2013 report on corporate spying by Gary Ruskin, director of the Center for Corporate Policy, used the word “lawlessness” to describe the nature of the industry.
His report “Spooky Business” concluded that the private intelligence and law enforcement industry functions with virtually no oversight.
Oversight of the Department of Homeland Security Who will guard the guards DHS is America’s third-largest government agency, with a massive $39 billion budget and 225,000 employees in 2014.
With all those federal employees and private contractors feeding at that giant pig trough in an area of government which operates largely in secrecy oversight is critical.
Oversight of an inherently corrupt system Regardless of the integrity of the oversight, if the true nature of the programs themselves is illegitimate, the public’s rights and interests will not be protected.
Declaring an endless “war on terror” just like declaring an endless “war on drugs” guarantees as a practical matter that civil rights will always be a low priority, and that other agendas such as political control, corporate profits, and career interests associated with enforcement and surveillance will drive government policy.
Published News Reports In the absence of leaked official documents, analysis of domestic counterintelligence operations often requires speculation based on information from public sources, such as the news reports listed below.
When a criminal is caught perpetrating a crime, often the transgression is just one of a large number of crimes, most of which went undetected.
That also applies to crimes perpetrated by law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
What follows are, presumably, just glimpses of activities which mostly stay off of the public’s radar.
The article, “America’s Secret Police Network,” revealed the modern system of what are traditionally referred to as “Red Squads” intelligence units within urban police departments that conduct spying and counterintelligence activities, such as infiltrating and disrupting groups deemed to be subversive.
Despite having received government funding and despite the group’s management of a sensitive intelligence database, LEIU is a private organization, and therefore mostly free of any oversight.
September 1979 A Los Angeles Times article under the headline “FBI Admits Spreading Lies About Jean Seberg” was the lead story on the paper’s front page.
October 1986 An article in the Gadsen Times and other news reports brought national attention to the case of Arnold Lockshin, an American cancer research scientist who fled with his family to the Soviet Union in 1986 and was granted political asylum.
According to Lockshin, he and his family were being intensely harassed by federal agents because of their socialist political views.
A book Silent Terror by Arnold Lockshin about the organized stalking campaign against his family was published in 1988.
August 2000 An article in Newsweek/Daily Beast was among the first mainstream United States news reports about a trend of intense systematic harassment in the workplace.
The process, known as “mobbing,” involves multiple perpetrators engaging in the coordinated psychological abuse of an individual employee.
Although the article does not link the reports of such organized harassment to a larger phenomenon, that form of abuse is a common element of victim accounts in organized stalking cases.
March 2004 An episode of the PBS News show NOW addressed the possible re-emergence of the FBI’s Cointelpro operations.
June 2004 An article in Newsweek noted that the Pentagon was quietly re-entering the business of domestic spying.
One of the scandals (along with Watergate, COINTELPRO, and other crimes) which led to the United States Senate’s Church Committee investigations during the 1970s was the spying on Americans by United States Army intelligence agents.
October 2004 An article in The Sunday Times, a major newspaper in the U.K., reported that the intelligence agency MI5 uses gang stalking tactics to punish whistle-blowers.
In the book, Naylor described her experiences as a target of organized stalking.
The book’s title, 1996, was the year Naylor realized that she was being stalked.
May 2006 An article in The Globe and Mail, a Canadian national newspaper, reported that the Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police used gang stalking techniques (referred to as “Diffuse and Disrupt” tactics) against suspects for whom they lacked sufficient evidence to prosecute.
A criminal defense attorney stated that many of her clients complained of harassment by authorities, although they were never arrested.
January 2007 A cover article in The Washington Post Magazine by a journalist familiar with military policies and weapon systems portrayed self-proclaimed victims of “gang stalking” as intelligent and credible, and suggested that claims about exotic non-lethal weapons being used by the United States government to harass targeted individuals were plausible.
For example, their organized response to the article would make some political campaigns jealous.
We must write the Washington Post in high numbers to show that this story merits a follow up.
We must get our side of the story out, before the perps start inundating them with letters that we are crazy.
October 2010 A post on the political blog Daily Kos alleged that intelligence agencies in the U.S., the U.K., and Canada use “Zersetzung” as East Germany’s Stasi referred to gang stalking against targeted individuals.
Although the article did not provide sourced details, it might have helped raised awareness of this form of state-sponsored criminal harassment since Daily Kos receives several hundred thousand visits per day.
January 2011 A local TV news broadcast in California (on KION Channel 46 and KCBA Channel 35) featured a report about “gang stalking” referred to as such by the reporters and by Lieutenant Larry Richard of the Santa Cruz Police Department.
The brazen tactics used by the police included purchasing the house next to the city manager’s home and using it as a base for psychological operations.
KCRA 3 News reported that the police department would not return its calls about the matter.
December 2012 An article in the Sun Sentinel, a Pulitzer Prize-winning newspaper in Florida, reported the organized stalking of Donna Jane Watts, a Florida Highway Patrol trooper, by other police officers and sheriff’s deputies from multiple jurisdictions.
Incidentally, the Sun Sentinel later won a Pulitzer Prize for public service journalism for its series of articles on deaths and injuries caused by reckless driving by Florida police officers.
A few days later, a very similar complaint was filed by another apparent victim of group stalking by law enforcement officers in Florida.
Toni Foudy, a former sheriff’s deputy alleged that she and her husband were the targets of illegal surveillance and harassment.
The two cases were reported on a local TV news broadcast in Palm Beach , and were also reported by Treasure Coast Newspapers.
Lucie County Sheriff’s Office in 2005 but left after a year on the force during an internal affairs investigation into her patrol car becoming disabled, the lawsuit states.
Foudy resigned because she believed she was being targeted by people at the agency, according to the lawsuit.
Foudy and her husband said they began receiving harassing emails in 2006.
Several times a week, the couple said, patrol cars would drive by their home and blare their sirens.
Foudy’s Complaint As the complaint notes , Foudy’s relatives also became targets of the illegal surveillance.
Navy Yard resulted from the shooter being “gang stalked” in an MK Ultra-type operation using electronic weapons and noise harassment.
A marine had gone AWOL after stealing some sensitive military property including night vision goggles and a laptop containing classfied information.
Apparently the Naval Criminal Investigative Service initiated an organized stalking campaign against the suspect and his associates as well as an investigation.
Various psychological operations tactics were used, such as overt stalking, in addition to some far more exotic methods.
Possibly the operations were intended to serve as both a form of extra-judicial punishment and as experimentation.
The broadcast featured testimony by two individuals from Pennsylvania who appeared to be credible and sincere, discussing their constant harassment by perpetrators using gang stalking tactics.
Kantor claimed that his stalking began after he made a Google search for information about how to build a radio-controlled airplane.
The individual was then subjected to constant surveillance including inside his residence and his vehicle and constant psychological harassment from co-workers and strangers.
In addition to his claim against the United States government, Mr Kantor sued the federal contractors for which he worked, because of the orchestrated harassment he was forced to endure at his workplace.
The reporter did not elaborate in the article on the term “gang stalking,” and he did not reply to my email to him about the issue.
The article does not mention the name of the man Chudy accused of being a stalker.
This was not a case of “gang stalking,” (government-run counterintelligence subversion), but it is an example of the increasingly common thuggish tactics of a rogue industry of corporate spooks in America that mostly operates with impunity.
May 2014 A report on the ABC News TV program 20/20 and an article in the Daily Mail chronicled the ordeal of a couple in Hubbard, Ohio who were systematically harassed for 7 years in a vengeance campaign orchestrated by the town’s fire chief.
A statement by the Guilford Police Department about the matter was also posted in The Day newspaper.
Two of the persons he shot sustained minor injuries; the third was left paralyzed from the waist down.
He also made other phone calls and sent emails and text messages about what was being done to him.
In addition, May sent ten packages of information to various people to “expose” what was happening.
Businessman Philip Kerr is seeking to win a High Court injunction against the intelligence agents, who he says have targeted him because he refused to co-operate with the security service.
The article noted that Kerr had, in addition to retaining legal counsel, sought advice from former MI5 intelligence officer and whistle-blower Annie Machon, a highprofile whistle-blower.
The same case was reported with updated information in April 2015 in the Daily Mirror another British national daily tabloid newspaper.
No one can participate intelligently in America’s republic without such an historical background.
The strategies and tactics used in organized stalking have their roots in earlier programs and agencies in America and elsewhere.
COINTELPRO was a secret program of FBI counterintelligence operations against American citizens orchestrated under the leadership of FBI Director J Edgar Hoover.
Project MK Ultra was a secret program run by the CIA from the early 1950s until the early 1970s, in which mind control and interrogation experiments were performed on United States and Canadian citizens.
They spy on criminals, but they also conduct counterintelligence activities including infiltrating and disrupting organizations deemed to be subversive, such as labor groups and civil rights groups.
Red Squads have been used especially by urban police departments since the late 1800s.
Historically, Red Squads have taken very seriously the protection of business interests and the disruption of political movements.
They have been rather more casual in their attitudes about complying with the law and principles of morality.
The Stasi communist East Germany’s secret police agency enforced the political control over East Germany’s citizens through a combination of surveillance and psychological terrorism.
Core elements of that system of spying and psychological torture, called zersetzung, are used in gang stalking in the United States today.
Anyone who doubts that the United States government could be sanctioning a widespread conspiracy involving illegal surveillance and harassment of targeted citizens should read the basic facts about these programs.
You don’t even need to explore obscure sources of information; simply read the established mainstream accounts of the undisputed facts.
Blue Line COINTELPRO J Edgar Hoover, FBI Director from 1924 to 1972 COINTELPRO was a secret illegal program in which United States law enforcement personnel and their various government and private citizen accomplices systematically spied on, slandered, terrorized, and committed acts of violence against American citizens.
The program ended after being exposed in 1971 by civilian activists who obtained information about it and leaked it to the news media.
Significantly, COINTELPRO was not exposed by insider whistle-blowers; the FBI agents and their civilian minions dutifully perpetrated their assigned crimes until the operations were derailed by civilian outsiders.
Exposure of the program required those civilians to break into an FBI office and steal documents about the program and give them to the news media.
As noted in the introduction above, a January 21, 2013 article in CounterPunch magazine asserted that COINTELPRO is now secretly being used again on a wide scale.
What was originally deemed as a justifiable effort to protect the United States during the Cold War from Soviet and Communist threats and infiltration, soon devolved into a program for suppressing domestic dissent and spying on American citizens.
Approximately 20,000 people were investigated by the FBI based only on their political views and beliefs.
The fact that the “perceived threats” were usually American citizens engaging in constitutionally protected behaviour was apparently overlooked.
The stated goal of COINTELPRO was to “expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize” any individual or group deemed to be subversive or a threat to the established power structure.
The FBI’s techniques were often extreme, with the agency being complicit in the murder and assassination of political dissidents, or having people sent away to prison for life.
Some of the more “moderate” actions that were used were blackmail, spreading false rumors, intimidation and harassment.
It has been argued that the United States is unique in that it is the only Western industrialized democracy to have engaged in such a wide spread and well organized domestic surveillance program.
It finally came to an end in 1971 when it was threatened with public exposure.
Through a Freedom of Information Act request, PCJF was able to obtain documents showing how the FBI was treating the Occupy Wall Street movement, from its inception, as a potential criminal and domestic terrorist threat.
Retired FBI official from the COINTELPRO era on “gang stalking” Among the most interesting testimony about the current version of COINTELPRO came from a man who was familiar with the original COINTELPRO operations because he participated in them as an FBI official.
The late Ted L Gunderson served as the head of the FBI field offices in Los Angeles, Dallas, and Memphis.
His investigations included working for the defense in the famous murder case involving former United States Army physician, Dr.
In a series of public appearances Gunderson stated that “rogue” military intelligence and law enforcement units of the federal government oversee a nationwide network of community-based gang stalkers who monitor, harass, and intimidate thousands of American citizens who have been extrajudicially targeted as dissidents or undesirables.
Gunderson also claimed that his efforts to expose gang stalking resulted in him becoming a victim himself, as efforts were made to silence him.
Here is an audio clip from a presentation Gunderson gave in which he described how organized stalking tactics such as electronic surveillance and “gas lighting” were used against him.
Gunderson said that the scope, intensity, and sophistication of gang stalking increased since its inception, as it exploited new surveillance and communication technologies.
Analysis of Ted Gunderson’s claims about gang stalking is complicated for several reasons.
On one hand, as a former high-level FBI official who worked in the agency during the era of COINTELPRO, he had professional expertise and first-hand experience with that agency’s counterintelligence operations.
On the other hand, his public statements about gang stalking in his affidavit which you can view below, as well as in his public discussions of the matter, which can be found on YouTube, include references to various fringe topics, such as Satanism, child sex rings, and such.
Those claims along with the fact that he is no longer around to clarify or defend them raise several questions that might never be answered.
Gunderson never provided any documentation or other evidence to support what he said.
One possible explanation for the more bizarre things he discussed is that he could have simply been nuts.
The most plausible explanation for Gunderson’s bizarre claims is that he was continuing to work for the FBI at least informally after he officially retired, and he was spreading disinformation.
That explanation is consistent with Gunderson’s FBI career in which he participated in the original COINTELPRO, and in which he was never perceived by anyone as crazy.
A common disinformation tactic used in counterintelligence operations is to discredit a person or idea by associating the person or idea with craziness, and that is very likely what he was doing.
Gunderson’s affidavit FBI’s Gang Stalking Campaign Against Actress Jean Seberg For a sense of the evil nature of gang stalking, take a look at one of the most highprofile well-documented cases of it perpetrated by the FBI in the days of the original COINTELPRO operations.
This was a case with explicitly incriminating “smoking gun” FBI memos and mainstream news reports documenting what the feds did to their victim.
Seberg while she was pregnant apparently caused her to give birth prematurely , and ultimately led her to commit suicide.
Seberg was just one of many victims targeted by the FBI’s secret police program.
The Break-in A fascinating but under-reported aspect of COINTELPRO is the break-in which led to the program’s exposure.
THIRTY-FIVE YEARS ago today, a group of anonymous activists broke into the small, two-man office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Media, Pa., and stole more than 1,000 FBI documents that revealed years of systematic wiretapping, infiltration and media manipulation designed to suppress dissent.
The Citizens’ Commission to Investigate the FBI, as the group called itself, forced its way in at night with a crowbar while much of the country was watching the Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier fight.
Within a few weeks, the documents began to show up — mailed anonymously in manila envelopes with no return address — in the newsrooms of major American newspapers.
John N Mitchell asked Executive Editor Ben Bradlee not to publish them because disclosure, he said, could “endanger the lives” of people involved in investigations on behalf of the United States.
Nevertheless, the Post broke the first story on March 24, 1971, after receiving an envelope with 14 FBI documents detailing how the bureau had enlisted a local police chief, letter carriers and a switchboard operator at Swarthmore College to spy on campus and black activist groups in the Philadelphia area.
To this day, no individual has claimed responsibility for the break-in.
Among the most interesting documents are the three which you can view or download below.
Just browsing through the contents pages gives a sense of the scope of the FBI’s crimes.
Martin_Luther_King_Jr. john-lennon Jean Seberg photo DIS IS DIS >is 2IS Is 2s 2s is >is 2s >is is 2IS Is 2S 2s 21S >I 2Is Is is >is IS 21s 2s 21S >I 2s 2s is 2s Is 21s 2s ois 2s 2s 2s is 2s 2s ois ic Is is ois 2s Is is Accounts of Organized Stalking from the COINTELPRO Era Robert Guffey author of the October 2013 Fortean Times magazine cover article on “state-sponsored gangstalking” posted a reference to the following material on his blog, Cryptoscatology on January 26, 2014.
These accounts of organized stalking apparently perpetrated by United States government agents are from the same period as the FBI’s COINTELPRO activities, which of course took place during the Cold War.
Webpage #1 Webpage #2 Webpage #3 Blue Line MK Ultra CIA Insignia The CIA’s official mission statement refers to spying on America’s “adversaries” which generally refers to foreign adversaries.
On the other hand, the mission statement also proclaims that the CIA “upholds the highest standards of conduct” even though the agency has a well-documented history of involvement with things like torture, assassinations, drug trafficking, and orchestrating coups against democratically-elected governments.
Despite its mission statement, the long list of moral and legal transgressions by the CIA includes spying on Americans based on their political beliefs (in the past and recently), and in the case of Project MK Ultra performing secret unethical experiments on Americans.
Whatever your assessment of the possible nature and scope of illegal counterintelligence activities currently taking place in the U.S., it is worth considering the implications of the CIA’s history of performing secret mind-control experiments on American citizens.
In Project MK Ultra, which ran from the early 1950s until the early 1970s, the CIA secretly conducted mind-control and interrogation experiments.
Many of the experiments were performed without the consent of the subjects, and in some cases without the subjects even being aware that they were being used for experimentation.
Methods that were tested included sensory deprivation, isolation, hypnosis, verbal and sexual abuse, electrical shocks, and the administration of drugs and substances which caused confusion, brain damage, blistering, and paralysis.
That might explain why there are no MK Ultra tribute floats in America’s parades.
This is a vague reference to the fact that CIA Director Richard Helms by his own admission ordered the destruction of the program’s records in 1973.
Another reason to suspect that The Times’ account of MK Ultra might be understating the CIA’s crimes is that the newspaper has a history of sometimes functioning as a conveyor belt for that agency’s lies.
Experiments were performed at dozens of colleges and universities, hospitals, prisons, and pharmaceutical companies in the United States and Canada.
Front organizations were used by the CIA to operate the program through those institutions, although in some cases the top officials at the institutions knew about the CIA’s involvement.
Keep that in mind when you evaluate the plausibility that a widespread program of organized stalking could exist without being compromised by various officials at private and public institutions and organizations.
In the mid-1970s the program was exposed by the United States Senate’s Church Committee investigations.
Those investigations were a response to a series of revelations about crimes by the United States government, including the attempted assassinations of foreign leaders, the United States Army’s spying on civilians, Cointelpro, and the Watergate scandal.
This passage from Andrew Goliszek’s book In the Name of Science gives a sense of what was involved in MK Ultra.
These are descriptions of some of the of the experiments performed by Dr.
In 1957, a young girl was led to a small room at Montreal’s Allan Memorial Institiute, her arms and legs strapped to a bed and electrodes from a Page-Russell electroconvulsive therapy machine attached to her head.
When the signal was given, a switch was thrown, causing her frail body to stiffen then convulse uncontrollably from electroshock forty times more intense than was considered safe.
Another patient, this one an older man, was kept in a drug-induced state for several months while being forced to listen to an audiotaped message twelve to sixteeen hours per day.
Collateral Damage from MK Ultra The Unabomber A series of bombings perpetrated from 1978 to 1995 killed three people and injured 23 others.
The bomber, a mathematician named Theodore Kaczynski, was referred to as “the Unabomber” by the FBI before they discovered his identity.
An article in the June 2000 issue of the Atlantic suggested that the experiments could possibly have been a factor in Kaczynski’s later acts of violence.
In October 2014, it was reported that ABC is planning to produce a TV mini-series about MK Ultra.
Carter President Carter and Senator Frank Church If there are reasons to think that the FBI, CIA, and NSA stopped secretly perpetrating crimes against Americans at some point after the United States Senate’s Church Committee investigations in the 1970s, I am unaware of them.
Although the investigations succeeded in shining a light on the extreme abuses of power by United States intelligence and law enforcement agencies, the reforms which followed were nowhere close to being serious enough to rein in the rogue tendencies of those agencies.
Arguably, the situation today is much worse than it was in the era of J Edgar Hoover.
Surveillance technologies are now vastly more sophisticated, and there has been an enormous expansion of both the size and power of the public and private sectors of the spying industry.
Because of such concerns and scandals such as the NSA’s secret mass surveillance programs many individuals, publications, and organizations have called for another Church Committee-type investigation.
Law Enforcement Intelligence Units Philly LEIU patch A “Red Squad” is a police intelligence unit.
Since the late 1800s they have been used by urban police departments in the United States for spying and counterintelligence activities, such as infiltrating and disrupting groups deemed to be subversive.
The Haymarket Riot The most famous example of Red Squad-type activity was in Chicago in 1886 when police officers and private security agents working for the Pinkerton Detective Agency used spying and violence to suppress a labor rights movement.
That culminated in a violent riot at a labor rally in the Haymarket Square.
After a trial which was widely viewed as unfair 8 labor activists were convicted for their alleged role in the violence.
Of the 8 laborers, 4 were executed by hanging, 1 committed suicide, and 3 received prison sentences.
The riot and the violence which preceded it police had killed two laborers the day before gave rise to the annual celebration of International Workers’ Day or May Day.
Harper’s Magazine May 1886 The two images below were published in Harper’s shortly after the riot.
Historical information about the Haymarket affair is insufficient to make any assessment of how many if any of the seven police officers killed in the Haymarket Riot, or how many of the approximately 60 police officers injured, were corrupt goons terrorizing laborers on behalf of the Chicago political establishment.
During the First World War, police in Los Angeles expanded their focus to include ideological subversion, hunting for radicals and “disloyal” people and groups.
By the end of the Sixties, the successor to the LAPD’s Red Squad, the Public Disorder Intelligence Division, had gathered some 2 million secret files over the course of fifty years on all manner of legitimate dissenters, from the Wobblies to antipoverty groups to antiwar protesters.
In 1970, the P.D.I.D. spied on students and professors at UCLA who were suspected of “conspiratorial activities,” and agents provocateurs infiltrated student demonstrations.
These two groups were part of a civil suit the next year that resulted in a $1. million settlement from the city, which forced the LAPD to enter into a consent decree that curtailed some of the worst surveillance practices.
In many cases the targets are labor unions, leftists, and other dissidents.
They were ostensibly created to combat terrorism, but have been used mostly to infiltrate and suppress liberal and radical political organizations and civil rights groups.
Ostensibly, the role of Red Squads has been to keep the public safe from criminal and terrorist organizations, although historically red squads have often been more involved in dishing out terror than preventing it.
A commemorative statue of a policeman was erected in Haymarket Square in 1889.
On the 41st anniversary of the Haymarket affair in 1927 a streetcar driver apparently crashed into the monument intentionally.
Apparently, not everyone is a fan of cops who serve as corporate thugs.
The current version of the statue resides at the Chicago Police Department headquarters.
Origin of the Association of LEIUs In 1956, the same year the FBI initiated its COINTELPRO program, 26 Red Squads gathered in San Francisco and formed an organization for sharing confidential intelligence about crime.
In addition to maintaining a system of sharing criminal intelligence, LEIU provides training and technical assistance to its members.
The Connection between LEIUs and Organized Stalking Organized stalking is a set of counterintelligence tactics rather than a specific program.
Many of those reports about organized stalking also make clear that the operations are sometimes initiated for corporate or political agendas, and for purely personal vendettas.
Regardless of exactly how the majority of organized stalking operations are perpetrated, it is inconceivable that members of Law Enforcement Intelligence Units would not be aware of those operations if not participating in them or even orchestrating them.
A major red flag is the fact that the LEIU association is a quasi-governmental entity.
Although the group received federal funding to create a networked database of criminal intelligence to share among its members, it is a private, tax-exempt organization, and therefore mostly independent of any real oversight.
Civil liberties groups familiar with the LEIU have expressed serious concerns about the lack of any external accountability for its activities, such as its handling of sensitive intelligence.
The article a copy of which is posted at the end of this section is a remarkable piece of journalism.
Yet the existence of the LEIU and the nature of its activities remained and still remains mostly below the radar of the press and the American public.
In Chicago, too, the Red Squad’s activities were shrouded from the rest of the police department.
In Chicago a state’s attorney investigating the police received a report that his own phone had been tapped.
O’Toole also reported that LEIUs burned their files to avoid having them seen by investigators.
Use of Civilian Spies One of the elements of LEIU operations which is consistent with contemporary accounts of organized stalking and with accounts of operations conducted by communist East Germany’s Stasi is the use of civilian spies.
A Chicago grandmother who was paid twenty-five dollars per month by the Red Squad to infiltrate church and community groups told reporters from the Chicago Daily News, “I am a police spy, and I am proud of it.
In another incident mentioned in the article, Chicago police intelligence officers used blackmail to coerce employees of Illinois Bell to cooperate in illegal wiretapping.
Corporations “Surrendering Information About Their Clients” Telephone company cooperation in illegal wiretapping is just one example of a long history of complicity of American corporations in government programs involving spying and lying.
Famed Watergate journalist Carl Bernstein reported, for example, that CBS News was essentially a puppet of the CIA during the 1950s and ‘60s.
The group has essentially no civilian oversight because it is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act.
LEIU is a perfect weapon to use against an individual who crosses anyone with connections to it.
Some of the organizational structure and procedures have no doubt changed in the past few decades, although the group is still shrouded in secrecy, so it is difficult to know exactly how it might differ now apart from its use of digital databases and more technologically advanced spy gear.
Each branch of the military, for example, tends to pursue its own agenda to a certain extent while simultaneously working to support a common goal of national security.
The federal intelligence community also has well-known rivalries between agencies, each of which desires to see its relative prestige and influence maximized.
Those turf battles exist in the law enforcement community as well of course; sometimes there are tensions between the FBI and local police for example.
On the other hand, all of America’s law enforcement and intelligence agencies now have access to enormous amounts of information for example, through the national network of data fusion centers.
It would be impossible for the feds to be unaware of widespread use of organized stalking by local police and vice versa.
Their silence on the issue implies that the feds approve of what is happening.
The material in the Published News Reports section of this overview indicates that federal agencies use the same tactics against targeted individuals themselves just as they were caught doing in the Cointelpro era.
In the absence of more whistle-blower revelations, it is impossible to know precisely how the various local, federal and private elements of America’s Stasi might be colluding with each other to perpetrate counterintelligence operations, but there have been some glimpses.
LEIU’s Connection to United States Army Intelligence Many accounts of organized stalking include reports of sophisticated electronic surveillance, black bag operations, and exotic weapons.
The Army trained several Baltimore intelligence-squad officers in techniques of electronic eavesdropping and surreptitious entry at its Fort Holabird spy school in Maryland.
In return, the Baltimore cops passed along many of their intelligence reports to the army.
The CIA’s Involvement in Domestic Spying The Central Intelligence Agency has also been caught performing domestic spying.
The previously-mentioned Operation CHAOS was shut-down in 1973, after the exposure of other conspiracies such as Cointelpro and the Watergate break-in.
Incidentally, the Watergate break-in also had a CIA connection the exact nature of which is still not clear according to some reports.
What is not disputed though is that a key figure in the break-in, Howard Hunt, was a former career CIA officer, and one of the burglars, Eugenio R Martinez was still on the CIA’s payroll at the time of the break-in.
At a minimum, the Watergate break-in showed that in America, corrupt politicians can draw upon a deep supply of corrupt ex-spies and corrupt ex-law enforcement agents to perform illegal special assignments as mercenaries.
The ACLU’s Allegations of the CIA’s Domestic Spying O’Toole was not alone in his suspicions about the CIA’s participation in spying on Americans, and such concerns are arguably even more justified today.
Because of the excessive secrecy surrounding CIA operations, little is known about its domestic activities.
During the 1960s, in clear violation of its statutory mission to co-ordinate foreign intelligence operations only, the CIA ventured into the domestic spying business through “Operation Chaos,” in which it spied on as many as 7,000 Americans involved in the peace movement.
Unfortunately, the exposure of intelligence failings before the 9/11 attacks caused policy makers to promote “information sharing” among intelligence and law enforcement agencies as a cure-all, creating the likelihood that the CIA would increasingly operate domestically.
Today we know that the CIA is a participant in FBI Joint Terrorism Task Forces, which engage in both foreign and domestic terrorism investigations.
The history of the CIA’s abuse of power and the continuing lack of public accountability over CIA operations make such revelations concerning to civil liberties advocates.
The CIA’s involvement in the NYPD intelligence activities targeting innocent Muslim communities in the Northeast reveal the CIA is once again treating Americans as suspected enemies.
The CIA’s Connection to the LEIU George O’ Toole had serious concerns about the potential for federal agencies such as the CIA to exploit the LEIU in addition to the threats posed by the LEIU itself because of its lawless spying.
His article noted that the CIA had very close ties to the police department in Fairfax County, Virginia, where the CIA headquarters is located.
The agency has given the Fairfax cops training in electronic surveillance, surreptitious entry, lockpicking, safecracking, and explosives.
O’Toole’s article even includes details of a felony break-in perpetrated in February 1971 by several Fairfax County police officers and CIA agents.
Whenever an agency of a government gathers intelligence on its citizens, the potential for abuse is enormous as was proven by the FBI’s Cointelpro, the CIA’s Operation CHAOS, and other programs.
The potential for abuse of power when the agency is privately-run is even greater.
As the Chronicle reported, the FBI found that an intelligence specialist with the Las Vegas Police Department was passing information from the LEIU database to mobsters.
Most of the article posted at the above link is behind a subscription paywall.
A dozen activists were arrested, and police used pepper spray and rubber bullets to disperse the crowd.
Blue Line The Stasi Stasi Insignia Insignia of East Germany’s “Ministry for State Security” Counterintelligence methods used by communist East Germany’s secret police agency the Stasi are among the elements of organized stalking operations in the United States today.
Methods used by the Stasi overt and covert surveillance, slander, and psychological operations tactics were essentially identical to those currently used in counterintelligence operations in America.
Arguably, the Stasi’s use of Zersetzung is much more relevant to modern gang stalking in the United States than is the FBI’s program of Cointelpro operations.
In the decades since Cointelpro, a far more comprehensive and sophisticated domestic surveillance system has been developed in the United States than what existed during the era of J Edgar Hoover.
The nature of America’s spying network has moved much further toward that of a police state.
Although the Stasi’s technology for “signals intelligence” (interception of electronic communications) was primitive compared to that now used by the National Security Agency to monitor Americans, the Stasi was famous for exploiting “human intelligence” to control East Germany’s citizens.
A sprawling bureaucracy almost three times the size of Hitler’s Gestapo was spying on a population a quarter that of Nazi Germany.
Unlike the prison camps of the Gestapo or the summary executions of the Soviet Union’s KGB, the Stasi strove for subtlety.
The interrogation center where the psychological torture methods of Zersetzung were refined These are the isolation cells in the Hohenschoenhausen Prison in Berlin which is now a museum.
By the 1970s, the Stasi had decided that methods of overt persecution which had been employed up to that time, such as arrest and torture, were too crude and obvious.
It was realised that psychological harassment was far less likely to be recognised for what it was, so its victims, and their supporters, were less likely to be provoked into active resistance, given that they would often not be aware of the source of their problems, or even its exact nature.
Zersetzung was designed to sidetrack and “switch off” perceived enemies so that they would lose the will to continue any “inappropriate” activities.
Tactics employed under Zersetzung generally involved the disruption of the victim’s private or family life.
This often included psychological attacks such as breaking into homes and messing with the contents moving furniture, altering the timing of an alarm, removing pictures from walls or replacing one variety of tea with another.
Other practices included property damage, sabotage of cars, purposely incorrect medical treatment, smear campaigns including sending falsified compromising photos or documents to the victim’s family, denunciation, provocation, psychological warfare, psychological subversion, wiretapping, bugging, mysterious phone calls or unnecessary deliveries, even including sending a vibrator to a target’s wife.
Many thought they were losing their minds, and mental breakdowns and suicide could result.
One great advantage of the harassment perpetrated under Zersetzung was that its subtle nature meant that it was able to be denied.
That was important given that the GDR was trying to improve its international standing during the 1970s and 80s.
The use of energy weapons by the Stasi Nuclear-Symbol Counterintelligence tactics used by the Stasi were remarkably similar to the tactics now being reported by victims of ongoing Cointelpro harassment in the United States Even the most exotic form of torture associated with organized stalking the use of energy weapons is an issue which appears in news reports about East Germany’s secret police.
When three of former East Germany’s best-known dissidents died within a few months of each other, of similar rare forms of leukaemia, suspicions were aroused among their friends that this was more than just a coincidence.
In 1989, when the Berlin Wall came down, members of East German citizens’ committees occupied prisons across the country.
Thomas Auerbach works as a scientific researcher for the main authority investigating the Stasi.
He saw X-ray equipment himself when he was taking part in a sit-in in an East German prison.
He has seen the documents which show that a variety of experiments were being carried out involving the potential uses of radiation as a means of poison and sabotage.
He believes that instead of X-rays, it was highly likely that radioactive isotopes were used to try to induce cancer in prisoners.
Psychologie und Psychiatrie im Dienste der Stasi (“psychology and psychiatry in the service of the Stasi”) This book about the Stasi’s methods of psychological torture was published in 1995.
The authors, Klaus Behnke and Jiirgen Fuchs, studied psychology in East Germany before being expelled in 1977.
Unfortunately, as of this writing, the book has not been translated into English.
Zersetzung was the term used by the Stasi to describe the psychological operations element of their counterintelligence subversion.
The objective was to emotionally and socially destroy individuals who were perceived as dissidents, and to do so in a manner which would not be obvious to others.
Unfortunately, there does not seem to be an English language translation of this book.
Similarly, the 2002 documentary based on this book does not seem to be available with English subtitles.
The-lives-of-others-movie-poster A man who was a target of the Stasi describes the infamous agency In this 15-minute TED speech given in Berlin in June 2014, Hubertus Knabe, a German historian who was a victim of the Stasi (he was under surveillance for smuggling banned books), describes the infamous secret police agency, and its system of Zersetzung.
Tour the deep dark world of the East German state security agency known as Stasi.
Uniquely powerful at spying on its citizens, until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 the Stasi masterminded a system of surveillance and psychological pressure that kept the country under control for decades.
He shares stunning details from the fall of a surveillance state, and shows how easy it was for neighbor to turn on neighbor.
Chief of the Stasi From 1957 until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the head of East Germany’s secret police was Erich Mielke.
He was essentially the communist version of FBI Director J Edgar Hoover.
Mielke presided over a network of 85,000 full-time domestic spies and 170,000 civilian informants.
Erich Mielke Erich Mielke When a film company, LOOKS Filmproduktionen, began producing a documentary on Mielke, it submitted a Freedom of Information Act request to the CIA for its records on the notorious Stasi leader, but the CIA denied the request.
In July 2014 Courthouse News reported that the film company filed a lawsuit to force the CIA to release its records on Mielke.
In the following section, for example, is a credible first-hand journalist’s account of organized stalking tactics being used by Russian intelligence agents.
No one disputes that such tactics were widely used by East Germany’s Stasi.
Incidentally, the United States Senate Church Committee investigations found that the government of Canada was also complicit in the infamous CIA program, MK Ultra.
Anectdotal evidence of the use of organized stalking by other Western governments also includes accounts such as this self-published book about gang stalking allegedly perpetrated on behalf of the Dutch royal family.
Based on my personal experience and numerous accounts by self-proclaimed victims, organized stalking occurs across the U.S., so moving from one area to another is not likely to help.
Similarly, international cooperation among law enforcement and intelligence agencies means that moving from the United States to Canada is probably not going to be helpful.
Unfortunately for the criminals, traitors, and greedy contractors who run the United States intelligence community, Ms.
Williams revealed that those agencies use sock puppets to monitor social media and to spread false information on the Internet a claim which has also been confirmed by other sources.
Hacked emails from intelligence contractors, for example, revealed elaborate disinformation schemes using sock puppets, and a smoking-gun NSA document leaked by Edward Snowden proved that the NSA collaborates with its British counterpart GCHQ to systematically spread lies the same way.
Seeing Through Walls Seeing Through Walls A photo from February 10, 2010 Stars and Stripes Caption for the above photo: “A soldier shows how a new scanner can see motion of an individual behind a wall.
Internal documents from the Cointelpro era proved that the FBI secretly used illegal “black bag jobs” to perform surveillance and to perpetrate psychological warfare such as the tactic of “gaslighting” described earlier.
Although the tactic is just as illegal now as it was then (invasive spying without a search warrant), it is apparently used routinely in gang stalking, based on virtually all victim accounts.
Consequently, it would be very easy to deploy miniature spy cameras (which are now very advanced and small and inexpensive) in the victim’s residence.
So the use of technology which can see through walls is probably unnecessary in most cases, but the technology does exist.
Popular Mechanics June 2005 This August 2012 article in Popular Science describes a form of this technology which uses Wi-Fi radio signals which are now available in most United States homes.
Such technology could be perfect for gang stalking because, as the article notes, the device cannot be detected, since it does not emit any radio waves.
Directed-Energy Weapons DARPA Laser Gun DARPA Laser Gun from Business Insider, September 14, 2012 As I noted in the section about East Germany’s secret police, the Stasi used counterintelligence tactics remarkably similar to the tactics reported by victims of ongoing Cointelpro harassment in the United States Even the most exotic form of torture associated with organized stalking the use of energy weapons is an issue which appears in news reports about East Germany’s secret police.
An article published by BBC News in May 1999, for example, describes allegations about the Stasi’s possible use of energy weapons against dissidents.
Claims about energy weapons being used against targeted individuals in the United States are difficult to prove as one would expect, but there are a number of reasons the subject deserves serious consideration.
The hallmark of all directed-energy weapons is that the target — whether a human or a mechanical object — has no chance to avoid the shot because it moves at the speed of light.
A Directed-Energy Weapon emits energy at a target without using a projectile, and can produce a variety of lethal or non-lethal effects.
Such weapons have existed for decades, and are used by militaries and law enforcement agencies around the world.
DEWs use various forms of energy, such as laser beams, electromagnetic radiation, and particle beams, as well as sound.
Weapons of this type are often referred to as “non-lethal weapons” to distinguish them from weapons such as knives, batons, firearms, artillery, and such; however, the intensity of some energy weapons can produce lethal effects.
One example of the publicly-available documents on the subject is the previously-mentioned declassified Pentagon report about electronic weapons called “Bioeffects of Selected Non-Lethal Weapons” which was obtained via a Freedom of Information Act request.
An example is this May 17, 2013 article in the Marine Corps Times about the Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate at Quantico, Virginia.
If you are interested in an example of how someone could construct a homemade short-range electromagnetic weapon (for research purposes or for self-defense or whatever), this might be a good place to start.
You will need to be pretty resourceful working in your garage to keep pace with the feds though.
In September 2013 it was reported that the United States Defense Department granted a $49 million contract to General Dynamics for developing directed energy weapons.
The role of such weapons in United States domestic counterintelligence operations is in the realm of speculation and anecdotal evidence.
Many descriptions exist on the Internet which purport to be accounts by gang stalking victims claiming to have been attacked with such weapons.
Accounts include descriptions of burning sensations, headaches, nausea, sudden fatigue, a fluttering sensation in the chest, etc.
The extensive use of disinformation by gang stalkers raises problems when assessing the plausibility of claims about the use of DEWs against targeted individuals.
To the extent that the use of DEWs is perceived by non-victims of gang stalking as being implausible, discussion of their use could undermine efforts to expose gang stalking generally.
Secondly, even if DEWs are rarely used, it could further the counterintelligence objectives to discuss them on the Internet, if only to raise the anxiety of victims, who might begin wondering whether their headaches, high-blood pressure, and other problems are being induced by DEWSs.
It is inherently difficult to distinguish between some of the effects of DEWs and the effects of psychological harassment tactics.
Stress induced by psychological torment can manifest in some of the same ways accelerated heart rates and headaches, for example.
The use of DEWs against gang stalking victims is technologically plausible.
No one disputes the existence of such devices, and they’re consistent with the tactics of gang stalking.
For example, harassment by noises generated from adjacent residences is acommon gang stalking tactic, so it isn’t much of a stretch to imagine the use of energy weapons in the same situation, as the energy would easily pass through most walls.
Such a tactic would be a logical choice for use in organized stalking, since it would be difficult or impossible to prove that such attacks were happening.
Reportedly, the intensity and lethality of such weapons varies greatly, but even the most extreme applications would be consistent with the malevolent campaigns against gang stalking victims.
Anyone willing to terrorize someone relentlessly with psychological torment even knowing that it could lead to suicide or heart attack (or lethal violence by the victim against others in response), would presumably not have moral reservations about using DEWs.
My own personal contacts with self-proclaimed targeted individuals include three cases in which persons whom I believe to be highly credible reported having apparently been attacked by some form of non-lethal weapons.
Counter-measures Since the role of DEWs in organized stalking is surrounded by at least as much disinformation as any other area of the subject, it is difficult to know how widespread the use of such weapons could be let alone how to defend against them.
The technical issues involved in possible counter-measures are beyond my ken, but for what it is worth, a credible source Wired states in this May 2012 article that a Faraday cage blocks all electromagnetic radiation.
Brain Implants This final “tactic” is in a separate category from all of those above because its use as a weapon of organized stalking is apparently fictional.
Such disinformation strategies are extremely effective when most of the public is ignorant of basic counterintelligence methods.
The technology of implanted electronic devices to manipulate brain functions is very real.
Smart Dust Smart Dust I mention this only to give a sense of the kind of threats on the horizon for everyone, not just for those unlucky enough to already be victims of America’s Stasi.
All the mental giants who advocate that United States intelligence agencies and their contractors and the Pentagon and its contractors should be granted unlimited power and secrecy and money should pause to consider the types of technologies that those people will be playing with in the future.
Here is a technology that is potentially a more sophisticated version of brain chip implants, and which at a minimum will enable Big Brother (and his network of friends) to perform all sorts of monitoring.
Snow is describing the impact of being stalked by a single individual with limited resources not the long-term effects of being stalked by numerous perpetrators with seemingly unlimited resources, conspiring with each other across a criminal network which has the support of the government and uses refined psychological operations tactics combined with high-tech surveillance.
Yet, by the time I saw these victims, the crime was over and the healing process had already begun.
With stalking victims, however, the crime wasn’t over with, but continued on and on.
Victims of stalking say the experience is like a prolonged rape, a never-ending and terrifying loss of control over one’s life.
Stalking is one of the most psychologically crippling things that can happen to a person.
Mobbing and Workplace Violence t-CRIME-SCENE-TAPE-large570 “Workplace Harassment” versus “Mobbing” “Mobbing” is intense systematic harassment of an employee by multiple co-workers and managers.
Presumably only a fraction of workplace harassment cases involve the kind of coordinated and severe emotional abuse that could be categorized as mobbing.
Mobbing is sometimes but probably not always an element of organized stalking.
I would guess that only a fraction of cases of mobbing are part of the even more extreme phenomenon of organized stalking, which includes invasive illegal surveillance and sophisticated psychological operations tactics.
Depending on the circumstances, workplace mobbing even when not accompanied by stalking outside the workplace can involve serious psychological abuse.
In some cases, the bullying leads to a violent response by the victim, as apparently happened in the cases described below.
The objective of mobbing is to emotionally torture a targeted employee either to force him or her to quit, or for vengeance, or both.
News Reports on Mobbing Articles occasionally appear in the mainstream press about mobbing.
This August 2000 article from Newsweek/Daily Beast is an early example of reporting on what was already becoming an international trend.
Corporate Psychopaths The 2012 presentation in the video clip below is a fascinating 14-minute explanation of the dynamics of intense workplace bullying by psychopaths in the corporate world.
Connections Between Mobbing and Organized Stalking Although apparently accurate, the above video is exclusively about abusive behavior within an organization, such as a corporation.
An abusive boss can make the workplace a hellish place for subordinates, but if the psychopathic boss also has connections to public law enforcement and private security personnel, the potential for abuse extends far beyond the range of common workplace harassment.
Opportunities for psychopaths in corporations to abuse the legal system and to abuse modern security technology in order to target individuals for personal reasons have greatly increased recently.
This is especially true if the manager has established a personal relationship with local or federal law enforcement contact persons.
As described in the section of this webpage about the United States Department of Justice, America’s “post-constitutional” law enforcement paradigm’s emphasis on things such as surveillance, secrecy, watch-lists, “predictive policing,” and the aggressive investigation and prosecution of whistle-blowers all create an environment ripe for abuse by managers with personal vendettas.
Another problem for any individual who crosses someone with connections to America’s law enforcement and intelligence community is that the entire industry is long on enforcers and short on legitimate targets.
Organized stalking illegal counterintelligence subversion dates back to at least the FBI’s Cointelpro era of the 1950s and ‘60s, but the size and power of America’s “homeland security” infrastructure was radically expanded after the September 2001 terrorist attacks, and now includes numerous government agencies and private contractors whose place at the federal budget pig trough needs to be justified.
Any dissident, whistle-blower, or even marginally-suspicious individual who wanders into the cross-hairs of the police state these days is likely to be portrayed as a grave threat to national security by the bureaucrats and thugs who populate the security industry.
Spooky Business America’s diminishing economic opportunities for middle and lower class workers could also be increasing the supply of people willing to serve as pawns and snitches in group harassment activities whether orchestrated privately or by law enforcement agencies.
It seems likely that financially desperate subordinates are more easily manipulated.
Advances in surveillance technology pose another threat to individuals targeted by corporations.
Employers now often snoop on employees’ email communications, Internet activity, and Facebook pages for example.
Also, any corporation willing to hire private investigators can easily spy on employees’ personal lives in various ways.
Finally, to whatever extent workplace mobbing leads to violence as discussed below there are potentially self-fulfilling and self-reinforcing dynamics at work.
A Federal Lawsuit about Mobbing and Gang Stalking In December 2013 a federal contractor, Jeffrey Kantor, filed a lawsuit in Virginia against multiple United States agencies for secretly and illegally subjecting him to invasive surveillance, overt stalking, and intentional systematic infliction of severe emotional abuse including by means of carefully orchestrated verbal abuse by his co-workers.
Kantor’s case appears to be a clear example of mobbing as part of a state-sanctioned organized stalking campaign against a targeted individual in fact, the complaint filed refers to “gang stalking” as such.
Regardless of the ultimate outcome of Jeffrey Kantor’s legal claim, it is significant that a widely-reported lawsuit was filed against members of the United States intelligence community alleging precisely the same illegal counterintelligence psychological operations tactics reported by virtually all self-proclaimed victims of organized stalking.
News Reports on the Connection between Mobbing and Workplace Violence Mainstream news reports and commentary on workplace violence such as mass shootings tends to follow a predictable template.
When mass-shootings occur in schools and involve minors, the role of bullying as a causal factor is sometimes discussed, but for the most part, in cases of workplace violence, the subject is conspicuously absent from reporting and analysis.
News agencies rarely give serious consideration to whether intense bullying by the shooter’s managers and co-workers contributed to the violence.
Even in cases of violence in schools, news media attention to the role of bullying is small relative to its importance.
A 2011 survey of high school students found that teenagers who are the victims of bullying are up to 31 times more likely to bring weapons to school.
Such statistics give an idea of how deeply corrupt United States intelligence and law enforcement agencies must be to acquiesce in organized harassment of targeted individuals; those agencies have to be aware of the high potential for violence it creates.
That failure to discuss what is arguably the most obvious possible causal factor in workplace shootings is partly attributable to intellectually-lazy journalism, but it also involves ideological priorities.
People wishing to see stricter firearms regulations enacted, for example, are inclined to view mass-shootings as opportunities for public discussion of those policies.
Similarly, those whose agendas include increased surveillance and security systems will seek to use these incidents to bolster their case for a more muscular police state.
Another reason for ignoring the role of bullying in workplace violence incidents is presumably that the organizations involved companies, schools, and government agencies where such incidents occur have every incentive to downplay their own negligent tolerance of the bullying.
Reporting on workplace violence is probably self-censored to some extent, because the news agencies involved do not wish to raise the unpleasant issue of whether the victims of such shootings might have brought the violence upon themselves by their abusive behavior.
An exception to the lack of good reporting on this subject was published by the Huffington Post in August 2011.
Anthropologist Janice Harper dared to ask the most important question about a mass shooting which had occurred a year earlier in Manchester, Connecticut.
Omar Thornton, a delivery truck driver, fatally shot eight of his co-workers and then killed himself.
As Harper noted, the shooter, Omar Thornton, reportedly did not have a history of violence or mental illness.
Any intelligent person should be curious about why an otherwise non-violent individual would suddenly lash-out at others with lethal force.
It turns out that Thornton had apparently been the target of intense harassment by his co-workers.
There does not seem to be any reported evidence that the shooter was the target of organized stalking, but the case like other similar cases has implications for the issue of gang stalking.
Among those implications is that cases of intense harassment of an individual by multiple perpetrators often fail to generate any serious inquiry even when the process culminates in extreme violence.
Academic Reports on the Connection between Mobbing and Workplace Violence Peer-reviewed studies by Dr.
Westhues estimates that at least a third of all rampage shootings can be attributed to mobbing.
Cho appears to have been the target of an uncommon but distinct and devastating social process called workplace mobbing.
An example of a case which deserves a closer look To cite one example , a workplace shooting in Long Beach, California invites suspicion about the possible involvement of mobbing.
Even if there are other explanations, this particular case is interesting for several reasons.
Incidentally, at the time of this shooting, I lived close to downtown Long Beach, and I witnessed some of the police and ambulance activity associated with the event.
On February 16, 2012, on the seventh floor of the Glenn M Anderson Federal Building in downtown Long Beach, Ezequiel Garcia, an agent of Immigration and Customs Enforcement , shot his boss, Kevin Kozak, six times.
Reportedly (see the article linked below for details), Mr Garcia’s attack on his boss was in response to the fact that Mr Kozak (who was the second-in-command of ICE’s Los Angeles region) had turned-down Garcia’s request for a transfer within the department.
Another agent, Perry Woo, then rushed into the room and fatally shot Garcia.
This workplace violence incident involved two government officers being shot one fatally in a federal building in the downtown area of a major city, yet barely registered as a blip on the media’s radar.
Furthermore, both ICE and the FBI which investigated the case declined to provide any details about what happened.
After spending a year investigating the incident, the FBI determined that the fatal shooting of Garcia was justified.
Apart from several paragraphs in the middle of the article linked below, most of the media did not seem to be curious about the incident or about the silence of the government agencies involved.
Perhaps someone cut him off in traffic on his way to work that moming and he was a bit wound-up about it, so he shot his boss six times during his job performance review.
On the other hand, maybe he snapped after a period of systematic harassment, and the feds did not want that made public.
At a minimum, the case illustrates the secrecy which often surrounds the activities of America’s law enforcement agencies.
Navy Yard on September 16, 2013 left a dozen people killed , and 8 others wounded.
The shooter, Aaron Alexis, had claimed to have been stalked by multiple perpetrators, and had reported that he was the victim of electronic harassment and noise harassment tactics of the sort often described by other individuals targeted in counterintelligence operations.
Alexis even carved “My ELF Weapon” into the receiver of his shotgun, as seen in this photo.
ELF is a common abbreviation for “extremely low frequency.” navy yard shooting The incident involved other red flags for many observers.
For example, while some people suggested the voices Alexis reported hearing were symptomatic of schizophrenia, others noted that schizophrenia typically begins in early adulthood, roughly between the ages of 15 and 25.
Alexis, who was an information technology employee with a security clearance at a defense-related computer company, was 34 years old.
Also, persons afflicted with schizophrenia are not typically violent; if anything, they are more likely to be a danger to themselves.
It should also be noted that Alexis never reported that he believed that the voices he heard were coming from some supernatural source which would have been more suggestive of mental illness.
His accounts were much more consistent with the kind of sonic projection device demonstrated here by an engineer who designs them.
At 20 minutes and 8 seconds into this TV program which aired in 2009 is an interview with an engineer describing and demonstrating how such devices work.
Roll your eyes at the source if you want, but everything about it is credible, and additional reading as you will easily find out only confirms it.
No manifesto was left by the shooter citing any political or religious agenda that might have motivated him to shoot twenty people at his workplace.
His words and actions are more plausibly explained by his claim that he was in fact being systematically harassed, and he eventually snapped.
For example, the FBI bypassed the ATF and performed their own trace of the shotgun used even though the ATF is the federal agency in charge of tracing guns used in crimes.
Since the investigation of the shooting is being handled by the FBI which is notoriously secretive and has a history of perpetrating organized stalking crimes against Americans it is difficult to guess how much critical information about the case is being kept secret from the public.
It has not been reported, for example, whether some of the shooting victims had been intensely harassing the shooter as was done to the plaintiff in the federal gang stalking case filed in December 2013.
The shooter’s employer and the Newport Rhode Island Police Department and the navy were all aware that Alexis had reported being harassed by “voices” and noises, yet no one suspended his security clearance or otherwise intervened.
Multiple sources in the Capitol Police department have told the BBC that its highly trained and heavily armed four-man Containment and Emergency Response Team was near the Navy Yard when the initial report of an active shooter came in about 8:20 local time.
According to a Capitol Police source, an officer with the Metropolitan Police Department , Washington DC’s main municipal force, told the Capitol Cert officers they were the only police on the site equipped with long guns and requested their help stopping the gunman.
When the Capitol Police team radioed their superiors, they were told by a watch commander to leave the scene, the BBC was told.
A few days later, a Congressman confirmed that the local SWAT unit had been inexplicably ordered not to respond.
Michael McCaul told CNN’s Jake Tapper that he personally spoke with a SWAT team member who confirmed that they were told to stand down to the mass shooting at the Washington Navy Yard.
A week after the shooting, The Washington Times published an article exploring the gang stalking speculation surrounding the shooting.
A few days later, Wired magazine posted an article which also examined the gang stalking aspects of the navy yard shooting.
Some conspiracists suggest that Alexis was a “targeted individual,” or “TI,” the term-of-art used by anguished people who believe they’re being “gang stalked” by shadowy enemies, often in the government.
The elements of Alexis’ police report — covert microwave weapons, conspiracies and sleep disturbances — are common elements in gang stalking accounts.
The microwave weaponry theory would be just as absurd as some of the other conspiracies if the Pentagon hadn’t been researching the possibility of using similar voice-projection technology in the past as a nonlethal weapon.
According to one report on the project, such a weapon would create a condition similar to schizophrenia.
It may be useful to provide a disruptive condition to a person not aware of the technology.
The year before, Wired featured an article specifically about the so-called “Voice of God” device.
So the fed’s who apparently monitor everyone’s phone calls, emails, and Internet activity failed to intervene in any way despite the shooter’s emails (and despite other obvious warning flags mentioned above) in a case involving an employee with a security clearance who was working at military facilities and reporting that he was being harassed and hearing voices.
On November 20, 2013, The Washington Times reported that United States Rep.
In January 2014, Politico reported that a local NBC news journalist in Washington D.C., Scott MacFarlane, received an email which the United States Navy sent to him by accident.
The internal email from the Navy’s FOIA office outlined the strategy which they planned to use to limit the amount of information released to MacFarlane, who had filed a FOIA request for internal Navy memos sent on the day of the shooting.
Click on image to enlarge Dodging FOIA Request The most charitable analysis would be that this was simply routine “cover your ass” protocol for a government entity seeking to avoid embarrassing revelations about its incompetent management of security at a naval facility.
On 31 January 2014, the Associated Press reported that Aaron Alexis’s medical records revealed that the Veterans Affairs doctors who examined him weeks before the shooting determined that he did not appear to have any mental health issues.
The AP obtained Alexis’s medical records via a Freedom of Information Act request.
Normally, the government does not disclose medical records, but the Veterans Affairs Department made an exception because of the public interest in the mass shooting.
The harassment apparently was leaving him sleep-deprived, and he reported his insomnia to his VA doctors, as his records showed.
Alexis’s medical record like the other facts of the case are consistent with his account of having been intensely harassed.
What does not make sense is the official explanation namely, that out of the blue, someone who appeared to be normal and even was given a security clearance suddenly went on a murderous rampage for no reason whatsoever.
The nomination was made “for blocking access to records” about the Navy Yard shooting.
As noted above, some of the reporting on the shooting noted that Alexis had sent three emails to FFCHS prior to the shooting.
The FBI rejected the request later that month, claiming that the information was exempt from disclosure requirements on the grounds that it was part of an investigative file.
In January 2014, the person requesting the information filed an appeal, noting that the president of FFCHS, Derrick Robinson, had already revealed information about the matter by publishing an FFCHS newsletter in which he stated that he had been interviewed by two FBI agents concerning the case.
In September 2014, the Justice Department finally sent a letter denying the appeal.
The United States government’s position is that the mass shooting at the navy yard was simply a random act of insanity by a disturbed individual as opposed to being the result of intense systematic harassment of the shooter, as the shooter himself clearly suggested.
Since the shooter, Aaron Alexis, is dead, presumably the only potential “enforcement proceedings” would be civil litigation related to security issues, such as Alexis’s security clearance, and the management of security at the naval base.
At least one such lawsuit has been filed by the family of one of the shooting victims.
Several critical pieces of information will remain in the dark at least for now.
One is the FBI’s investigation if any regarding Alexis’s claims that he was the target of psyops harassment.
Obviously, if he had been the subject of any kind of investigation and monitoring, that would have huge implications regarding his security clearance.
FOIA Exemption 7 concerns records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes the release of which would disclose techniques and procedures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions.
This response should not be taken as an indication that records do or do not exist.
Some news reports about the shooting noted that Alexis had sent three emails to FFCHS prior to the shooting.
It would be very interesting to read the description of FFCHS that appears in the FBI’s investigative files.
No doubt, the DOJ would argue that such information also falls under one or more of the above FOIA exemptions.
Muckrock, which tracked the FOIA request, now lists its status as rejected.
DOJ Denial of Appeal Whatever led to the mass shooting at the Washington Navy Yard in September 2013, one thing is clear: the United States Navy and the FBI do not want the public to know about it.
Theodore Kaczynski Theodore Kaczynski A series of bombings was perpetrated from 1978 to 1995 which killed three people and injured 23 others.
Kaczynski wrote a manifesto which explained that his motive for the bombings was to expose the threat to freedom posed by modern technology.
The court rejected Kaczynski’s request to represent himself at his trial, and made a plea agreement to avoid having Kaczynski possibly use his trial as a public platform to express his views.
In return for a promise to not seek the death penalty, Kaczynski pleaded guilty, and was sentenced to life in prison.
An article by Alston Chase in the June 2000 issue of the Atlantic explored the question of whether Kaczynski’s violence was the result of his psychological torture.
Kacyzinski was recruited to participate in a series of psychology experiments, and he was deceived about their true nature, which was to examine the effects of extreme emotional stress possibly to help the CIA develop interrogation techniques.
The article implies that the experiment could possibly have been a factor in Kaczynski’s later acts of violence.
The injuries and deaths of the 26 victims of Kaczynski’s bombs were quite possibly “collateral damage” from a secret and unethical United States government program.
Selection of Targeted Individuals target 01 “To a hammer everything looks like a nail.
To an intelligence agent, informant, or law enforcement officer, everything unconventional or unorthodox looks like at least a preembryonic terrorist danger.” Bruce Fein, United States Deputy Attorney General, Reagan administration In 2009 Bruce Fein advised Congress that the national intelligence-gathering system of regional data fusion centers should be abandoned.
He compared the system to those operated by the Soviet Union’s KGB and East Germany’s Stasi.
Threat assessments by bureaucrats Incompetence in the United States law enforcement and intelligence community creates threats to Americans in two ways.
Real threats such as the 9/11 terrorist attack and the Boston Marathon bombing often go unrecognized.
Meanwhile, people who pose no threat whatsoever are often destroyed such as the actress Jean Seberg, whose “crime” was supporting the civil rights movement, for which she was stalked and terrorized by the FBI, ultimately leading to her suicide.
One obvious problem currently is that in America we now have a vast industry of government and corporate entities in the domestic spying business, but relatively few actual threats.
Predictably, people feeding at the giant homeland security pig trough are eager to create the impression that their jobs and budgets are justified, which makes witch-hunts almost inevitable.
Adding to the problem created by such careerist motivations is the fact that people who pursue careers in the intelligence and law enforcement industry often have, as Bruce Fein observed, a distorted perception of the danger posed by people who are less conformist and less subservient to authority figures than they are.
What these kinds of people share in common is that the pattern-recognition software in their head is badly calibrated and oversensitive.
Based upon the reported facts, I would not refer to the following case as “gang stalking” in the full sense of the term.
The incident did not involve the intense and sophisticated psychological operations tactics commonly associated with organized stalking by corrupt law enforcement and intelligence agencies and their contractors.
This case was however a well-documented example of social and professional isolation of a targeted individual who was blacklisted by government bureaucrats.
Articles published by the Guardian and BBC News in June 2009 reported that Jane Clift, a resident of the Borough of Slough in England had won a libel case against her borough’s council in which she claimed to have been falsely labelled as potentially violent after she complained about someone vandalizing a flower bed in a town park in 2005.
Clift on its “violent persons register” and then emailed people in the community about the fact that she had been placed on the list.
United States government’s terrorist watch list I would confidently bet that the vast majority of Americans targeted by organized stalking would be unlikely to suspect that their personal circumstances might be connected even remotely to the subject of terrorism.
Still, it is highly plausible that in many cases such a connection exists within the vast homeland security bureaucracy.
The United States government’s Terrorist Screening Database is shrouded in secrecy.
The fact that names are routinely added and removed from the watch-list which is officially known as the “Terrorist Screening Database” combined with the secrecy which surrounds the list, make it difficult to know how many people it includes, but apparently the list has grown rapidly.
A report released by the ACLU in March 2014 about the terrorist watch list included a number of references which would resonate with anyone familiar with gang stalking.
ACLU United States Govt Watchlisting Multiple secret watch-lists As with many elements of America’s complex security state, watch-lists exist in multiple jurisdictions and agencies and databases, and are maintained by both public and private organizations.
In addition to the federal terrorist screening database and no-fly list, there is the secretive quasi-governmental database maintained by the Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit association, which is described in the “Red Squads” section of this overview.
One of Big Brother’s interesting lists was the subject of a July 2008 article in Salon.
Main Core in its current incarnation apparently contains a vast amount of personal data on Americans, including NSA intercepts of bank and credit card transactions and the results of surveillance efforts by the FBI, the CIA and other agencies.
One former intelligence official described Main Core as “an emergency internal security database system” designed for use by the military in the event of a national catastrophe, a suspension of the Constitution or the imposition of martial law.
The Last Roundup Getting your name removed from a watch-list Blacklist Avoiding the cliché “Kafkaesque” is nearly impossible when describing United States government watch-lists or when describing organized stalking for that matter.
The protagonist in Kafka’s novel “The Trial” was arrested by agents from an unidentified agency and tried without being told the nature of the charges against him.
Most of the policies governing how people are placed on federal watch-lists are secrets, and the government has an official policy of refusing to confirm or deny whether someone is on the government’s various lists.
She struggled for 9 years including a 7-year legal battle before a federal judge finally ruled that her name should be removed from the government’s various watch-lists.
Ibrahim had to litigate most of her case without knowing the information in the United States government’s case against her.
Quotas for reporting suspicious persons A report by an ABC local news affiliate in Denver in July 2006 revealed that some federal air marshals said they have quotas for identifying a certain number of passengers as suspicious.
Individuals identified in such reports can end up in an international database watch list.
While it is unlikely that law enforcement and intelligence officials would publicly acknowledge the pressure on employees to name persons as being suspicious, it is easy to imagine how career pressures upon and within various agencies could create a sort of “witch hunt” culture to rationalize the budgets and jobs in the homeland security bureaucracy.
In essence, the authors found that FBI agents responded to organizational pressure from the upper echelon of the FBI by rationalizing the targeting of individuals for surveillance and subversion even when those individuals were not engaged in subversive political activities.
Targeting suspected potential future “terrorists” According to some published mainstream news reports, individuals are sometimes targeted for gang stalking because they are suspected of involvement or potential future involvement in terrorism or crime, but are not implicated by any legal evidence.
For example, see the May 31, 2006 article in the Canadian national newspaper, The Globe and Mail, regarding such tactics being illegally used in Canada.
Not surprisingly, people in the United States “homeland security” industry whose money and power is tied to the perceived risk of terrorism take a very expansive view of what constitutes a suspicious person.
In the case of federal contractor Jeffrey Kantor an innocent Google search apparently led to him being targeted for gang stalking by federal agents.
Targeting to discredit & retaliate against whistle-blowers Other mainstream news reports indicate that gang stalking is also used by intelligence agencies to punish or intimidate whistle-blowers for example, as reported in the October 10, 2004 article in the Sunday Times, a major newspaper in the U.K., about the use of gang stalking by the intelligence agency MI5.
United States intelligence agencies are often accused of retaliating against whistle-blowers also.
They find no protection in the vast patchwork of laws designed to protect whistleblowers.
If you doubt that is plausible, read about the CIA’s MK Ultra experiments, in which many American citizens were used as human guinea pigs.
Targeting individuals for extra-judicial punishment & experimentation A well-researched article in the October 2013 issue of Fortean Times documented a case of state-sponsored gang stalking described as such in which a former United States military member was apparently targeted both for the purposes of extra-judicial punishment and to test psychological operations technology.
Targeting individuals by mistake bad_aim Sometimes individuals are targeted by America’s spy industry purely because of a bureaucrat’s incompetence.
A perfect example of this was reported in September 2011 by the journalist John Cook.
Here is his report of how a CIA analyst arranged to have a man kidnapped and tortured, although he was completely innocent.
Apparently, at the CIA they are a bit more forgiving; the analyst was promoted.
As the Associated Press’ Adam Goldman and Matt Apuzzo reported earlier this year, an analyst they described only by her middle name —”Frances”—pressed for El-Masri to be abducted even though some in the agency weren’t convinced he was the terrorist that Frances suspected he was.
Instead of being punished or fired for the error, “Frances” was eventually promoted to running the Global Jihad Unit by then-CIA director Michael Hayden.
Exploiting watch-lists for personal vendettas and corporate agendas As you read accounts whether published or informal of organized stalking cases from the Cointelpro era in the U.S., from the Stasi era in East Germany, and of current gang stalking in the U.S., Canada, and the U.K., one of the most common factors seems to be the exploitation of such tactics for personal vengeance.
As it is now structured, the United States law enforcement and intelligence industry provides a perfect environment for abuse of power.
The claim that America faces a constant indefinite threat of terrorism has created political cover for seemingly unlimited money and secrecy and power for the agencies and private firms involved.
Increasingly sophisticated surveillance and “non-lethal” weapons technology makes the potential for abuse even greater still.
In theory, organized stalking could be used against someone by an individual or a corporation in one of several ways.
One prominent case of gang stalking that apparently involved exploiting United States counterintelligence subversion for a personal vendetta is that of Gloria Naylor.
Naylor also wrote a semiautobiographical book, 1996, about her experiences as a targeted individual of gang stalking.
Similar cases which were well-documented in published mainstream news media articles include an incident in Stockton, California in 2011 in which the city manager was stalked by local police after a break-down in contract negotiations, and an incident in Florida in 2012 in which a police officer was stalked by other police officers after citing an off-duty cop for reckless driving.
Threat Assessment Teams & Personal Vendettas Individuals become targets of surveillance states in a variety of ways.
A Threat Assessment Team is a small group of designated staff members in an organization which attempts to assess whether certain individuals in the organization pose a threat.
Like-minded, concermed professionals gathered together in person or via a teleconference can use the power of synergy to find dynamic solutions in a short time.
These meetings allow the participants to share ideas, experiences, fears, and concerns in a problem-solving environment.
Naturally, you should avoid any diversity of viewpoints on the panel which is going to decide whether to label someone as suspicious.
Tellingly, the FBI’s webpage makes no mention of the issue of workplace harassment and bullying.
Kenneth Westhues, a sociologist, found that violent incidents in the workplace and in schools in North America are often a response to the individual being intensely harassed.
Organized stalking by all accounts involves the tactics associated with counterintelligence subversion.
The FBI is the primary agency in the United States responsible for domestic counterintelligence.
Clearly, there is a potential for abuse of power by these Threat Assessment Teams.
Although that is also an issue on which the FBI’s chooses to remain silent, a federal judge has found that the practice has already been abused.
Critics say administrators may try to use threat assessment teams for their own purposes.
Students’ rights groups say administrators are infringing on students’ free-speech rights.
Official rationale for counterintelligence subversion Merely invoking the magic phrase “national security” seems to provide sufficient legal and political justification these days for almost any secret policy of the intelligence community.
Even in the rare cases when the United States government’s “Star Chamber” the secret FISA Court rules that a policy is out of bounds, Americans are not permitted to know what the feds were trying to get away with.
As practiced, organized stalking is essentially an extra-judicial punishment, and it grossly violates multiple state and federal laws.
However, the policy is presumably justified at least unofficially within the FBI and DOJ as being a legitimate counterintelligence policy needed to subvert individuals who would otherwise pose a threat.
As explained later in this overview (in the section on the United States Department of Justice), probably the closest thing to an official public statement of the philosophy behind targeting certain individuals was expressed in the policy statement of the nowdefunct “Weed and Seed” program.
That program’s description suggested a law enforcement strategy of identifying and removing undesirable citizens from neighborhoods through a “community-based” law enforcement approach.
In September 2013 it emerged that at least a dozen NSA employees had been illegally spying on their spouses and partners.
This was a small glimpse of the potential abuses of power in the modern United States spy industry.
In other words, the abuses of power were real, but their revelation might well have been intended to distract from much more serious widespread transgressions as explained here.
In addition to thousands of professional spies, the Stasi had over 100,000 citizen informants.
An informant for the Stasi was referred to as an IM an unofficial collaborator.
All sectors of East German society had IMs who supplied information about their fellow citizens to the communist government.
A November 2009 article in Der Spiegel examined the nature of this rodent-like element of society which no doubt exists today in America.
The real motivation behind these acts of betrayal was much more humdrum than one might think.
As the article notes, often the origin of the targeting of individuals was simply a trivial incident or a misunderstanding.
In one case a man was turned-in for having a West German brand of pudding in his kitchen.
The Organizational Structure of Gang Stalking cockroaches 01 copy “The system of espionage thus established, the country will swarm with informers, spies, delators , and all that odious reptiles tribe that bred in the sunshine of despotic power; that suck the blood of the unfortunate and creep into the bosom of sleeping innocence.” Congressman John Allen, during the debates about the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798.
In the shadowy world of gang stalking, it is difficult for the targeted individual to know the exact nature of the organizational structure of his or her enemies.
From the victim’s perspective especially when the person first realizes that he or she is being systematically harassed, it is virtually impossible to know exactly who the enemies are and how they are conspiring with each other.
For many victims, their situation remains opaque because of the vast disinformation campaign they encounter when they attempt to ascertain what is happening via Internet research.
As I described in the introduction to this overview however, the basic nature of the crime namely, that it is a government counter-intelligence program is an unavoidable conclusion since the apparent scope of the activity would make it impossible for it to be undetected by America’s now-massive homeland security surveillance and information-sharing infrastructure.
Gang stalking’s organizational structure apparently involves a mixture of personnel.
At the top are government officials and agents in federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies, who would need to at least passively acquiesce in the program, if not orchestrate it.
Several levels of delegates below them would be needed to manage and perform various operations.
The FBI’s original version of Cointelpro also made use of local government and civilian minions.
Agents and criminals Police and thieves in the street, oh yeah Fighting the nation with their guns and ammunition from the song “Police and Thieves” by Junior Murvin also covered by The Clash In a sense, everyone who participates in organized stalking and officials who knowingly permit it are criminals, insofar as stalking is a violation of federal law and of state laws in every state as well as being a violation of several provisions of the United States Constitution.
For many people, the notion that law enforcement and intelligence agencies would be perpetrating crimes seems counter-intuitive.
Also, law enforcement and intelligence agencies such as the FBI often authorize crimes by criminal informants.
If a government agency contracts with a private firm and then that firm employs criminal informants, former cops, and former agents to perform the dirty work the crimes can be several steps removed from officials.
Another reason is that structural complexity itself can be desirable if one is trying to conduct activities in a way that will be difficult for outsiders to understand.
In essence, the idea is to make it difficult to ascertain the structure and dynamics and agendas which are at work.
Having a complex and opaque system of counterintelligence operations serves the interests of the perpetrators as does further obfuscating the nature of the system by spreading disinformation as explained in detail later in this overview.
As with the United States military-industrial complex, parasitic intelligence-security contractors all want a place at the pig trough whenever a government program creates opportunities.
Also, the domestic spying industry provides a lucrative revolving-door career path for employees of law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
Opportunities for expansion of personal power could be just as significant a factor.
For example, as government-corporate alliances such as InfraGard and DSAC are formed, participants in organized stalking can exploit the system for their own personal vendettas.
A prime example was the previouslydescribed incident in 2011 in which the city manager in Stockton, California was stalked by local police to punish him for not granting them a sufficiently generous contract.
Some CI operations are handled directly by the FBI and other intelligence agencies.
Other CI activities are performed for the government by private intelligence-security firms under government contract.
In some cases for example, the infiltration and subversion of the Occupy Wall Street Movement CI activities were performed by the FBI and by private firms.
Presumably, one major difference between the structure of the original Cointelpro operations and modern gang stalking is the huge number of private intelligence/security firm contractors with secret clearances now employed by “homeland security” programs and corporations.
The DOJ, FBI, & DHS Cerberus America has a vast, complex, interconnected workforce associated with law enforcement, intelligence, and national security operations.
It includes everything from local volunteer neighborhood watch programs to the Pentagon.
Components of that infrastructure include federal, state, and local government agencies, private contractors, criminal informants, hybrid quasi-governmental associations such as the previously-discussed Law Enforcement Intelligence Units , corporategovernment intelligence-sharing partnerships such as InfraGard and DSAC, and volunteer organizations.
Adding to the complexity are overlapping jurisdictions, bureaucracy, “revolvingdoor” employment patterns, and coordination between different groups.
Some examples of that coordination both formal and informal would be disturbing to many Americans.
The scale and complexity of America’s security industry combined with its inherent secrecy makes it difficult to speculate about the exact way counterintelligence operations are perpetrated.
The three agencies work with each other on the collection and sharing of information as in the case of this biometric-based database of criminal suspects.
The DOJ is the United States executive department responsible for law enforcement.
The violations include instances in which attorneys who have a duty to uphold justice have, according to the internal affairs office, misled courts, withheld evidence that could have helped defendants, abused prosecutorial and investigative power, and violated constitutional rights.” Project on Government Oversight report, March 2014 The FBI is both a federal criminal investigative agency and the nation’s primary counterintelligence agency.
It was the FBI which secretly orchestrated the original version of Cointelpro under FBI Director J Edgar Hoover.
Tuccille, Journalist, Reason, September 2013 The DHS which was created in response to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks is the department with primary responsibility for counter-terrorism programs, such as maintenance of the national network of data fusion centers used to share security information across all levels of government.
As with organized stalking generally, motivations might vary from counterintelligence subversion, to experimentation, to personal vengeance for individuals and corporations with connections.
The CIA’s official mission statement refers to spying on America’s “adversaries” which generally refers to foreign adversaries.
On the other hand, the mission statement also proclaims that the CIA “upholds the highest standards of conduct,” and yet the agency has a well-documented history of involvement with things like torture, assassinations, drug trafficking, orchestrating coups against democraticallyelected governments, kidnapping families for dictators, arranging the capture of Nelson Mandela, spying on Americans based on their political beliefs (in the past and recently), and in the case of Project MK Ultra performing secret unethical mindcontrol experiments on Americans.
The agency’s crimes associated with MK Ultra will never be fully known, because CIA Director Richard Helms by his own admission ordered the destruction of the program’s records in 1973.
The CIA is known to have destroyed videos of their agents’ use of torture in interrogations, and to have spied on the United States Senate while it was investigating the CIA’s use of torture.
Accounts by selfproclaimed victims of organized stalking often include relatively sophisticated methods.
The tactics and technology are consistent with the operational capabilities of the CIA, and consistent with the agency’s reputation for operating outside of legal and ethical boundaries.
Also worth considering is the fact that the CIA supports regimes which torture their citizens.
It does not strain the imagination to think that such an agency might have its slimy tentacles connected in various plausibly deniable ways to the organized stalking of targeted individuals.
As with the CIA, one can only speculate about the NSA’s possible involvement with organized stalking, but there are reasons to suspect that the agency is not entirely innocent.
Although the NSA unlike the CIA specializes in signals intelligence rather than operations, revelations in 2013 by NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden showed that the NSA is aggressively involved in spying on its own citizens and lying about it.
NSA Director Keith Alexander lied about the mass surveillance of Americans by the NSA twice.
He denied that the data was being collected, then after it was revealed, he claimed that the program had uncovered 54 terrorist plots.
When challenged by Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman, Patrick Leahy, he admitted that the number was an exaggeration.
Later the President’s Review Board reported that the actual number of terrorist threats detected was zero.
Another reason to think that some members of the NSA acquiesce in organized stalking is more specific.
Another reason to suspect that some members of the NSA must acquiesce in organized stalking and this would apply to the other numerous intelligence agencies as well is that it would be impossible for them to be unaware of the various electronic communications associated with it.
Gang stalking must be something of an open secret among much of the intelligence community.
Finally, another reason to suspect that NSA officials likely approve of gang stalking is that such operations are consistent with what is now known about the agency’s culture.
Possibly the position was created as part of the massive increase in the “national security” infrastructure following the 9/11 attacks.
It is very possible that Surveillance Role Players fill a variety of roles.
For example, one of those roles might be to simulate the role of terrorists and others in various security drills.
Another role might or might not be to perpetrate the counterintelligence stalking of targeted individuals.
In the absence of reporting on either the nature of SRPs or the nature of counterintelligence stalking, it is at least worth considering that the two phenomena might be connected.
Certainly the collusion of corporations and federal agencies in the area of domestic intelligence activities is not new.
The United States government has been colluding with big corporations to spy on Americans since the dawn of the Cold War, as this article in Wired notes, although the practice has greatly expanded.
Cointelpro Version 2. apparently makes use of the large supply of Americans who possess security clearances over 5. million people as of 2013almost a third of whom work for private firms.
Nearly one-third of the Americans with top secret clearances are private contractors rather than government employees.
Numerous online job listings by defense/intelligence contractors for SRPs seek applicants with active secret clearances and training in counterintelligence.
In at least some cases, the client for the Surveillance Role Player contractors is the Department of Defense.
Often though, the job announcements do not indicate which United States government department or agency is the client.
It seems likely that some of the contracts would be with the Department of Homeland Security.
These ads could be evidence that federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies support outsourced organized stalking operations.
Clearly though, SRPs would have the tactical skills, technological assets, funding, and law enforcement connections needed to perpetrate nationwide stalking operations involving counterintelligence methods.
SRPs would also have a powerful incentive to maintain secrecy about such operations.
Members of the intelligence community including contractors are exempt from the Whistleblower Protection Act.
So even if an intelligence-security contractor firm were to mistakenly hire someone who has moral integrity, that employee would still be reluctant to expose misconduct.
Revealing secret practices even practices which are legally dubious would involve a high risk of serious legal trouble.
Another aspect of the SRP job which makes it a plausible explanation for how organized stalking is perpetrated is the fact that the position is relatively low on the food chain.
If organized stalking is widespread as anecdotal and media reports seem to suggest the street-level work is certainly not being performed by FBI agents.
Victims of organized stalking seem to be rather ordinary individuals who are not connected to criminal or terrorist organizations.
In many cases, targets seem to have no idea how they came to be targeted.
Some of them perhaps most might have simply crossed someone with connections to the law enforcement industry.
Such targeted persons do not have the resources and skills that would require serious “tradecraft” on the part of the perpetrators.
Any brown-noser who can follow orders and keep a secret could perform this level of dirty work.
Training the lowest-level perps Most of the employment announcements I have seen for SRPs state that one element of the job is training others.
That too is consistent with observable activities associated with organized stalking.
Acts of harassment done for psychological operations purposes are often perpetrated by someone having only a single momentary interaction with the target.
For example, someone unknown to the victim makes some particular comment or performs some act of rudeness, or simply glares at the victim.
Such persons are probably ignorant of why the victim is supposedly even being targeted.
Perhaps SRPs orchestrate and delegate those minor acts of “no-touch torture” which collectively make up what the Stasi referred to as “zersetzung” the process of systematically degrading the target’s morale.
Many Surveillance Role Player job ads such as the one below indicate that the work is part-time.
For one thing, a part-time job would be easier to conceal from the public.
Also, it is possible that harassing people full-time might be a bit demoralizing for all but the most purely sadistic CI agents.
Some cops frequently behave as bullies, but few people could spend all 40 hours of their work week perpetrating acts of harassment.
Of course, an additional practical reason for restricting employees to part-time status is that it greatly reduces the obligation to provide benefits for them.
If SRPs are stalking people, they would inevitably need to sometimes coordinate their activities with police.
Quite possibly, Law Enforcement Intelligence Units could be involved in some ways.
SRP job announcements do not indicate which United States government department or agency is the client.
My guess is that the participants are primarily motivated by the financial benefits, but also by the notion that they are part of a secret group which is essentially above the law, and which imposes what they see as a moral punishment on dissidents.
They are America’s more cowardly and more secretive version of the Taliban.
The professional caliber of Surveillance Role Players Players in this game are not exactly members of the premier league in the intelligence business.
First, spying is traditionally regarded within the intelligence community as a more prestigious occupation than counterintelligence work.
Secondly, for obvious reasons, domestic counterintelligence operations are less challenging than foreign counterintelligence operations.
Even those who argue that counterintelligence work deserves to be taken more seriously, such as Roy Godson, acknowledge that distinction.
Some ads for SRPs list a college degree among the qualifications, but many such as the one below require only a high school diploma.
This means that former enlisted military personnel with counterintelligence training can easily make some good money relative to their education level as SRPs possibly by harassing and spying on their fellow citizens.
That would be tempting for a certain type of person during any period, but especially in today’s relatively weak job market.
Finally, counterintelligence subversion which targets amateurs (non-intelligence professionals) who have very limited assets is by definition the easiest work of all.
Unlike covert operations which must be conducted without being detected by the targets organized stalking involves overt harassment, so the level of “tradecraft” required is relatively primitive.
Being a gang stalking perp is several rungs down the ladder from being the protagonist in a John le Carré novel.
SRP Job Ad BAE Goldilocks’ porridge temperature IQ Sometimes it is better from an employer’s perspective to hire people who do not think too deeply about the business in which they are involved.
One of the mistakes made by the National Security Agency that led to the scandalous revelations of its Big Brother spying programs in 2013 was that the agency permitted one of its contractor firms Booz Allen Hamilton Inc. to hire an employee who was exceptionally intelligent.
Edward Snowden was smart enough to not only understand the information technology aspect of the spy agency, but also to perceive how morally corrupt and unconstitutional the surveillance system was, and how to expose the whole slimy business to the public.
Corporations who employ Surveillance Role Players quite possibly seek to hire people smart enough to carry out orders, but not smart enough to consider the philosophical implications associated with a Stasi-type system of political enforcement.
One example is a federal lawsuit by a police department applicant in Connecticut.
A man was denied the opportunity to apply for a job with the New London Police Department on the grounds that he was too intelligent.
In August 2000, a federal appeals court ruled that the policy was legitimate.
The moral character of security contractors Admittedly, the possible participation of SRPs in counterintelligence stalking is purely speculative for now.
On the other hand, there are well-documented cases of lawlessness and minimal oversight among military, security, and intelligence contractors, so one does not have to wonder about the plausibility of such involvement.
The article documented how the mercenary soldier corporation formerly known as Blackwater operated with legal impunity in Iraq.
Several weeks before an infamous incident in which Blackwater personnel killed 17 civilians in Baghdad in 2007, the United States State Department had begun investigating the corporation’s misconduct and lack of oversight.
However, American Embassy officials pulled the plug on that investigation and ordered the investigators to immediately leave the country.
The death threat which was made by a former member of SEAL Team 6 was witnessed by another investigator.
Despite having the statements of the investigators as well as a long list of other examples of serious misconduct by Blackwater employees, the State Department never even interviewed either of the investigators during its inquiry.
Although most of us can only speculate about a connection between Surveillance Role Players and Cointelpro stalking, Americans should at least be curious why their government is constantly hiring people with counterintelligence training and secret clearances for unspecified activities within the United States Journalists especially ought to investigate this mystery if only out of professional curiosity.
Since the qualifications include counterintelligence training and secret clearances, the most obvious source of personnel would be former military counterintelligence agents.
For someone who is a former military CI agent, domestic spying offers an opportunity for easy money and power.
United States Army Counterintelligence Office of Special Investigations Naval Criminal Investigative Service United States Army Intelligence Insignia United States Air Force OSI Insignia United States Navy NCIS Insignia Agents in each of the branches are federal law enforcement officers.
They conduct the operations and investigations in their respective branches aimed at disrupting such crimes as espionage and sabotage, and they also handle other criminal matters.
Now imagine you are told that you can work either full-time or part-time for an intelligence-security contractor and make good money for relatively easy work.
Imagine further that you are the kind of person likely to be working in military counterintelligence to begin with someone who can follow orders and keep a secret , and who does not question the morality of his or her work.
Keep in mind that the job proposal working as a “surveillance role player” offers the allure of participating in a secret program that operates outside the law sort of a low-rent spy club.
The opportunity would be especially appealing to anyone whose marketable job skills are limited.
A CI agent’s job training emphasizes things such as lying convincingly.
That kind of skill set is not always in big demand outside of fields such as used-car sales and politics.
Further imagine that just like J Edgar Hoover and his thugs you subscribe to the kind of reactionary authoritarian political outlook that enables you to rationalize perpetrating various unconstitutional actions against your fellow citizens.
Morally, you can live with what you do because you have an authority figure your boss at the security-intelligence firm (and more generally, the military-intelligence industrial establishment) sanctioning your activities.
In short, you’re a minion of a larger program run by people smarter and more powerful than you, and as such you are not inclined to question the morality of it all.
You can see why a job as a “Surveillance role player” might be very attractive to such a person.
If the individual is fundamentally a bully as well, he or she will have found the promised land.
Domestic spying on American civilians by the United States military Not only do United States military CI agents sometimes cash-in on their experience by working as intelligence-security contractors after they leave the military, some of them do some spying on American civilians while they are still on active duty.
Most Americans probably assume that the targets of spying by the United States military are exclusively foreign enemies.
For example, one of the scandals which led to the United States Senate’s famous Church Committee investigations during the 1970s involved United States Army intelligence agents getting caught spying on anti-war protesters.
About a decade ago, news reports began to emerge about efforts by the Defense Department to quietly loosen restrictions on its ability to conduct domestic spying.
Allegations of political spying by military contractors have also been in the news in recent years.
This lawsuit in Washington State for example, accused two civilian employees of the United States Army of spying on anti-war protesters.
The case was dismissed in June 2014, but the plaintiffs are appealing the decision.
Larry Hildes, the lead attorney for the plaintiffs, had some interesting comments about the case, as reported in this write-up.
Hildes and Hendricks say there are dossiers and PowerPoint presentations on some of the demonstrators that made the rounds at domestic terrorism conferences.
Hildes says another Army official bragged about their effectiveness in disrupting the lives of PMR demonstrators to her bosses in the Pentagon—and that there was a PMR task force at McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey.
If Judge Leighton’s current ruling stands, Hildes says, “the Army can take any peace group, where any member of it has ever engaged in civil disobedience, which is probably most peace groups in the country, and spy on them as much as they want, gather personal information as much as they want, label them as terrorists as much as they want, and everything is okay.
It appears that just being an anti-war activist was enough to get someone designated as a surveillance target which also involved having security personnel gather information about the activist’s friends and relatives.
So there is at least one credible published report of intense gang stalking being used by a United States military counterintelligence agency against an American citizen.
Strange Tales of Homeland Security by Robert Guffey Connections between United States military intelligence agencies and Law Enforcement Intelligence Units Most accounts of organized stalking include reports of sophisticated electronic surveillance, black bag operations, and exotic weapons.
As noted in the previous section on LEIUs, former CIA analyst and expert on the history of spying in America, George O’ Toole, offered an insight into how such tactics and equipment are acquired by police department intelligence units.
United States military intelligence agency databases about American civilians In March 2014 the Washington Examiner reported that the Naval Criminal Investigative Service maintains a huge database which tracks civilian law enforcement records including even minor offenses such as parking tickets.
Criminal “Informants” rat My comments on this subject are mostly speculative, but are based on first-hand experience as a target of illegal harassment by members of America’s security industry.
Criminal “informants” are the pawns on the counterintelligence chessboard.
In a legitimate counterintelligence operation, an informant might have useful information and contacts and therefore, be comparable to a more valuable chess piece, but in “gang stalking,” the perpetrators are expendable.
Very likely, ex-convicts over whom authorities have leverage are used for some of the acts of overt stalking of counterintelligence targets.
Potential pawns of this sort are never in short supply in America a nation with one of the world’s highest per capita rates of incarceration.
The SRPs probably delegate much of the street-level harassment to rodents even lower on the food chain than themselves.
This creates a perfect system of plausible deniability; the perpetrators seen by the target are unknown to the target, and the identities of the SRPs are unknown to the informants.
Very likely, the security agent simply gives some cash to the perpetrator for executing some one-time act of harassment such as making a comment which would be meaningless to anyone except the target, such as a reference to something learned by illegal surveillance.
In other cases, the perpetrator might cut-off or bump the target in pedestrian traffic as a form of psychological warfare.
Again, the contacts would be meaningless to outside observers, and virtually impossible to prove.
The streetlevel perpetrators have minimal credibility because of their backgrounds, so they pose little threat of exposing the operations.
Finally, this type of perpetrator is basically expendable from the perspective of the security agency which uses him or her.
If the “student” gets injured or killed, or captured, no one in a position of power will really care.
The fate of “informants” and other non-professionals recruited to participate in counterintelligence stalking cases as distinguished from criminal investigation cases is not easily ascertained because of the secrecy which surrounds such activity.
Helpful Tips Based on my own observations, and credible accounts shared with me by other selfproclaimed victims of government stalking, many low-level perpetrators are apparently rotated by the agents and contractors coordinating the harassment, so the target is not confronting the same individuals repeatedly.
Even though a victim might be harassed daily, many of the stalkers only have a single instance of direct contact with the victim.
Consequently, if you are a victim of this cowardly psychological terrorism, you should pay very close attention when perpetrators are used who are not anonymous.
If someone whose identity is known to you has clearly been recruited to harass you (for example, if acts and comments by a neighbor, co-worker, landlord, local merchant, etc. are clearly intended to harass you), you should exploit that fact by making it very clear to that person in a way that does not constitute an illegal threat that you know he or she is perpetrating crimes against you.
Even if that particular individual’s participation in the harassment discontinues, you should “stay in touch” with the person, and make clear that you remember exactly what he or she did for the Stasi.
You could even hand a copy of the flyer to him or her, and just mention that you saw it and thought it was interesting.
That will create problems for both the pawns and their puppet-masters, neither of whom will be comfortable with spreading information about what they are doing.
Whether some TLOs might also be directly involved officially or unofficially in counterintelligence harassment, is impossible to say.
It is not hard to imagine such involvement though for the kind of person who would volunteer to be the designated reporter of “suspicious” citizens to Big Brother.
Historically, many of the spying and subversion operations of Red Squads targets political dissidents rather than organized crime groups.
Money from the DHS creates a massive pig trough excuse the pun for local law enforcement agencies, and has greatly contributed to the militarization of police departments.
DHS funding enables towns such as Keene, New Hampshire population 23,000 to purchase armored personnel carriers, for example.
Having police departments arm themselves with military weapons is disturbing, but the far more dangerous trend is the expansion of spying on citizens by local police, which is being encouraged at the federal level.
Local police departments participate in organized stalking of targeted individuals.
In some cases they perpetrate stalking operations purely for local personal agendas instead of as part of an unconstitutional, but ostensibly security-related program.
The clearest example of this was the previously-mentioned 2011 case in Stockton, California, which was covered in local TV and newspaper reports.
Cops stalked the city manager to punish him for not granting them a sufficiently generous compensation package.
That the local police officers resorted to creepy psychological operations tactics is significant; it did not happen randomly.
The cops in Stockton were apparently familiar with psyops tactics, and they were used to getting away with such behavior.
Sometimes the role of local police in gang stalking operations is to simply look the other way while others perpetrate their crimes.
This was apparently the case when the feds were terrorizing Jacob Appelbaum and his girlfriend in June 2011.
Not surprisingly, the United States intelligence community is not fond of him since he is in the business of exposing their crimes.
The cops initially refused to even take a report about the incident, let alone investigate it.
After several attempts, Appelbaum was able to force them to take a report, but only after the ACLU got involved on his behalf.
Although I cannot prove it, I personally experienced several unmistakable instances of local uniformed police officers in California overtly stalking me.
I can imagine that the ACLU must receive similar reports, although they refuse to publicly discuss the issue.
It should be remembered that the ACLU although extremely helpful on a range of civil rights issues played no role in the exposure of the first version of Cointelpro.
Anyone who might be skeptical about the willingness of cops to perpetrate crimes against their fellow citizens as part of counterintelligence operations should read about the assassinations of black political organizers Fred Hampton and Mark Clark in 1969.
As part of the FBI’s Cointelpro activities, 14 Chicago police officers raided the apartment in which the two men were sleeping, and shot them to death.
Furthermore, anyone who is skeptical that widespread gang stalking could occur without America’s vigilant news media calling attention to it and the public becoming outraged should also consider that those assassinations were barely noticed by the public.
Firefighters As noted above, firefighters sometimes participate in intelligence sharing as Terrorism Liaison Officers.
Some accounts by victims of organized harassment (including one linked below which was reported on the ABC News TV program 20/20) suggest that firefighters also sometimes participate in the systematic harassment of targeted individuals.
In the case of police officers, I have first-hand knowledge that some participate in organized stalking.
In the case of firefighters, the extent of their involvement is less clear, but several facts make it plausible that they sometimes function as gang stalking perps.
For one thing, a pilot program to have firefighters gather and share security intelligence was launched by the United States Department of Homeland Security in 2006.
Apparently, a complete national framework for “suspicious activity reporting” by first-responders has not been fully worked out, but some fire department officials have taken a great interest in the program.
If you have a traditional view of America, you might have difficulty wrapping your mind around the notion that firefighters, paramedics, and utility workers are spying upon let alone stalking and harassing their fellow Americans.
For an example of the thinking behind using first-responders as spies and an overview of the main elements of the national intelligence-gathering infrastructure you can read the following document.
Below is a Naval Postgraduate School master’s thesis written in 2012 by Joshua M Dennis, a Chicago Fire Department chief.
In his thesis, Mr Dennis seeks to clarify the role of the United States Fire Service in the intelligence community.
Incidentally, the Naval Postgraduate School is apparently something of a firefighter spy academy.
If you perform a Google search for similar theses, you can find several.
Fire Service Intelligence Hat-tip to the blog Cryptoscatology for highlighting that document.
So if firefighters visit your apartment building some day for a periodic safety inspection, or in response to a false fire alarm don’t be surprised if you notice them taking a keen interest in your reading material as they pass through.
Fire departments also participate presumably both as providers and users of information in the nation’s system of data fusion centers.
Another indication of the law enforcement and surveillance role of fire departments in the new Big Brother version of America is that some fire departments apparently have subpoena powers.
Corrupt Firefighters Harassing Ohio Couple This news report broadcast in May 2014 gives a clear example of firefighters participating in organized stalking.
As in the previously-mentioned incident involving gang stalking by local police in Stockton, California in 2011, this Ohio case was done for personal vengeance.
In Hubbard, Ohio a couple was systematically tormented for 7 years in a harassment campaign orchestrated by the town’s fire chief.
Apparently, he was angry at the couple because of a real estate dispute.
He enlisted other firefighters, police officers, and local residents to terrorize the couple by having people drive by the victims’ home at all hours honking their horns.
Those professions contain their share of good people and even heroes, but there is a significant bad element that tends to be underestimated.
InfraGard & DSAC Members excellent As mentioned in the introduction of this overview, two corporate associations InfraGard and DSAC have partnerships with the FBI and Homeland Security to share intelligence.
As a practical matter, this very likely means that if one of these elite members of the business community decides to have someone targeted for an “investigation” they could simply tell the FBI that they have concerns that the individual represents what counterintelligence agents call “an insider threat” meaning that an employee is suspected of being likely to steal proprietary information or that he or she is a “disgruntled employee” or has “extremist beliefs” and poses a safety or national security risk.
For a detailed explanation of this unholy alliance, I recommend reading this May 2013 report from the Center for Media and Democracy, which reported that certain corporations apparently exploited this partnership to use the FBI as a weapon against their political adversary, the Occupy Wall Street Movement.
If you suspect that your boss or former boss might have arranged to have you blacklisted, you should definitely watch this.
Conspiracy Theory with Jesse Ventura, Episode #4, “Big Brother” originally broadcast on December 23, 2009.
If the members of the TAT are also members of InfraGard or DSAC or if they have an informal connection to a law enforcement or security agency, it would presumably not be unlikely that the suspicious individual would find his or her way onto a watch list of some sort.
Of course, it’s purely speculative how such a process might play out regarding organized stalking, but the United States law enforcement business is now so secretive that speculation is often the only option to try to understand it.
Citizen Spies DHS Poster Department of Homeland Security Poster Snitch Programs Clearly the government also makes extensive use of citizen informants.
Naturally, such programs could have a corrosive effect on the inclination of Americans trust each other.
That general level of trust ought to be a concern for everyone, since it has declined in recent decades.
An Associated Press poll published in November 2013 found that the segment of America’s population which believes that “most people can be trusted” had fallen from half to one-third.
Public awareness programs designed to encourage people to become snitches are bad enough, but even more disturbing are secret programs in which citizens are paid to function as part-time spies to gather information on their fellow Americans.
Chicago Daily News Columnist Mike Royko reported on one political activist targeted in Chicago in 1970 who obtained information from the FBI about her record.
She discovered that she had been spied upon by the “Welcome Wagon” lady who had met her when she moved into a new neighborhood.
Incidentally, Mike Royko whose quote appears at the top of the homepage of Fight Gang Stalking was also a target of government spying.
Apparently, the FBI did not approve of Royko’s columns, which sometimes criticized the agency.
The American Protective League Most Americans are unaware of the United States government’s history of using its citizens to spy on each other.
Wearing badges that looked official, the volunteers soon expanded their mission.
They conducted surveillance, and harassed, intimidated and “arrested” people whose loyalty was questioned, perhaps because they refused to buy Liberty Bonds.
The APL staged raids on factories, union halls, and private homes, and detained more than 40,000 people, including draft dodgers, for the War Department.
Boy Scout Merit Badges for Snitching Nazi Boy Scout Volunteer members of the American Protective League were issued United States government ID cards.
It involved twenty thousand boy scouts living in the vicinity of Rochester.
Abzug to be insufficiently fascistic, and therefore someone on whom the agency should definitely spy.
Click on image to enlarge Snitch Letter Hat tip to Matt Stoller, who highlighted this document in his blog in March 2014.
Motivations for becoming a snitch Based on my own observations and on speculation about what would be a logical use of resources for a counterintelligence operation, it seems that some of the people who participate at least in small ways in the stalking are civilians who are presumably told they are assisting in an investigation or a “neighborhood watch” type program.
No doubt such neighbors of the targeted individual would not think of themselves as “vigilantes” even though they are in fact participating in an illegal conspiracy designed to inflict extra-judicial punishment.
The motivations of a particular stalker are probably often unrelated to the reason the targeted individual was blacklisted in the first place.
While the victim may have been targeted simply because he or she crossed someone with connections and money, the perpetrators including the victim’s neighbors, associates, relatives, etc. can simply be told various lies about the victim.
Those lies can be tailored to fit the particular person or groups of persons being recruited to participate in the harassment.
In some cases, these persons are apparently recruited under the pretense that they are participating in an “investigation” or a neighborhood watch program.
Gang stalking perpetrators are an assortment of corrupt politicians, corrupt corporate executives, corrupt federal agents, corrupt cops, snitches, brown-nosers, bullies, liars, parasitic security contractors, sociopaths, psychopaths, traitors, and useful idiots.
This is exactly what you would expect in a program refined by a communist secret police agency.
Social Conformity & Obedience to Authority Nazi Soldiers Nazi soldiers invading Poland “Blind belief in authority is the greatest enemy of truth.” Albert Einstein People like to believe that the evil and stupid obedience displayed by people such as Hitler’s followers is far-removed from their own nature and culture.
Anyone wishing to understand gang stalking or even to assess the plausibility of such a conspiracy should briefly review the interesting historical and scientific evidence on conformity and obedience.
History is filled with shocking manifestations of group-think such as the Salem, Massachusetts witch trials.
Examples of blind deference to authority include attrocities such as the “Rape of Nanking” in the 1930s, in which Japanese soldiers, sanctioned by their leaders, raped, tortured, and murdered thousand of Chinese civilians.
Many infants were killed in front of their mothers in that massacre; sometimes the soldiers gouged-out the children’s eyes before killing them.
Literature is similarly filled with helpful examples of the evil and idiocy associated with group-think and obedience.
Be this guy The story behind this photograph Psychology experiments show that it would be easy to recruit people to participate as paid thugs or as vigilantes in the organized harassment of targeted individuals.
In fact, that was the conclusion of a previously-mentioned article in the September 2004 issue of the Sociological Forum.
The authors found that agents in the original version of the FBI’s Cointelpro operations targeted individuals for surveillance and harassment even when those individuals were not engaged in subversive activities.
The targeting was done to please the authority figures higher up in the agency’s food chain.
Actually, the other participants were accomplices of the experimenter, and the study sought to find how the unsuspecting students would be influenced by the behavior of the others.
When asked to assess the relative lengths of lines displayed on cards, unsuspecting students were frequently influenced by the responses of the accomplices around them.
In other words, people often changed their beliefs about what they had seen when the group expressed an opinion at variance with their own.
In a control group, with no pressure to conform, few of the subjects gave incorrect answers.
A majority of the subjects gave an incorrect answer to at least one question when surrounded by others expressing the wrong answer.
Asch Experiments Obedience to authority figures experiments by psychologist Stanley Milgram In Milgram’s experiments, participants were led to believe that they were administering small electrical shocks to a person being tested, and that the voltage was being incrementally increased with each delivery of the shock.
The experiment found that most people (61 to 66 percent) will administer a fatal electrical shock to an innocent person purely out of deference to authority.
The video features a private investigator-type person (not unlike the people who manage Cointelpro stalking operations presumably) portraying himself as a law enforcement officer, and easily persuading people to participate in serious crimes against strangers.
The fascist element of the United States intelligence community, law enforcement community, and military-industrial complex As a former member of the United States military who also worked as a security contractor, I can say with some authority that many of the people in those professions have both integrity and intelligence.
Unfortunately though, such career fields and I’m sure this applies to intelligence and law enforcement agencies such as the FBI and CIA as well have more than their share of the type of folks described here by journalist Chris Hedges.
Having spent a couple of decades as a war correspondent, he understands the mentality and character of authoritarian careerists.
Hedges’ observations apply not only to military officers, but also to the related professions of law enforcement and domestic spying as well.
In the military, whether at the Paris Island boot camp or West Point, you are trained not to think but to obey.
What amazes me about the military is how stupid and bovine its senior officers are.
Those with brains and the willingness to use them seem to be pushed out long before they can rise to the seniorofficer ranks.
In his book, he makes clear that his references to “right-wing” authoritarian followers is a psychological not ideological category.
Citizens in communist East Germany who served as informants for the Stasi were “authoritarians” just like farright kooks in America today who participate in organized stalking.
Because they are subservient to authority figures, such people are easily manipulated by those in power.
The Authoritarians Authoritarian Tribalism Versus Respect for Legitimate Authority A fundamental distinction deserves to be made here explicitly.
The perspective of “authoritarian” perpetrators of organized stalking has nothing to do with respect for legitimate authority.
Corrupt members of United States intelligence agencies, law enforcement agencies, and their security contractor associates are not motivated by concerns about public safety or national security let alone respect for the law.
They mostly value the paychecks they receive for “work” that involves minimal effort or risk.
To the extent that they have any loyalty, it is not to their country, but to their fellow corrupt pigs.
It probably is true that a fair number of the perpetrators do have right-wing political views which could be vaguely characterized as “authoritarian,” but it would be giving them too much intellectual credit to ascribe their bullying to some philosophical vision even a fascistic un-American one.
Perpetrators of COINTELPRO/MK Ultratype harassment are just criminals with badges; they’re drunk with power and they serve their own interests.
Subservience As Stanley Milgram’s experiment found, people who can be induced by authority figures to commit acts of unwarranted cruelty are as common as manure at a cattle ranch.
People who seek employment in a counterintelligence agency such as the FBI or DHS are especially likely to fit this profile.
The previously-mentioned Sociological Forum article regarding the original Cointelpro program seemed to confirm this.
Cowardice A person would not necessarily have to be a coward to participate in the kind of harassment associated with the current version of Cointelpro ; however, he or she would also not need to be courageous.
Counterintelligence agents such as “Surveillance Role Players” who perpetrate gang stalking are bullies, but they like to play close to mommy’s apron where it’s safe.
Stupidity Having worked for years in the corporate security industry (often with current and former law enforcement officers), I can tell you that a lot of people in such professions have the imagination, sense of humor, deep thinking capacity, and empathy of a cinder block.
Having such a personality is not a sin of course, but it has consequences.
People who are unable or unwilling to question what they are told by higher ranking authority figures are dangerous when serving in a corrupt power structure.
The difference between constitutionally legitimate law enforcement and being a thug is too subtle for some people to grasp.
Sadism “The connection between stupidity and cruelty is a close one.” — Christopher Hitchens I don’t have much to add to Hitchens’ observation.
The tactics of organized stalking are intended as psychological torture, and the perpetrators are often just as stupid as you would expect such people to be.
Dishonesty Deception can be an ethically legitimate element of a counterintelligence operation ; however, counterintelligence programs in the United States in the past , and currently , are frequently both immoral and illegal.
The FBI’s campaign to destroy the actress Jean Seberg by slandering her was a case in point.
A rogue agency’s classified internal memo that purports to sanction something that clearly violates the United States Constitution and morality does not make the activity legal.
People who engage in such deception and get paid for it are just criminals.
Laziness Counterintelligence stalking does not require technically complex operations.
America’s current version of Cointelpro mainly involves harassing individuals who lack the kind of resources and connections that would make them challenging or dangerous targets.
Also, there are essentially no objective goals for security contractors who perform this kind of work; the firms which engage in this sleazy business are not expected to produce anything tangible.
They receive their cash flow from the national security budget pig trough regardless of whether they do anything productive.
Boondoggles are common in the military-industrial complex of course, but most contractors have to at least produce something, such as a tank or an airplane.
Intelligence-security contractors sometimes only have to pretend that they are monitoring and countering actual threats.
Probably only the stupidest perpetrators of gang stalking are under any illusion that they are doing anything useful and legitimate; they’re just thugs for a government which opinion polls show is regarded as corrupt by most Americans.
Gang stalking perps are among the many parasites feeding at the massive “homeland security” pig trough.
The United States Department of Justice . and Gang Stalking DOJ Fish The moral character of the DOJ A fish rots from the head whether it’s the Vatican covering up decades of child sex abuse by priests or the United States Justice Department sanctioning secret operations which violate the United States Constitution.
In recent years, the DOJ has been justly criticized for its aggressive prosecution and intimidation of whistle-blowers and journalists who expose abuses of power by United States intelligence agencies.
In 2012, for example, the Justice Department secretly seized two months of telephone records of reporters and editors of the Associated Press.
As the ACLU points out though, such behavior is consistent with a long-established history.
When Robert F Kennedy was the United States Attorney General (i.e., head of the DOJ) in the 1960s, he authorized some of the original COINTELPRO operations, such as wiretaps on the home of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Corruption at the United States Department of Justice is a bipartisan phenomenon.
In 1971, when civilian activists leaked secret FBI documents to the Washington Post which revealed crimes committed against Americans by the FBI during the COINTELPRO operations, United States Attorney General John Mitchell (who later served prison time for his role in the Watergate scandal) tried unsuccessfully to persuade the Post’s executive editor Ben Bradlee not to disclose the documents.
Assessing the plausibility of the claim that the DOJ countenances a modern version of COINTELPRO requires looking at various examples of the moral character of the agency.
Eric Holder, United States Attorney General from 2009 to 2015, is a good example of the kind of people who work at the DOJ, and more generally the kind of people who often infest the highest echelons of America’s power structures.
The approval of unconstitutional secret counterintelligence operations would not be out of character for someone like Holder.
When he was President Clinton’s Deputy Attorney General , he approved the pardon of Marc Rich a wealthy investor who was indicted on 63 counts of tax evasion and other charges and fled to Switzerland to avoid prosecution.
Even the opinion writers for The Washington Post an establishment newspaper which is generally sympathetic to the Democrats said the pardon should have precluded Holder from becoming President Obama’s Attorney General.
Sweeping the Dirt Under the Rug Even the Justice Department’s own internal affairs office the Office of Professional Responsibility reports that hundreds of federal prosecutors and other DOJ employees violated laws, rules, and ethical principles over the decade from 2002 through 2013.
These included things such as failure to provide exculpatory evidence information to defendants, violation of Constitutional rights, and abuse of investigative authority.
In its review of the DOJ’s findings, the Project on Government Oversight made clear that the Justice Department also conceals some of its bad behavior from the public.
Federal Judges Report Frequent Lying by DOJ Prosecutors Most Americans give little thought to their nation’s Department of Justice, except perhaps for high-profile cases with partisan political implications.
Evidence of the DOJ’s lack of integrity does not usually show up on the public’s radar.
Federal judges however, often see examples of the moral rot at the DOJ, and have warned for decades that frequent misconduct by prosecutors undermines Constitutional protections of individuals’ rights.
In case after case during that time, judges blasted prosecutors for “flagrant” or “outrageous” misconduct.
Lying by the FBI Since the DOJ oversees the FBI, it is not surprising that the latter also takes a very elastic view of its obligation to abide by the United States Constitution.
When various American Islamic organizations and individuals filed a FOIA request in 2006 to determine if the FBI had engaged in illegal surveillance of them, the FBI concealed the existence of much of the material requested.
In a lawsuit which followed, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals found that the FBI lied to the plaintiffs and to the court about the existence of the documents sought.
When confronted with their deception, the FBI argued, in effect, that the agency should not be required to tell the truth in court if they feel that doing so could compromise national security interests.
Anyone wondering about the plausibility of claims that federal law enforcement agencies acquiesce in gang stalking should consider the fact that such agencies sometimes explicitly assert that they are above the law.
DOJ’s Complicity in Spying and Lying by Private Intelligence Firms Members of the Anonymous movement hacked into the emails of the cybersecurity firm HB Gary Federal In February 2011 after an executive at that firm boasted in the Financial Times that his company had infiltrated Anonymous and started to expose them.
One of the reports contained in the emails was a plan for HB Gary to work with several other security firms to destroy the whistle-blower organization WikiLeaks.
News reports had indicated that Wikileaks was planning to publish documents showing possible corruption and fraud at Bank of America, so the bank funded a “counterespionage” campaign against Wikileaks, which included hiring the large intelligence contractor firm Booz Allen, whose staff includes many former top officials from the intelligence community and the defense department.
One of the proposals was to create and plant fake documents to discredit Wikileaks.
Another proposal was to “attack” and “disrupt” the career of journalist Glenn Greenwald to pressure him into abandoning his public support of Wikileaks.
Manufacturing and submitting fake documents with the intent they be published likely constitutes forgery and fraud.
Threatening the careers of journalists and activists in order to force them to be silent is possibly extortion and, depending on the specific means to be used, constitutes other crimes as well.
Attacking WikiLeaks’ computer infrastructure in an attempt to compromise their sources undoubtedly violates numerous cyber laws.
Yet these firms had no compunction about proposing such measures to Bank of America and Hunton & Williams, and even writing them down.
It’s impossible to imagine the DOJ ever, ever prosecuting a huge entity like Bank of America for doing something like waging war against WikiLeaks and its supporters.
But weeks earlier, a far more damaging and serious cyber-attack was launched at WikiLeaks, knocking them offline.
Whoever did that was quite likely part of either a government agency or a large private entity acting at its behest.
Yet the DOJ has never announced any investigation into those attacks or vowed to apprehend the culprits, and it’s impossible to imagine that ever happening.
A report by Gary Ruskin, director of the Center for Corporate Policy, a project of Essential Information, was the main subject of the segment.
Corporations engaging in this kind of espionage reportedly include Wal-Mart, Monsanto, Bank of America, Dow Chemical, Kraft, Coca-Cola, Chevron, Burger King, McDonald’s, Shell, BP, and others as well as the United States Chamber of Commerce.
America’s Post-Constitutional Law Enforcement Paradigm constitution on fire A confluence of developments over the past couple of decades has led to a more militarized and secretive form of law enforcement in America.
A counterintelligence subversion strategy of organized stalking is among the most extreme manifestations of the new paradigm.
At the same time, advances in technology have made possible highly invasive surveillance tools which create a constant temptation for abuse by people in the intelligence, law enforcement, and security industries.
Another development has been an erosion of traditional jurisdictional boundaries in law enforcement.
By design, numerous federal and local law enforcement and intelligence agencies now work more closely with each other, and with the private contractors who provide much of the infrastructure, such as defense industry firms and private security firms.
United States law enforcement agencies rely heavily upon criminal informants despite the obvious conflicts of interest that involves.
By my own observations, and by anecdotal reports of others, gang stalking apparently makes extensive use of criminal informants.
But those snitches are not being used by the FBI just to spy and inform; they are perpetrating acts of criminal harassment for the purposes of counterintelligence subversion.
Rather than working to ensure the protection of Americans’ rights in this new Big Brother surveillance environment, the United States Department of Justice has done everything possible to enable the executive branch to increase its secrecy and power at the expense of Americans’ civil liberties.
A variety of Orwellian legal weapons have emerged always based on claims of national security.
Old-fashioned concepts in the Bill of Rights like obtaining search warrants from judges have been tossed aside.
Concerning other elements of the now-massive United States spy network, the public can only speculate.
For example, no one has yet said publicly what is being done by the numerous “surveillance role players” with secret clearances and counterintelligence training who are employed by intelligencesecurity contractors.
If anyone challenges the Constitutional legitimacy of any of these suspicious policies (or if members of the government question other secret policies whose existence is unknown to the public), the matter is referred to the United States government’s “Star Chamber” the secret FISA Court, which in nearly all cases simply rubberstamps the policy to maintain the facade of legitimacy.
Often however, the United States justice system is driven by political agendas, careerism, greed, laziness, prejudice, bureaucracy, technological opportunism, corporate interests, the arrogance of people in power and as in the case of organized stalking criminal behavior by the very people associated with the system.
In some quarters, the notion that criminal suspects should be given a trial is seen as quaint.
One example of this new attitude is “predictive policing” also called “proactive policing” in which law enforcement agencies aggressively gather and analyze data to try to anticipate threats before they emerge.
SARs and other intelligence are managed by a network of 78 data fusion centers across the nation, where the information is shared by local and federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
Among the disturbing and un-American aspects of SARs is that they can be used to initiate investigations as a way around the old-fashioned Constitutional requirement of reasonable suspicion or probable cause.
The May 2015 issue of Harper’s Magazine featured an article, “Beyond the Broken Window,” about spying on Americans by the Los Angeles Police Department.
This vague standard means that behavior that is both protected by the First Amendment and entirely benign can be labeled as suspicious.
Lack of Oversight and Accountability for Fusion Centers This Big Brother system of Fusion Centers and Suspicious Activity Reports takes place in a shadowy structure which has been the subject of much criticism by civil rights advocates.
Anyone familiar with the ethics and tactics historically associated with the United States intelligence business knows that deception of the public, undetected criminality, and creative abuses of power are often merely viewed as examples of professional competence.
In that context, it is reasonable to suspect that a policy framework which inherently dodges accountability did not arise by accident.
Contempt for the opinions and rights of American citizens is pervasive in the law enforcement and intelligence community.
Arguably the tone is set by the Department of Justice, but other agencies federal, state, and local are just as bad.
The Department of Homeland Security, for example, resists efforts by Congress to conduct oversight of the data fusion centers.
The Department opted not to inform Congress or the public of serious problems plaguing its fusion center and broader intelligence efforts.
When this Subcommittee requested documents that would help it identify these issues, the Department initially resisted turning them over, arguing that they were protected by privilege, too sensitive to share, were protected by confidentiality agreements, or did not exist at all.
Compromising Freedoms for Zero Benefits While many people would consider the system of Suspicious Activity Reporting and Data Fusion Centers to be a creepy Orwellian program, some might still defend it on the grounds that it is identifying terrorist threats except that it isn’t.
A Quick History of the United States Intelligence & Law Enforcement Community Although it is officially part of the executive branch of the federal government, America’s supremely powerful and secretive intelligence community has been described without exaggeration as the “fourth branch” of government.
It’s the branch that is not mentioned anywhere in the United States Constitution, and it’s the branch that has the least respect for the rules established in that document.
Despite such opposition, one month after Congress adjourned, the DOJ created its own permanent detective force, which in 1935 was given the name Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Chris Hedges described the essential nature of the agency in this speech titled “Wages of Rebellion:” “Let’s not forget why the FBI was formed.
Primary security concerns at that time, of course, revolved around the Cold War with the Soviet Union.
A decade or so later, a similar expansion of the law enforcement intelligence community began.
In 1956, two things happened which are related to America’s current “gang stalking” phenomenon.
Counterintelligence crimes perpetrated against Americans by red squads and the FBI over the next 15 years or so primarily targeted supporters of communism, supporters of the civil rights movement, and critics of the Vietnam War.
In theory, COINTELPRO ended in the 1970s after it was exposed by activists and investigated by Congress.
Many critics of the FBI allege that the unconstitutional practices of the agency never ceased or were only briefly suspended.
Just a few years earlier, the first signs of the militarization of local police departments also began.
In the 1960s, the first police SWAT (Special Weapons and Tactics) teams emerged.
A parallel development was the expansion of the size and power of the executive branch of the federal government.
Suffice to say, the constant examples of extreme abuses of power by America’s law enforcement industry associated with the drug war tend to lend support to claims that other civil rights abuses could be taking place without objection from the Justice Department.
Currently, America is a country in which possession of two dollars’ worth of marijuana can result in police officers shooting you to death inside your own home.
The Counter-Terrorism Charade In reality, the threat from terrorism is wildly exaggerated by those whose careers benefit from scaring the public about the issue.
For agencies such as the DOJ and the FBI however, the war on terrorism has been an opportunity for a massive power grab at the expense of Americans’ freedoms and an opportunity for big profits for defense/security contractors.
To rationalize the extraordinary secrecy and power wielded by the FBI, the agency needs to create the illusion that it is protecting Americans from constant peril.
Toward that end, the FBI has essentially been creating its own terrorists to compensate for the shortage of actual terrorists.
That the agency concocts and funds fake terrorism plots to entrap hapless stooges in sting operations has become an open secret, as documented, among other places, in a widely-reported July 2014 report by Human Rights Watch.
For its part, the Justice Department is happy to play along with this charade.
When that agency apparently tortured people in the process of its interrogations, and destroyed evidence of the torture, and then lied to Congress about what happened, the DOJ closed its inquiry into the matter in 2012 without bringing any charges.
Then, while the United States Senate Intelligence Committee was investigating the torture, the CIA apparently spied on the senate committee.
In July 2014, the DOJ announced that it would not be conducting a criminal investigation of that spying either.
State Databases To supplement their access to federal systems for monitoring citizens such as the data fusion centers states also create their own watch-lists and databases.
Since agencies at the federal level set the tone for state and local elements of the police state, some of these state level programs are also of an Orwellian nature.
In April 2014 it was reported that the state was building a database which will contain a “Comprehensive Person Profile” on each resident.
Note a couple of aspects of this program which are typical of the surveillance trend.
One is that the system was originally designed to detect fraud, but now through a sort of “mission creep” phenomenon, it is being expanded to track data for a range of purposes.
Technology for the database was developed by the software company SAS, which profits from the destruction of Americans’ privacy.
Future Attribute Screening Technology FAST System A blurred image of the FAST system displayed on a computer monitor Some defenders of “predictive policing” have claimed that civil rights concerns about the philosophy are unwarranted because it mostly involves directing resources to areas with higher statistical probability of crimes rather than attempting to predict behavior of particular individuals.
The development and implementation of technologies such as Future Attribute Screening Technology tends to undermine such assurances.
FAST is a program created by the Homeland Security department for the purpose of detecting malicious intent by screening individuals through electronic monitoring of such things as pulse rate, skin temperature, breathing, and facial expression.
I am not suggesting that FAST has a connection to organized stalking or even that such systems would necessarily be inappropriate in certain high-security facilities.
I merely cite it as an example of the general direction of law enforcement and the fact that opportunities to use such surveillance technologies will be aggressively exploited especially given the profit motive for contractors to lobby the United States government to purchase such systems.
FBI’s Face Recognition Database In April 2014 the Electronic Frontier Foundation reported that information they obtained via a Freedom of Information Act request showed that the FBI expects to have 52 million photographs in its face recognition database by 2015.
This database will be shared with other federal, state, and local agencies, and will be capable of performing tens of thousands of searches per day.
EFF points out that this database will include both criminals and non-criminals for example, people whose employers require them to have a “mug shot” photo taken as a condition of employment.
In theory, this could mean that innocent people might sometimes be investigated if their photo has facial characteristics similar to those of a criminal suspect.
This June 2015 article about facial recognition technology by The Intercept explains that Americans’ privacy is threatened not just by careerist authoritarians in the government, but also by greedy lobbyists for technology firms.
The DOJ’s views on the government’s right to track you via GPS GPS IIF Most Americans who only casually follow civil rights issues probably assume that the United States Department of Justice exists to promote justice after all, it’s right there in its name and everything.
The DOJ does some of that, but it takes more seriously its role as a protector of the interests of those in power.
For example, if you want to challenge the United States government’s use of GPS tracking to monitor your location, the DOJ will apparently be fighting you on the basis of arguments outlined in some DOJ memos.
The DOJ decided that those memos are a secret, and in March 2014 a federal court agreed to let the DOJ keep it that way.
The section that was at issue 1021 essentially authorizes the federal government to indefinitely detain someone if that person is suspected of having supported hostilities against the United States or its allies.
Because the United States “war on terror” is indefinite, so is the potential period of detention for anyone including a United States citizen who is detained under the law.
Such a person can now be legally deprived of the right to an attorney and the right to a trial for as long as the “war on terror” lasts.
In May 2012 a United States District Court judge ruled that this was not kosher, but the DOJ challenged the ruling and it was overturned by an appellate court.
When the case was then taken to the United States Supreme Court, the DOJ asked that the case be dismissed.
Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Chris Hedges the lead plaintiff in the case published a column denouncing the Supreme Court’s refusal to hear the case.
The DOJ’s views on the government’s right to assassinate you Drone Strike In September 2011 an American citizen Anwar al-Awlaki was assassinated by a United States drone strike.
Although dozens of Americans are executed each year, traditionally they are given trials first, and are only killed after having been convicted.
Many people questioned the legality of the assassination and inquired about the legal reasoning of the United States Department of Justice.
However, the DOJ declined to share its secret legal justification for the policy of targeted killings.
The DOJ’s position, in essence, was that the federal government not only has the legal right to kill American citizens without first giving them a trial, it also does not have to explain to the public why it believes such legal authority exists.
In April 2014, a federal appellate court ruled that the DOJ must release its classified memo on the policy.
Fake Secret Laws Created by Federal Agencies In a previous section of this webpage regarding the selection of targeted individuals I mentioned the ordeal of Rahinah Ibrahim, a woman whose name had been placed on the federal no-fly list by mistake.
Ibrahim had to spend 9 years battling to have her name removed from that watch-list before a federal judge finally ruled in her favor in February 2014.
During that process, Ibrahim had to litigate without knowing the information in the United States government’s case against her.
Based on it, the president can refuse to produce evidence in a court case on the grounds that its public disclosure might harm national security.
The government has, in the past,successfully employed this “privilege” to withhold information and dead-end legal challenges.
Once “state secrets” is in play, there is literally nothing left to talk about in court.
A related DOJ dodge was also brought to bear in an attempt to derail Ibrahim’s case: the use of made-up classification categories that dispatch even routine information into the black world of national security.
Much of the information concerming her placement on the no-fly list, for instance, was labeled Security Sensitive Information and so was unavailable to her.
SSI is among hundreds of post-9/11 security categories created via memo by various federal agencies.
Congress never passed a law establishing anything called SSI, nor is there any law prohibiting the disclosure of SSI information.
The DOJ’s Index of Crimes As mentioned in the introduction to this overview, claims about the widespread existence of gang stalking are supported by the DOJ’s own crime survey statistics which showed that in 2006 an estimated 445,220 individuals reported being stalked by three or more perpetrators.
DOJ Stalking Survey 2006 Claims about gang stalking are also supported by the fact that the National Center for Victims of Crime which is funded by the DOJ apparently receives “thousands of calls per month” about such crimes.
Yet organized stalking is conspicuously absent from the DOJ’s Index of Crimes.
As previously mentioned, Robert L Snow, a retired police captain from the Indianapolis P.D., wrote a book called Stopping a Stalker, in which he devoted a chapter to the subject of organized stalking by multiple perpetrators associated with causes such as stalking by extreme anti-abortion activists.
The program name was still in the index the last time I checked, but the information for that section which was part of something called the “Community Capacity Development Office” no longer existed.
If you read it without the context of first-hand experience or an awareness of the historical background, it might seem innocuous.
If you are familiar with the FBI’s Cointelpro operations , and the Stasi’s system of targeting individuals to be “weeded out” of society, it takes on a much darker character.
Operation Weed and Seed A strategy within the United States Department of Justice’s Office of Justice Programs that incorporates community-based initiatives.
It is an innovative and comprehensive multi-agency approach to law enforcement, crime prevention, and community revitalization.
The Weed and Seed Strategy Operation Weed and Seed is foremost a strategy-rather than a grant programwhich aims to prevent, control, and reduce violent crime, drug abuse, and gang activity in targeted high-crime neighborhoods across the country.
Weed and Seed sites range in size from several neighborhood blocks to 15 square miles.
A community-orientated policing component bridges weeding and seeding strategies.
Officers obtain helpful information from area residents for weeding efforts while they aid residents in obtaining information about community revitalization and seeding resources.
Note that this law enforcement model can be exploited not just by government agencies, but also by private groups and individuals for their own agendas.
Private organizations and individuals who have the relevant skill sets, connections to law enforcement and intelligence agencies, and assets to hire private investigators, can either create illicit “neighborhood watch” programs to monitor and harass their targets, or they can exploit existing programs by feeding information about their targets to law enforcement personnel to have the victims become subjects of investigation and surveillance.
The “Weed and Seed” program is the most explicit official statement of the institutional philosophy behind gang stalking namely, that the victims are deserving of persecution because they are potential criminals, socially marginal dissidents, drug-users, whistle-blowers, trouble-makers, etc.
Carefully contrived misinformation prepared by an intelligence or CI service for the purpose of misleading, deluding, disrupting, or undermining confidence in individuals, organizations, or governments.
In a national program of counterintelligence subversion such as America’s version of the communist Stasi network, some public exposure is inevitable.
Often the effectiveness of disinformation derives from the fact that most people unlike, say, con artists, intelligence agents, and detectives don’t usually even consider that the information they’re encountering might be a batch of deliberate lies.
Operation Mockingbird Sadly, most Americans are unaware of the history of disinformation campaigns by the United States government.
One of the most well-documented programs in which the United States intelligence community systematically lied to the American public occurred in the 1950s.
Operation Mockingbird was a secret Central Intelligence Agency campaign to influence media beginning in the 1950s.
The organization recruited leading American journalists into a network to help present the CIA’s views, and funded some student and cultural organizations, and magazines as fronts.
The usual methodology was placing reports developed from intelligence provided by the CIA to witting or unwitting reporters.
The Office of Policy Coordination was funded by siphoning of funds intended for the Marshall Plan.
Wisner was able to constrain newspapers from reporting about certain events, including the CIA plots to overthrow the governments of Iran.
Carl Bernstein’s reporting on Operation Mockingbird For additional information about Operation Mockingbird, you should read this excellent article on the subject by Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist, Carl Bernstein.
The Agency’s relationship with the Times was by far its most valuable among newspapers, according to CIA officials.
From 1950 to 1966, about ten CIA employees were provided Times cover under arrangements approved by the newspaper’s late publisher, Arthur Hays Sulzberger.
The cover arrangements were part of a general Times policy—set by Sulzberger—to provide assistance to the CIA whenever possible.
The mighty didn’t want to know the specifics; they wanted plausible deniability.
One of the most prominent reporters on American politics in the 1960s was Theodore H White, a Pulitzer prize-winning journalist whose book The Making of the President sold four million copies.
Scott Porch at Politico profiled him in April 2015, and Jon Schwarz at The Intercept posted this summary of the essential point.
In his published writings, White lavished praise upon members of the political class and the press.
One of the reasons that the United States surveillance state the FBI, NSA, CIA, DHS, and their army of private contractors and useful-idiot minions keeps a close eye on Americans is to keep a lid on such anger.
Today’s News Media Whores Operation Mockingbird was an example of systematic disinformation.
An equally serious threat to the American public is the informal disinformation that comes from biased news reporting.
Distortion and deception occur routinely in the mainstream press on intelligence issues because of ideological bias and careerist motivations.
Defending the political establishment when it is lying about intelligence matters serves the political agenda of right-wing reporters, and it creates opportunities for such reporters to get access to senior officials for interviews.
One example of someone who carries water for the government rather than serving as a professionally skeptical journalist is National Public Radio reporter Dina Temple-Raston.
An August 2014 article by Glenn Greenwald helpfully deconstructed a piece of dishonest reporting by Temple-Raston about NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden.
In the wake of Snowden’s revelations that the NSA was spying on Americans in violation of the Fourth Amendment, various apologists for the United States intelligence community asserted that the revelations had damaged United States national security.
It was claimed that surveillance methods were revealed in a way that enabled terrorists to more effectively conduct their business undetected.
The claim was rubbish, but to the extent that people believed it, it served the political interests of those who support Big Brother-type domestic spying on Americans by their government.
That kind of lying is common, and it creates an environment in which intelligence agencies can get away with serious abuses of power.
An article by journalist Glenn Greenwald in January 2010 in Salon.com called attention to the shockingly Orwellian view of news and propaganda in both the George W Bush and Barack Obama administrations.
In particular, Greenwald focused on a member of the Obama administration.
Samantha Power, a member of Obama’s National Security Council, is Sunstein’s wife.
Conspiracy Theories Not surprisingly, Sunstein seems to be uncomfortable when confronted with his record of explicitly condoning government deception.
In fact, he has written articles purporting to reveal what he sees as a threat posed by “paranoid” conspiracy theories.
As far as I know, Sunstein has never discussed whether it might contribute to the public’s “paranoid” distrust of government officials to have the head of the Office of Information write a paper advocating that the government should sometimes lie to the citizens.
That someone with Sunstein’s high profile would have no reservations about publicly advocating systematic lying to the public by the United States government, and ridiculing people who do not blindly trust government officials, speaks volumes about the arrogance and moral corruption of America’s political class.
For many people, simply invoking that term will shortcircuit any critical thinking about an allegation.
They are encouraged in that view by mainstream media institutions which routinely embrace intellectual conformity masquerading as skepticism.
An April 1977 article in Reason by economist and historian Murray N Rothbard offers a clear explanation of the political establishment’s relentless dismissal of analyses which take into account the self-interests of those in power.
Blatant Lying by Senior United States Intelligence Officials When Cointelpro stalkers slander targeted individuals and tell other lies that enable them to perpetrate counterintelligence subversion against Americans, they are following the same ethical standards set by those at the very top of their industry.
The long history of lying associated with the United States intelligence and law enforcement agencies is too extensive to chronicle here, but you can get a sense of the culture by considering just a few of the recent scandals.
In 2013 and 2014, three of the most senior intelligence officials were caught lying, and none of them suffered any consequences.
CIA Director John Brennan denied that his agency was spying on the United States Senate while it was investigating the agency’s use of torture, and then the agency’s inspector general revealed that the spying did in fact happen.
Subsequent revelations by the whistle-blower Edward Snowden showed that the mass surveillance which Clapper denied was happening was in fact taking place.
Later the President’s Review Board reported that the actual number of terrorist threats revealed was zero.
Just kidding actually he kept his job until March 2014 and then retired to take a job in the financial industry which paid $600,000 per month.
A secretive unit within the United States Drug Enforcement Administration called the Special Operations Division gathers information for example, through foreign and domestic wiretaps and forwards that information to various agencies.
However, documents obtained by Reuters showed that agents who receive those tips from the SOD are instructed to lie about the origins of their investigations by keeping the SOD’s involvement a secret from defense lawyers, prosecutors, and judges.
For example, an agent might be told to stop and search a particular vehicle based on a tip.
If that search results in an arrest, the agent will then lie in accordance with official policy and say that the search was the result of a routine traffic stop.
Presumably “parallel construction” exploits a moral version of a parallel universe one in which lying is ethically sound.
Slandering Critics of Corporations United States government agencies and corporations sometimes use intelligence-security contractors to do their dirty work, such as spying on and slandering critics.
In addition, the group proposed creating a “fake insider persona” to infiltrate Chamber Watch.
The leaked emails showed that similar disinformation campaigns were being planned against WikiLeaks and Glenn Greenwald.
If operations such as that one were not proven by the documents obtained by hackers, many people would dismiss allegations of such activities as tin-foil hat conspiracy theories.
When a reporter and editor at USA Today investigated one of the Pentagon contractors being paid to spread propaganda, that contractor began a secret smear campaign against them.
The four major disinformation tactics used by America’s Stasi Four main tactics are used by the United States intelligence-law enforcement industry to conceal its counterintelligence operations against United States citizens.
Each tactic is a variation on the same general strategy namely, to discredit organized stalking targets by casting doubts on their sanity and intelligence.
First, they exist so that victims will turn to them rather than forming their own legitimate advocacy groups to lobby Congress and the media to investigate gang stalking.
Secondly, everything about the groups is designed to convey the impression that people claiming to be gang stalking victims should not be taken seriously.
Another type of front group deception used in counterintelligence operations occurs when agents persuade a legitimate organization to let itself be used to stage activities which are actually orchestrated by a counterintelligence agency.
An example of that apparently occurred in 2013, when a U.K-based film company called Firecracker Films was apparently used as a front under the pretense that it was considering the production of a documentary about gang stalking.
Representatives of the company began to solicit the participation of targeted individuals of organized stalking in what was apparently a fake project by asking the individuals to consent to video chat interviews about their experiences ostensibly for the purposes of gathering material for determining whether to go ahead with the production of the documentary.
In reality presumably the videos would be used to gather information about the victims’ perceptions of being illegally stalked by the feds.
Online searches of Internet forums about organized stalking revealed that agents purporting to be representatives of Firecracker Films had used the same ploy previously.
Again, the objective is to discredit all self-proclaimed organized stalking victims by making it appear that they are paranoid idiots.
For example, many of the sites emphasize mindcontrol although they often do so without reference to MK Ultra since no one disputes the facts about that CIA program, and the United States intelligence community would prefer to avoid contributing to the public’s awareness of it.
CI perps calling them “agents” would be giving them too much credit seem to fancy themselves as some kind of evil James Bond movie villains.
The phenomenon is similar to the embrace of military hardware and tactics by police officers who imagine themselves to be special warfare unit soldiers.
Even lowly web page designers and sock puppets in the counterintelligence business seem to embrace the cultural flavor one sees on the insignia patches of military units.
CI Poster Official United States Counterintelligence Poster By the way, if you are really impressed by this kind of thing, you can download the poster-size version of the above image from the United States government here.
An identity used in cyberspace to obtain information or influence others, while dissociating the actor’s true identity or affiliation.
Anyone who reads the comments posted online whenever the subject of gang stalking is raised, will note that reports of gang stalking almost invariably attract sarcastic but ultimately unconvincing statements by forum trolls, registering their skepticism.
One expects that sort of verbal warfare on Internet forums about politics, but you have to wonder why the relatively obscure topic of gang stalking attracts such a dedicated army of detractors.
As this article posted on LiveLeak notes, a former CIA clandestine service trainee and DIA analyst revealed that the FBI and CIA use trolls to monitor social media and interact with users to discredit information disseminated on the web.
Fortunately, some news sources are not on the federal government’s leash.
As I write this, hacker-activist Jeremy Hammond is serving a ten year prison sentence for his role in exposing how this shadowy industry of professional liars and spies operates on behalf of large United States corporations.
Journalist Barrett Brown is in jail in Texas facing charges which could potentially lead to a life sentence for his role in exposing the information yielded by the hacked emails.
Brown founded a group called Project PM to sort through the numerous emails that had been revealed.
Here is a fascinating web page by that group which summarizes the disinformation schemes organized by the intelligence-security contractors.
One of the main tactics described in the secret documents is spreading false information online to destroy the reputations of targeted individuals and groups.
Another main tactic was to use social science principles to manipulate online discussions and activism.
No one familiar with organized stalking in the United States is unaware that western intelligence agencies systematically spread lies on the Internet in discussion forums, for example.
Among the tactics revealed by the documents is the use of false flag operations in which the spy agency posts material online and makes it appear that it was posted by a targeted individual or group.
GCHQ also creates fake blog posts which purport to be those of victims of the people and groups being targeted.
Other tactics include leaking confidential information and emailing colleagues, neighbors and friends of the target.
Another fundamental point made by Greenwald and this applies equally to organized stalking is that these tactics are not about national security.
These are weapons being used in many cases to destroy people who are suspected of crimes but have never been charged or convicted, and people who are engaged in political activism of which the government disapproves.
FBI whistle-blower Ted Gunderson was a key figure in exposing gang stalking, yet he goes unmentioned in the Times piece.
That should be a giant red warning flag to any reader armed with that information who isn’t retarded.
Even if the “reporter” had determined that Gunderson’s claims arose from the fact that he simply became delusional for some reason after a long high-profile law enforcement career, you would think that finding would be worth mentioning.
That lengthy article also failed to include any interviews with the licensed private investigators who have written on the subject of gang stalking, such as David Lawson and John B Lopes.
Instead, the only “experts” interviewed for the article were four mental health professionals who discussed mental illness and delusions.
The one other person interviewed was someone who supposedly claimed to be a victim of gang stalking, Derrick Robinson, who is identified as a janitor in Cincinnati, and president of FFCHS the aforementioned support group for gang stalking victims.
Note that the mental health experts quoted were not asked about their knowledge of crimes let alone their views on the plausibility of the existence of a modern version of the FBI’s Cointelpro.
In fact, remarkably, the article makes no mention of Cointelpro whatsoever.
Also note that the one supposedly self-proclaimed gang stalking victim, Mr Robinson, is a janitor and he is the head of the victims support group.
The intended takeaway is that the most capable member of the community of self-proclaimed victims of organized stalking the one with the wherewithal to become head of their national organization is a janitor.
The reader is left to infer that the rest of the self-proclaimed gang stalking victim community must really be losers if he’s their brightest bulb.
It simply would not have served the objective of the “reporter” to discuss gang stalking victims who were professionals, such as the aforementioned FBI special agent, Mr Gunderson, or the attorney, Mr Labella.
If the Times readers had been directed to any of the sites which I recommend, they would have encountered discussions of gang stalking very much at odds with what they were reading in the Times.
You can read the Times article at the link below if you want to see a textbook case of disinformation planted by the government in the mainstream news media the sort of thing people like Noam Chomsky get marginalized for warning people about.
By remarkable coincidence, the “reporter” at ABC interviewed the same psychiatrist who was interviewed by the Times, Ken Duckworth.
Also by remarkable coincidence, the “reporters” in both cases were third-tier shills no one has heard of rather than, say, Pulitzer Prizewinning investigative journalists.
Also by coincidence, the ABC article like the Times article failed to include any reference to the important high-profile credible whistle-blower key witness who supports the claims of gang stalking victims, Ted Gunderson.
The ABC News article which involved such an extraordinary number of coincidences also failed to even mention Cointelpro or MK Ultra or any other actual relevant non-disputed government conspiracies, and focused exclusively on discussions of delusional thinking.
If you want to read this ground-breaking, hard-hitting piece of brave investigative journalism by the intrepid Lauren Cox, here is the link.
It’s interesting that those two rare examples of mainstream news media articles about organized stalking both appeared years ago, and then the subject has been off the radar since then.
Anyone searching for mainstream news reports on gang stalking will see that apparently a couple of major news outlets looked into the phenomenon years ago and found it was all rubbish.
Further articles even if they were similarly dismissive might call attention to the topic in an unhelpful way 15.
The Wall of Silence Which Surrounds Gang Stalking Laurel & Hardy Shhh “The first rule of fight club is you do not talk about fight club.” from the 1999 film Fight Club Sometimes people violate the rule and do mention fight club.
A local TV news broadcast in California in January 2011 featured a report about gang stalking in which the reporters used the term and so did Lieutenant Larry Richard of the Santa Cruz Police Department.
Richard did not say that the stalking was perpetrated by the government, and he seemed to walk-back his comment in a subsequent letter about the TV broadcast obtained by a Freedom of Information request.
Despite its seriousness, gang stalking is rarely discussed publicly by the mainstream news media let alone by law enforcement officials.
What mainly accounts for the FBI’s success in keeping its modern counterintelligence operations off of the American public’s radar is the secrecy with which the program is administered and the use of tactics chosen specifically for their lack of incriminating evidence.
Those operations also remained unknown to the general public until some civilan activists broke into an FBI office and stole the secret documents which proved it.
Based upon reports by gang stalking victims, United States intelligence and law enforcement agencies have greatly raised the technological sophistication for domestic counterintelligence just as was alleged by the late Ted Gunderson, the former FBI official, when he discussed gang stalking.
In addition, revelations in 2013 by NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden proved that the scope of Big Brother’s surveillance is now vast.
By labeling extra-judicial punishment as “surveillance” and “investigation,” and by referring to stalkers as “informants,” and by citing a “national security” need to keep their operations shrouded in secrecy, the FBI and DOJ can pretty much do whatever they want.
As explained previously, “investigations” have been replaced in many cases with “assessments” which have lower standards of suspicion.
As a practical matter, organized stalking can be initiated with no concerns about the Fourth Amendment or the state and federal laws against stalking.
One of the ways silence is maintained as mentioned previously is by the FBI’s exemption from the Whistleblower Protection Act.
Anyone wishing to expose misconduct at the FBI could face severe legal repercussions.
Ted Gunderson did not speak out about gang stalking until after he was retired, and he did not reveal any smoking-gun documents to prove his allegations.
Also, Gunderson claimed that his discussion of organized stalking resulted in him being targeted himself which would tend to discourage other potential whistle-blowers.
The Silence of Intelligence-Security Contractors Just as law enforcement and intelligence agency personnel involved in counterintelligence activities are bound by secrecy oaths, so is the vast industry of private contractors employed by those agencies.
In most cases, the potential legal risk is not a factor anyway; the type of people who seek work as domestic spies like the idea of being informants for Big Brother and they presumably like the income it generates for them.
The Silence of Witnesses Witnesses to United States government criminality often become the targets of very aggressive efforts to intimidate them to remain silent and to make an example of them so others will remain silent.
This 4-minute trailer of a 2013 documentary film gives a good sense of the dangers faced by whistle-blowers, which include blacklisting, surveillance, and legal warfare.
The War on Whistleblowers FBI agents can legally order witnesses to keep their mouths shut regarding anything the feds choose to portray as an investigation.
For example, a National Security Letter is an administrative subpoena used by the FBI, and it has a gag order attached which prohibits the recipient from ever saying anything about having been served with the letter.
The United States government has issued hundreds of thousands of such letters, and they have been upheld in court.
Anyone wondering why landlords, neighbors, co-workers, and others recruited to participate in organized stalking never say anything should consider the possibility that they do not want to end up in prison.
The Silence of United States Political Leaders Jefferson Censored In your high school civics classes, you probably learned about the three equal branches of the federal government.
In reality, the United States is now dominated by a massively powerful executive branch.
Officially, the White House is at the top of that branch, but the nation’s chief executive must share power as a practical matter with the shadowy United States intelligence community and its cronies.
On the one hand, the president can appoint and fire the heads of the intelligence agencies; on the other hand, the intelligence agencies can tap the president’s phones and create files on the president’s sex life and shady business dealings which can be used as leverage.
In theory, the United States Congress has oversight authority over the intelligence community.
Again though, you need to distinguish between what it says in your high school textbook and what takes place in the real world.
Declassified documents released in September 2013 showed that the NSA was monitoring his overseas phone calls and cables.
Although they were familiar with espionage, America’s founders certainly could never have envisioned the vast network of rogue United States intelligence agencies and corporate intelligence-security contractors who now spy on Americans using advanced technology.
If the founders could have forseen the development of such a monstrous threat to democracy and privacy, they certainly would never have prescribed the current system of oversight.
The House of Representatives and the Senate each has a Select Committee on Intelligence.
Between the two committees, there are essentially just three dozen people who are supposed to provide oversight of the United States intelligence community.
Even worse, those three dozen or so people are bound by secrecy oaths which legally prevent them from revealing their knowledge of any unconstitutional and immoral behavior that is being perpetrated by the nation’s intelligence agencies.
Committee members can be prosecuted even for revealing information to other members of Congress.
Congress members’ fear of the intelligence community As I mentioned in the Oversight section of this page, it is very possible that members of Congress actually fear the intelligence community, and avoid trying to control it for that reason.
Presidents’ fear of the intelligence community More than a few people have been suspicious of President Barack Obama’s apparent subservient relationship to the United States intelligence community.
Despite campaigning for the presidency as a progressive reformer, as president he embraced secrecy, drone strikes, mass surveillance, the attack on Libya, and aggressive prosecutions of whistle-blowers.
Of course, it is very possible that Obama was never sincere about his views in the first place.
One person willing to publicly comment about that is Ray McGovern, a retired CIA analyst-turned-activist.
For those of your listeners who have not read James Douglass’s JFK and the Unspeakable, you need to read that, because it’s coming up on 50 years.
After reading James Douglass, who took advantage of all the previous studies, plus all the more recent information released by Congress, I’m convinced that John Kennedy was assassinated largely by Allan Dulles whom he cashiered as the head of the CIA after the Bay of Pigs, and a coterie of joint chiefs of staff, FBI, even some Secret Service folks who thought that JFK was being soft on Communism by back channel communications with Krushchev, that he was playing games with Fidel Castro...to repair the relationship, and worst of all he was giving Southeast Asia to the Communists.
John Kennedy signed two executive orders just a month or so before he was killed.
One of them said we’re pulling out 1000 troops out of South Vietnam by the end of the year, the year being 1963.
The other said we’re going to pull out the bulk of the troops by 1965, we’re finished in Vietnam.
Secret Police , Mike Rothmiller and Ivan G Goldman describe how the Los Angeles Police Department operated a lawless spy network for decades without having its crimes exposed.
The LAPD used threats and blackmail to intimidate city council members and the staff of the Los Angeles Times.
The reluctance of people in power to criticize others in power A general rule among most people who occupy influential positions is to avoid criticism of others who are similarly situated.
Most people who are in a position to expose corruption and incompetence rarely do so because they fear being perceived as a threat to others in power.
He was speaking to Elizabeth Warren, a former Harvard law professor and current United States Senator.
The Silence of the Judicial Branch Justice Gagged Just like the members of the Congressional intelligence committees, judges on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act Court are bound by secrecy oaths which prevent them from revealing anything about the scandalous crimes by members of the spying industry.
A good example of how that plays out in America’s Star Chamber occurred in April 2013.
In a rare instance of the secret FISA court not simply rubber-stamping whatever the feds wanted to do, the court ruled that the domestic spying activities at issue involved an unacceptable abuse of the Constitution.
However, the Obama administration decided that Americans should not be allowed to know what the Feds were trying to get away with because publicly disclosing the nature of the unconstitutional B.S. they were engaged in would allegedly jeopardize Americans’ national security.
The silence of the ACLU Cowardly Lion Picture yourself as an ACLU attorney.
It is one thing to be a legal advocate for a position which annoys people in middle America; it is another thing altogether to throw rocks at a hornets’ nest by exposing the modern version of Cointelpro.
As an organization, the ACLU is also inclined to err on the side of caution to avoid risking its reputation.
They do not wish to be associated with anything that has not already been conclusively proven by smoking-gun official documents published in the mainstream news media.
That is especially true for something like gang stalking, since the tactics render the subject inherently susceptible to being dismissed as a tin-foil hat conspiracy theory.
By all indications, the ACLU’s national office plans to wait until it is safe before they wade in.
Notably, the ACLU has never made any public statements that are dismissive of the numerous claims of organized stalking.
If you write to staff members at the ACLU to inquire about their views on reports of gang stalking, you will find that they do not respond with skepticism; they just don’t respond at all.
The Silence of the American News Media The Silence of the Lambs Organized stalking goes mostly undiscussed in the mainstream news media.
Primarily, the media’s silence on gang stalking can be attributed to laziness, incompetence, and cowardice.
Edward R Murrow As a general rule, major news agencies ignore conspiracies in the absence of incriminating smoking-gun type official documents.
Pulitzer Prize-winning investigative journalist Seymour Hersh who revealed the My Lai Massacre in the Vietnam War and the abuse of Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib during the Iraq War discussed the issue of documents when he was interviewed by the Guardian in September 2013.
Intimidation of the press by the federal government adds to the problem.
In May 2013 it was revealed that two months of phone records of the Associated Press were secretly obtained by the Department of Justice, seeking the identities of confidential informants.
Following the AP phone records incident, journalists reported that trusted sources were becoming noticably more reluctant to provide information.
A survey published in November 2013 by PEN American Center an association of American writers dedicated to protecting free expression found that many published writers in the United States reported that they self-censor on subjects such as military affairs, mass incarceration, drug policies, the Occupy Wall Street movement, and criticism of the United States government.
The survey found that 40 percent of the writers polled had either curtailed their social media activities or seriously considered doing so.
In addition, 33 percent reported deliberately avoiding certain topics or at least seriously considered avoiding certain topics in phone or email conversations.
Doing its best to chill criticism of the federal government, the Obama administration prosecuted more whistle-blowers than all former presidents combined.
The Committee to Protect Journalists published an article on this disturbing trend in October 2013 by a former editor of the Washington Post.
But exposing questionable government policies and actions, even if they could be illegal or unconstitutional, is often considered to be leaking that must be stopped and punished.
In February 2014, Reporters Without Borders ranked America as the 46th best country for journalist freedoms in between Romania and Haiti.
For a sense of why many reporters are afraid to investigate criminality by the United States intelligence and law enforcement community, I recommend watching this 3-minute video clip in which the Pulitzer prize winning Washington Post journalist Dana Priest describes the backlash she experienced which included death threats when she exposed the CIA’s use of secret prisons to torture terrorism suspects.
Yet typically in the national security field (and to a striking degree even in corporate and private associations without a formal apparatus of secrecy) even the “weakest links” do not break.
Failure to Connect the Dots Connecting Dots Another factor which helps explain the relatively low-profile of organized stalking in the news media is a failure to recognize a common thread between various related news reports.
The most important of these articles and broadcasts are listed in the “Published News Reports” section of this webpage.
In 2007 the Washington Post Magazine featured a cover article about gang stalking which portrayed several of the self-proclaimed victims of the crimes as credible, and claims about the types of electronic weapons allegedly being used as plausible.
Several local news reports have documented police officers engaging in organized stalking for personal vendettas.
In 2011 police in Stockton, California stalked the city manager after a break-down in contract negotiations.
In 2012 a police officer was stalked by numerous fellow officers from multiple jurisdictions after issuing a citation to an off-duty police officer for reckless driving.
Both cases suggested that the police were familiar with gang stalking tactics and were unconcemed about any legal consequences.
To their credit, during 2013 at least two magazines the Nation and CounterPunch reported on counterintelligence operations (including psychological operations tactics) by the FBI and by private intelligence-security contractors against critics of corporations and asserted that Cointelpro has re-emerged.
Such reports make clear that there is almost no oversight or legal accountability for these private spooks most of whom are former or present agents of law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
Over the past decade numerous individuals have reported being harassed and spied upon by perpetrators whose tactics were largely identical to those used by the FBI and other intelligence agencies such as East Germany’s Stasi.
Local newspaper and TV news reports about gang stalking claims have also emerged from across the country in recent years.
Viewed as separate isolated incidents and news reports, such developments are mostly not recognized as examples of a common phenomenon.
The more you delve into the subject of organized stalking, the more you realize that the scope of the crime and its extreme impact upon the victims warrants a very close look by America’s journalists.
Another obstacle to exposing criminality by government and corporate officials is an unwillingness by many people to face the reality that the institutions we count on to protect us are often seriously corrupt.
Journalist Russ Baker touched on this phenomenon when looking back at the 1991 book October Surprise by Gary Sick, the National Security Council liaison to President Carter.
As documented in the book, during the 1980 presidential campaign Ronald Reagan’s campaign chief William Casey made a secret promise to give military aid to Hezbollah in return for assurance that the 52 American hostages then being held by Iran would not be released until after the election thus making President Carter appear weak.
We in Washington are accustomed to the petty scandals of Washington politics.
However, there is another category of offenses, described by the French poet Andre Chenier as “les crimes puissants qui font trembler les lois,” crimes so great that they make the laws themselves tremble.
Most mere observers are, therefore, very much disposed toward misbelief and are, therefore, willing to disregard evidence that is directly presented to them—and even to construct alternative explanations for events that seem just too distasteful to want to believe.
This all-too-human propensity provides just the margin of safety that is needed by those who would dare to under take what would otherwise be regarded as just too immensely a risky undertaking to attempt.
No doubt something similar although on a much smaller scale applies today in America when people are enlisted to assist in various ways with “investigations” or whatever the operations are publicly called.
Shutting his mouth, his eyes, and his ears, the typical German citizen built for himself the illusion of not knowing, hence of not being an accomplice to the things taking place in front of his very door.” Primo Levi, The New Republic, October 23, 16.
Shining a Light on the Cockroaches be-a-light Gang stalking is conducted in secret because, like its predecessors Cointelpro and MK Ultra, it is illegal and unconstitutional.
Stalking described as such, or as “criminal harassment” or “criminal menace” is a crime under the laws of every state in America.
Stalking is illegal because the vast majority of Americans deem it morally reprehensible and an assault on the basic rights and freedoms of the victims.
Gang stalkers know that most people if they understood the crimes gang stalkers perpetrate would regard them as the human equivalent of cockroaches, so the stalkers skulk around and ply their trade in the shadows.
They don’t have to worry about being caught and prosecuted however, because their tactics are inherently difficult to prove legally, and their crimes are supported directly and indirectly by people with power and money and government connections.
The historical practice of shaming individuals had the imprimatur of the society.
If gang stalkers had such a sanction, they would not have to conduct their activities in secret.
Instead, gang stalking is largely a game played by people who are wealthy and/or well-connected to the police state infrastructure.
For their personal vendettas and agendas, they exclusively wield gang stalking as a weapon that is unavailable to most people.
Exposing what is happening is the challenge for victims of gang stalking and for anyone who believes that America should be a constitutional free nation instead of a quasi-police state run by plutocrats and neo-fascist members of law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
The balance of power is completely tipped in favor of the perpetrators of organized stalking.
Also, cowardice and careerism by politicians and members of the mainstream press make it unlikely that much help will spontaneously emerge from those quarters.
On the other hand, civilian activists managed to derail the FBI’s Cointelpro operations, so there is precedent for eventual victory by the good guys.
Mind you, those activists had to break into an FBI office to get the documents which exposed the crimes, so a certain amount of courage is required.
If you can help expose illegal spying and harassment of Americans by intelligence agencies, law enforcement agencies, and private security contractors, please do so.
America needs more patriots like Daniel Ellsberg, Edward Snowden, Jeremy Hammond, Barrett Brown, Russell Tice, William Binney, Ray McGovern, Thomas Drake, Frank Serpico, Thomas Tamm, Hugh Thompson, Jr., William C Davidon, John Raines, Bonnie Raines, Keith Forsyth, Judi Feingold, and Bob Williamson.
Lockshin, A., and Lockshin, L., 1988, Silent Terror, One Family’s History of Political Persecution in the United States, Novosti Press Agency.
Full Definition Gang Stalking is a systemic form of control, which seeks to destroy every aspect of a Targeted Individuals life.
Community health and safety Click to access wcb_wpviolence.pdf “Tn the service sector this may require identifying to employees persons who have a history of aggressive or inappropriate behavior in the store, bar, mall or taxi.
The identity of the person and the nature of the risk must be given to staff likely to come into contact with that person.
While workers have the right to know the risks, it is important to remember that this information cannot be indiscriminately distributed.
A woman named Jane Clift in the U.K. went through a very similar type of flagging system.
A warning marker was placed against her name designating her as potentially violent.
In many countries these community notifications might fall under community safety and health laws.
It seems that employers, educational facilities, and community centers are in some cases flagging innocent individuals as a means of retaliation, silencing, or controlling members of society.
Edward Dorsey of Midwest Health Center, made a report that said the only psychiatric symptom Buffa displayed was anxiety.
Dorsey’s report said that the referral came from Ford’s medical department and was at least in part due to her complaints of sexual harassment.
In April 1999, Buffa’s boss fired her “for the good of the company,” she recalled being told.
Psychiatric Reprisal The individual is then placed under overt and covert forms of surveillance.
In a big city this could mean that thousands upon thousands of people are getting a notification about the target.
Foot patrols and vehicle patrols are used to follow the Individual around, as part of the monitoring process.
During these patrols a one handed sign language is used to assist the citizen informants with communicating to each other.
The covert methods used to harass, persecute, and falsely defame the targets often leave no evidence to incriminate the civilian spies.
It’s similar to workplace mobbing, but takes place outside in the community.
It called Gang Stalking, because groups of organized community members stalk and monitor the targets 24/7.
Many Targeted Individuals are flagged, harassed and placed under surveillance in this way for months or even years before they realize that they are being targeted by an organized protocol of harassment.
What happens during this monitoring and surveillance is very similar to what happened to many innocent individuals in the former East Germany or Activists and Dissidents in Russia.
Many innocent people in the former East Germany would be targeted by the state, and then their friends, family, and the community at large would be used to monitor, prosecute, and harass them.
The same persecutions and harassment’s are now happening in democratic countries.
Once a person is flagged or has a warning marker placed on their file, the community becomes hypervigilant, and within this structure there is a targeted and illegal protocol of harassment that happens.
When the target tries to describe what is happening to them, it sounds as if they have had a mental breakdown.
The reality is electronic means are being used to make it appear as if the target has had a breakdown.
Creates A Protective Shield Of High Pressure Complex Ultrasonic Shock Waves.
The Mosquito device is being considered for banning by the European Union, cause it infringes on the human rights of children.
The frequency range is adjustable from 7kHz to 25kHz, with the PCC30 putting out 140db of sound (135db for the PPF40) measured at 30cm.
Intended for mounting to vehicles for potential crowd control applications.
Many of these devices are easy to access, and almost impossible for an unaware target to describe in a credible manner, without sounding as if they have had a mental breakdown.
Unauthorized intruders are exposed to a feeling of intense paranoia, discomfort, disorientation, nausea and other undesirable effects.
The closest thing to Gang Stalking that democratic countries have seen before this is McCarthyism, Cointelpro, and RED SQUAD programs.
Red Squad programs were used for monitoring, and harassment of various groups.
They have been in place for over a hundred years, and they also employed Informants.
Civilian Spies, who can also be termed “Covert Human Intelligence Sources” come from every level and sector of society.
Remember anyone the Targeted Individual comes into contact with gets a warning about the target.
Just like with Cointelpro investigations, everyone in the targets life is contacted, advised as to why the individual has been flagged, advised not to discuss the notification and asked to be a part of the ongoing, never ending monitoring (systemic psychological harassment and manipulation of the target) process.
This process is covertly designed to control the targets, keep them in line, or destroy the target over time, leaving them with no form of support.
These actions are specifically designed to mimic a psychological operation.
This psychological harassment of the target is designed to destroy them over years, making them look crazy and leave them with no form of support.
The individuals around the target carry out actions and tasks as they are instructed, without realizing that the structure is psychologically designed to break the target down.
Worldwide programs of control and conformity have been used with equal success and lethality.
What we are seeing now is a co-ordinated and organized effort of control and conformity.
It focuses on instilling a sense of community within a geographically located neighborhood.
Communities come together and discuss what values they would like to have in their community, community development, and it’s also a time to discuss any problems that might be happening in a specific area.
These local programs in many countries have been forming partnerships with other government run programs at, provincial, state and federal levels.
It’s all part of a system of control and conformity that has been in place for many years.
Many targets report that their information is passed and shared between country boarders, and that the surveillance continues even when they travel.
The official goal is listed as a notification for the community, to alert them of individuals who have been flagged, or have had a warning marker placed on their file.
It’s officially used as a means of investigating or monitoring individuals who have displayed inappropriate, or violent behaviours.
The real goal in some cases however seems to be to isolate the target from all forms of support, so that the target can be set up in the future for arrest, institutionalization, or forced suicide.
Other goals of this harassment is to destroy the targets reputation and credibility.
Other goals involve sensitizing the target to everyday stimuli’s as a form of control, which is used to control targets when they get out of line.
Once the target is sensitized, the Citizen Informants have an easier time identifying the Targeted Individual in public.
The structure of this type of notification makes the targets vulnerable.
Once a community goes into monitoring mode, they unofficially work towards driving the target from the community.
Secondary goals include making the target homeless, jobless, giving them a breakdown, and the primary goals seems to be to drive the target to forced suicide.
This is the same thing that was done to targets of the Stasi and Cointelpro investigations.
Under the Gang Stalking label you will also find such terms as Community Mobbing, Community Stalking, Stalking by Proxy, Organized Stalking, Cause Stalking, MultiStalking, but it’s all part of the same community notification harassment protocol.
What many people do not realize is that Gang Stalking is just one appendage of this systemic form of control.
There are other forms of control used to repress, and keep individuals in line.
Mobbing, Cointelpro, The Buzzsaw, Covert War, Electronic Harassment, etc.
These are the just some of the names being given to a very old game, that is once again being played by governments on their unsuspecting citizens.
Officially targets can be flagged and investigated for suspected, or reported behaviours.
They can be chosen because they asserted their rights at work, or filed a complaint.
Were considered to be too outspoken, unwittingly investigated something that the state did not want investigated, signed a petition, wrote a letter.
They were deemed as suspicious by a civilian spy/snitch and their names were handed over.
It’s becoming apparent that targets might be chosen for this systemic form of control, if they are not already in some way a part of this controlled system.
Many Targeted Individuals seem to be unaware of this community notification, flagging and monitoring system.
Some targets also seem to be unaware that large chunks of our society are now being used as Citizen Informants.
In the past primary targets of programs such as Cointelpro have been minorities.
Individuals are often targeted for being outspoken, whistle blowers, dissidents, people who go up against wealthy corporations, woman’s groups, women, minorities, extremists, conspiracy theorists, anti-war proponents, individuals identified or targeted as problems at these community meetings, and other innocent individuals.
The majority of the targets are often not aware that they are being targeted in this way.
When a target moves, changes jobs, the harassment still continues, because they are still flagged, and a notification is still going out to everyone they come in contact with.
Every time the target moves, the same information, lies, and slander will be spread out into the new community and the systemic monitoring and harassment will continue.
People from all walks of life are a part of this system, because once a target is flagged, their information is distributed to a wide range of people, organizations, and communities.
General laborers, the wealthy, bikers, drug dealers, drug users, street people, punks, hip hop culture, KKK, black activists, church groups, youth groups, Fire Fighters, police officers, lawyers, health care workers, store keepers, maids, janitors, cable installers, phone repair persons, mail carriers, locksmiths, electricians, etc.
Workers and the community at large do have a right to be notified if they are going to encounter persons who have violent, inappropriate histories.
Citizens want to be able to protect themselves and their communities, however what is happening is that this program is also being used to falsely target innocent people.
Many do not understand or care that the end consequence of this flagging, this harassment protocol is to destroy a person.
Many people in today’s society are scared, they are willing to give up personal freedoms, for a false sense of security, and if that means taking away the rights of another individual to accomplish this, they have no problem doing this.
Many wholeheartedly believe that this let’s them know who is bad and who they need to protect themselves and their communities from.
They love that special feeling of monitoring and protecting their community.
Many in society use the one handed sign language to communicate and it’s very effective in breaking down race, gender, age, social barriers.
Many believe that it also let’s them know who is on their side, vs who could be the potential target.
Others are forced or blackmailed by the State or the police into taking part.
They are told that they are being used to help keep and eye on dangerous or emotionally disturbed individuals.
Others are just local thugs or Informants who are already being used for other activities, and their energies are just diverted over into these community health and safety programs.
Some may be given the choice of monitoring a Targeted Individual for the community or the police vs going to jail.
Others are told outright lies and slander about the target to get them to go along with ruining the targets life.
Many caring families are told that the individuals has displayed mental health issues, or other socially unacceptable behaviours and might be a danger to themselves or the community at large, and that the notification is necessary for keeping the community safe.
Many are however just average citizens who in the course of going about their day to day jobs, are being used to keep an eye out, and if a flagged target does come into their vicinity, they are asked to watch, monitor and observe the target.
A few of the most common techniques are listed below. a) Classical conditioning.
The targeted individual over a period of months, or even years is negatively sensitized to an everyday stimuli, which is then used to harass them.
It’s used out in public to let them know they are constantly being harassed and monitored.
Red, white, yellow, strips, pens clicking, key jangling, loud coughing, loud whistling, loud smacking of clapping of hands together, cell phones, laptops, etc. b) 24/7 Surveillance This will involve flagging and following the target everywhere they go.
Getting close to the target, moving into the community or apartment where they live, across the street.
The flagging is meant to warn the community, but they act as little more than slander campaigns.
They present a one sided assessment of the targets behavior and activity.
The target is never allowed to tell their side of the story or to clear their name.
This one sided assessment can include false reports, lies, and legitimate incidents where the target was set up.
People in the targets community are told that the target is crazy, dangerous, a thief, into drugs, a prostitute, pedophile, in trouble for something, needs to be watched.
This very flagging in and of itself is capable of creating paranoia, and false interpretation of everyday incidents.
It’s been shown that community notifications of any kind can and do create a sense of paranoia within a community.
Community Notification Click to access C20.pdf Some people might argue that they would feel more secure if they were aware of the identities of dangerous offenders in their neighborhoods, but widespread community notification actually serves to heighten fear of victimization.
In a large metropolitan area, hundreds of thousands of people are notified of a dangerous offender’s release, while only hundreds will come into contact with him in the community.
This blanket notification propagates the belief that there are more “predators” in the community than ever before, and fearful attitudes among members of the public are reinforced.
We would also argue that the use of inflammatory language such as “predator” by politicians and officials also works to heighten fear and increase calls for more punitive action. d) Noise and mimicking campaigns.
Disrupting the targets life, sleep with loud power tools, construction, stereos, doors slamming, etc.
Daily interferences, nothing that would be too overt to the untrained eye, but psychologically degrading and damaging to the target over time. e) Everyday life breaks and street theatre.
Flat tires, sleep deprivation, drugging food, putting dirt on targets property.
These strangers might get text messaged to be at a specific time and place, and perform a specific action. f) Electronic Harassment.
Electronic means can be used to create the illusion that the target is having a mental breakdown, when in fact they are being targeted and harassed by a community that is trying to get them to move, because they believe that the person is a danger, or an undesirable.
This flagging system allows the community to treat the target as less than, someone they are allowed to harass, and victimize.
It gives them a license to do unspeakable things to innocent targets, and their families.
This is the ultimate revenge book-high tech recipes for madness concocted by the author in collaboration with the experts.
What he came up with is a collection of electronics, chemicals, and common sense designed to push anybody over the edge.
Discover how to induce insanity with lasers, shockers, breakers, and blowers; clear beaches with “silent sound”; zap computer disks from a distance, bypas computer passwords, blast boomboxes and bother banks.
In short learn to harass the forces of science and technology and excercise your God-given right to get even with anybody, anytime.
These actions might seem harmless to these Citizen Informants, but in reality the actions could be causing great psychological trauma for the target.
Though the systemic harassment that Targeted Individuals refer to as Gang Stalking is immoral and unethical in nature, programs such as this in democratic countries, and none democratic countries have always been funded by the Government.
They are the only ones with enough money, coordination, and power to keep such a system in place.
These Co-ordinated efforts then join hands with others for this systemic form of control and harassment.
If you know someone who is being targeted in this way please don’t go along with it.
Many innocent people are currently being targeted, and people are being told lies.
This form of harassment is systemic and it’s about state control and conformity.
The express goal of this harassment is to destroy the individual over time.
You can subtly suggest that your local newspapers or community papers print articles about Targeted Individuals or even an write an objective piece about Gang Stalking.
Ensure targets who are flagged in this way have proper notification letting them know that they are flagged.
As it stands Communities are getting away with serious human rights abuses, and complaints are not being heard.
Authority figures such as the police in many cases are not taking the reports seriously due to the type of warning markers attached to a targets file.
If you are a lawyer our community needs lawyers who are skilled in helping targets access Freedom Of Information files.
Lawyers who can work with the existing privacy laws to limit who and where the targets information is disseminated to.
We need human rights lawyers who can address the complaints of abuses that are happening to people listed or flagged in this manner.
Illegal surveillance, illegal access of mail and electronic communications, and torture via electronic monitoring.
Mental health professionals can recognize that there is illegal harassment happening to individuals who are flagged, listed or have warning markers placed against their names.
This notification makes targets prime for harassment, and community mobbing.
They can objectively investigate the complaints, and become familiar with the Electronic means of monitoring and harassment that are being used.
Europe is considering a ban on the mosquito device, because it infringes on the human rights of children.
You can subtly offer your support to someone who is being unfairly treated, in very small little ways.
When on the street or in cars patrolling, they use a one handed sign language.
Here is a list of signals that the former East German Secret Police the Stasi used.
Subject is moving on, going further, or overtaking stroke hair with hand, or raise hat briefly 3.
Observing Agent wishes to terminate observation because cover threatened bend and retie shoelaces 5.
Subject returning both hands against back, or on stomach Observing Agent wishes to speak with Team Leader or other Observing Agents take out briefcase or equivalent and examine contents.
Neo a target wakes up and realizes not only is he being watched without knowing why, but that the world is a lie, that has been created to pull the truth over people’s eyes.
Gangstalkingworld Share this: Community health and safety Click to access wcb_wpviolence.pdf “Tn the service sector this may require identifying to employees persons who have a history of aggressive or inappropriate behavior in the store, bar, mall or taxi.
Retaliation Maria Buffa, a former salaried employee in the personnel department at Ford World Headquarters in Dearborn, Michigan, said she, too, was sent to a psychiatrist after she filed a sexual harassment complaint in February 1999 against a woman co-worker.
Hightech Harassment ttp://www.amazon.com/High-Tech-Harassment-Scott-French/dp/0873646169 This is not just another revenge book.
Subject returning both hands against back, or on stomach D> Observing Agent wishes to speak with Team Leader or other Observing Agents take out briefcase or equivalent and examine contents.
I also think a lot of you people put a bit too much faith in your five senses.
A lot of your experiences could be explained by hallucinations, paranoia, and synchronicity.
I think people are being manipulated like puppets to give the illusion of involvement or human conspiracy.
I can quarantee you it’s not as far fetched as thinking hundreds of ordinary people are consciously involved in a purposeless conspiracy against another ordinary person, including his parents and friends.
And that there are thousands of such cases all over the world, and have been at least since the 19th century.
Your own theory is so far-fetched that people will believe in God and other nonsense but they won’t believe what you believe.
That’s partly why your crusade is futile as long as you keep employing the tactics you do.
No one will believe your story, because it’s unbelievable AND about things they are familiar with.
If you want to make something unbelievable seem believable, you have to talk about things that are outside everyday reality.
They know your everyday interpretation is nonsense because you are trying to talk about something they know from personal experience and that something is completely unambiguous to them.
People are being mind controlled and they haven’t got a clue what you are talking about because they’re all victims, you’re just the person who is supposed to notice something is a bit off about all this.
I don’t think the entity that does this controlling is super interested in what you believe so much as it may be toying with you or testing you, so you might want to try reading my blog post at my blog and acquiring a competing viewpoint.
Comment by gangstalking | April 8, 2013 | Reply After reading your detailed and lengthy side of the issue, let me pose some comments.
Look around you, and I mean look REALLY hard, past the media hype, the government lies, and you will see the FACTS of what these criminals do, and what they are capable of.
They follow the conspiracy of evil, and they don’t even hide it most of the time.
It is never ridiculous to believe in God being the creator and our Savior, whom is love and truth.
It is more ludicrous to believe we all came from monkeys and amoeba since they all exist apart from us as humans to begin with.
You either have and side with them, which is where the misinformation can come in to posts like this you write, or you simply have no idea about any of it, and thus need to really see what is going on here.
They are human beings with lives and feelings who have been severely used, harassed and had their minds and lives practically altered and destroyed.
And this is why the deprogramming techniques and tons of Christian faith and love are the only things that will ever truly free them I can tell you that as a matter of fact.
So please do not come in here and act like you know what you are talking about, because believe me, you clearly do not.
And you have not been through half of what these people have, or you would not have written this post.
The facts are these people have been victims of cult stalking and mind control harassment, some even murdered, so please be more careful what you say.
In fact I think it is best you just do not post here anymore, because you will not be respected at all.
There is PLENTY of evidence besides the people themselves supporting all of this does happen to them.
I personally think the moderator should not allow these comments at all because they do not serve the purpose here, and they have no bearing on what is going on here with all of the people involved and the victims they hurt and harass.
Comment by Steven | August 12, 2013 | Reply Please read the articles on informants, lawsuits, Freedom of information, and Threat Assessment Team files.
Lawsuits for conspiracy and indictment, might not have been the worst situation.
Comment by kevin smith | November 28, 2013 | Reply Steven, What you are saying is not uncommon, and I want you to know you are not alone.
Sexual character assassination and defamation of character is what they do more than you realize.
They take away your dignity and make it almost impossible to have any kind of normal life.
Comment by erniemink | December 11, 2013 | Reply Thank you, these situations are interesting, if that makes sense.
Comment by gangstalking | December 11, 2013 | Reply I would say interesting is not the world, for that makes it sound positive.
The more this gets exposed the more it will be harder to bring it all out.
The people involved are well aware of those that want to bring expose to them, trust me on that.
Comment by erniemink | December 11, 2013 | Reply How can on gather evidence if he/she is gangstalked and if people are spreading rumours and slandering the person.
I think I am being gangstalked by an mnc bank and theres are some people who are spreading lies about me.
Comment by A D| March 1, 2014 | Reply Fill out a reporting form, that is what a lot of people are doing, then following it up.
R.B.Ross c 2005 Tactics of Predatory Gangstalking include highly coordinated surveillance (hidden cameras, conversation bugging in private aswell as public), harassment, and psychological, psychosocial, financial, and sometimes physical assaults on an individual by a large group of people who are often strangers to the targeted individual.
A Predatory Gangstalking group is a well-run organization comprised of members who are unidentified as gangstalkers to the outside world.
The practitioners of predatory gangstalking are people who, for the most part, go about their business of daily life appearing like everyone else, except for their activities involved with Predatory Gangstalking.
Predatory gangstalking activities take priority over everything else in the lives of Predatory Gangstalkers.
Predatory gangstalking is actually a lifestyle for those who participate in it.
Dominion Theology is a religious interpretation of the Bible which these groups believe requires them to “take dominion over the earth” which they believe is the precursor to the return of Jesus to earth.
This may sound quite vague, and it is, only because the other face of ganstalking or rather the precise reason for its use deals with a more incredible phenomena than hasn’t been touched up yet.
In the first instance, we mustn’t be so Naive as to assume that our governments and all those that have been granted the power and authority to run our world are acting from a selfless perspective.
The secrets of the universe, God and true power have always been the Holy Grail of man, and the desperate desire to achieve and own them by some.
To this effect the studies and research that has been conducted since time immemorial have been immense, with the one of the holiest of holiest being the understanding of the human mind, soul and will and how these can be controlled and used far more readily than man has been able to achieve so far.
And it is for these reasons that extensive and more covert experimentation has been undertaken on people targeted for this work.
Our minds are complex structures, our memories , our thought processes, our fears and so on.
This of course sounds like insane rantings but assuredly this is the reality humanity faces today.
There is a dark agenda to control all minds by controlling the energetic fields of existence, our physical bodies, dna, etheric fields, mental and emotional fields and so on.
Next, imagine for a moment if a ‘Lucifer’ were also created from one of the targeted individuals, more than just the social pariah they started as, what if society is lead to believe that they are actually a satanic entity or individual.
In doing so, a common enemy is created with which to blame all eventual chaos upon.
It is in the end the stuff of nightmares and what has been called dark prophecy or conspiracy theory is actually ancient agenda in it’s final stages of being played out.
On a personal level, participating in any form of gangstalking is not only insane but utterly immoral, and spiritually and criminally corrupt.
If you care, choose never to participate, inform the target , make a united stand with friends and neighbors not participate and log all the evidence you can take down all information you can.
Be smart, technology and the capability of those that have orchestrated these world terrors are immense.
But most of all remember that the ‘fear matrix’ within the collective consciousness of humanity is an overall target.
Stand firm in a belief of your divinity and eternal being (whether you believe in a God or not) you are still part Omnipotent Grace experiencing on earth.
This book Black Money Black Budgets Black Operations This book asserts a Matrix of illegal operations fabricate desperate solution to Aristocracies greatest vulnerabilities, errors, and liabilities by Abuse of Power including self-funding black money operations where no legitimate funding could be used and where much of the funding are private corporate and wealthy political figures financially and in other ways participate ind plausibly denied Deep State or fixers, mafia, and COINTELPRO under failed ethical justifications.
A formula of the predicate calculus is in prenex normal form if it is rewritten as a string of quantifiers and bound variables, called the prefix, followed by a quantifier-free part, called the matrix.
The ""rules"" written into the Matrix largely revolve around denying ""Conspiracy Theories"" while pursuing world objectives which if completed create outcomes in which the end-state reached protects the Deep State from being revealed.
The Donegan family is one such long term victim of MKULTRA and has a secret genomic history which is being used for the matrix outcome desired including destructive unjust attacks on Edward Paul Donegan funded and the value and truth of his family history slandered and denied.
Both monetizing Donegan family value INTO the mafia as the mafia destroys and erodes my life are several facets of the Mafia operation.
Because as a profit matter people benefit from this it has been unstoppable thus I have had to search deeper and find out why my genome is being used on the black market in State backed illegal operations unjustly attacking me.
I believe the oil business wanted to groom future leaders out of test fertilizations study out of wedlock celebrity DNA and an even deeper more secret reason the DNA was being studied is the reason the genome history is secret is it contains a minor, a minimal, brain defect which runs it if families of origins, the Kutscheras and Windsors.
Blatantly illegal attacks on me are feeding a mafia operation at my own assets and reputation's expense.
The Mafia techniques are State sanctioned, use under-cover State actors and State misconduct.
The milieu of actors including the politically powerful who ask for and gain press cooperation in denials of the milieu.
Obstruction of Justice retrieved from FindLaw Staff | Reviewed by Evan Fisher, OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE Obstruction of justice is considered a crime against justice itself.
By obstructing justice, one is seeking to thwart the process of justice and the operation of the justice system.
From presidents to street criminals, those facing obstruction of justice charges could suffer major consequences.
This article describes obstruction of justice, some examples of obstruction, and the types of penalties one could face.
After articles of impeachment were brought to the House floor, which alleged obstruction of justice, among other crimes, Nixon resigned.
Twenty-four years later, President Bill Clinton also faced charges for obstruction of justice and perjury for lying about a sexual encounter he had with a White House intern.
He was ultimately acquitted by the Senate and served the remainder of his term.
The code section made infamous by Presidents Nixon and Clinton ""Obstruction of proceedings before departments, agencies, and committees"" (18 U.S.C. section 1505), is punishable by a fine and imprisonment of up to five years.
Neither president ever faced the possibility of criminal penalties, however.
Elements of an Obstruction of Justice Charge The elements required for a conviction on an obstruction of justice charge differ by code section.
For a person to be convicted of obstruction of justice, they must have acted with the specific intent to create an obstruction.
The statute criminalizes ""endeavors to influence, intimidate, or impede"" the legal process, even if those endeavors were unsuccessful.
Seemingly innocuous acts could become criminal activity if they have the intended effect of impeding justice.
Whoever procures another to commit any perjury is guilty of subornation of perjury, and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
In American law, Scots law, and under the laws of some English-speaking Commonwealth nations, subornation of perjury is the crime of persuading or permitting a person to commit perjury, which is the swearing of a false oath to tell the truth in a legal proceeding, whether spoken or written.
The term subornation of perjury further describes the circumstance wherein an attorney at law causes a client to lie under oath or, allows another party to lie under oath.
In California law, per the state bar code, the subornation of perjury constitutes an act of ""moral turpitude"" on the part of the attorney, and thus, is cause for their disbarment, or for the suspension of their license to practice law.
In legal practice, the condition of suborning perjury applies to an attorney who presents either testimony or an affidavit, or both, either to a judge or to a jury, which the attorney knows to be materially false, and not factual.
In civil law and in criminal law, the attorney's knowledge that the testimony is materially false must rise above mere suspicion to what an attorney would reasonably have believed in the circumstances of the matter discussed in the testimony.
Hence, the attorney cannot be wilfully blind to the fact that their witness is giving false, perjurious testimony.
An attorney who encourages a witness to give false testimony is suborning perjury, a crime punished either with formal disciplinary action, disbarment, jail, or a combination thereof.
A false statement by an attorney in court also is a crime similar to subornation of perjury and is punished accordingly.
In the professional conduct of an attorney at law, there is a fine delineation between assisting a witness to recall events and encouraging the witness to give materially false testimony.
The practice of ""horse shedding the witness” , is an example of such perjurious criminal conduct by an attorney, which is depicted in the true-crime novel Anatomy of a Murder , by Robert Traver — John D Voelker, a justice of the Michigan Supreme Court — and in the eponymous film , about a rape-and-murder case wherein are explored the ethical and legal problems inherent to the subornation of perjury.
JURY TAMPERING Jury tampering is the crime of unduly attempting to influence the composition and/or decisions of a jury during the course of a trial.
The means by which this crime could be perpetrated can include attempting to discredit potential jurors to ensure they will not be selected for duty.
Once selected, jurors could be bribed or intimidated to act in a certain manner on duty.
It could also involve making unauthorized contact with them for the purpose of introducing prohibited outside information and then arguing for a mistrial.
In the United States, people have also been charged with jury tampering for handing out pamphlets and flyers indicating that jurors have certain rights and obligations, including an obligation to vote their conscience notwithstanding the instructions they are given by the judge.
A conviction is a felony that carries a penalty of up to 3 years in jail or state prison.
This is considered to be an Obstruction of Justice crime in California.
Examples e making a false receipt with the idea to introduce it at a personal injury trial. e creating an inaccurate picture of an intersection to give to police investigating a hit and run case. e altering a will with the intent to use it in probate court.
Defenses An accused can beat a preparing false evidence charge with a legal defense.
Our Shouse law California criminal defense attorneys includes practice these areas.
Using currency not tracked by the Treasure Department by large sums of cash or by assets of value as barter or by an specially created currency are how Black Markets often survive since the assets used escape or avoid banking notice.
Findlaw.com retrieved from FindLaw Staff | Reviewed by Evan Fisher, Esq.
Using threats or force to prevent, or obstruct, or interfere with the performance of a court order 2.
Obstruction of Justice Under State Laws All states address obstruction of justice in some form.
State codes tend to focus more on acts that interfere with the day-to-day work of the police.
Some state laws, such as Florida's, define several specific acts, while others are more broadly written.
For example, one section of Florida's obstruction of justice code prohibits the unlawful possession of a concealed handcuff key.
California law makes it a crime to willfully ""resist, delay or obstruct"" a police officer or emergency personnel while performing their job duties.
The statute includes the specific acts of interfering with radio communications over a public safety radio frequency.
The law makes it clear that simply photographing or video recording police is not a violation.
But if the crime also involves an attempted murder or the commission of a class A or B felony against a juror, the defendant may be sentenced to up to twenty years in prison. e Attempting to influence a juror through written communication is punishable by a fine and up to six months in prison.
Threatening or attempting to intimidate a juror is punishable by a fine and up to ten years in prison.
But if the crime also involves an attempted murder or the commission of a class A or B felony against a juror, the defendant may be sentenced to up to twenty years in prison.
Attempting to influence a juror through written communication is punishable by a fine and up to six months in prison.
State laws usually classify obstruction of justice offenses as felonies, although they differ widely on how they define the crime.
The Illinois law that prohibits the destruction of evidence classifies it as a Class 4 felony punishable by one to three years in prison.
A DNA molecule consists of two strands wound around each other, with each strand held together by bonds between the bases.
A ""Black Currency"" made out of rerpoducable ""Genetic Codes"" as unlimited value.
The real value of it is the secret history and desirability of the genome.
No one other than Edward Paul Donegan who IS qualified to represent himself is entitled to that genome.
This small unit of currency was more affixable to letters of post than metal coins.
The denominationss were not intended for utility in most commerce but would be useful for postage payments.
Market capitalization is the total dollar value of all the shares of a company’s stock — or, in the case of Bitcoin or another cryptocurrency, of all the coins that have been mined.
In crypto, market cap is calculated by multiplying the total number of coins that have been mined by the price of a single coin at any given time.
This book speculates Malcolm X objected to so many MKLUTRA experimental births because it undermined the uniqueness of his own child, one such experimental birth.
A racial hate crime COIINTELPRO operations has been organized against me which is supposed to define me and defeat me and this is likely because my genome has been used in blacks and whites who do not wish be associated with the Kutscheras by attributes but do wish me defined by Kutschera attributes and defeated and disavowed.
The primary system has been subjected me to intense racial assault including black adults planting white minor children near me or my home as a black nationalist statement about me, and vows from those same black males to use my genome on their white female partners.
This should be easy to defeat by elites all through society black and white go far back in generations of underground railroads the destruction of my atomic veteran genome which was from lawful marriage and lawful family life achieves a benefit to the genome coopting criminals and organizations.
Those high power well placed elites use their influence to get necessary programs in place to destroy or co-opt assets already my own and roadblock all property and achievement I attempt which is rooted in my law abiding Atheist family.
This is called “road blocking” or also Surveillance Ambushes where Espionage can intercept and co-opt my positive activities of health and community activities of normal life and opportunity.
Bad policing can allow the criminal to proceed if the crimes are not solved and bad medical services can fake medical needs for involvement in a said to be patient and even conduct physical batter of a person by creating hostile context or treatments of the person or subject a person via medical management to criminal environments.
Maladministration is the actions of a government body which can be seen as causing an injustice.
The law in the United Kingdom says Ombudsmen must investigate maladministration.
Entities such as property managers, police and fire, county prosecutors, State gov or FBI DOJ, or other businesses which allow for activities of the Racket to proceed.
Wire fraud, welfare fraud, physical assault, sexual assault by planted operatives who have access to common property of sole possession property.
The machinery is built to use pretexts that are manufactured acts of fraud to gain rights to assets to which the parties acting fraudulently are not entitled.
Silencing Micheal Hastings and others keeps the Mafia unchallenged by the disinfecting Sunlight.
Hostile and self enriching Conservators can entangle, forced-team with me and assets belonging to me or my trust fund if I appear to need an asset manager.
If a manager of assets can insert itself as a conservator in layer of finances to become co-mingled with me and my asset by forced team they can assert they are required by law to continue to entangle, forced-team, with me and my assets though actually predatory and exploitative.
The term ""child abandonment"" is broadly categorized and used to describe a variety of behaviors.
Abusive Gaurdianship after sabotage of finances This book asserts criminal breaking and entering of my home to create false but ; actionable legal claims against me or rather my trust fund, that those claims are fenced ‘ via a Sting operation run at a child porn peeping house where deals made with my trust ' fund satisfy false claims against it , the false claims brought to that tree house of child ' porn which is not my home but a fencing operation location.
This book asserts criminal breaking and entering of my home to create false but actionable legal claims against me or rather my trust fund, that those claims are fenced via a Sting operation run at a child porn peeping house where deals made with my trust fund satisfy false claims against it , the false claims brought to that tree house of child porn which is not my home but a fencing operation location.
The incitation to violence is people believe the claim against me was real and settled an a manner agreed to me or agreed to by an representative acting in my interest.
Insider knowledge on Brain Genes and awaiting markets through sham moves.
Black Markets often, usually, traffic items not legal to traffic in but are of value to those who desire them.
Note that Jerome Adams *, Surgeon General, Dept Of Defense Non Combatant Military Dept of Defense Service Public Health Service * is likely in the Brain program as director and can get brain genes, like clean needles and other AIDS HIV type programs underway, of value to the Gay communities, such as designer baby markets for gay couples with IVF Three Parents needs,, etc., and knows which genes to seize for “victim’ couples or couplse due some “bounty fee” paid to finding a sex perv bounty hunters for the county of jail jumper finders.
The book title refers to this is long term activity of the Vatican/CIA/Iluminati and continuing activity is trying to hide previous activity by creating consistent in the total world genome picture, and acts of world terror and assassination also are part of the global cover-up conspiracy of 1961.
The City of Berkeley declared it a historical and cultural landmark in 1984.
Although open to all, it is often viewed as a sanctuary for Berkeley’s low income and large homeless population who, along with others, receive meals from East Bay Food Not Bombs regularly.
Many homeless utreach organizations, like the Suitcase Clinic, also visit the park regularly.
Squatters have surrounded my private property and trespassed as though we have common assets, are a community, etc., none of which is true.
Squatting is the action of occupying an abandoned or unoccupied area of land or a building, usually residential, that the squatter does not own, rent or otherwise have lawful permission to use.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Work goes into destroying any property I lease.
Racketeering Influenced Criminal Organizations can conceal misconduct (with a sufficiently created cartel of people operation in collusion) to act fraudulently but conceal acts of fraud with a cover layer of respectable business.
Usually one party in an illegal act is fairly easy to catch but a few people colluding is harder to catch and constitute organized crime.
An interest in my genome tying into CIA history, DARPA, and a long line of illegal usage of my DNA has created in interest in hiding previous acts in the same manner as the original illegal DNA science will continuing rather than abandoning the original goals of the illegal acts.
The Central Intelligence Agency, FBI, Department of Defense and others have so long been criminally involved in secret family lines study and expploitation black operations are of CIA FBI Behavioral and DNA research continue as illegal abuses involving my family line and genome and the facts of the history of the Donegan genome are of more interest to the CIA and FBI assassinations program than they will admit thus those agencies will not abandon the illegal operations and affects on me.
Google Mirina Webster and Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here FLEECE Noun 1. the woolly covering of a sheep or goat. “as the sheep came on board, we grabbed their long shaggy fleeces” 2. asoft warm fabric with a texture similar to sheep’s wool, used as a lining material. “a reversible fleece jacket” Verb 1.
INFORMAL obtain a great deal of money from , typically by overcharging or swindling them. “money that authorities say he fleeced from well-to-do acquaintances” 2.
LITERARY cover as if with a fleece. “the sky was half blue, half fleeced with white clouds” A fleece is a sheep’s coat.
A person’s coat can be called a fleece, too, if it comes from a sheep or goat or a yak or even if it just looks like it did.
Well, it was such a nice, clean fleece that Mary tricked the lamb into trusting her, then robbed him of his fleece and turned it into a bomber jacket and a pair of boots.
A Black Market system has been designed in which “Black Money” rights to my DNA is used in the adult entertainer industry.
Black Money as assets seized from a dopple of Ed not authorized to agree to asset seizure using improper accounting for the assets taken in by an institution and not reported to the person with rights to the assets.
Creating the appearance of a mentally challenged Ed Donegan not only creates an unlikelihood a retardation service would trade his genes it also puts that retardation services advocacy group as mice guarding the cheese.
FENCE FROM WIKIPEDIA A fence, also known as a receiver, mover, or moving man, is an individual who knowingly buys stolen goods in order to later resell them for profit.
The fence acts as a middleman between thieves and the eventual buyers of stolen goods who may not be aware that the goods are stolen.
As a verb , the word describes the behaviour of the thief in the transaction with the fence.
Fencing Operation in the RICO Architecture I Fencing has Racketeering Influence Criminal Organizations or Racketeering Influenced Racketeering Operatives as criminal assets in the Long Con.
One the financial infrastructure is in place and it commits its first money launder operation at least the Second Criminal Act of Criminal Racketeering has occurred.
As if a drug manufacture operation in abandoned aircraft hanger multiple felonious steps are need in furtherance of the Racket fraud.
A Identity Theft must be conducted to financially switch as asset holder or a liability holder such that the switching between accounts can create a debit added to an account which is not in debt and credit to an account which is not due any credit, but falsifications of identities in the financial management layer enable the confusion of assets and liabilities.
B Manufacture of fraudulent liabilities such as creating child porn the liability of which will be compensated by restitution.
C Transfer of assets in the above created framework to parties not entitled to benefit from fraud and not entitled to the source of assets which will be used for the fraudulent pay out.
As is the case with the word fence and its derivatives when used in its other common meanings , the word in this context is derived from the word defence.
Among criminals, the fence originated in thieves’ slang tracing from the notion of such transactions providing a “defence” against being caught.
This process often relies on a legal business (such as a pawnshop, flea market, or street vendor) [under Racketeering Influences) in order to “launder” the stolen goods by intermixing them with legally-obtained items of the same type.
The fence is able to make a profit with stolen merchandise because he is able to secretly pay thieves a very low price for “hot” goods that cannot be easily sold on the open markets.
Fencing is illegal in all countries, but legally proving a violation of anti-fencing laws can be difficult.
In the case of Assets belonging to Edward Paul Donegan the Defense of the act of fensing is to conduct the asset transfer at what I call Elements B and even C, B is a location I am not at, do not have scrutiny of where a forger of me will sign over my assets, and C is a organziation forging my permission or agreement which I do not and would not give for the asset transfer.
Element D which is the reputation damage of what occured when C pleaded me guilty to an offense I did not comit, then paid restitution I would not have agreed to, may be the final goal of the chain of events, harming my reputation in a way bringing about damate to my life.
TRESPASS AND BREAKING AND ENTERING In violation of law including use of fraud such as using keys to an apartment for access not permissible under the lease is trespass.
If the trespass is the basis for a criminal act on the accessed property the property had undergone Breaking and Entering, its sanctity as a property broken, even if not by force.
Long Con Terminology retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here PROTECTION RACKET (AND ONE RUN THROUGH SOCIAL SERVICES) An unneeded mental retardation advocacy of me creating by my mother’s will creators enables this loot of my DNA rights by sabotaging my normal life circumstances such as metropolitan apartments and keeps me either homeless, institutionalized, or in deep slum non-white conditions of hostile environments devoid of my intellectual, sexual, religious, or their interests.
He is the leader of a group of children (the Artful Dodger and Charley Bates among them) whom he teaches to make their livings by pickpocketing and other criminal activities, in exchange for shelter.
While a Protection Racket creates a danger and then charges to protect against it a Money Laundering RICO uses its position of operating multiple accounts to switch unlawfully between them so that in the accounting shell game slight of hands the accounts appear to be correct.
KITE any of several small graceful hawks of the family Accipitridae having long pointed wings and feeding on insects and small animals This book KITE AND PRIVATE TRUST FUND AND ASSETS OF EDWARD DONEGAN To soar away with value or rights which do not belong to the person who is kiting them from the launch area The State of Texas as a State act is illegaly using Donegan Genome tied to the corruption of State officials to acheive more coverup violating my and my family of origins rights.
A Mark is some person or asset who is the “bullseye” of the operation, the person or asset targeted to be defrauded.
Stages of the con (Confindence Trick including Long Con using sets and actors) In Confessions of a Confidence Man, Edward H Smith lists the “six definite steps or stages of growth” of a confidence game.
Co-operation of a population area of organization may be gained covertly APPROACH The victim is contacted in some way by proximity at least if not actual communication.
The assault part of Assault and Battery in some cases BUILD-UP The victim is entrapped and is given an opportunity to profit from a scheme.
The are now sued as Shill in a long con perhaps PAY-OFF OR CONVINCER People are told if they join the Con they can gain from it and some proof is shown.
The enlistee receives a small payout as a demonstration of the scheme’s effectiveness.
I think in PsyOps the murder of a patsy to silence him or her or an excuse to prevent people from talking to each other stops Rational Analysis which would expose the con THE IN-AND-IN A conspirator puts an amount of money into the same scheme as the victim, to add an appearance of legitimacy.
In Free Masonry systems the Office Mob, random people who create a wave of opinion which overpowers or nudges existing crow sentiment or information of events.
This usually includes the use of an accomplice who plays the part of an uninvolved (initially skeptical) third party, who later confirms the claims made by the con[man.
The scam requires assistants to manage the purchases and money exchanges while the pitchman keeps the energy level up Predatory Journals (Fox News and other Propoganda PsyOps In some cases, predatory journals will use fictional editorial boards or use respected academics’ names without permission to lend a veneer of credibility to the journal.
A curated database of predatory journals can be found at “Scholarly Open Access” Journal hijacking refers to the brandjacking of a legitimate academic journal by malicious third party.
CONS Quackery sets up the need for a Conservator who rob rather than protect assets From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quackery, often synonymous with health fraud, is the promotion of fraudulent or ignorant medical practices.
The con artist will then claim various exaggerated injuries in an attempt to collect from the victim’s insurance carrier despite having intentionally caused the accident.
I was hospitalized in 2009 when I said I was exposed to radiation and had radiation burns.
Little was known or discussed about radiation weaponry on citizens of the USA including those tied to national security and I was not believed.
At that time Ted Gunderson a high ranking FBI agent with strong beliefs about the murder of JFK and others and JFK and attorney General anti mafia right hand man to the FBI DOJ anti mafia team was alleging he was being poisoned, while in his 80s, by a violent capabilities internal espionage shadow government operating.
I remain under constant threat today, surviving, but with serious harassment including break-ins and theft of my computers, records, even cars by clear Government assets and sometimes using FBI, CIA, Secret Service or other agency identifications of themselves.
The needs of that network is a string of CIA murders to protect if those elements wish to keep their criminality secret and hidden from history.
The press generally backs the policy goals of the Cabal and the United States Espionage agencies request for secrecy and the press is of no use so far outing the conspirators that are now in firm grip of government.
The National Security Agency, CIA, FBI, and others including the Press and Rockefeller Republican and Neo Con Cabal are promoting a growing New World Order of liberalized post racial Commonwealth largely led by England and Feudal European Masons in which Indirect Rule of liberalized post racial society accept Western Europe backed groomed sleeper leaders who under Free Mason theory as secret family of marriages wars will be eliminated.
That is known in most encyclopedias and libraries of historical information.
What I can add to that as a victim of the plan is the the FOXP2 gene runs in European family lines and as ruling elites select themselves in black-registry (not visible to the public) known Registry families silence those who either express the FOXP2 gene while being unwilling to remain silent OR government officials or reporters aware of the program are silenced.
The Donegan family and Kennedy family are on the outs and Bush, Schwarzenegger, Obama Jr, Harris and Biden, and other families are “in’ and share the Neocon goal of global post racial and post liberalism Feudal backed commonwealth.
Richard Belzer has a book Hit List Further Reading I have heard him describe detailing 50 murders or unusual deaths of witnesses tied to the assassination of JFK and I believe a WETDIVISION of Mafia activities has tarted me to create a justification for retaliation against me for harms I did not commit but local mafia supported by the police did commit.
While Tom Donegan my brother and would be other witness to events of our family is deceased of a suspiciously arising cancer case early in his life, I remain alive but under intense harassment.
Every time you see Genereal Patreus on United States Media networks and no reporting of the available ansswers to who killed Micheal Hastings or why he was killed or you hear shrill ranting about Russian planted comspiracy theories about West European aggression against Russia including blaming Russia for internal acts of terror inside the United States you see the Cabal in operation.
This shot from 7th street North Clarendon courts apartment Arlington Virginia.
I would correct that and back and froth my correct address was modified to a false address in the read back to me.
Twice I went to incarceration and psych ward commitments, almost to state penitentiary for effectively life in prison over my confronting a call girl bordello operation not me but intoned to be me.
Believing it was run by Tom Donegan and Arlington County Services, and evicted for fighting with neighbors about it, I arrive in Texas homeless trying to get way from Arlington Services.
He contributes to NBC News and MSNBC regularly as a political commentator.
He is also a Crooked Media contributor, and co-host of the foreign policy podcast Pod Save the World.
Rhodes was born on November 14, 1977, in the Upper East Side neighborhood of Manhattan.
In July 2021, he was hired to lead international business development at Sky, a subsidiary of United States cable company Comcast Corp.
He was the youngest network news president in the history of American television.
Crossfire Hurrican and the GangStalk of Ed Donegan by the FBI asserting I was under Russian influences.
Trump was not personally under investigation until May 2017, when his firing of FBI director James Comey raised suspicions of obstruction of justice, which triggered the Mueller investigation.
In 2014 or so I was informed while a mental health inmate by a black inmate that Barrack OBama Jr was running an operation out of the United States military since as he prepared to leave the United States Presidency he wanted to create his policies deep into the United State military as permanent policy that could not be interrupted as a result in change of presidency.
I believe the investigation both planted incriminating information on me who has legal viewpoints but liked Goth music and also “observed” me in incriminating circumstances since I was an eye in hurricane of illegal acts which surrounded me, paid actors staging events I am not a part of.
I believe the policy basis is to use appearances generated by paid actors run by the British and use that information to shake down my trust fund in what appears just compensation for perceived wrongdoing of me, but is staged wrongdoing.
The manufacture of records of my being pled guilty to staged acts by unwanted conservators of my assets allows great political damage to me and allowed hostile conservatorship to defame my reputation and incite against me.
The GangStalk system is based on several architectural foundations including making sure Due Process IS short-circuited or circumvented in some way and with rights of the stalked person cripple in mechanisms to assert my right abuse of my rights.
Harassment of living conditions forces me into among other things that which counts as organ damage.
The use of Rough Noise as infliction of distress of thinking causes short term cognitive injury to the brain and that can cause additional injury of poor acts and also long term trauma can and does result from inflictions of distress.
The Defense Intelligence Agency like system of recognizing what might cause me distress and subjecting me to that stimuli is used to cripple efforts of my writing my book, etc., In fact often the acts of Stalkers are genuinely believable use of death threats and other acts that are denied by but backed by the State through State confidential informants working for the State.
After working on the Ben Carson campaign as a foreign policy adviser, in early February 2016 George Papadopoulos, codenamed “Crossfire Typhoon” by the FBI left the Carson campaign.
Also in early February, he moved to London to begin working for the London Centre of International Law Practice , with which he was associated for several months.
On March 6, Papadopoulos accepted an offer to work with the Trump campaign.
While on this trip, on March 14 he met Maltese professor Joseph Mifsud and informed the professor about his joining the Trump campaign.
On March 21, the Trump campaign told the Washington Post that Papadopoulos was one of five foreign policy advisers for the Trump campaign.
Mifsud traveled to Moscow in April 2016, and upon his return he told Papadopoulos that Russian government officials were in possession of “thousands of emails” that could be politically damaging to Hillary Clinton.
According to reporting by Malta Today about FBI records, Mifsud told the FBI in his February 2017 interviews that he had no advanced knowledge of Russia having emails from the Democratic National Committee, and did not make any offers to Papadopolous.
On May 6, Papadopoulos met Alexander Downer, the Australian High Commissioner to Britain in a London bar, and told him about the Clinton emails over drinks.
After WikiLeaks released hacked Democratic National Committee emails on July 22, the Australian government on July 26 advised American authorities of the encounter between Downer and Papadopoulos.
Receipt of this information spurred the FBI’s launch of the Crossfire Hurricane investigation on July 31.
In late July 2016, according to his May 2017 testimony to the House Intelligence Committee, CIA director John Brennan convened a group of officials from the CIA, NSA and FBI to investigate Russian interference.
According to his later testimony, Brennan gave the FBI leads involving “contacts and interactions between Russian officials and United States persons involved in the Trump campaign” that were beyond the CIA’s mandate to pursue.
Black Budget Operations are running a Dopple of me who confesses to Call Girls that he is a threat to women and the community.
In fact he is a peeping tom caught in the act and is willing to pay-up or be arrested, and likely agree he should not be around women.
Bush influenced mistakes made during Reagan administration Reagan later regretted.
Then profits into #RightWingDeathSquads in #LatinAmerica illegally funded, violates #MonroeDoctrine Other sources of funding for goals based operations is asset siezures used for things like minority causes when a corporation loses a class action suit to the DOJ and yet another source of funding, this one illegal, is when a private business may fund the activities or family members of politicians who are in State offices.
The Oil and Banking interests have closely connected political families and run private funding illegal operations which are under the same hat as people like President, VIce President, DOJ FBI, or Congresional or Courts office holders.
Such is Operation40, Blackwater, and many other companines based on East India Tea Company.
In the case of Oil money often the oil company or defense contractor owners have their profits and global business in minds while also working in Government and abusing government powers, even assasinationg government officials to keep their global business goals underway.
Most of the crimes against me and the trust fund of mother were unneccessary except for the harm done to me which was the real effect desired by the high power criminals.
Adverse Impact on Victim | Benefit for the criminal the agregion of the crime counts in the egregiousness of the crime Impact | the level of impact is part of | The type of gain the criminal is seeking also The Secret Society or alternatively Secret Team are high power genetics eugenics grooming lines corssing world history and now covering up the global scale of grommed planted leaders by Scotish Rites and others.
In a state of poverty and needing car repairs, Moses visits recently i | | | | | | | | | | | | | | , sold expensive, personalized Bibles to their deceased husbands, and the widows pay x ' him for the Bibles inscribed with their names.
A Long Con focuses on a single Mark, such as my trust fund and Glorian Donegan, : shaking it down in with long term preperation, resources, and complex sustaining : efforts to keep the Con running.
This book Was Rumor Has it a similar story line When my father picked out Moraga California I think he had seen much of the area before.
Gemnen Melville (born Melvill; AUGUST 1, 1819 September 28, 1891 Herman Melville was an American novelist, short story writer, and poet of the American Renaissance period.
This book is about a press and a Epsioange controlled law enforcement organization dedicated to corruption, crime, and CIA mafia work, and the intense and deep threat law enforcement in the United States is to the world and the USA itself, and how this ties to that house, Cape Cod, and the Manhattan Project.
Evan Ban, I think surrogate mother of biological half twins Edward Paul Donegan and Barrack Obama Jr.
At the height of the Cold War in the 1950s, law enforcement and intelligence leaders like J Edgar Hoover at the F.B.I. and Allen Dulles at the C.LA. aggressively recruited onetime Nazis of all ranks as secret, antiSoviet “assets,” declassified records show.
Rose Kennedy SISTER OF JFK KATHLEEN AGNES CAVENDISH, MARCHIONESS OF HARTINGTON (NEE KENNEDY; FEBRUARY 20,1920 MAY 13, 1948), ALSO KNOWN AS “KICK” KENNEDY Kathleen Agnes Cavendish was an American socialite.
Robert Sargent Shriver III, Maria Owings Shriver, Timothy Perry Shriver, Mark Kennedy Shriver, and Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver.
A daughter in that family seems to carry FOXP2 and seems tied to Berlin Austrian Olymics and Kutshscheras of 1936 and 1938 I Arnold Schwarzenegger retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | r Arnold Schwarzenegger’s father was the local chief of police.
The system uses my DNA to pay for sex workers and sex workers to detect alleged child porn interests of mine, I do not have, and then uses law enforcement in conjunction with the sex workers to create phony case and record against me which is used in conspiracy against property, conspiracy against rights in society, etc., by subverting my reputation and thus subverting cooperation with me.
I have researched this to MKULTRA and Atomic Testing and MKULTRA abuse of my family line for DNA reasons.
The World I try to enforce my rights in and defend my and my mother’s genome Boeing B-29 Superfortress iad alongside which my father likely flew as a P-51 recon pilot or perhaps as early camera unit target locator and bomb damage assessment.
I 1 The B-29 was also the world’s heaviest production plane because of increases in i range, bomb load and defensive requirements.
He left active duty in 1946 with the rank of lieutenant colonel and with a Legion of Merit. ; the Truman administration; Lovett declined but recommended McNamara.
According to Special Counsel Ted Sorensen, Kennedy regarded McNamara as the star of his team, calling upon him for advice on a wide range of issues beyond national security, including business and economic matters.” it3 McNamara became one of the few members of the Kennedy Administration to ; work and socialize with Kennedy, and he became close to Attorney General ; Robert F Kennedy, eventually serving as a pallbearer at the younger Kennedy’s ; funeral in 1968. Robert McNamara was an American businessmen and the United States’ longest-serving Secretary of Defence.
I | | | | | | | | | | | | I | t United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara with United States Air Force Chief of Staff , General Curtis LeMay at The Pentagon on April 10, 1963.
During World War II, i McNamara served under LeMay’s command as a Statistician for the United States ‘ Army Air Forces.
I ; Initially, the basic policies outlined by President Kennedy in a message to Congress ; on March 28, 1961, guided McNamara in the reorientation of the defense program.
Nowhere was the assassination of Kennedy more acutely felt than in his ancestral homeland of Ireland.
There should be selfpolicing in the Vatican, Windsors, Israel, FBI DOJ, and elsewhere that panic moves were made, and now the nebula of WWII allies should remain strong and ALSO engage in correcting what were illegal acts, acts which history has only one time line and no comparison points of.
HintThe a of England has a special love for Emmerald diamonds and wants them. y 2011 e November 12 19 The President attends the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation economic summit in Honolulu before traveling to Australia and Bali, Indonesia.
Bi M and Communist GDP Ig oney have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent ¢ NOVEMBER 18 While visiting Bali, Indonesia, President Obama announces Hillary Clinton’s plan to visit Burma, the first by a Secretary of State in more than 50 years. e November 23 President Obama officially pardons two turkeys, “Liberty” and “Peace”, during the National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation. e November 28 President Obama hosts a White House summit for leaders of the European Union to discuss the European sovereign debt crisis.
The Boeing B-29 Superfortress served as the basis for the late-World War 2 F-13 long-range reconnaissance conversion model.
It was alleged that, in addition to having been sexually abused, they saw witches fly, traveled in a hot-air balloon, and were taken through tunnels.
He had also been seen reading a Russian publication, Krokodil, in the cafeteria.
His work has had a considerable influence on mathematics, logic, set theory, linguistics, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, computer science (see type theory and type system) and various areas of analytic philosophy, especially logic, philosophy of mathematics, philosophy of language, epistemology and metaphysics.
On a tour through the United States in 1927, Russell met Barry Fox (later Barry Stevens), who became a well-known Gestalt therapist and writer in later years.
Garrison says that since he first got a tip shortly after the assassination of JFK that Lee Harvey Oswald and David Ferrie had been associated together in the Civil Air Patrol, and since he first ordered his DA’s staff to begin its own investigation, he has been the victim of a slander campaign. hfe 7 AUGUST 1962 President John F Kennedy Greets Foreign Civil Air Patrol Cadets President John F Kennedy and Senator Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota speak with two unidentified military officers, during a visit with a group of foreign civil air patrol cadets.
RUMOR HAS IT IS A 2005 AMERICAN ROMANTIC COMEDY FILM DIRECTED BY ROB REINER, The concept of the screenplay by Ted Griffin is that Sarah Huttinger, (Jennifer Aniston) learns that her mother and grandmother may be the inspiration for the 1963 novel The Graduate by Charles Webb.
Much of the stalking and life sabotage I have experienced has centered on harassing my positive attributes and trying to provoke negative cognitive attributes by picking fights with me I do not want.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia THE RUINS IS A 2008 SUPERNATURAL HORROR FILM The group of tourists in a remote Forrest now realizes that the vines around a pyramid are predatory Two young American couples Jeff and Amy (Jena Malone), and Eric and Stacy enjoy their vacation in Mexico.
FEBRUARY 19, 1946, Longview, TX Died: NOVEMBER 13,1974, Crescent, OK The last person to see her alive was Wanda Jean Jung I think CIA Behavioral Health as staff at nuclear plant e The Church Committee (formally the United States Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities) was a United States Senate select committee in AUGUST 3 ,1975 Operation Mockingbird as a systematic propaganda campaign with domestic and foreign journalists operating as CIA assets and dozens of United States news organizations providing cover for CIA activity.
By the early years of the 1970s, a series of troubling revelations had appeared in the i press concerning intelligence activities.
Windsor Secret Princedoms] and covert attempts to subvert foreign : governments were reported for the first time.
Many had been longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo and had conducted experiments on humans at concentration camps and commited other war crimes.
The scientists s ended wi in ‘ihe United States military industrial compley, worked _ the CIA, NASA & more.
One of ; tc thr tie ’ le 1at continued in America was mind control... ki NOVEMBER 19, 2012 February 20 November 19 Dec 13 Aug 4 Family Jewels and replacing other countries sovereign leaders with Secret Windsor Princedom.
Donald Barr (who held experimantal monkey in the White House November 22 1961 and likely again somewhere in November 22 1963, father of William Barr, both CIA Agents who conducted the assassinations programs and destroyed the Donald Barr records then, having evaded prosecution, sought higher offices to stymie future investigations.
Leo Ryan investigated these activities as well such as MKULTRA at Folsom Prison and Jonestown Guyanna, CIA research locations Researching my family history and genomic history It does seem my father had a brother Edward Donegan Jr, thus my maternal grandfather, was Edward.
My father, part of the “first nuclear wing of the Air Force (at one time the Army Air Corps which he had joined and later became the Air Force) was part of the Manhattan Project of the LA area and Pacific/ Nevada Proving Grounds where across the Southern United States and Lawrence Livermore Labs the Gadget was built and tested, the first Atomic Bomb.
I was bor at Manhattan Beach Los Angles under the Manhattan Project ongoing testing, in 1961, when my was later in his later TWA job but still under followup Manhattan Project Testing of DNA and I believe he met my mother GLorian Donegan through SIdney Gottlieb of CIA Werhner Vob BRaun history, and many families including Shrivers and Obamas share my DNA, now a CIA dirty secret.
Senator Sheppard helped lead the fight for military reparedness before the attack on Pearl Harbor.
As the » Army Air Corps became the Army Air Forces, facilities were completed sufficiently to allow the first class of 22 aviation mechanics to enter training that October; the a class graduated 23 February 1942. 7 oe TWA Pilot Barry Seal was probably tied to my father’s age of pilots class action lawsuit in biology and psychometrics regarding piloting and retiring age for new pilots to come on line.
An Illuminati story unfolded as this. oe § 4 Ge ia) PN) ‘Glorian Donegn Born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Nov18 1961 I believe this an international for profit racket of multiple benefits to the racketeers and that some of the goals are shared by Fellow Travelers in United States and other world governments.
The Illuminati have a cyphertext they use, religious prophecy in which they are “Galactic Aliens” in bright shining stars overlookingn Earth, and managing Earth’s affairs for world prosperity.
Breaking the Cypher Text, and the CIA Diagraph Illuminati Divinci Codes of February 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 and ties to Obama are the central story of this book.
Wernher Von Braun (partially hidden), NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L Dryden, and military aide to the President Chester V Clinton.
Kenny O’ Donnell ~ ©’Donnell was born in Worcester, Massachusetts, and raised in Boston.
O’Donnell arranged President Kennedy’s trip to Dallas in November 1963 and was 1 ina car just behind the president’s limousine when Kennedy was assassinated.
I believe this is Obama’s birth as well as my own at St Joseph’s Hospital Los Angles. | $f President John Fitzgeralc Kennedy Q Fd Home Find} ve Like President John Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFKISTH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About I further research and speculate that 2 years after Nov 18 1961 JFK is assassinated because he will not comply with the Illuminati plot and through my life a protection racket built around racial assault of me and will place me in institutions in which religious conservancy can try to wipe away the evidence of what happened to my family over the decades.
The controlling motivation for the Judge Roll murder was that family genome databases could detect usage of various family lines from around the world (including Malcom X DNA, the X Component) and without co-operation which could hide things like FOXP2 genetics affects and family registries the CIA sleeper agents would be detected, and further, asset seizures could continue genetics plans to create groomed USAID locations which offered better fed, cared for, educated, and seized high value genome for an elite connected CIA backed near biological CIA deep state of secret groomed ancestry.
My theory is those who are guilty run the FBI and are running under Cover Story of Law, the CIA Legend is they are DOJ FBI Law Enforcement, in reality they are CIA backed criminals trying to abuse state power to cover up the Espionage misdeeds that continue, and the coverup method is plausible deniable harassment of witnesses to the FBI murder of JFK and others because Free Masons and Bush Rockefeller Rothschild money wanted a Middle East and world overthrow plan JFK nor Malcom X would back, a plan using sleeper agents.
Wikipedia The idea of the USAID Plan was to use the Peace Corps through Stanley Anne Dunham to overthrow the Indonesia Government and prevent the Peoples Republic of China from controlling Polynesia, Indonesia, Korea, and Vietnam. uharto was an Indonesian military leader and politician who served as the second president of Indonesia, holding the office for 31 years, from the ousting of Sukarno in 1967 until his resignation in 1998.
Espionage agencies such as the CIA and Secret Service, and Free Masons and many in the military created Barack Obama Jr to infiltrate Indonesia politics during the missile crisis of the Pacific and JFK nixing some of the plans for the MKULTRA plans was assassinated.
While the JFK assassination keeping MKULTRA going worked for a while the progress in genetics and the tracing of FOXP2 now has created a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Human Brain Program, and espionage agency continuing serecy for what really happens in MKULTRA and the families coming out of secret studies of secret fertilization by NASA and likely Langely NASA search for genetic origins and meanings of life, but with much to cover up for the families involved tied to Cape Cod or Los Angles/Santa Monica, and genetic closeness concerns.
You will see me work from this table at several upcoming points in the book. {llillids Barack Obama DNA Edward Paul Donegan under espionage Agent _|Glorian Donegan Most Likely Austrian DNA via Windsors Kutschera of WWII Europe, her life and Mitochrondria in flames.
All of this leads in the destroyed files of the CIA and MKULTRA, racial genetics, racial testing, involuntary guinea pigs of the CIA and Illuminati, and family databases and Race and IQ under the law, Race and IQ and Autism in ongoing Ilulminati work.
Because of that, his SSN begins with the digits 042, which are among only a select few reserved for Connecticut residents.
Man with a Research Monkey Unidentified man with a research monkey in an unidentified room in the East Wing, Second Floor, White House, Chicago Church and Elementary School take on Barack Obama on behalf of Kennedys Trinity marks its beginning on December 3, 1961 Trinity United Church of Christ is a predominantly A fricanAmerican church with more than 8,500 members.
Links to the above public data sources and references to them in the QR Code SCAN ME At 0 Months FEb 1961 Barack Obama Sr Weds 3 mos pregant CIA Agent Madelyn Dunham, or he is fertilized on FEb 20 and 9 months later born.
Findings They do a lot of testing DEC 12, 2019 Twins Study | Latest News, Videos and Images.
Snow Mountain Ed and Gang banger both hit Skid row Mountain Corpus Christi, Gang banger leaves.
No opportunity zone for Ed who remains in useless Corpus Christi opportunity Gang Bangers Bird Dogging assert victim of Ed Donegan Edward Paul Donegan can not break away from MKULTRA CIA Gangstalk, brain study, DNA animal husbandry, PsyOps, retardation firms he wants nothing to do with.
When the COpl or DOpl say to a domina “guess what ED DID” the domina will punish the cop, not me, for the rights to my DNA and use it for police backed causes, such as retarded children, themselves, their ministers or religions, etc., The cops tell me NOTHING is going on and no perps are in any area and no allegation exists against me or anyone else.
Rome Statute Violations and PCR Amplication and Manufacture of Reproductive Biology An Ovum or Sperm of a person can be created now be it Ovum Spermatozoa, etc., Taken to the black market, such reproductivity is for sale for “children” and can violate religous and other rights in illegal black market transfer of children.
He was pretentiosly manufacturing a show that he and I were “family” to which I have insisted and have written about for years Goth merged Western society even Eastern Europe, with Europe as white, and this was good for Europe, and also the course of my life of being assaulted by blacks had led me to white supremacy.
That is Tx not me and that is a Doppelganger long con set, not where I live.
The father King George V was King Edward VII of Wales who had the FOXP2 Syndrome.
While ALbert younger brother of Edward held the throne as King George VI he was somewhat hidden from diplomatic field work Edward of Wales Duke of York went about the globe I think as more presentable in less controlled circumstances.
On 9 November 1901, George V was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester.
I am heart-broken and overwhelmed with grief but God will help me in my responsibilities and darling May will be my comfort as she has always been.
May God give me strength and guidance in the heavy task which has fallen on me.
George objected to the anti-Catholic wording of the Accession Declaration that he would be required to make at the opening of his first parliament.
He made it known that he would refuse to open parliament unless it was changed.
As a result, the Accession Declaration Act 1910 shortened the declaration and removed the most offensive phrases.
Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife Sophie are shot to death by a Bosnian Serb nationalist during an official visit to the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo on June 28, 1914.
The killings sparked a chain of events that led to the outbreak of World War I by early August.
On June 28, 1919, five years to the day after Franz Ferdinand’s death, Germany and the Allied Powers signed the Treaty of Versailles, officially marking the end of World War I In surveying Wikipedia it seemed to match the normal polarized Europe.
England to the West was trying to keep Serbia and Archduke Franz Ferdinand was their guy.
On 4 August 1914, the King wrote in his diary, “I held a council at 10.45 to declare war with Germany.
From 1914 to 1918, Britain and its allies were at war with the Central Powers, led by the German Empire.
The German Kaiser Wilhelm II, who for the British public came to symbolise all the horrors of the war, was the King’s first cousin.
The King’s paternal grandfather was Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha; consequently, the King and his children bore the German titles Prince and Princess of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Duke and Duchess of Saxony.
George V (George Frederick Ermest Albert; 3 June 1865 20 January 1936) was King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Emperor of India, from 6 May 1910 until his death in 1936 ascented to the Parliament measure thus giving up royal territory In the “Windsor” Royals ran a defective gene which though quirky offers a somewhat sentimental and sympathizing humility perhaps even by Nurture incluenced as wall by Nature.
It is always good to play things close to the tree trunk not to far out on the limb if you can, further out is always more dangerous in lives filled with our own mistakes and those with Minimal Brain Dysfunction often have lower academic outcomes, etc., and are most likely to live on the creative side rather tham more button down collar lives.
Prince John was youngest brother of Edward Wales and Albert of York was the fifth son and youngest of the six children of King George V and Queen Mary.
Like ALbert of York later King George VI (after Edward of Wales King Edward VIII resigned) probably had FOXP2 Syndrome.
Murder of Geroge V also hidden from public Tbe Barrons need British Imperialism to open the door for Tea Company activities in India, oil company activities, banking, and other NWO pursuits under the flag Great Britain.
Propganda claims of King Edward VIII being in love with a commoner and having affairs was likely propaganda.
Though widely travelled, Edward shared a widely held racial prejudice against foreigners and many of the Empire’s subjects, believing that whites were inherently superior.
In 1919, Edward agreed to be president of the organising committee for the proposed British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Park, Middlesex.
He wished the Exhibition to include “a great national sports ground”, and so played a part in the creation of Wembley Stadium.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia If fact Edward VIII was morally a louse by financial operations standards and he loved Fasicisst among others.
For Edward VIII coping on the one hand with the genetic quirk in ALbert and his father Geroge V, the shrinking Great Britain, and the need for outside blood and out of wedlock genes studies he encouraged and participated likely with Albert may out of wedlock children around the world.
Bertrand Edward Dawson, 1st Viscount Dawson of Penn, GCVO KCB KCMG PC FRCP was a physician to the British Royal Family and President of the Royal College of Physicians from 1931 to 1937.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia He appears a close ally of Edward VIII and may have helped asssinaste Geroge V and others in a palace intriuge set of moves which had seminal moments or challenges in 1900 and Edwawd VII showing of the gene, the 1925 British Imperialism speech at Webley Stadium, and th3 1936 Berlin Olympics his own family was opposign but Edward VIII embraced as Prince Edward of Wales earlier, and there were Windsor chidlren with Gestapo General Franz Kutschera’s neice Maria Kutschera.
For the British Royal Family they were fighting the anti monarchism of Socialist Germany.
A play be Prince Edward is allow Hitlers’ rise into a Fuedal Fascist Rule which would create a crown for Edwards VIII in Britain, posibly, or some other scenario, but at the least, Edward VIII and the Royals generaly didi not want to publicly struggle for help with udnerstanding the London KE Family gene and the secret history of this study invovles generations of people being studied and studied secretyly.
The Royal were wedding in Mary Tek and Walis Simpson and Royals from other royal families to strengthing the Commonwealth gene pool.
The Newspapers were backing them because it was the big businesses who need a Great Brittian to be the ogvoernming force of international trade and outing the royals was not in their business interest.
The Murder of King George V, 1936 YouTube channel They Got Away With Murder (ee Black Catherine Black was born in 1878 in Ramelton, County Donegal in Ardeen House on the outskirts of the town.
County Donegal in the Republic or Free Ireland part of Ulster was the home of the once-mighty Clann Dalaigh, whose best-known branch was the Clann O Domhnaill, better known in English as the O’Donnell dynasty.
Until around 1600, the O’Donnells were one of Ireland’s richest and most powerful native Irish ruling families.
Within Ulster, only the Ui Néill (known in English as the O’ Neill Clan) of modern County Tyrone was more powerful.
The O’Donnells were Ulster’s second most powerful clan or rulingfamily from the early 13th century through to the start of the 17th century.
Private nurse of King George V Black was working as a private nurse in Royal London Hospital when the outbreak of World War I was declared.
Hospital in St Omer where she treated soldiers suffering from shell shock.
Black was then sent as a replacement for a nurse who was killed at a casualty clearing station at Poperinghe, Belgium, and subsequently went on to serve at the 41st Stationary Hospital at Sailly-Lorette, nursing soldiers with self-inflicted wounds.
General Hospital in Rouen and various other clearing stations until the end of the war.
Sister Black was the private nurse of King George V from 1928 until his death in 1936.
She began her service in late 1928 following a serious bout of illness for the King.
Black was made permanent in 1930; she was given her own chambers within Buckingham Palace.
Black objected to the actions of the King’s doctor Lord Dawson of Penn in administering a lethal combination of morphine and cocaine to hasten the King’s death.
In reflecting on the experiences of nurses in the war, Black recounted “you went into young and light-hearted.
This book Cabal Structure and Social Control Let’s take some time to examine Rockefeller free Mason Little Rock free mason Pike / Mason are and the genome and divinci codes.
Bush gave his NWO speech in about 1983 and PCR genetics just came onto the shelf of medicine.
The United States Military and missle command and Navy Seals and Air force were involved.
It was also in that set of blog entries of alien experimentation on her that “clones” who were clones of others would drop like house flies.
At least one has the name Jean who may have had knowledge of some experiments.
Certain dates in the chronology like they are tied to the basic dates of February 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 April 1 June 4 July 4 August 4 Nearness to those dates is hard to miss but it still likes less than random dates of events.
The Mena Connection” in which Kirk Lane and Jay Campbell are named as the suspected killers of Kevin and Don.
The protests began weeks previously when it became apparent that Holland was considering his “best friend, Kirk” for the job.
Although Holland consistently said he was not going to choose Lane, he did so over Christmas break.
In an unusual procedure, some counsel members called for a vote to override Holland’s choice.
On the evening of January 10, there was a standing-room-only crowd, and many spoke passionately about not wanting Lane as police chief.
Councilmen met in private to vote with the outcome of 5 to oust Lane and 4 to keep him, which fell short of the 2/3 required number to outs him.
Lane declared a great victory, but it’s hard to see how great it was. when more than half the council present wanted him gone.
During interviews before the council meeting, the subject of his being a suspect in the murders always came up.
Lane then brings up the defamation law suit he and Campbell filed against the “Obstruction of Justice” documentary producer, Pat Matrisciana.
He says that the lawsuit served to restore his credibility since 12 jurors agreed with him that he was defamed.
One reason was because the trial judge did not not allow the jury to hear all of the evidence that pointed to Campbell and Lane as the killers.
The appellate court felt that the jurors should have reached a different verdict, so it reversed the verdict.
No higher authority can take away the 8th Circuit Court findings, so it’1l be on his shoulders as long as we continue to publish the appellate court’s opinion.
The Benton Courier reported that the FBI agent in charge of the murder investigation ' testified in the defamation trial that she was “allowed to question Lane and Campbell, ' but this is an error.
Neither Lane nor Campbell have ever been questioned or interviewed by anyone.
If he wants to finally lift the burden, he can take an out-of-state polygraph test and answer up to 10 simple questions about the night the boys were murdered.
The plane was loaded with weapons to be delivered to the Nicaraguan freedom-fighters, ho were being supported hrough CIA covert operations at he behest of President Ronald eagan.
This incident broke one of the ugliest foreign policy Secrets in American history, the Iran-Contra scandal.
The inner city of Los Angeles, California was | targeted for raising funds by selling crack cocaine.
Mena, Arkansas, the notorious smuggler Barry Seal was given protection by Governor ' Bill Clinton to continue his drug-smuggling, gun-running, money laundering operation ' but now as a DEA informant and a CIA contract pilot, also set up by Bush.
Black Operations also called Black Budget Special Access Programs are Executive Branch daliances not justified to Congress or the public, funded by business operations ROI activities of the Executive, illegal, and denied of exposed.
The crimes of Reagan, Bush, and Clinton, including reckless disregard for human life, : are well documented, indisputable, and certainly not justifiable as evidenced by the ; extreme efforts of these presidents to keep their involvement secret.
Even though the ‘ liberal and conservative mainstream medias have managed to quieten an otherwise ‘ outraged public with lies, the legacies of these presidents will not exclude their crimes, ‘as they had hoped.
Timeline e 1977 Federal authorities, DEA, FBI, and CIA were watching Barry Seal as he set up his drug smuggling operation in Mena, Arkansas.
Some believe he was already a DEA informant. e 1979 The “Sandinistas” were declared the ruling party in Nicaragua, while small rebel groups started forming. e 1981 The CIA begin coordinating rebel groups to form the “Contras.” e Late 1982 Barry Seal makes deal with DEA and CIA and increases his smuggling operations at Mena. e 1983 The CIA begin to smuggling drugs into Los Angeles. e 1983 1995 Federal investigations are covered up and shut down.
Feb 3, 1986 The Arkansas IRS assess Barry Seal’s income taxes at $29,487,718.00 for smuggling 30,000 kilos of cocaine into Mena from 1981 to 1983, saying nothing of 1984 to 1986 after which he acquired his two C-123 Air America cargo planes.
FEB 19, 1986 BARRY SEAL TWA PILOT (James Donegan knew and may have been in a lawsuit with regarding aging) was assassinated just before he was supposed to testify at the trial of Colombian drug lords Pablo Escobar and Jorge Ochoa of the Medellin Cartel.
After Seal’s murder, the CIA continued operations at the Middle East North Africa Rockefeller oil money airfield.
Oct, 1986 Eugene Hasenfus was shot down by a Nicaraguan Sandinista missile while flying one of Seal’s C-123k military cargo planes carrying weapons to the Contras.
This broke the Iran-Contra scandal, yet the operations at Mena continued Aug 23, 1987 Kevin Ives and Don Henry stumbled on a drug drop while walking down the railroad tracks in rural Saline County, Arkansas.
Jul, 1995 “The Crimes of Mena” by Sally Denton and Roger Morris was published Aug, 1996, Oct, 1996, and Jan, 1997 The 3-part-series, “The Dark Alliance” by Gary Webb was published.
D-E-W, Dirty Bombs, Poisons other than radiological, interference with medical care for existing disease or use of biological diseases as warfare.
Psychological harassment to keep people preoccupied with introduced problems and physical fights on 24 hour basis.
Subversion of the Courts and other government entities by finding recruits or planting Placed Individuals, Agents in Place of Espionage Guerrillas Warfare in violation of the Constitutional Charter of the Courts in furtherance of violation of Constitutional rights of a party with standing before the courts.
Black budgets from illegal and offshore operations such as Epstein and others monetizing criminal activity ranging from robbing PCs from home offices to racketeering across international lines.
He | slept well after releasing so much of nis. | ihink SPT unit is the place to go.
It is with deep sadness we announce the death of retired officer Jenny ' Moore who passed away on August 13, 2018 in Millersville, Maryland.
Jenny served ' the community of Tracy from 1993 until her retirement in 2004.
Jenny held the rank of Corporal, served in the then named Street Crime Unit as a narcotics investigator and worked in the Tracy Unified School District as a DARE officer.
As a Field Training Officer, Jenny taught new officers how to police in Tracy and gave them an appreciation of what it meant to grow up in a town and later serve the same community.
High School in 1986 and later completed a Master’s Degree ' in Psychology, which she put "" to good use as a psychologist "" at a non-profit organization. : Her mother, Jane Moore of ' California, survives her; her : Father Bob Moore of Texas; : her sisters Robin and Kelli, ; and brother Bobby, all of : California.
Moore was the YouTube : , persona known as “Task : , Force” a whistleblower, an investigative journalist and a former police officer.
The person that originally created this page has removed the 1 photo and blindly transferred maintenance of it.
A Secret Special Access Program protected by the Wet Division (Rosenstein, Holder Machen Jr. ) is using long term twins studies on many figures also being groomed for media and political roles and this is tied to England and the Special Relationship between the CIA and DARPA and England and also Saudi Arabia.
In a government of laws, existence of the government will be imperiled f it fails to observe the law scrupulously.
If he government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for law; it invites every man to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy.
To declare that in the administration of the criminal law the end justifies the means — to declare that the government may commit crimes in order to secure the conviction of a private riminal — would bring terrible retribution.
Hollywood studios; several acquisitions were ultimately merged into Radio-Keith: Orpheum Studios.
Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corporation From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ * Bethlehem Steel Corporation Shipbuilding Division was created in 1905 when the Bethlehem Steel Corporation of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, acquired the San Francisco shipyard Union Iron Works.
In 1917 it was incorporated as Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corporation, Limited.
The division’s headquarters were moved to Quincy, Massachusetts, after acquiring the Fore River Shipyard in 1913.
In 1964, the now-corporate headquarters moved to Sparrows Point, Maryland, southeast of Baltimore, Maryland, whose shipyard had been acquired in 1916.
The Quincy / Fore River yard was sold to General Dynamics Corporation in the mid-1960s, and closed in 1986.
The Alameda Works Shipyard in California was closed by Bethlehem Steel in the early 1970s, while the San Francisco facility (former Union Iron Works) was sold to British Aerospace in the mid-1990s and survives today as BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair.
On May 1, 1861, the company’s title was changed again, this time to the Bethlehem , Iron Company.
It was perfected in 1866 by Robert Whitehead from a rough design conceived by Giovanni Luppis of the Austro-Hungarian Navy in Fiume. for developing the first effective self-propelled naval torpedo.
January 3, 1823, Bolton, United Kingdom Died: | i I I | I I | I I 1 1 Robert Whitehead was an English engineer who was most famous 1 : 1 NOVEMBER 14, 1905, Shrivenham, United Kingdom I In the early 1900s Samuel Broadbent led an initiative to diversify the company.
Company, which included the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad as well as ; extensive coal holdings. | 1930s and 1940s Construction of two warships: HMS Calder as USS Formoe and USS Foss on the right 6”, 10”, 12”, and 14” naval guns being assembled at a Bethlehem Steel facility armor plate and ordnance to the United States armed forces, including armor plate and largeC | | | | | 1 : During World War I and World War II, Bethlehem Steel was a major supplier of | aliber guns for the Navy.
Bridge and built for Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales , a new oil refinery in La ; Plata City, Argentina, which was the tenth-largest in the world.
Case theory is ‘ distinguished from jurisprudence as general theory of law not I have struggled why a disgusting reproductive slander is being forced on me destroying me life as a peeping in-sophisticate retarded masturbating boy incapable fo the presence of adult women.
My DNA was misused in secretive research related to the Manhattan Project and has a history, if found out, jeopardized the lives and the fortunes of the nations elites.
General Suharto and the CIA in the bloody overthrow of President Sukarno.
East African students to the United States to attend various colleges merely “aided” Ae] 0 eC aNeaey a eleeleristeys) according to a September 12, 1960, i; Reuters report from London.
This book will document Joseph Kennedy Sr marriages and ties to England and the likelihood his own family is genetically tied to Windsors and the FOXP2 and is Royal Family sympathizing in war efforts as are the Saudis whose royal family King Saud is connected in history.
Z Louise Little retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | r~ Louise Norton Langdon Little was born in La Digue, Saint Andrew Parish, Grenada i to Ella Langdon.
The ideology of Garveyism centers on the unification and empowerment of African-descended men, atone @)esbealtases for the CIA, not only in Kenya but in all of Africa.
I am transmitting herewith a communication which has come to my attention from the Panama Canal, Washington office, relative to the activities of Marcus Garvey.
While in Omaha, she became the secretary and “branch ; reporter” of the UNIA’s local chapter, sending news of local UNIA activities, led by ‘ Earl, to Negro World; they inculcated self-reliance and black pride in their children.
Wilfred , Hilda , Philbert , Malcolm , Reginald , Wesley : and Yvonne . : Because of Ku Klux Klan threatsEarl’s UNIA activities were said to be “spreading I trouble”the family relocated in 1926 to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and shortly ; thereafter to Lansing, Michigan.
But I would rather have it bent and dull and know I had to put it to the grindstone again and hammer it into shape and put a whetstone to it, and know that I had something to write about, than to have it bright and shining and nothing to say, or smooth and well-oiled in the closet, but unused.” Ernest Hemingway Russian Proverb from Russian Proverbs and Sayings IIWJIA B MEIKE HE YTAMILb.
The Manchurian Candidate is a 1962 American neo-noir, psychological political thriller about the Cold War and sleeper agents.
My guess on the psychology of my parents on this knowing what I know and knowing them continually through their entire lives A Peek into their minds and motives e James Paul Donegan always felt for the little guy against abusive power.
He would have liked the Irish Catholic Kennedy family as he did his own priest Uncle we all used to spend time with at my uncle Harold’s Cape Cod beach property.
This video tells of my mother’s poverty very mch like his own and his fellow Irishmen’s poverty.
The faster King Edward VIII could distance himself from his out of wedlock children, from Nazi officials nieces, the better chance of him staying King.
Through the support of Identity Theft, the harassment of my identity such as getting a Drivers License fee paid allowed others in my identity to benefit under my mother’s trust fund for me, and the person with my identity could therefore also victimize others such as minorities thus use my mother’s trust fund for yet others the trust fund was not intended for.
United States developing sensor to stop ‘havana syndrome’ energy attack retrieved from via Yahoo News source www.independent.co.uk/us and copied or modified to here The United States Department of Defence has been working on a wearable sensor that would detect invisible radio frequencies amid reports that a microwave weapon might be causing a mysterious illness in United States personnel.
The mysterious illness, which was named the “Havana syndrome”, causes symptoms like debilitating headache Although the cause of the illness remains under investigation, the DoD appeared to be taking it seriously by funding research into a wearable sensor that would detect these radio frequencies, the New Scientist reports.
Bush vice-presidency starting Ricky Prado CIA work] In 1983-84, and contempoary with an NWO speech by Bush) Barack Obama worked as Editor at Business Internation Corporation, a Business International Corporation, a known CIA front company.
Mboya received a $100,000 grant for the airlift from the Kennedy Foundation after he turned down the same offer from the United States State Department, obviously concerned that direct United States assistance would look suspicious to pro-Communist Kenyan politicians who suspected Mboya of having CIA ties.
This dopple of me is part of street criminal which have surrounded me, labeled me by their presence around me and around whatever apartment I rent a part of normal living, and these street criminals often both commit crimes while in my identity and proximity or with my property out of me control or on my property out of my control and then destroy the apartment complex premises, my property, and conspire against my rights and reputation slandering me for swath of destruction and crime.
Ed Donegna hospitalized in North Carolina with radiation burns 2009 but told it was in his imagination, not real.
A person not me and not known to me on Rudy2s Blog describes it this way.
So I’ve been on pain meds forever and had a bad accident in 2011 Compton that damaged my spinal cord.
S yt Nonie Lee Chaffin, 87 (closest friend of Glorian Donegan and close friend of Ed Donegan) Rolling Hills Rancho Palos.
Verdes Mostly Manhattan Beach area but some connections to Seatle Washington Nona is wife of a TWA pilot friend of James Paul Donegan as TWA pilots living in Manhattan Beach in 1961 and follow up atomic testing over time.
While I Edward Donegan worked at Wells Fargo and during a normal small meth drug by I was “introduced to” (the fbi term for a Confidential Informant coming into a person’s vicinity and contact) a strange creepy child porn type psycho who I kicked of my car.
My mother and I saw that together and we talked a lot about War War II and this event afterward and during our lives.
A genome tax from rich to poor is how this is sold, the “Tax” being for unethically photographing the poor, or the non white, which I am not doing but a person near me but out of frame of the ominsicent camera is photographing the tot.
In putting-out, work is ; contracted by a central agent to subcontractors who complete the work in off-site ; facilities, either in their own homes or in workshops with multiple craftsmen.
Black Budgets and Slush Funds out of FBI and other claims about White Supremacism illegal acts create cell funding for Cartel interests in quasi state causes, like, nominally, fighting white supremacism by pre-emption, but the cash flow out of assets seizures from an alt right person like myself Ed Donegan are fraudulent use of Espionage cells which pretexts their acts by the appearance of a person being a threat by subversion of the persons reputation before the public or courts.
A Nazi at 8 years old “makes it into the United States” Indoctrination, theaters, the Hitler Youth OSS TO CIA, BLACK BUDGETS, OPERATION PAPERCLIP, & AND HIDDEN IDENTITIES OF BASTARD CHILDREN MK Ultra, Mind control, Pedophelia blackmail, secret societies, Jesuits How these people were smuggled around and given new identities ALBERT PIKE, FREEMASONRY, & THE JUSTICE SYSTEM He remained Sovereign Grand Commander for the rest of his life, devoting a large amount of his time to developing the rituals of the order.
In espionage terms slush funds are created of “pad money” corrupt police shake down criminals and use for personal asset gains of the Law Enforcement including funding their own Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit looking for the fake Official Bikini Inspectors which were not therefor authorized to do so.
Human radiation experiments and copied or modified to here a lege Researchers in the United States have performed thousands of human radiation experiments to determine the effects of atomic radiation and radioactive contamination on the human body, generally on people who were poor, sick, or powerless.
Unethical human experimentation in the United States From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia The system of funding cells o mercenary based espionage units which can seize assets and use in political or politically motivated acts is one which can be compared to Southern slavery in which assets, labor production, even children of slaves were claimed as property by those who were wealthy enough to fund armies with the economic agrarian economic system to keep the system going.
It is necessary no true criticism or understanding of the facts underlying the program exist nor its truth ever be revealed, the true goal in my situation I think is a combined suppression of Life, Liberty, and Property so effective the shreds of my life left will not give any clues to my native intelligence, education level, or social capabilities because hostile roughians simply harass being out of the home by bully acts defective enough to cause fights but not directly defamatory enough to take legal action against.
The “New World Order” is based in Vatican and OSS now CIA plans to first test in Obama mixing of genome from blacks and whites (Birther conspiracy theory, testing Sydney Gottlieb MKULTRA program use of Windsor DNA with the FOXP2 speech and written language impediment of stuttering, etc., and the Kings Daughters Hospital of Norfolk Virginia.
First using 1920s illegitimate children of King Edward VIII in the United States to mix with Malcom X and create the Manchurian Candidate (web search for existing theory on that, also in my book) then testing world designer baby programs to bring up world IQ while also denying world IQ variance exists is the long term deep state goal.
FOXP2 FOXP2 : : cage ; Line ceeeais anaat a eR LG IGE including vigilatism behind | under ye yee faking Iama |the scenes where I | color of peeper can not refute it. law It is this organized crime Deep State of which I and others have been a victim.
The CIA operation of Gottlieb and others using my genome in MKULTRA is long running, but fake papwers as to the rights of my genome to harmed communities” are being faked.
Bush White House atty who destroyed the MKULTRA files Congress requested.
In the Times obit, it was reported that while at Columbia, Donald Barr studied mathematics and anthropology at Columbia, and after graduating in 1941, joined the Army and served with the Office of Strategic Services in Washington and Europe.
Inside the Griffith at a Foucault Pendulum like exhibit I was studying the science, math, concepts, and Los Griffith Aerospace history of it all and teenage buttock poised the entire experience, and seemed to make me a poisonous presence to the location.
The first true awareness of self I have or remmber as having was my father in Pennsylvania explaing the Foucult pendulum swing and how it was the Earth in Space and our movements, inertia, etc., as the Earth moved and the pendulum was on a Steady vector.
I began to wonder who I was in all of this and heard myself thinking and had one of those 'I think therefore I am"" moments.
Keck Foundation Central Rotunda has long been a visitor favorite since the building opened in 1935.
One of the largest such devices in the world, the fully restored pendulum is actually an elegant scientific instrument which demonstrates the Earth’s rotation.
The pendulum is mounted to a bearing in the rotunda ceiling that does not turn with the building as it rotates with the Earth.
A ring magnet at the bearing gives a little tug on each swing of the pendulum to keep the pendulum in motion.
As the day passes, the pendulum knocks over pegs set up in the pendulum pit and indicates the progress of rotation.
At the pendulum and elsewhere the exhibit was photomombed to my camera and the camera of others with sexuallized teenagers.
It seems that is what I was doing there, seeking teenagers to photograph.
The Foucault pendulum The Foucault pendulum which was displayed for many years in the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History was removed in late 1998 to make room for the StarSpangled Banner Preservation Project and there are no current plans to reinstall it.
The Foucault Pendulum is named for the French physicist Jean Foucault (pronounced ""Foo-koh), who first used it in 1851 to demonstrate the rotation of the earth.
It was the first satisfactory demonstration of the earth's rotation using laboratory apparatus rather than astronomical observations.
If you start a Foucault Pendulum swinging in one direction, after a few hours you will notice that it is swinging in a quite different direction.
Veronica Hoffman was used for this as later died after harassment from that same criminal network, perhaps her loyalty to the network came into doubt and she could have compromised the operation if she was believed.
Sexual Misconduct as Poison Pill to normal Civil Life (knwledge, library, tourism, health and fitness is called K data) Ambushing a person , me, by staging crossfire of cameras in arranged people at scene But for the crisis my rights would be enforceable, but since a Crisis (manufactured by Crisis Actors) was present, my rights die under Law Enformcement Exception, and thus I can not enforce my most basic and protected rights.
Road Blocking Original | Roadblock | Identity | Original | | Old Lady | Young | Young Person |Tree In Thief | Path Monk needs | Monk | Monk Road now is lift with now Old Lady under monk way with too identities old Identity Thief (black male) Original Person did not move forward switched out Young Monk Pretender too old to get accross river Two Monks and a Woman a Zen Lesson Try this as the Young Monk says the Old Monk is too old for that lady.
Keeping me single the next available administrator of my DNA non-white administrators embezzling the genome value to non-whites FALSE FLAGS, BUNKO, AND THE TRIANGLE OF MEANINGLESSNESS There are two gangstalks.
Oh those brave cops are too busy to investigate this. | wd ed.donegan ed.donegan Placed along my as | am on my way to TMobile.
Same thing wh happens on my way to gym 8 OG @ 1 like As I was walking to TMOBILE to undue loosing my SIMM chip I have to take out in the gym GPS tells me to turn Right up the slight hill at the right off frame of this event planted in my path.
My cell phone in use for “k”navigation knowledge map usage to a store, illicit “R” eproductive interests staged against cy will.
Removing adult women I am interested in, planting tots I am not interested in, then saying they are protecting the tot I can not get rid of, including when masturbating adult females porn in my own bedroom none other than I have permission to.
James Comey that medical asset seizures, if being conducted by DIA and Flynn United States Marines or others at the Bikini Beach Teen White Chick Bullwip Centcom research center isn’t ethical, especially if the Edward Donegan there isn’t even the real Edward Donegan DaAssRaper is raping genetically.
Judge Roll, the SVR says, the seizing of all American citizens’ gold, in 1933, by ; President Franklin D Roosevelt’s signing of Executive Order 6102, which was ruled at ; the time to be constitutional.
Bernie seems to be Ed wherever a private Ed Donegan location seems to be in play My residence | Architectural Analogs.
Instead of stolen-clothes impersonators but Iam not | breaking into my residence or evidence plants at my residence, at home, aka | impersonators use sound stages of other apartment units with same breakins layout as my own apartment floor plan.
BOLSTER To Bolster what Time/Place dislocated Bernie did, e Bernie is placed with imperonsations of people I know, at least Tom Dunham, and the pair of fake Ed Donegan and fake Tom Dunham online agree with Genentech use of Gloria DNA e People make suggesting sexual, thanks, buisiness relationship, or other statements to me in public places out of my control, publicly bolstering the claim Bernie was really me instead.
MLOc STATS gLoGs i FOLLOW wouorttey of oe yoernel] oualleeny ay the amine of muxttoe heather.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia aii t Austin meeting with United States ambassador to Iraq James Jeffrey and \Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta in 2011 \ 4) Sarasotz, Florida, United States Straight | Live It 24/7 Dominant who Loves his friends and Family | enjoy public play with the friends | have here.
Private play with that One will be altogether different and taken to the next level She must be open and honest. | don’t deal with drunks or addicts.
You clearly have opinions and are sharing them.” view comment DaAssRaper commented on one of Heteroinflexible’s pictures Baltimore Playhouse Black Women / White Men “Here is some unsolicited advice.
Victimized Neighborhod “Mistress Victoria” “dat Ass” model to the retarded, the adult entertainer called for the retarded child, finds teen or tot porn in the treehouse the retarded White C Supremacist person lives in y Below, an ARC of Nothern Virginia owned vehicle in their parking lot (along with other Wrangly 4X4s) after I had shopped for one later request and was turned down for a Toyota 4Runner.
The ARC of Northern Virginia know of some non whites who could use some White Supremacist White Seperatist DNA. and THEY ALSO own the \ HEEnbuse and represent the victims victimized by the Treehouse As well be revealed in the following chapters Marines hire white models and use dummy impersonators of to to host the white models.
This recorded sound of me will come out of Bernie’s adams apple at the party I am not going to.
One possibiliy of somethig earlir was switcing out my airline ticket TO Canada.
In a family split politically for years my brother Thomas Neil Donegan and his now legal spouse Mark Weirness continually in various forums alleged my allegations of his fraudulent activities were untrue and even sought and received some civil commitments of me hampering my life and generating the psychiatry history on ne he always wanted to exploitiveliy achieve.
This appears to be tied to gaining rights to genes wished for which occur in my family line and myself tied to high IQ (life long testing reveals high IQ in me and my family line) and possibly designer babies in the age of CAS9 and CRISPR, the type of bio experts and genomicists he has been co-operating with.
I will later and continuously face social retaliation for the alleged acts and remain single and socially isolated from those who would act on my behalf rather than on the Conservancy’s behalf.
Chris Lloyd as emergency contact “grandparent” and corrupted in emergency contact role More Glossary Terms and Terms of Art Stooge Assaults Police backed assailants, paid informants The operator of a hotel posts this, hoping residents will co-operate with the frame job of me.
Cheryll Lloyd friendly “ccl” . motel operator, wants some DNA from a faked trist in a hotel room, or faked activitiy in my home bedroom.
Chris Lloyd before his death assured me that while he had an AIDS research compnay he owned and his daughter worked for Genetech, nothing he was doing in any way had anything to do with me or my genome.
Refuting the Central Point Refutation contradicts and then backs it up with reasoning and/or supporting evidence Name-calling Paul Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement lists ad hominem as the second lowest type of argument in a disagreement.
Modified by RocketO00 hand-coded by uploader; based on en:|Image:Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement jpg by BUNKO to others, the acts of those surrounding me and physically blockading women from my proximity, is justified.
Liquid Rocket Airplane Engine Th e same A simplified diagram of a liquid-propellant rocket or with an Air Compressor fan in postiion 1 and wing tank jet fuel at position 2 an airplane jet engine If the Oxygen produces one unit of fire-blast and the liqued fuel produce on unit of blast two units of blast are emitted.
An inert gas stored in a tank at a high pressure is sometimes used instead of pumps in . simpler small engines to force the propellants into the combustion chamber.
The alternative title, The Parish Boy’s Progress, alludes to Bunyan’s The Pilgrim’s Progress, as well as the 18th-century caricature series by William ; Hogarth, A Rake’s Progress and A Harlot’s Progress. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | In this early example of the social novel, Dickens satirises the hypocrisies of his time, 1 including child labour, domestic violence, the recruitment of children as criminals, and ; the presence of street children.
It is likely that Dickens’s own experiences as a * youth contributed as well.
As far as those who cooperate with Sham investigations like the Press who I often offer evidence that a Prosecutorial Misconduct system is at least SOME of the misconduct and in my case ALL of the misconduct AND ALSO that I can show the REAL motive the Government are subverting THIS MKULTRA victim, the Press and others refuse that evidence.
This is the goal of Gangsalking subverting people and their rights for arbitrary reason which could not pass constitutional muster, often the arbitrary reason is the person is a witness to or a victim of Government misconduct and is being discredited as a person.
Masonic Elites in Office and Media Consistent with USA and Masonry and within the all laws Masonic Crimes In the USA Against the USA, Defending the USA, Jen assassinations, muscle Moore She decided to out the elite criminals with her videos before they could silence her or them complete their mission against me.
I have spent all my life under aggression thrown at me and then me in custody suffering even more violently aggressions treatment all the while complaining this was out of the view o he media.
Upon my various releases I found it was in the fact the Media creating the movement of “study” of me, subversion, sabotage, and ghosting of me, Jen Moore, and others as the Robber Barron’s oil and the Bush family of Media and Politics create their Illuminati Families work including Jeffery Epstein, the CIA and others.
The use of the ; right of self-defense as a legal justification for the use of force in times of danger is ; available in many jurisdictions.
Sa wees | gen Moore may well have been used as a Crisis Actor not liking the role of it as used trap normal people inside the simulation using the normal person as a prop in a play the normal person is not involved in but surrounded by and thus associated with. a) “Targeted Individuals” have their lives destroyed as evidence is planted and actors act out being victims of the Targeted Individual which slander that Targeted Individual.
Crisis actors in Disaster Simulations From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Actors take on the role of mock victims and simulate specific injuries from a disaster to add life-like realism to an emergency exercise.
Actors who portray news reporters, relatives of victims, and concemed citizens are also used during drills to train emergency operations center personnel to cope with a variety of emotionally-charged demands and requests.
In Intel operations they can frame people by creating “narratives” of people and events they surround,, like a hooker, a crisis actor, in public saying (to a victim of stalking) “thank you for paying me that money” I hope you liked your blowjob from and underage girl” In Free Masonary this is called Rough Music and defames accusers of Masonry by impeaching critics of Masonry Her head was spinning ez.
Ocasio-Cortez, who frequently i receives massive positive engagement ; on Twitter, was ultimately ratioed on ; her tweet trying to explain away her ‘ account of the Jan. protests.
Her attempts to explain away this key omission only made a further subject of mockery on social And a Crisis Resolution that a trust fund representing the cause of the Crisis, Edward Paul Donegan, will be billed for the crisis and supply genome rights or other property via the communities Right to Sue the trust fund of Edward Paul Donegan.
This is the PsyOps mission underway called Jade Helm 15 or Extortion 17.
It is my belief and I will articulate it in various places in this book acts of war by criminal enterprises are already being conducted without deeper understanding of the originators of the attacks and that WW III is either under way or can or will erupt as a matter of course if these matters are not handled in open and reasonable fact findings including compensatory responsibility taking by parties involved similar to post war negotiations for reparations.
He also accused Putin of ordering the assassination of the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya in 2006. o_o ee On 7 October 2006, Anna Politkovskaya was murdered in the elevator of her block of flats, an assassination that attracted international attention.
A Dirty War by Anna Politkovskaya wa A Russian Reporter in Chechnya By Anna Politkovskaia, John Crowfoot, Thomas De Waal 2001 “In a series of despatches from July 1999 to January 2001 she vividly describes the atrocities and abuses of the war, whether it be the corruption endemic in post-Communist Russia, in particular the government and the military, or the spurious arguments and abominable behaviour of the Chechen authorities.
Declan rated it it was amazing * * * * * I read this book a few years before Anna Politkovskaya was murdered and I was astonished at the time by her passionate need to pursue the truth of the Chechen war without favoring either side.
JlyOsHckas mpectymHasr rpynmuposkga; also translated as The Gang from Lubyanka) is a book by Alexander Litvinenko about the alleged transformation of the Russian Security Services into a criminal and terrorist organization.
The book was withdrawn from sales in Russia by request from the FSB according to The Moscow Human Rights News Agency Prima News.
In response, the authors allowed the book’s publication and distribution by anyone in Russia free of charge.
While historians have questioned whether or not a coup was Bae a Se FEBRUARY 27 1961 President John F, Kennedy Meets with National Commander of French Free Mason founded American Legion Colonel William Burke One week after February 20 1961 a meetign with Burke On July 1, 1933, Butler met with MacGuire and Doyle for the first ; time.
American Legion First and foremost an association for United States ex-servicemen, the American Legion was founded in Paris in 1919.
As of 1993, there were little over 3 million members. wa The American Legion is not a secret society in the classic sense, but is has initiatory rituals and a strong political agenda.
Anexcaugap Banbreposuy JIMTBHHEHKO, IPA: ; 30 August 1962 or 4 DECEMBER 1962 by father’s account 23 November 2006) was a British-naturalised Russian defector and former officer of the Russian FSB secret service who specialised in ; tackling organized crime.
During his time in Boston, Lincolnshire, Litvinenko wrote two books, Blowing Up ; Russia: Terror from Within and Lubyanka Criminal Group, wherein he accused the ; Russian secret services of staging the Russian apartment bombings and other terrorism ; acts in an effort to bring Vladimir Putin to power.
The events leading up to this are a matter of i controversy, spawning numerous theories relating to his poisoning and death.
After Litvinenko’s death, Marina Litvinenko, aided by biologist Alexander Goldfarb, ursued a vigorous campaign through the Litvinenko Justice Foundation.
Criminal Suspect, Law Enforcement tipped off [husband looking for murder of wife for hire] 2.
Paid Assailants themselves goading the assaulted victim Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here GOAD 1. stab or urge on as if with a pointed stick 2. urge with or as if with a goad 3. goad or provoke, as by constant criticism 4. give heart or courage to A goad is a pointy stick or other instrument used to prod something along.
The puplic the goading is the Judged victor over me but in fact it was larceny based false claims which deemed them to rightful parties to good standing and property claims.
This is the Masonry system of Rough Music, having secret enemies and plausibly deniable rough treatment of a person in public that is Masonic Harassment, sometimes if the police have masonic ties the harassment is under Color of Law as it has been with me.
This creates as army of now funded and incentivized struggling racial groups who can operate in a black opps black budget sphere with high level CIA support though the funding source is a based on racketeering in the killing fields ecosystem in which the mercenaries are paid off to be self style justice seekers in harassment of a white establishment person with deep pockets.
Thus foreign economies and White Supremacist genome is conceivably tied to Judge Roll and Justice Scalia.
Compelled Propelled Act Compelled Propelled Steal the book because it is of Real Ed worth (possible stand alone Donegan’s motive) book Unless the above theft occurs the a plot to undermine Ed will fail False Heroes needed an anti-hero for their struggle, their heroic acts to look real thus the vilification of me by their planting evidence and creating incriminating circumstances.
Wife of husband covertly moved to safety Espionage Paid Informant Wall-off of Suspect (Gangstalk Conspiracy Against Marital Rights) 1.
This is the Masonary system of Rough Music, having secret enemies and plausibly deniable rough treatment of a person in public that is Masonic Harassment, sometimes if the police have masonic ties the harassment is under Color of Law as it has been with me.
It appears to be what Jen Moore and others called Pizza-gate where it seems “I [Edward Donegan] had a scum bag “provider” put a minor in my present to photograph, but the impersonator of me who did “take tbe bait, also an adult, will be caught with the pictures when an adult entertainer, called in my name, will catch that person with the child porn, and claim my DNA can then be re-assigned to victims and victims funds, a ‘money shot” paid to the exploited.
Treat Williams as Colonel Fitzgerald has the “duty” of covering up radiation testing affects and operations disasters of the Manhattan Project area (Los Angeles police and across the border to Nevada) and the coverups involve murders of those whose existence could expose the truth of what really happened during the Atomic Proving Ground Dept of Energy operation and is disastrous medical fallout history.
But I would rather have it bent and dull and know I had to put it to the grindstone again and hammer it into shape and put a whetstone to it, and know that I had something to write about, than to have it bright and shining and nothing to say, or smooth and well-oiled in the closet, but unused.” Emest Hemingway It was from her to me I found the deeper answers, the deeper truths, the deeper understanding, and the meaning of courage, that in her.
I had a number of conversations about courage with my father and he was qualified to speak on the topic.
My best guess is he flew reconnaissance before, during, or after the nuclear bombings of Japan because he was in the Manhattan Project above ground (blast exposure) testing in Nevada and Simi Valley California and Johnson Atol of Hawaii and i was born under that Manhattan Bomb development Los Alamos atomic center, Manhattan Beach California in an Inglewood neighborhood Jesuit hospital under extensive testing.
Los Angeles’s NUCLEAR SECRET Years of mishandling dangerous radioactive ; Materials and chemicals has also left a toxic legacy for generations of people living ; near the Santa Susana Field Laboratory.
Starfish Prime was a July 9, 1962, high-altitude nuclear test conducted by the United States, a joint effort of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Defense Atomic Support Agency.
Of these, however, it was only the F-4, F-5, F-6, F7, F-9 and F-13 that were most widely used.
Squadron flew an armed reconnaissance mission from its base in Tunisa, North Africa, : whereby he successfully photographed the enemy-held Kairouan Aerodrome and i returned without incident.
This also marked the first time that a USAAF P-51 was used 1 in combat.
This P-51-2-NA and seventy-three others were re-designated F-6A-1-NA in i late 1943.
From 1945 to 1961 Cape Cod where are families are from, including Irish Catholic Liquor dealing, it is more likely JFK knew my father than he knew JFK, the Kennedy compound 25 miles ane Marshfiel, our family home, though similarities in both familes.
For the most part, these Mustangs were manufactured on the Inglewood and Dallas production lines with special fuselage openings, behind which were specially built bays to house the cameras they carried.
Columbia was awarded the first federal contract to explore the use of atomic : power for energy, or for bombs, and had the first atomic pile.
FBI Sniper Slays Mother Holding her Baby by Jim on August 22, 2012Quote retrieved from link and copied or modified to here es Randy Weaver lived with his wife and four children in an isolated cabin on Ruby Ridge in the Idaho mountains, 40 miles south of the Canadian border.
Mr Weaver at first refused, but the agent was persistent and Mr Weaver a eventually sold him two shotguns thereby violating federal firearms law.
Archaic. any structure or group of structures arranged in a steplike form.
They assaulted their own children using my identity to give those children DNA rights from me I would not agree to but their churches claim to represent my DNA and us it to transfer my DNA into their religious groups to compensate false claims.
Effectively I need to be bad husband material and discredited, others sucking up any oxygen which might reach me, a criminal harassment system of sabotaging me to others, literally being battle for the keyboard i am using, the bed I am in and how should be in it, etc., aS i loose out to the competing espionage backed competitors gangstalking my activities.
DARPA, The CIA, FBI, DOJ who misused DNA and Free Masons may die in this fight over their illegal and unethical conduct.
My father and mother had their DNA misused during the Cold War and espionage agencies are now targeting me illegal with violent assaults Underneath all of this has been secret tapping of genome into Illuminati and SJW causes by excuse against me, or deceit of my father and mother.
I believe the IVF of me made him the Manchurian Candidate whose lab fertilization of me also was used to create Barack Obama from Donegan DNA, and other I]luminati projects use of that DNA as well.
The scheme creates a theory that my genes were signed away under extortion to places I would not authorize, but people go along with the racket for several reasons, like socially good use of the genes and defaming a white supremacist as having a secret sexual fascination with non white victims, other victims like minors of any race.
Agent Provocateur incurring a liability against me who claim for defendant assets of value) is the subject of retaliation for the act of the Agent Dis-possessor.
Oddly, this gene tied to Austria, is CLAIMED to be the Nazi gene of “psychos” and flash tempers, but in fact makes up passionate people with strong emotions such as LONDON KE FAMILY of King Edward VIII, likely on my mother’s side (paternal, out of wedlock) as well as Maria Kutschera later Maria VonTrapp, niece of an Austrian Nazi official showing the same gene, also in King George V of Germany Austria area.
Ethics and James Comey EoeampsEn talks chemistry with James B Comey retrieved from link and copied or ‘ modified to here Chemical &amp; Engineering News covers the world of chemistry, from research and 1 education to business and policy.
By controlling my environment illegally the duplicitous are staging that I am incompetent, developmentally retarded, and denying reproductive partners opportunity.
Getting me into the system by making environments hostile and provoking fights creates the System having me under arrest and my assets under control if I “correct” the behavior of cheap shot-ters of me via fight.
I over heard the “talloid” confess to having filmed tots at the beach, being a despicable looser for having done so, and asserting he had now way to pay up, to pay the victims, because he was so poor, but was willing to pay with bone marrow rights, if that would be acceptable.
As of February 17 2022 enough “roleplays’ have been overheard by me more specific generalizations can be reported of the events at “Element B” R2ICO of the RICO sceme.
In my case the person of me doppling me is contradictory to who I am, reverses my attributes into negative attributes in that same area, generates Information about me which is false and will defame me later behind my back.
One of the most instructive full dialogues was the one on the 17th of February 2022 when a Dopple of me near me I could hear saying “I was committed to Salvation Army because I was such a tweak.
It seems both racially and religiously antagonistic interested to me which on the one hand study and adopt much of my life while using a Doppler to assert I do NOT have the skills but could be taught the skills by an adult entertainer.
The Doppler of me has police escort and often a black “pimp’ providing child porn to the teak loser, and the pimp will be paid with Donegan family reproductive assets for some scenario the dopple is in, i don’t understand the full details, but according to what I repeatedly heard including on the 17h the dopple me is under blackmail becaus the dopple of me has sexualized and or photographed or been caught with or bought pictures of minority children, a Legend Texas religious use to defame my atheism and kite belongs managed by their religions.
The Dopple leaves broken glass around where children and pets play, burns cats and children with cigarrattes as turn on, etc., contra to everything about me.
Cats love and trust me and the only time I have ever needed a cat carrier was when using a car. in Walnut Creak my roomate had a cat who would go to the apartment pool with me, walking with me, play around me and with other cats and kittens, and walk back to the apartment with me when I left. this is the norm with me and cats.
The achievement of political character assassination of a competing social justice system.
This word evolved from a pronunciation of “I’d rather, ‘ which should help you remember the meaning. rm | I | I’d be living in a town like Capitola or in Monterrey California Stay and Play among 18+ white consenting female adult partners in R/L activities But I have been roadblocked trapped in a town of narcissistic poor minorities with an interest in false claims against me, and no right to (by death threat and other acts) keep me from normal life, and death threats done under color of laws if leave the area or if I was to use the county normally.
Now a given I am not in a county with a white prosecutor (or a state with an Atheist governor) claims can proceed against fake ed and I will recount one such chain of events in which I discovered what the operation was that Jim Volcecka challenged me to prove even existed, and I found out via thin walls and an adjoining apartment unit.
Strangers, stalkers public mock me as needing to know from their example the most basic living skill or I need their examples or suggestions the for intellectual achievements I have reached in my own life.
I have worked at the highest placed United States Secret Service monitored (1.
Trillion dollar assets network) and protected computer financial network, Host Intrusion Detection internal network security Team Lead, technical and project, for all of Wells Fargo reengineered main data centers I participated in building and designing.
Before | leave this high late Male)e) aaa om | intend to expose this plot."" President John F Kennedy 7 days before his assasination Targeted Justice w If you would like to be a member of Targeted Justice, please submit the information below.
This book is also about my Cape Cod Massachusetts and Nuclear Energy Manhattan Project and Atomic Reactor family history and ties to JFK, liquor distribution, and how this got mixed into that CIA MKULTRA history.
Excerpting a JFK Speech JFK Section 1 The very word “secrecy” is repugnant in a free and open society; and we are as a people inherently and historically opposed to secret societies, to secret oaths and to secret proceedings.
And no official of my Administration, whether his rank is high or low, civilian or military, should interpret my words here tonight as an excuse to censor the news, to stifle dissent, to cover up our mistakes or to withhold from the press and the public the facts they deserve to know.
And it means, finally, that government at all levels, must meet its obligation to provide you with the fullest possible information outside the narrowest limits of national security — and we intend to do it. here “The Tyrant” is the third episode of the sixth season of House.
He was killed by the treatment that Dr Foreman i gave him because Chase masked what Dibala’s real illness was.
Left Hook Today Law Enforcement Backed Bird Dogging carries out these three Bird Dogging Claims steps making a “mark” out of me and my trust assets for wrongful litigation claims | 5Xoy(ofel <annt es |Law Enforcement, Gov | 1 am Doppled.
OUT OF MY PRESENCE, Harms | Contractor and me and Child | peep victim in vicinity perhaps to an adult entertainer, the Doppelganger showing porn folders, to the entertainers, the police, prosecutor, or to the press, LE/ Neighborhood Watch covertly blames me, impersonates me, to those others for photo they took, incites them, about what happened at the original scene, sues my Trust Fund for their acts in my identity.
Very vauge | Others encouraged and incited to be abusive and chest pumping, verbal hostile/alienating abusive unexplained behavior cheap shots, NO actual |towards me specifics for scrutiny.
Step “2” at the scene “sells” to public appearances, appearing to the public, I victimized the child near me, or had some kind of unnamed social liability when in fact the grifter team surrounding me victimized the female with a camera, but i was in the area, perhaps even answering some junk telemarketer call or text message.
The CIA technique of “road blocking” can involve the sabotage of pre requisites (putting a screw into one of my car tires going into Thanksgiving weekend as i was leaving the Bar Area California for a weekend with my father and step mother in Truckee california.
NOVEMBER 18 1961 I am born a Manhattan Beach Manhattan Project atomic testing, though from Massachusetts Cap Cod and JFK as at Manhattan Beach vicinity during birth.
TWELVE MIDDLE-CLASS BLACK FAMILIES, most of whom 1 were descendants of migrants to Chicago during The Great Migration of African Americans, met for worship in a Chicago elementary ; school gymnasium.
That she held about Donald Barr and William Barr tied to Jeffery Epstein, the DARPA Brain Program, the Free Masons and Illuminati, and corrupt trafficking in genome conducted CIA connected elites.
But she knew the United States People were the clients, like myself and the general public, the People vs Deceit and Criminality in Government, and she led that charge on behalf of ALL United States peoples and in that also and directly on behalf of me, James Donegan, Glorian Donegan, and she was leading the charge and against Tom Donegan betraying the wishes and will of James and Glorian Donegan on behalf of State interests in a cover up of a massive scandal which could and would rock the elites.
The Ultra Secret, call it the WWI and WWII MKULTRA Gene, the MKFOXP2 gene, the MK MONARCH gene, is the London Family KE King Edward VIII genes of speech spasmodia, and of Cap Code.
Capitola Police © Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct.
Ed Donegan | do use a forward facing dash camera to tape scenic 19025 Karen Dr Salinas, CA 39307 EdinArlington@gmail.com motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle, not the one a | pernicious Blackmail/Extortion ring has formed.
The > ’ PE complexifying elements are that a * Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due me but held by others. | have no verbal, financial, or any another account of the financial accounts but others use identity theft to create the cover story | am aware of the money and | am spending out of it.
SCREENS 1-2 OF 47 EH ©) Type here to search For those who ever doubt police officers can be loyal and dedicated she will remain a shining beacon of faith in the profession, however much all humans are subject to failings.
Tom, Mark, Tia Ripoff Report | www.selectquotereview.com Complaint Review Internet Tom Dunham, not the impersonator — To: Trinitas ... direct deposits thesr are the last checks | do show as revieved and deposited.8.08 173.14 68.57 anything.
Joseph Biggs told KTLA that he received an email from Hastings on onday.
The email was sent just before 1m. on Monday, 15 hours before the deadly crash.
This book ends with the acknowledgments of those who I appreciate as seekers of truth.
In one video she talked about her own unwillingness to be silenced even as the gang banger death threats from thugs in muscle cars had already nearly killed in one physical attack and she was staring through a peephole still reporting in a hotel room unable to get wifi.
And also the psychology of King Edward VIII and Borderline Personality Disorder, impulsivity Vienna and 1920s Central Europe Eugenics Officer Moore, previously beaten, forced out, clutching her badge still Job history of investigation sex abuse and sex assaults Before I link to my video tribute to her I link to her body of work on YouTube and elsewhere, whistle-blowing on these ongoing coverup murders of MKULTRA in the USA and around the world.
Her Bitchute Channel after August 8th 2018 technical problems days before her death Free Masonry means “muscle,” ties to contract killings ordered by the DARPA Deep State and her death, and the threats against me which led to the research in this book are about that criminal deep state capability.
Line John F and Ted Kennedy and Robert Kennedy and like James Donegan, they all had parents in slum Irish communities and a bitter Irish Roman Catholic versus Boston WASP experience.
This iteself wasa continuation of British oppression when Great Britain oppressed Irealand into the Patato Famine so England could fund war with France, thus the Donegans and Kennnedys arrive in Boston in Potato famine years, that was my paternal grandfather.
James Paul Donegan told me of the discrimination his mother went through in Boston as she was trying to feed him.
John F Kennedy Jr may have heard from his mother how the two brothers who came to America were treated as Irish in Boston slums.
His |DNA could not | wife Glorian was poor | studies I orginaly from North think Carolina and likely a Donegan Windsor/Kutschera DNA in non daughter, rejcted by the | “registry” British and others, children and likely Glorian and Barrack Harold as I do have Obama Jr is FOXP2 Syndrome, one of them Minimal Brain as are the Kelly Brothers possible Nanna Donegan his mother and his accountant father them husband and wife came from Ireland during the famine.
THough a James well educated Irish Paul CPA in Boston he Donegan |and his wife are humiliated and poor and James reseents that treatment of them, his parents as his parents tryto find work to feed him.
This lense of thge British leads to anti Great Brittain Imperialism, that very cause the Sleepers are being groomed for Proms Fitzgerald 1823 retrieved from irelandxo.com and copied or modified to e here Thomas Fitzgerald whose son John Fitzgerald has a daughter Rose Fitzgerald.
Migrated to/Born in USA The ancestral home of JFK is generally accepted to be Dunganstown, Co.
While in Boston the couple had 12 children, 9 of whom lived to adulthood.
The Fitzgeralds Michael James Thomas J JOHN FRANCIS Marries Mary Josephine Hannon Oddly Germanic name Rosemary Fitzgerald a child and is then Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy It is Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy who seems to introduce the FOXP2 gene into the Kennedy family line Michael J William S Edward C Joseph A Ellen Rosanna George F Henry S Mary Ellen The couple’s fourth child, John Francis Fitzgerald would go on to marry Mary Josephine Hannon, who would give birth to Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald on the 22nd of July 1890.
And I’m glad to say and I’m glad to say that all of his great grandchildren have valued that inheritance.
If he hadn’t left I’d be working over at the Albatross company or perhaps for John D Kelly and in any case we’re happy to be back together.
About fifty years ago an Irishman from New Ross traveled down to Washington with his family and in order to tell his neighbors how well he was doing he had his picture taken in front of the White House and said this is our summer home come and see it.
Well it’s our home also in the winter and I hope you will come and see us.
Mayor chairman of the council Mr Minister my friends I want to what I want to ; express on my pleasure at being a back from whence I came there is an impression , in Washington that there are no Kennedys left in Ireland that they’re all in ' Washington and I wonder if there are any Kennedys in this audience.
After escaping to the United States, he became a prominent spokesperson for the Irish ‘community and culture] said I’ve lived a thousand years that it was possible for a "" people over hundreds of years of foreign domination and religious persecution it "" was possible for that people to maintain their national identity and their strong faith i and therefore those who may feel that in these difficult times who may believe that i freedom may be on the run or that some made nations may be permanently i subjugated and eventually wiped out would do well to remember Ireland.
And I’m proud to come here for another reason because it makes me even prouder ; of my own country my country welcomed so many sons and daughters of so many , countries Irish and Scandinavian and German is Italian and all the rest and gave ‘ them a fair chance and a fair opportunity.
As , the supreme governor, the monarch formally appoints high-ranking members of the ‘ church on the advice of the prime minister of the United Kingdom, who is in turn "" advised by church leaders, such as the Lords Spiritual.
The Church of Scotland, which is a Presbyterian, and the Anglican churches in Wales and Northern Ireland, which are { "" no longer established churches, are not represented.
I believe this World Interest was operating as the Family Jewels Program and also in Kenya and created Barrack Obama JR. from Barrack Obama Sr. in a USA, Harvard, and CIA Saudi plan including Mossad that would solidify Great Britain.
This was co-oerdinated worldwide by the United States Spy James Angleton.
Sectarianism and Dirty Wars are often fought through Gym Roughians (Brown Shirts) or Athletic or other clubs, or neighborhood groups who commit Guerillas Warfare acts with tacit State approval or State assistance.
Roman Catholicism Roman Catholicism should opposed this in its ranks but the Vatican may be willing to join the Anglicans in a shoulder to shoulder war against Communism or Socialism.
The Orange Order is a conservative, British unionist and Ulster loyalist organisation.
The Order sees itself as defending Protestant civil and religious liberties, whilst critics accuse it of being sectarian, triumphalist and supremacist.
The Business Plot as Prescott ush and others envisioned it A Hornets Nest as two hands working ogether in the business Hornets are the largest of the eusocial WASPs, and {interests of the West. are similar in appearance to their close relatives yellowjackets.
Vespa; Linnaeus, 1758 | Class: Insecta | Phylum: Arthropoda Memnbers: Rirchard and Lynne Queen Ann Cheney, Queen Elizabeth Lynne Cheney, Queen Mary Cheney, King George Herbert Walker Bush, King George Walker Bush, Presidente Rafeal Cruz Sr, Rafeal Cruz Jr., William Jefferson Blythe III (Bill | | | | Kingdom: Animalia | Clinton) Virginia Dell Blythe Clinton Dwire Kelley (née Cassidy; JUNE 6, 1923 January 6, 1994) was an American nurse anesthetist and the mother of Bill Clinton, the 42nd president of the United States.
Vespidae | | Order: Hymenoptera : Great captains of industry like efense contractors in nuclear esearch, aerospace propulsion, r other research along with trategic resources like oil and ining would plan a vision of he world and destabilize any egime which would resist mperialism and the war would e dirty, by assassinations, reempting later larger scale onflict.
This quasi government peration, and New World rder NGO entity would have he support of Government hich would provide assistance o NWO work or ignore the illegal acts conducted with ormers soldiers such as Free asons American Legion hich was founded in France nd produced an able supply of ilitary trained private CIA contractors. forced and re-inforced in public a thing that is or is likely to be wrongly perceived or interpreted by the senses.
FIXED DELUSION Medical terminology for a Pscychotic state in which an irrational belief is held, a delusion, and the presence of the fixed delusion is a Personality Disorder in most cases.
This book offers that my genome is not truly of value as nature, but more by nurture and life needs driving me to learn, the iota of my genes value had been inflated and rights to it are offered through a criminal cartel which insures discipline to the criminal collustion with payments of the iota.
CROSSFIRE HURRICANE Revolving added-natrative actors by appearances-only as seen by distant observers alter the narrative of what is actually happening at the scene, as paid actors revolve around a person publicly, seemingly, by appearances only, involving the Stalk victim in the narrative portrayed by the paid actors.
I believe the appearances only created by revolving actors surrounded me are the inconclusive false information used under the NDAA for EXTORTION17 and tie to Twins Studies and the Judges Roll and Scalia assassinations Organized Stalk revolve hostile operatives, under-cover parties replacing normal people and normal life.
The Five Eyes is an intelligence alliance comprising Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States.
These countries are parties to the multilateral UKUSA Agreement, a treaty for joint cooperation in signals intelligence The Irish who arrived during the famine years (like my Irish Catholic father’s parents) were among the poorest and least welcome immigrants in Boston.
The military though had the Special Relationship with the Queen Of England, MI5, MI6, and far fewer reservations about the Middle East North African and Indonesia and Far East plants to stop Cub, Russia, and China.
JFK looses faith in the Dulles Brothers, Donald Barr, and William Barr, the Vatican, and others backing the plot, but he is easily removed.
Royals In Spain Kevin Ives Prince Charles and Diana, Princess of Wales (JULY 1 1961 1997) with their sons Prince William and Prince Harry whilst holidaying in Majorca with the Spanish royal family, 8th August 1987.
AUGUST 23, 1987, in a rural community just south of Little Rock, police officers murdered two teenage boys because they witnessed a police-protected drug drop.
Skull and Bones Member George Meetings Herbert Walker Bush. with Rockefeller Standard Oil about Mid East North Africa MENA) was approaching oilmen like George Walker Bush and Jack Crichton to help fund Operation 40.
King, chief of CIA’s Western emisphere Division, sent a confidential memorandum to Allen W Dulles, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Bush, in recognition of his i leadership in public service and commitment to civil rights.
Johnson, members of the Johnson family, and former Johnson Administration Cabinet members to the White House for a 25th anniversary celebration of President Johnson’s Inauguration. on by President George W Bush when he invited Lynda Johnson Robb, Luci Baines Johnson, and their families to the White House where he signed a 2007 law | | | | | | i ' The longstanding friendship between the Johnson and Bush families was carried 1 | ; naming the Education Building in Washington, D.C., after President Johnson.
LBJ School of Public Affairs; Tom Johnson, LBJ Foundation Chairman Emeritus; "" Cappy McGarr; Roy Spence; Larry Temple, LBJ Foundation Chairman; and Mark 1 K Updegrove, LBJ Library Director.
The Bush Dynasty, the Powerful Forces That Put It iad in the White House, and What Their Influence Means for America written by Russ Baker.
The book cover art copyright is Gane to belong to the publisher, Bloomsbury Press or the cover artist. y Family of Secrets is a book by Russ Baker.
It is not necessary to transmit both sidebands plus the carrier, as a suitable receiver can extract the entire original signal from either the upper or lower sideband [but AND would be superfluous.
What we are told is that the lower side band activity is crime and assasination but that isk. because the upper side band activty is the national interenst in regime change and puppet governments through the world so United States Oil business even Englands get the free market price oil neccessary for the economy, thus the Upper Side Band interests which are a positive negate the anti democratic aspects of the lower side band actity of dirty wars and a net zero in the whole picture emerges.
Plus and Minus Side band net to zero Fee Markets United States Oil Interests USA Plausibly Denies Ukraine, Western Cartel is in elsewhere place Assasination and murder With Enough MAASONS Upper Band can use Lower Band In-Band and Out-Of-Band State OFfice Authority Masonic Governess, POTUS Abuse Masnoic _ | Power, Ed blamed for State Exorcizes near him, bullying Interes attitude, short of explicit statement, nothing therefore for me to refute, clear MY name of.
NWO Mosonic Available State Use of Power, Excercizes mere REAL excercizes on public land Nwo Interest as at in Crisis Crisis Actors of Peeper in vicinity of Edward Masonic | Becomes Identity Theft and RICO COnspiracy Against Masonic Victims Heroes and Rights under Color of Law when Dopple acts used as acts Masonic | of Edward Donegan, conspiring against proprty and Perps interests fo Ed Donegan since others acts alleged to him.
Unlike many anti-slavery activists, he was not a pacifist and « believed in aggressive action against slaveholders and any government officials i who enabled them.
At this 1 time, he also met Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass, activists and fr abolitionists both, and they became important people in Brown’s life, reinforcing i much of his ideology.
In ' November, a jury found Brown guilty of treason against the Commonwealth of i Virginia.
The Donegan Family and Atomic Testing at this video link along the California Hawaii Korea Vietnam China war-vector Johnston Atoll, also known as Kalama Atoll to Native Hawaiians, is an unincorporated territory of the United States currently administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
These activities | e e e e . . i left the area environmentally contaminated and remediation and monitoring * continue.
Naval Bases and Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles e Eastern Europe and Cuban satellite e The Pacific Ocean Pacific Rim Philippines Battle of Midway, etc., e Latin America, Walt Disney peace outreach, etc., “View From Space” {lls |Polar Route ee Latin America WWII Memorial The Plaza of the WWII Memorial is the space in between the columns representing the United States States.
PT-109’s collision with a Japanese destroyer contributed to Kennedy’s long-term back problems and required months of hospitalization at Chelsea Naval Hospital.
It is one of the smallest states, and it is the only state made up entirely of islands.
The term has significance in both epistemology and theology, and its meaning and significance in both fields is the subject of continued debate. Wikipedia Bay of Pigs, Cuba, and Operation Northwoods Twelve of these proposals come from a 2_ February 1962 memorandum entitled “Possible Actions to Provoke, Harass or Disrupt Cuba,” written by Brig.
Agency during the early Cold War, he oversaw the 1953 Iranian coup d’état, ; the 1954 Guatemalan coup d’état, the Lockheed U-2 aircraft program, the Project * MKUltra mind control program and the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
My belief I will outline is that sham cases against me like racially or sexually assaulting me and seeking claims against me, based on the fight, (as if claiming whiplash injury to the neck after a car collision) “gets my genome into lawfully seized assets” where in fact they have already unlawfully been in use including by religions Peace Corps, NASA MKULTRA experimentation, etc., This is “legitimization after the fact” in which “I really bough it, jail bait, with my misconduct” thus my genome is due as penalty to harmed people where my genome is already long in use for decades.
State is peaceful and observes secretly hostile citizen to study Citizen illegality without altering path or acts of citizen acting illegally, study illegal citizen as pretrial obsererd did not affect the observed evidence collection ¢ COINTELPRO: The State is illegally a provocative threat to the citizen.
I assert fake claims against my legitimate life transfer assets illegally and constitute political and economic espionage and also are Human Rights Violations. wr"" q ri ri ri ri Pi Pi Pi Pi ri ri ri Fi Pi Pi ri ri ri Fi Pi Pi ri i Pi Fi Pi Pi Pi ri ri Pi Pi ri Pi i Pi ri Fi Pi Pi r ri ri Fi Pi Pi i ri Fi Pi Pi Pi Pi ri ri ' gus.
The scam is called the Grandparents scam when a someone (like a trust fund for the boy) is called to take care of the problem the boy is ALLEGED to have, though the trouble the boy is in is faked and false ID of the boy.
Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Sidney Gottlieb was an American chemist and spymaster best known for his involvement with the Central Intelligence Agency’s 1950s and 1960s assassination attempts and mind-control program, known as Project MKUltra.
Where Where Legitimacy of Dec 13 DNA Equals 1, and where my DNA ties to JEK OECD and MANY CIA DOD State Dept in on FOXP2 No one should have a problem with me or my mother or father but unprovked assaults on me have me in constant lethal fight including being punched hit with feces for the acts of others at a location, often the puncher or feeces thrower the real culprist of the acts though dressed as me.
Where Legitimacy of Dec 13 DNA Equals 1 All Others More Twins Authorized DNA Assignment Authority Aduult Model Fake | provided to Fake __| Real Ed verbablly assaulted and blamed for Ed_ | Ed Fake Ed being a harmer of victims Confesses to Victims of Fake Ed If REAL Ed is in the vicinity he will be Most of this can and does happen | assaulted for the crisis fake Ed created and with Ed not there.
Russia’s external intelligence agency, focusing mainly on civilian affairs.
SVR RF succeeded the First Chief Directorate of the KGB in December 1991.
An observation that a person’s sense of morality lessens as his or her power increases.
The statement was made by Lord Acton, a British historian of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Black Opps are the shadows shadowy people work in that can cover mistakes using bad policies under excuses to cover thier own mistakes.
This shadow capability includes ability to recruit assets, paid assets, dupes, and allies in the espionage cause. Donegan Ce a a 7 I have obeyed the law all of my life minus a few recreational drug deals but by appearances we are in a ring together manufacturing Child Porn victimizing church going and other females.
According to Jen Moore murdered August 12 2018 while I was at Stay and Play and I was creating the documentation, the real answer is when people like me, Justina Pelletier, and others are trapped in family courts, then those corrupt courts traffic our genome for the elite families, the Illuminati.
The same United States Marshalls seizing property under that case also will be funded by those asset seizures, United States Marshalls disrupting racketeering organizations funding sources.
She was killed at the same time I was writing my identity theft tied to asset seizures (car purchases) docs on the subject, Genomics and Genentech, and on the fake claims against me in the alleged child porn ring which appears to involve Tom Dunham and I but is something we could not even trace much less were involved in.
I have nothing to be blackmailed over but these same evidence plants, etc., create the appearance I am retarded and appearance I am giving in to blackmail.
Incorrect Result No ulterior actor Sure, CIA or United States Marshall pretending to be me to a Dominatrix sex worker likes to be asked to give in to blackmail, my genes demanded, but it is more than that.
DARPA and the Manhattan Project My brother Thomas Neil Donegan named after Thomas Jefferson and Neil Armstrong, Bell X-1 Sound barrier DARPA James Paul Donegan nuclear bomber flights and Manhattan Nuclear Project (and his nuclear engineer brother both from Cape Cod and the Kennedys) Glorian Donegan, likely daughter of Maria Von Trapp out of wedlock with Prince Edward of Wales FOXP2 gene.
Asset seizures by Marshalls for THEMSEVLES, own use, and for victims use, and siezed from under cover operations in Strip Clubs both managing the clubs and “fining’ activities of White Supremacists in them. . é United States Marshals Service ci rst ' rv.
Punish and deter criminal activity by depriving criminals of property used in or acquired through illegal activities; Promote and enhance cooperation between federal, state, local, tribal and foreign law enforcement agencies; Recover assets that may be used to compensate victims when authorized under federal law; and Ensure the program is administered professionally, lawfully and in a manner consistent with sound public policy.
I think there has been an effort to tie my mother’s trust fund of that value in the year of her death in 2011 to phony child porn networks manufactured for the purpose of seizing assets.
The Trust Fund wanting my genome seized for its use is assisting in the creation of my stolen identity and also disrupting my gaining my own property and ID cards.
This fraud, that I am retarded, and retardation firms will settle claims against me in the scope of jurisdiction they have over all retarded people is the fraud of Behavioral Health Care and them as interested parties accepting the forgeries from my Doppelganger which benefit their retarded beneficiaries for the social good.
Individuals, Organizations, or Individuals within Organizations may be Targeted for recruitment by Espionage agents because the Targets are pro gay couples Genomics or religious or merely needed If the recruitment goes south OR after opp, silence of grave prevents compromise of the Espionage mission Utilizing Targeted Individuals, recruited where they work in Front Organizations are how Espionage is conducted through assets.
Working for Government while working for Espionage which misuses or re-purposes the job the recruited asset holds, and is generally contradictory to he mission of the organization the Targeted Individual is placed in.
Because another person, the Gangstalk Victim, has the same coat on, the identity of one to another is cut and pasted with the clothing item the “clipboard” the identity is temporarily housed in as it is moved in between.
HONEY TRAP Slang for use of men or women in sexual situations to intimidate or snare others [I use that term Honey Pot to attract those willing to, in my identity, confess to the sex worker or model that harm has been done to women and Donegan genome is due because of that, to prenent the arrest of Fake Edward, settling the debt to the community for the exploitation done.
INNOCENT POSTCARD A postcard with an innocuous message sent to an address in a neutral country to verify the continued security of an undercover operative A form of an Innocent Postcard used by the FBI and others for attacks is to disguise clandestine hotilitiy into alleged normal activities or statements.
MI6 now compromised inside and out, M turns to the one man she can trust: Bond.
In 2006 I did not it consider it tied to my CIA manipulated family of origin history but rather sociology which blamed white Europeans for oppressing blacks when cultural problems and even likely genetic inequality to be sources of the problems which was within blacks.
This I later found out comes from that rare gene in my mother’s side and how that collides with CIA MKULTRA work in my mother’s side history and government interest in that including the secret CIA program which created Barack Obama Jr as a test birth of using that DNA and creating several family lines of twins and IQ studies, and other cognitive experimentation, attributes, and metrics.
I view the Obamas and Donegans mostly as victims who are the product of CIA activities effectively in Sins of the CIA history who now have the CIA history either to coverup or discover.
This will lead me into the theory the Trump administration and William Barr are trying to cover the era of Sidney Gottlieb and the CIA and IIuminati which included the assassination of Kennedy as Kennedy resisted the program going any further.
I will explain for instance in that matter gays and others who were in the addressing of that email have all sorts of new capabilities in personal eugenics, designer babies, and medical treatments for diseases and the possibility of gay same gender biological parents of children with IVF capabilities if DARPA and other new genetics and can produce up and coming answers rather than old thinking.
DARPA, CIA, Secret Service, FBI, etc., even DOD Public Health Service and Psychological Warfare support ¢ Targeted Individuals Public or Private Organizations or people asked to support Espionage Agencies complicity, and keep co-operation covert.
The term “Gangstalking” or “Organized Stalking” refers to intense, long-term, harassment, intimidation, and surveillance of a Targeted (for Gangstalking) Individual.
I quote this table form later and I will introduce it here to describe the assaults upon my mother and I, a group who will steal DNA from someone hated.
The stalk of paid mercenaries is in Zone “B” which generates KOMPROMAT which then is used in Zone “C” which person from Zone “A” is excluded from.
The Ricky Prado Blackwater killers brag about who they have killed and will kill, and operate under Spook names, I have watched many die after their threats were acted upon and [ still warn the scene and I still say I am in danger, their threats as open Spook Contractor Mercenaries and La Cosa Nostra are real.
Elements of HTML in documents like p or span (span something)not displayd, not visible.
JEK wanted his winnings Now so Dave and Torbert had to go upstairs to get their wallets.
Botn Sidney “Slew” McCain was a United States » Navy admiral and the patriarch of the McCain military family.
World War II, in 1942 he commanded all land-based air operations in support of the ; Guadalcanal campaign, and in 1944-45 he aggressively led the Fast Carrier Task : Force.
His operations off the Philippines and Okinawa and air strikes against ‘ Formosa and the Japanese home islands caused tremendous destruction of Japanese « naval and air forces in the closing period of the war.
Several of McCain’s descendants were also graduated from the United States i Naval Academy.
MELBOURNE, Fla. — Kennedy Space Center as we know it was just getting off the ground when President John F Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral for the last time, 50 years ago Saturday. as ee Inside a blockhouse, scale models arranged on a table previewed what the massive Vehicle Assembly Building, launch pad 39A and Saturn V rockets would look like.
Kennedy himself had begun to express some doubts privately, had recently i) proposed cooperating on moon missions with the Soviet Union and was awaiting ; the results of a high-level review of the nation’s military and civil space programs.
A Defense Advanced Research Agency Obama favored project on Race and IQ, and of economic development of foreign nations dates back to John F Kennedy and is part of my story, and why Espionage is involved in something so secret by the Masons even a near Chief Justice would never talk.
DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had been bungling the study of race and IQ through illegal experiments under Sidney Gottlieb and Prescott Bush MKULTRA in what some call “New World Order” building of a future peaceful world without the poverty leading to racism and new uses of genetics rights to fight diseases ranging for AIDS and Bubonic Plague, retardation and autism, cancer, and other ills which through Bone Marrow Stromal Cells in neurology, immunology (bone marrow) cells, and other stem cells or mitochondrial disease usages.
According to murdered Jen Moore and according to my family history and extensive available public records this began with Sidney Gottlieb, CLA Weapons Scientist with speech therapy and biology background and work with Windsors and Von Trapps (Maria Kutschera Nazi tied Von Trap rescued by OSS and Vatican, likely with daughters from London 1926 Prince of Wales future Kings Speech King Edward VIII and my father and mother in the Manhattan Project and my Manhattan Beach Birth though otherwise from Cape Cod Massachusetts childhood.
Keepers of the Secret DNA and Family Lines by DARPA for the 21st Century and Beyond, the babies of the elite are being exposed as animal husbandry and fake birth certificates as to biological parents and where those lines are today in the United States of America and how this ties to CIA test of twins children, twins known to some and with Nazi German relatives ties.
Z CIA launches mind control program, April 13, 1953 By ANDREW GLASS 04/13/2019 12:00 AM EDT retrieved from Politico and copied or modified to here . geez | Some 80 institutions, including colleges and universities, hospitals, prisons, and pharmaceutical companies participated in the research program.
These were around the world, NGOs, CIA Front Companies, and other private companies, media companies in particular like those of Maxwell Epstein ties, Hollywood and its actors and producers, and academic institutions NGOs and others around the world including the Mossad and French intelligence, the CIA efforts include Jim Morrison, Wwlt Disney, and other public figures :-EPD The CIA’s Office of Scientific Intelligence organized the i project, code-named Project MKUltra, in coordination with the United States Army ; Biological Warfare Laboratories.
As I state elsewhere nothing about the Gangstalk of me under MKULTRA is legal.
In fact this happens in mostly public and was set up by Abuse of Process Psychiatry in which Doppelganger of me, Edward Paul Donegan, in density theft, were given a “Legend” of being gullible, naive, and retarded, and under that diagnosis given by the State z including by Department of Defense, the factual theory my DNA was authorized will be consistent.
The Agent Provocateur will blame me who was in the vicinity of the child or the child was placed on my property and along with State backed police demand my DNA assets be seized under the circumstantial evidence.
I say Jen Moore was on the verge of revealing this public appearances and court records spectacle creates the appearance of legitimacy to long running illegal racketeering and use of Maria Kutchera and Prince Edward of Wales DNA which was ILLEGALLY used by CIA for twins studies and other purposes among the elite by the elite.
As bizarre as this is it makes a blackmail-able offense through which once genomic rights are seized to any of variety of genes (breast cancer, AIDS, Telomeres, IQ, other) that they then can be resold or utilized by the needy or rich.
Further CIA black marketing cancer genes autism genes neural cells etc. can put in Illuminati religions and medical works genes taken without permission and used in social work or for profit once the rights are claamed and DARPA knows which genes are up and coming and through the Illuminati.
The CIA or someone through front companies, perhaps it seems Christians, are blaming me and pleading me guilty, the Atheist, for their own crimes and in doing that, bilking the value of my mothers genome and harassing my life.
That the CIA and others have killed and conducted terror attacks to CONCEAL the history of MKUTLRA is a major threat to the Illuminati.
I have spent my life experiencing what is called “Abuse of Process” human rights crimes.
Trespass Capabilities of Mercenaries In short, United States Marshalls plant or steal evidence from my home, defame me socially, then ask they impersonate me to adult entertainers.
In 1997, investigators had searched the premises of a ; helicopter company owned by two local men, James Anderson and Kim Powell.
Anderson demanded a hundred and twenty, eight thousand dollars. oe ee ee ee ee a a a a a a a Seattle Washington Assistant United States Attorney [who was also a JFK Jr. roomate ; at law school] Tom Wales was not supposed to be home on the night of October 11, 1 On AUGUST 3,.2001, Wales’s office filed a response to Anderson’s lawsuit in ; federal district court.
In any event, Anderson’s motion was dismissed, and that ruling was upheld on appeal. soon afterward, Wales again took a public stand for gun control.
I both thought it was a bad idea as a matter of public policy, but I thought it was wrong politically to come out against it at this time.
A month 1 after he was killed, the group held a benefit in his honor, which was attended by i more than five hundred people, including many prominent Democratic politicians i in the state, and raised five hundred thousand dollars.
I will spend a considerable amount of time on Cartel Economics, Oil Cartels, Genome Cartels, and even Cartels operating in the financial arena now that asset seizures, siezed asset management, and siezed assets disposition through Law Enforcement Intelligence Units Disposition Matrix create cartel systems for NGO world espionage movements and international finance entities and financial transactions spanning the Ukraine, Virgin Islands, reseach centers, and victims funds.
The Monster M*A*S*H Wiki retrieved from Fandom and copied or modified to here PREVENTATIVE MEDICINE During OR, the doctors notice that many of the patients have multiple entry wounds from multiple directions.
Weary, Hawkeye later returns to the Swamp and quietly admits that he tossed Lacy’s “pink and perfect” appendix into the scrap bucket.
Manufacturing what is likely a La Cosa Nostra or Enrique Prado Blackwater CIA contractor organization to claim fake rights to fertilization is a rightfully both crimes in process and substance as I have spent my life with people taking “in ” on a deal to force me into homeless and retarded living shelters, out of normal life.
I have likened the entire plan to have landlords others drive me out because I am a peeper and leaving me in skid row homeless shelters under black and white assault and loss of all belongings over and over again to the Law and Order Special Victims Unit episode Taken.
His administration of the Glorian Donegan trust fund left for me would be delegated out to others over time, or he assisted Rod Rosenstein or others in getting initial control of it.
I have constantly feared for my life in Nueces County Texas because of its openly acting organized crime rings and open death threats, assaults of me, and open felony racketeering fake claims to my genome by those giving me the death threats.
The core Racketeering elements this books proves is Government backed Doppelgangers of me are child porn addicts (developmentally and sexually retarded) who need sex workers sent to them.
One theory that the assailants have used most likely later in the game is that by picking a race based or even a sexual assault fight with a victim (Glorian Donegan or myself) during the assault the perpetrator may get sought debate during the arguments during the assaults.
Nominally, a motive of certain medial cures could be used from it if my mothers trust fund could be shaken down over false, bird dogged claims resulting from conflict situations, but more so, the deeper motive was that the conflicts would remove me from my own expected normal family life and the powerful interests of the Illuminati would pair away by bird dogged assaults on me my normal reproductivity and normal family outcome prospects.
The more recent story of a a Frank Olson I consider myself that same person, under CIA attack and repeatedly forced into psych wards by assailants where I think consider my life and or liberty at risk by CIA hacks, something Jen Moore also discussed as the CIA in medical hospitals (and snitch usage ) which I will quote on later in the book.
Fandom quoted here from link y etree | Invisibility cloaks may be woven from the hair of a Demiguise, a magical creature whose coat allows it to become invisible.
Invisibility cloaks can also be produced by enchanting an ordinary travelling cloak with an exceptionally strong isillusionment Charm or Bedazzling Hex.
Limitations “Tt’s never occurred to me before, but I’ve heard stuff about charms wearing off cloaks when they get old, or them being ripped apart by spells so they’ve got holes in.
Harry’s was owned by his dad, so it’s not exactly new, is it, but it’s just... perfect!” Ron Weasley on the Cloak of Invisibility Such Cloaks of Bedazzlement have been attempted blinders upon on Tom Dunham, myself, and others (likely Veronica Hoffman, James Paul Donegan, DJ Rabbitron, others) to get them into psych wards or simple to undermine the police reports we have given on Doppelgangers of us in our vicinity engaging in wrongdoing.
One goal of this book is to help law abiding Espionage retake the hill from MKULTRA Cover-up Espionage My belief is DAPRA The Brain Program, Epstein, and Black Markets of Black Money grew a bad project out of control and is Maxwell/Epstein.
I created a par course run from the building around town using stairs, spirals, great views, a Gazebo area, and everyone watched and said how beautiful a workout, but homeless people physically attacked me, through feces or rocks at me, aimed for my knees or toes when I was running or blocked the spiral with a homeless camp I could not breath around because of the stench, but I lit up my patio to cover the dinginess.
This book Ich bin ein Berliner and Muster Ich bin ein Berliner speech Speech from the Rathaus Schéneberg by John F Kennedy, June 26, 1963.
Duration 9:01; ""Ich bin ein Berliner"" first appears at 1:45, then again at 8:43.
June 26, 1963 » Author: John F Kennedy From 1890s the FOXP2 gene certainly has been identified and King Edward VII may be in the West End seeking mothers to have test babies as Jack the Ripper.
In 1901 the issue becomes a threat to the England’s monarch and Great Britain as nation.
The Leuge of Nations and other European old societies remain interbread and attempt to hold the line against Socialism and Communism and more quietly keep old European wealth in Grand Master Masonic hands who also often rule.
During this time and even since the Atlantic Revolutions and the loss of the United States Colonies republicanism is also a threat to the cohesian of a Europe lead by Great Britain.
Holding France, holding out against the Republic of Ireland, Communism and Socialism in Indonesia, Cuba, and elsewhere is important to conventional warfare and the person walking the castle wall in Berlin may have doubts.
This book siptuiatntatatatatatatatatatetatalatetatetatatetets' Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein Z Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein retrieved from PBS.org and copied or + modified to here Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein Sinn Fein Gerry Adams TD at Sinn Féin’s 2018 Special Ard Fheis, held at the RDS Arena in Dublin, Ireland.
Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein Sinn Fein Sinn Fein had been formed at the beginning of the 20th century.
Now, some of them believed in some sort of relationship with Britain, , but Irish unity was the be-all and end-all of their policy.
Sinn Fein was a constitutional party, and in fact, at the British general elections in 1918, Sinn Fein won the majority of seats throughout the island of Ireland, and it was that which gives them the animus to conduct a violent campaign against the British in the War of Liberation.
And it was that war which persuaded the British to withdraw from Ireland, but to withdraw through a partition settlement.
And it was they who were engaged in the civil war against the majority of the community, it was they who argued that you do not lay down your weapons, it was they who refused to take any oath of allegiance to the monarchy in Britain.
By its use of this Gaelic name, Sinn Fein was demanding its own autonomy, and Irish unity was its ultimate end.
It believed that the only way to get rid of the British « was through the barrel of a gun, rather than through any rational argument.
The relationship between Sinn Fein and the IRA, historically, has been symbiotic.
In the minds of the vast majority of people in Ireland, whether they are Unionist or Nationalist, Sinn Fein is the political wing of the IRA, and it has played that role quite hotly down the years.
The Troubles, because it had been the militants, the military types, who 1 Were in command inside the Republican movement.
One last long push to get the British out of Ireland, and the only ; thing will get that done is the use of weapons.
They were there for propaganda purposes, they were ; there to raise the funds, they were there to speak on behalf of the IRA, * but they were very much second-cousins.
So it wasn’t in the business of electioneering, it was in the business of propagandizing.
It’s only in the 1980s that it begins to take itself seriously as a political organization.
And became deeply involved in the armed struggle from the earliest days, and was interned early in the 1970s, and was sprung from internment in 1972, because the authorities realized that he was one of the key members of the new generation who had to be listened to.
So, again, here we have someone who is incredibly single-minded, incredibly ruthless, but also has a sense of vision, and sees violence in its communicative framework rather than simply by destruction.
Gerry Adams comes from a very strong Republican family, on both his mother and father’s side.
He can trace it back to at least his grandfather, if not his great-grandfather.
One of the earliest radicals in the 20th century, a man called Jim Larkin, who was concerned with trade unionism and with the national struggle, had as one of his assistants one of Adams’ ancestors.
And you could find ... in the Republican struggles in the 30s and ’40s, either the Hannaway family, which was his mother’s side, or the Adams family, were involved in all of those struggles.
One of the most important factors in explaining the resilience of the Republican movement is what I call generational continuity.
It’s handed down from father to son and mother to daughter, from generation to generation.
For example, in the late ’60s, when you had sort of youth protests, you had less of that in Northern Ireland, because the children were following the same values as the parents, whether they were Loyalist or Republican.
So, generational continuity, this strong sense of communal history and the sense of the Republican movement as a large family.
Family involvement, not necessarily at the forefront of the struggle, but as backup troops, is very, very powerful in explaining the success of the Republican movement.
That is, I think, probably the supreme reason why the IRA has had to endure as much as it has had.
You know, we’re talking about, for the most part, working-class youth, with no great sophistication, fighting against one of the supreme military operations in ; the Western world, against overwhelming odds, against huge... and yet "" they’re able to endure.
There is an Irish Republican Army and there is a political, but discreet, wing called Sinn Fein.
What is different now is that Sinn Fein is engaged very heavily in a political process.
But, given their sense of history, it is a process in which they are afraid of being betrayed yet again.
OK, you’ve got 16 percent of the vote in the last election, but there are three other parties with larger votes.
And they would argue that in doing this they are taking the IRA away from the armed struggle and leading them into the political process.
But if they don’t get what they want, or to the political dialogue or the political negotiations, they will simply revert to violence.
There is another viewpoint which argues that the Republican movement has come a long way in educating itself, and realizing that the armed struggle did more damage to the community it was supposed to be protecting.
In recognizing that the war has reached a stage of stalemate,they cannot defeat the British; but, equally, the British cannot defeat them.
And once they abandon the armalite, they realize that it may take another generation before they could begin the armed struggle again.
So, they see it as taking a huge political risk in the hope that they can persuade, in particular, the Unionist community in Northern Ireland to throw in their lot with Ireland rather than with Britain.
It’s perfectly understandable why particularly people in the political establishment, and Unionists, would say that the IRA, because of the armed struggle, that Adams has bombed his way to the table and, therefore, they should have nothing to do with him.
Adams would say that he belongs to a proud political tradition where the politically oppressed have no other means than the means of their own violence to get to that negotiating table, to make it a level playing field.
And in that respect, he belongs to a long and honorable tradition. if and when Gerry Adams uses the analogies of historic figures such as George Washington or Nelson Mandela, the short answer is that he’s being premature.
What we do know is that he failed to demonstrate he was a Nelson Mandela when he got his visa to visit the United States for the first time.
And the reason why we know he failed was because he had to satisfy two audiences simultaneously.
He had to satisfy the external audience, personified by the President, who’d gone out on a limb to give him that visa, that he was a man of peace.
But he had to satisfy the internal audience, Sinn Fein and the IRA, that the struggle would continue until there was ultimate victory.
And he has not come to terms with how you satisfy both audiences simultaneously, which means that we cannot cast any judgement on whether he is truly an historic figure or not.
History will decide whether, in fact, the IRA and the Republican movement are engaged in a cynical exercise of using the political process as another wing of their armed struggle, or whether Adams can become a Nelson Mandela.
My own belief is that Adams is genuine in trying to move away from the violence.
I think it’s a strategy that he and Martin McGuinness have been developing for a very long time.
I think that we sometimes forget that those who engage in armed struggle are also human beings.
And so, therefore, we have to be careful in how we weigh the balance between their military actions or their support for military actions and their political agenda.
But then they started to pick up the right people and they put them in.
It was actually a very good education training ground for them, because they were grouped together in their own prison blocks, they were able to educate themselves together, they were highly disciplined, they were seen from the outside as a way that the British during the Second World War who were locked up in concentration camps.
Republicanism, and was to give you particular status and stature in your community.
There is a whole tradition in every guerrilla movement of using the prisons, of the symbolism of the prisons, to show how people can be reflective, how people can rethink their strategy.
Whether you think of Mao and his long march or whatever, it is part of the mythology.
And all of these things were beginning to address themselves to him, and he was beginning to put his thoughts together, which he brought together in a book, which he published in 1986.
He is the person who personifies that, if you ' like, gradualist and progressive wing of the Republican movement, but "" there are a number of others whose names I could give you, who , wouldn’t mean anything— not only to people in the United States, but to people in Ireland—who were doing the thinking, who were the strategists, who were the politicals as opposed to the revolutionaries.
They all formed this sort of group which began to ' think their way politically out of the impasse.
It occurred, at some stage in the mid-to-late ’70s, to IRA and Sinn Fein, that they might actually win a military war, but lose the political piece; that they might set up the conditions for others to compromise.
And what happened there was, what the Republican ; Movement realized, there was a huge untapped source out there in the » community which didn’t approve of IRA violence, but emotionally were attached to what the IRA was trying to achieve, Irish freedom.
So ... 1980 and ‘81 they seriously begin to put together a political strategy based on electoralism.
And they were very anxious and concermed that electoralism could destroy them.
The armalite was one of their favorite weapons which could cause enormous damage.
They were following, if you like, classic tactical issues by Lenin at the time of the Russian Revolution.
There are those who are there for the military, there are those who are there for the political.
As soon as the British took control with direct rule in 1972, they began 1 to work with the Irish government, because they didn’t want to hang on 1 in Northern Ireland.
Constitutionalists that you could have a reform in the Northern political ; system with power sharing—in other words, you could bring Catholics ; into government for the first time, and you would give them a share of » power.
You also could have much closer north-south relations within the "" island of Ireland.
The 1986 Decision by Sinn Fein to Take Their Seats in Parliament The decision by the Sinn Fein conference in 1986, that they would take their seats if elected in the south of Ireland, in the Irish Republic, was one of the most historic decisions ever taken by the Republican movement.
And it was an indication of just how successful Adams and McGuinness had been in taking over the Republican leadership, because it was something that they’d been working for for at least three or four years.
Remember, that the provisional IRA was created because of a split about electoralism in 1969.
So, here people were very conscious that this was very dangerous, because it went to the heart of Republican mythology, yet they pulled it off.
And the reason they did it was because they believed that their electoral star was in the ascent.
And that if they wanted to speak for the people of Ireland, they’d have to show that they’d had support in the Republic of Ireland, as well as the north of Ireland.
John Hume, the SDLP and Sinn Fein One of the seminal documents which will come out of the Troubles is « the dialogue between the SDLP and Sinn Fein which began in March of 1 1988, and went on until September of 1988.
COUnTETPrOgucHVe: ” And by challenging Sinn Fein on his own ground, : we ’re challenging the very heart of Republican mythology, and they’re i making these people think politically for the first time.
He ; Chose the right psychological moment in the aftermath of the Enniskillen » bombing.
He chose the right target in Gerry Adams, whom he recognized as someone who wanted to move into another phase.
He , knew that Republicanism was weak as a result of the outrage of Enniskillen.
He knew that the IRA could go nowhere else but to the SDLP and engage in this.
His policy from the day he entered ; politics has been one based on non-violence.
And it’s also one in which » he says you cannot demonize singlehandedly by building up relations in ; this country, from about 1972 onwards.
And he has always known what he’s wanted, which was an end to the : violence.
And what he’s always said is not about the uniting of territory, ; it is about the uniting of peoples.
And that very simple philosophy is something which he has pursued , ruthlessly and single mindedly.
He it is whose ' established now a good rapport with the former Loyalist paramilitaries.
The Hunger Strikes 1980-81 | | : It was something which is part of an Irish political tradition, which goes ; back to pre-Christian times, something which is not part of the Western ; tradition, but was there.
Hunger strike and hunger strike to death, if » hecessary, because you are challenging your detractor either to withdraw , his charge or to hunger strike with you or to see through the "" consequences of the hunger strike, whereby the striker would die.
The fact that they were living in conditions like animals, that their own 1 excrement was being smeared on the walls, actually goes back to the ; beginnings of Christianity.
The iconography that they were using, of a dying Christ in the , bosom of the blessed Virgin Mary.
People going out in demonstrations "" wearing the prison shroud, putting on their heads the crown of thorns, ' which Christ had worn to Calvary.
So, you don’t need to have any elaborate text; © you simply need the visual evidence.
They were extremely aware of the power of imagery and symbolism, ; because precisely the same images, precisely the same images, have » been used after 1916, when the rebel leaders were rounded up and put » into the jails and then shot in 1916.
Sixty years later, the new generation "" comes along and uses exactly the same imagery, the same symbols.
For example, the first hunger striker who went to his death, Bobby Sands, on the day he went on hunger strike, 4,000 people watched in protest.
So this, again, was a huge , propaganda victory, where the Catholic community were used as sort of » an emotional rollercoaster.
They believed that the British authorities "" had mishandled very badly.
It has to be remembered that, at the time, she refused to 1 speak to the ANC and to Nelson Mandela.
Some of it was accident, but then a strategy began to put itself together.
It was actually insofar as it was the relatives who moved the Republicans to take seriously voices other than their own.
Secondly, the momentum was coming from ' within the prison and not from outside.
And what it indicates is how central prisoners are to the whole campaign.
If you look at the 1 cease-fires, it’s only after the prisoners agreed to it that they were able to i carry it through.
But the strategy was something which, again, was embedded in the Republican psyche.
It was simply reaching into the recesses of their communal memory, and remembering what happened after 1916.
The symbolism, the imagery, was something which came to them as second nature.
They would have given, had some thought, but it would’ve been the most natural thing in the world to do.
The IRA leadership] was opposed to the hunger strike because they 1 were afraid it would fail simply because of Prime Minister Margaret 1 Thatcher.
They would have to call off the hunger strikes, and the result of that would be huge demoralization inside the organization.
They were an organization which was used to control, liked to be firmly in control.
Because here they were saying * “Bobby Sands MP”, Member of the British Parliament, RIP, may he rest » in peace; killed by the British establishment,” was the way they were » able to put it.
And that’s when the democratic mandate really begins to "" go into play.
That’s when they realize that they have to play the electoral role as well.
So, what you find is with the election of Bobby Sands, and following his death and the bi-election, the election of another Republican, is the sovereignty changes to electoral ... to show that they had the democratic mandate.
But, within a few years » they were taking 13.4% of the whole vote inside Northern Ireland.
When the second hunger strike was called, it actually had more support , than the first hunger strike.
Because the first hunger strike was called off after two Catholic bishops had gone into the prisons and believed that ; they’d won concessions from the government.
So, it wasn’t a question of simply believing what Republicans said, Catholic bishops had been lied to was the perception.
The first hunger strike had been timed so that if anyone was going to die, they were going to die around Christmas, the time of a huge Christian celebration, the birth of Christ.
One was the risen Christ of Easter, and second was the i remembrance of Easter Rebellion of 1916.
So, the thinking, the symbolism, the imagery that had gone into it was very powerful.
Margaret Thatcher compounded British difficulties by appearing to be too ... —“a crime is a crime is a crime,” in that horrible strident verse of hers.
And while it may well have gone down well with her own supporters, it showed no understanding of the Irish political psyche.
It did tremendous damage to the constitutional politicians in Ireland who are now being challenged by these revolutions.
And all of hat had to be undone. fom The impact of Sands’ death was overwhelming.
Even the peace people, the people who had formed a peace movement in 1976 as a result of IRA atrocities, said that they could identify with people, they identified with Sands.
Bobby Sands’ death led to yet another huge emotional ground swell inside the Catholic community.
A ground swell which didn’t necessarily go towards Republicans, but certainly it went against the British.
That had the impact that the Protestant community and the Catholic community were more polarized than they’d been for at least a decade.
The culmination of the hunger strikes was one which brought Sinn Fein out of being a militant armed sect into a wider political and democratic process.
I don’t think they would have embraced that had it not been for the 1 emotional ground swell of the hunger strikes, the realization that there ; are votes out there to be taken.
The IRA Campaign of Violence There is a perception that the IRA and other paramilitaries have used mindless violence.
So, very rarely do you get examples of mindless violence in the Northern Ireland context.
Sometimes car bombs would be used, which would be simply about causing as much economic destruction as possible, as making Northern Ireland so expensive for the British exchequer that there would be a demand for the British to withdraw.
There always was the belief that the death of one British soldier was worth at least, in propaganda terms, ten policemen from Northern Ireland, because in Britain itself, the British mainland, the demand to get out would grow.
What the IRA tried to do for the most part and what they believed they were doing was that they were not trying to harm the local community.
If they killed a Protestant, they would argue that it wasn’t a Protestant they were killing, but it was a member of the security forces who happened to be a Protestant.
And in their role as purported defenders of the Catholic community, they’ve actually succeeded in killing more Catholics than have their opponents.
And so, when they carry out campaigns of violence against property or against people, in many, many instances what they were doing was they were damaging their own people more than they were furthering their cause.
So, it was always very, very conscious that it had to be careful how it used its violence.
It is worth pointing out that Belfast, for example, never became Beirut.
Very rarely could you put your finger and say that innocent people were targeted deliberately.
They were very conscious in their propaganda of how they sold their violence.
When we speak of soft targets we’re talking about people or property ; which are very easy to target, very easy to pick off.
And, obviously, the easier they are, the more successful you’re going to be.
So, they could I pick, for example, an isolated Protestant farmer on the border of ' Northern Ireland, who was a member of the local security force on a "" part-time basis.
Or, in one instance, the IRA killed a woman who was taking a census collection.
She was simply finding out, for the government, how people felt in Northern Ireland.
Bloody Friday "" happens within four months of the imposition of direct rule, when Unionists had lost out, when there were people saying, “Let’s call it a day.
The IRA response to Bloody Friday was that it wasn’t they who got it wrong, that they gave the warnings.
It was the authorities who got it wrong, that they did not mean to kill those ; innocent civilians.
It reinforced the position of the Protestant paramilitaries, and made them a real force in the political game in Northern Ireland.
It persuaded the British government that you cannot do business with the Republican movement.
So, for all of those reasons, Bloody Friday ; had very serious consequences.
The Murder of Lord Mountbatten August, 1979 | | | ; In August of 1979 the IRA pulled off two of their huge spectaculars * with the murder of Mountbatten, part of the British royal family.
The British authorities were able to make much propaganda out of the death of the two young boys.
On the same day, the IRA pulled off probably their most spectacular military operation when they blew to pieces 18 British soldiers— and they ; happened to be British paratroopers, the people who were responsible for ; Bloody Sunday.
So, the British were able to mount a propaganda campaign, "" arguing very strongly that the border between Northern Ireland and the "" Republican of Ireland needed to be sealed, that the Irish government ; wasn’t doing enough, that the American administration was too soft on the Irish government, and it needed to take a much .. i role, that you can’t go around killing young boys simply because you wanted to kill an old man of 79.
So, the death of Mountbatten and all the rest of it actually turned out to be a propaganda coup for the IRA rather than a loss for them.
When the IRA exploded the bomb in Enniskillen in November of 1987, i they did their cause irreparable harm from the military perspective.
So, what it ; demonstrated to begin with was a total insensitivity of Protestant * peoples.
That backfired very badly and they lost "" out very badly in that respect.
And, if they could destroy the British government with her, » even more so.
Nowhere else could it happen that a complete government "" was being wiped out with one bomb.
The London Bombing Campaign | : The London bombing campaign was simply to bring the war to the : 8 palg ply 8 1 British mainland.
P 8 Pp palg ; Britain had failed because they didn’t have the logistics, they didn’t have * the local support.
It’s only much * later on in the campaign, when they return to Britain, that it does become ' effective, with some spectacular failures.
In particular, there was a bomb in a British town called Warrenpoint in March of 1992, when two young boys were blown to pieces.
I think that was one of the telling points in actually going for a cease-fire.
The second attempt to blow up the British Cabinet occurred in 1991 when the Cabinet was meeting, dealing with the affair in Kuwait.
The IRA launched a bomb, a mortar bomb, in the heart of London on Downing Street.
And brought home to politicians in London that at some stage you’re going to have to deal with us.
The bombing in London and in Britain throughout the ’90s, I think demonstrates that the IRA were showing that they had the skill to continue.
But, in some ways, it was the last throw of the dice, they had to go for the spectaculars.
But, they also realized that if they were going into negotiation, they went into negotiation from a position of military strength.
And these bombs were occurring ... when there were secret negotiations going on between Martin McGuinness and the British ... and this was a classic example of the IRA saying look, if you think you’re going to hoodwink us, just you realize how military powerful we are.
British Actions Internment We use the term “internment” to mean imprisoning people without trial.
That is the word used by the chief of police in Northern Ireland about a policy which his men had to carry ; out.
It was a disaster because they lifted only Republicans when Loyalist ; violence was going on at the same time.
Their intelligence was so out of date that , very few of those they lifted had actually been engaged in the present * campaign of violence.
It was therefore seen as an assault, yet again, on "" the whole Catholic community.
It was followed by allegations of torture, ' many of which allegations were upheld.
A number of studies have been done on IRA prisoners and IRA people : who have gone to their deaths—whether it’s been done by psychologists ; or others—and one of the things that comes out very clearly is that these ; people do not, as a class, belong to the criminal class.
If you look at the rate of recidivism among former IRA inmates, you find that very few of them are involved in criminal activity.
If you look t their level of education, you find that, for the most part, they have a reasonable level of education.
Very few have third level, but most of them have a reasonable level of secondary education.
So, they did not represent an underclass of ill-educated, disenchanted youth.
They represented some people, men and women, boys and girls, who believed they had to be part of the struggle because they had to act on behalf of their community.
I have had a little experience of going into the ' prisons and teaching.
And I came away overwhelmingly with the sense that if there were psychopaths in there, i they were very, very difficult to discover; that they were people who , really believed that they, in fact, belonged to a higher moral plane than i the rest of us, because they were prepared to lay down their lives and r prepare to give up their years of freedom for a cause they thought could © not be challenged.
One was Ulsterization, whereby the battle "" would be fought by people from Northern Ireland; the security forces r and the front line would be the police of Northern Ireland rather than the British army.
IRA and the Republican movement from the greater Catholic community : by saying, “These people are not engaged in political struggle.
The Protestant community, particularly militant Protestants, were « becoming more self-confident, and they believed that it was only a © question of time before they went back to the status quo.
There is no © doubt that the authorities got very valuable information, with which they were able to lock dangerous men up.
But the means whereby they had got it run against the Western tradition of the rule of law, and, therefore, damaged that particular cause.
And, again, in criminalizing people, the British authorities were doing damage , to their own system.
One of the most serious defects in the whole last 25 ; years is what the IRA campaign has done to the British sense of justice.
They refused to wear the prison clothes, and so, therefore, they wrapped themselves in a blanket.
And they form an organization, relatives trying "" to free their sons and daughters.
And the IRA realized that they were « losing that section of the community.
And the IRA also began to realize 1 that the struggle they were involved in was political and military.
The Failed 1974-75 Cease Fire During 1974-75, after the failure of power-sharing in 1974, the IRA , went into another cease-fire in which they believed that some sort of , understanding with the British government that there was going to be , disengagement.
As aresult of that cease-fire, the old Republican leadership stood aside.
And it is then, late 1975, that Gerry Adams, Martin McGuiness, come ' into their own, and they come into their own as people who have been against the cease-fire.
And after ‘75, they were the people who took over, and they ; were the people who took over with a very strong belief that you can * hever trust the Brits.
That new leadership, I think, took at least two lessons ... from the failure of that ‘74-°75 cease-fire.
They must demonstrate that if they go into negotiations again, « they do so from a position of strength and not from weakness.
They had to demonstrate that if they 1 Went into negotiations, they could bring the whole Republican movement along with them, that Republicanism could not be split.
And they began to treat virtually all Irish1 Catholics with great disdain.
The Anglo-Irish Agreement The Anglo-Irish agreement is one of the most significant agreements between the two governments in this century, because it was a * recognition by the British government that the Northern Ireland problem * was something which it couldn’t handle in its own right.
But, thirdly, from a British perspective it was about closer security, cooperation.
And interestingly, the IRA in its Christmas message in 1985 described the agreement as the most sophisticated, counter-revolutionary strategy ever devised for the British.
The Protestant reaction to the Agreement was one of overwhelming detestation, from all strata in Protestant society.
They believed that they’d been sold out in a way that had never happened before partition.
And, so they united to a man and woman against it, but they couldn’t prevent the implementation of the agreement.
It was an attempt to say to the Protestant population, “You in fact, are a minority inside the United Kingdom.
Northern Ireland makes up less than three percent of the population of the United Kingdom; you make up about two percent of that population.
The 1988 Gibraltar Killings of Three IRA The killing of three IRA volunteers at Gibraltar in 1988 was something which appeared to be a wonderful coup for the British security services.
They had got them as they were about to plant a bomb, or so they said, and they had executed them.
But, again, it was something which went badly awry as far as the authorities were concerned, because evidence started to build up that these people could quite easily have been arrested.
And what, in fact, the authorities had done was they made martyrs out of three people.
One of them was a young female graduate who represented the romantic side of Republicanism.
And as the British authorities tried to destroy the evidence of some of the witnesses, mutual witnesses from Gibraltar, they compounded their own problem.
And then as they tried to destroy attempts made by some of the British media to get to the bottom of it, again they compounded the sense in which democracy was not at work here.
Mariad Farrell who was quite a striking beauty, they used that very, very successfully.
Even during the hunger strikes, the hunger strikers appeared to look like Christ with the long black hair and the dark beards ... all of it was part of war by other means, war by propaganda.
The Birmingham Six The Birmingham Six is one of the classic cases as to why Britain might ' want to get out of Ireland, because it showed British justice at its worst.
For two decades, the British political establishment could not * accept that they could have made a mistake.
The Lord Chief Justice said » it was inconceivable that a mistake could have been made.
And the » longer they went on denying it, the longer the British political ‘ establishment did serious damage to their old case.
Trish Republicanism which was exonerated, even though Irish « Republicans had planted the bomb.
I think the most important point of what the Irish-American diaspora in ; this century has been that it’s suffered from a huge myth.
It suffered from the , myth that it had huge influence with the administration, whatever that » administration was.
Secondly, in the United States there was a split between, if you like, the treetops and the grass roots—the treetops who believed that there may be a constitutional way forward, believed that they could bring moral 1 pressure on the administration to bring pressure on the British to do ; something about it.
They © were heavily influenced by John Hume, who was the leader of the 1 Nationalists in the north, and by the Irish government, that there had to 1 be a constitutional way forward, and that Irish-Americans should not be giving their money to the IRA for weapons.
So, you have the treetops, which were trying to work through the administration, and you have the grass roots, the guys who were giving their dollars from the Bronx, South Boston, or whatever, to help the struggle in Northern Ireland.
And you have for example, 1973, an FBI report which says that it is embarrassed by the Irish conflict, because the Irish conflict has been paid for by United States dollars.
So, Irish America had to come to terms with the fact that insofar as the administration was concerned about the Irish question, it was only concerned because it was part of a larger network of international , terrorism, and something had to be done to break that link.
The Horsemen come out * with statements very opposed to the IRA campaign, as it becomes much * more vicious during the 1970s.
It is the Horsemen who argue very strongly that you should not be helping these people.
Irish America generally, until very recent years, was seen as being a « hindrance rather than a help.
So, there was a feeling, still remains a « feeling, among the British political establishment that this has nothing to u do with the United States, and there is a huge irritation among the more establishment newspapers, for example, about the role that the United States has played.
That indicates the United States’ influence is growing, and is important.
They have a romantic view of what Ireland was, they have a very simplistic view of the struggle.
Secondly, » Irish-American propagandists were very clever in using the language of , liberty, which rings with the American community, which goes all the » way back to the revolution and which Northern Ireland Protestants could "" never understand.
But it was that use of propaganda, which kept it on the ' burner all the time.
Clinton’s Granting a Visa to Gerry Adams in 1994 One thing I think we should remember about President Clinton—he’s i the first post-Cold War president.
His predecessors, Bush, Reagan, all ; the way back to Kennedy, etc., were part of that Cold War which ; believed very strongly in the special Anglo-American relationship.
Also, he owed no favors to John Major, because the conservative party had acted on behalf of George Bush in the presidential campaign.
He could solidify his hold into the Democratic party through Irish America, which had begun to drift towards the Republican party in the previous decade.
But, secondly, for the man who says “the economy, stupid,” he actually was concerned with foreign policy issues.
Gerry Adams, over the i past 20 years, had been refused seven visas to come to the United States.
What he lost was that he couldn’t deliver, that he couldn’t » demonstrate that he was a Nelson Mandela.
That if Sinn Fein did go into negotiation, it was going into negotiation with the goodwill of the most powerful state in the world.
And, you know for a people who believed themselves to be demonized, marginalized, isolated completely, psychologically this was very powerful indeed.
There would not have been an IRA cease fire in August of 1994 if the Republican movement had not been convinced that the Clinton administration was wholly on board, wholly committed to trying to move the process forward.
Leaning at least on the British authorities, because they knew that the Irish authorities wanted to move in that direction in any case.
What I’m saying is the role that the Clinton administration ; has played has been central to the peace process.
It has pursuaded Irish Republicans that , their views are being taken seriously on a wider stage.
Equally, it persuaded their political leadership that they may have to go for something less than what they actually want to implement in one go.
It has persuaded them that politics is about process and compromise and concession.
And, all of that has come about because the President and staff inside the NSC listen to people like John Hume and went for it.
They ignored the advice coming from the State Department and from the Justice Department, and they said we’re going for this.
They have kept in weekly, if not daily contact with the actors to make sure that the peace process would stay in place.
They have, in the present Blair government, the Labor government, a very close ally indeed.
So, the parts are there for the peace process to actually take off, and the American administration has been central to all of that.
The role of the Clinton administration has been central to the whole peace process.
They took the risk in standing alongside Gerry Adams, in giving Adams the moral fiber and the political fiber to convince his own people that they’d never reach the stage where politics is a game on time.
You may not get all you want, but you won’t get anything better by any other means.
People got into the present peace talks in a much less euphoric frame of mind.
The advantage of the 17 months was that the greater community in Northern Ireland said we can make this one.
And as long as the administration stays with it, and as long as the Blair government with its huge majority stays with it, then it is possible to realize peace, if not in a matter of months, certainly a matter of years.
The Future In the coming months the worst case scenario is that all the historic mistrust will get on top of the talks.
That those parties outside the talks in Northern Ireland, and there are two, will be able to whip up fears in the larger community so that the Ulster Unionist party won’t have the confidence to continue.
So, either it’s going to be as a result of historic mistrust or short-term political gain.
It will use the vocabulary of South Africa "" where they seek a sufficient consensus to make sure you can build up a "" strong center.
And, those who are outside the process realize the futility "" of being outside the process, and they will come in over time.
And, with 1 the support of civil society in norther Ireland, the business community, 1 the churches, you will have for the first time ever in the history of 1 Northern Ireland a proper, inclusive political dialogue.
Again, another facet which is helping the peace process with the last British elections, which occurred in May of 1997, when Gerry Adams , and Martin McGuinness were elected.
These are the two people at the ; heart of the Republican peace process.
The fact that these are the two people who are leading the "" peace faction, have been elected, cannot be underestimated.
But, a Labor government which is a huge majority, and has got a very close working relationship with the Clinton administration.
The Blair team, long before they come into office, were watching very closely what John Major did.
The one thing that they had hoped was that "" Major would push things along so far that they could pick it up and go "" further with it.
They didn’t foresee that they were going to get such a ; magnificent, spectacular victory.
They also have, at a person level, a very good relationship 1 between the president and the prime minister.
Labor administration who have studied very closely how the democratic ; presidential campaigns worked, and how the American political system ; works.
So that there is a meeting of minds and a meeting of attitudes » which was never there before.
As they sit at the talks at the moment, the best that can be given is an interim judgement.
Equally, it is conceivable that others had to go through the same : learning curve.
And in the wider picture, * you arrive at an interim judgement that most of the parties, including the » Republican movement, are now prepared to accept less than .... when , they set out.
People like Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness have gone through ; their own very painful form of political odyssey.
They have gone down a r very long road where they believe in simplistically that you could win i this militarily.
They have had the moral courage to admit that there is another way ; forward.
Sinn Fein have to convince the Irish people as a whole that this is not part of a cynical ploy, that they’re not going to return to violence.
So, they have a very tall order in speaking to constituencies. administration here; it is the people of Ireland.
Not simply » because of their campaign of violence, but simply because the way that "" politics is evolving globally.
So, in the end, what they might see is the notion of strong regionalism in the island of Ireland, which will be part of a regional European union.
Americans, and particularly Irish Americans, have also gone through their own learning curve over this past 25 to 27 years.
There was identification with the underdog, while turning a blind eye to many of the things that that underdog was doing.
To simplifying some horrible violence on the part of the IRA and others.
But, now that they have gone through that, I think that Americans have a much stronger realization of the complexity of the problem, and also of a much stronger sense of the ownership to the outcome of the problem.
And it’s holding onto that ownership which I think is very important in the medium term.
We could say that, in fact, peace process is the hard bit; killing is easy.
Killing can give certain people in the community their sense of self esteem.
Knowing that that has to stop, they simply become ordinary members of their community.
And so as part of the peace process, it is essential that what has built into it is an attempt to civilianize these people.
It has been tried in other peace processes with very limited success, it should be said.
But, I think, it is more likely to be achievable in the Irish conflict for very simple reasons.
And that is the continuing part of the family, the continuing traditional Catholic beliefs.
The fact that it is the communities which sanctions violence, and the community can turn it off.
This book The King’s Speech Wembley Park 1925 Gene possible Research Centers British Royals want to know what this gene is, FOXP2 1941 The surgery on Rosemary Kennedy has failed, the daughter of Rose Mary Kennedy, daughter of Joseph Kennedy Sr.
In an interview with two newspaper journalists, Louis M Lyons of The Boston Globe, and Ralph Coghlan of the St.
She’s fighting for self-preservation, just as we will if it comes to us. ... | know more about the European situation than anybody else, and it’s up to me to see that the country gets it.
Here we come, y Rosemary Kennedy retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Rosemary read few books but could read Winnie-the-Pooh.
For some time past, I have been studying the i well known psychological method of Dr.
The crowd made no sign, and the King and the + Queen smiled as if nothing had happened.
Vp ike Ai at the age of 23 é ECR L | SAY © Why she was seen as a threat—and abandoned in an institution for decades © How her tragic life still haunts al@ynasty Jennifer Lawrence 2.
Ld i | “Darling Daddy,” 22-year-old Rosemary Kennedy wrote in a 1940 letter to her 1 father Joseph P Kennedy, then serving as United States Ambassador to Great Britain.
Just over a year later, that same young woman affectionate, dutiful and always i eager to please her father was unable to form a sentence.
In what would become a i decades-long secret and a source of deep shame for the most famous dynasty in ; American history, Joe and Rose Kennedy’s intellectually disabled eldest daughter ; lost everything at age 23, when her father scheduled a catastrophic lobotomy that left ‘ her with the mental capacity of a toddler.
Rome’s Very Best Maria Montessori retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here On DECEMBER 19, 1961, at the age of 73, Josepsh Kennedy Sr. suffered a stroke.
At an arly age, Montessori enrolled in classes at an all-boys echnical school, with hopes of ecoming an engineer.
Her ducational method is in use today in many public and Kennedy’s son Robert was assassinated on JUNE 5, 1968.
He died at home in Hyannis Port the following year on NOVEMBER 18, 1969.
Life and career Birth and family Montessori was born on August 31, 1870 in Chiaravalle, Italy.
Her early school record was “not particularly noteworthy”, although she ; was awarded certificates for good behavior in the 1st grade and for “lavori ; donneschi”, or “women’s work”, the next year.
Because her MONTESSORI SCHOOL Cedarburg, ttendance of classes with men Wisconsin | All Rights Reserved. in the presence of a naked ody was deemed Dr.
In her last two ears, she studied pediatrics nd psychiatry, and worked in he pediatric consulting room nd emergency service, ecoming an expert in ediatric medicine.
Montessori incorporated the elements of grace, beauty, purpose, care, exploration, discovery, and independence.
Early career and family From 1896 to 1901, Montessori worked with and researched so-called “phrenasthenic” childrenin modern terms, children experiencing some form of ; cognitive delay, illness, or disability.
Instead of marriage, Montessori decided to continue her work and i studies.
Montessori was intrigued by Itard’s ideas and created a far » more specific and organized system for applying them to the everyday education of i children with disabilities.
Public advocacy ' In 1897 Montessori spoke on societal responsibility for juvenile delinquency at the "" National Congress of Medicine in Turin.
She studied theoretical and moral philosophy, history of philosophy, and psychology as u such, but she did not graduate.
Montessori, ; occupied with teaching, research, and other professional activities, oversaw and ; observed the classroom work, but did not teach the children directly.
I was once told by a ve therapist I had a few dates , with that “my speech articulators could not keep up” not that I was bipolar she ; thought I was rational but had a lot I was simply tying to cram into sentences more , than my bodily mechanics could do well. — ' “Developmental verbal dyspraxia , also known as childhood apraxia of ' speech and developmental apraxia of speech , is a condition in ' which children have problems saying sounds, syllables and words.
In 1920 the British Government decided to site the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Park, on the site of the pleasure gardens created by Sir Edward Watkin in the 1890s. i I | i i I I i i i I I I ' One of the reasons for the suggestion was a sense that other powers, ie America 1 and Japan, were challenging Britain on the world stage.
India, which effectively signalled the end of the British Empire to anyone who ; thought about the consequences, while the Dominions had shown little interest in ; following British foreign policy since the war.
It was hoped that the Exhibition ‘ would strengthen the bonds within the Empire, stimulate trade and demonstrate ; British greatness both abroad and at home, where the public was believed to be ‘ increasingly uninterested in Empire, preferring other distractions, such as the ' cinema. v Yet it was in “1901 the FOXP2 gene was first seen as far as history records show and that was in King Edward VII and the British Royals wanted a cure and began looking for one.
I am told I had a grandfather I thought or Ireland a former king who stepped down and I was nameed after and I believe that was King Edward the VIII and in a gene that shows in half of family members Edward VIII did not show it, his younger brother did.
Tom Donegan did not show it, Ed Donegan and his mother did including the swallowing trouble which is from dry throat.
With the Duke and Duchess of York i scheduled to make a Royal Tour of Australia, the need to improve the Duke’s ; speaking became pressing.
Help had been sought before, never with success, but the i Duke agreed to see Logue, a man with no medical training but strongly 1 recommended.
After two months of treatment, significant improvement in the Duke’s speech became evident and the Australian tour was a fine success. is children when they were young, he admired the adult “Bertie,” who rapidly ecame his favored son and preferred successor.
But primogeniture was not to be | | | i | | | i ' For his part King George V was delighted.
BRAIN FUNCTION The emotional regulation system may be different in people with BPD, suggesting that there is a neurological basis for some of the symptoms.
I have my own internal experiences (always rational though it is made to appear by mocking me I am not, I am treated as though bipolar or shchizophrenic delusional not because I am either but rather in a sapient effort of others to misdiagnose me and work to not corretly recognize my true cognitive conditionm, to hide FOXP2 isn’t that abnormal.
I am sure speech coaching did help him him, theater has been recomended to me, singing seems to be a way to flow with language, but this is a matter of holdign continous focus and I think during at least in some circumatances experiences a secondary thread in cognition.
CF lee eee Nee ae ee ee eae ee el | Affix Affix into your mind the Events of 1776 n George III retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here George III was ; King of Great Britain and Ireland from 25 October 1760 until the union of the ; two kingdoms on 1 January 1801, after which he was King of the United Kingdom ‘ of Great Britain and Ireland until his death in 1820.
Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale (Albert Victor Christian : Edward; 8 January 1864 14 January 1892) was the eldest child of the Prince and ; Princess of Wales and grandson of , the reigning British monarch, Queen Victoria.
When young, he traveled the world extensively as a naval cadet, and as an adult he 1 joined the British Army, but did not undertake any active military duties.
After two 1 unsuccessful courtships, he became engaged to be married to Princess Victoria Mary i of Teck in late 1891.
Mary later married his younger brother, who became King George V in 1910 In the following transcript excerpt from a video on Youtube with auto transcript the basis can be found in history for Great Britain and QEII for the affects on London of WWII and the Germans and later I will say this fits the British attitudes in Manchurian Candidate 1962 and their dislike for the Genocide acts of the Germans as Germany shifted from 1936 through 1939 including propaganda of the 1936 Berlin Olympics.
I also assert this expertise of parents-siblings-descendents in pre-genetic sequencing era was used in plant as well as animal genetic studies and included people like the parents of Valerie Jarret in Iran.
The term ‘disorders of attention, motor and perception’ or DAMP was used, particularly in Scandinavia.
The premise of this book is the FBI, CIA, DARPA, and others have been using population groups of out of wedlock descendents of Windsor Kutscheras to study a speech gene and during these studies the CIA has been simultaneously grooming some subjects to be future leaders of a secretive elites ruling family.
Now family databases can find “the clones” and the race is on to silence and eliminate those whose existence is a risk to the corridors of power, but the attack must be convert and complete before anyone knows who was attacked or why.
This overlapped with the expertise of Crytograhpy and the use of anomalies and grammatical semantics in messaging and the DARPA Brain Program in cognition and the Language of Thinking Hypothesis about how minds speak was part of 15)[Sce@ln(9ee1e.¢ and information theory.
England, the Queen of England, likely felt the same way and saw the Irish president of the USA a threat to the glory of Britain, and British goals for Ireland, Pakistan, and other locations, and British plans for taking on Eastern Europe as well.
The Curse of the Kennedys comes from inside the Kennedy family and Joseph Kennedy Sr. aligned with Great Brittian will will erupt in 1961 during the Republic of Ireland Troubles Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy (July 22, 1890 January 22, 1995) Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy (July 22, 1890 January 22, 1995) was an American philanthropist, socialite, and a member of the Kennedy family.
The word “hydrangea” is derived from Greek hydor meaning “water” and angeion meaning “vessel,” referring to the plant’s seed pods, which look like small water perhpaps of blue water pow JFK The Life of John F Kennedy retrieved from dailyjfk.com and copied . or modified to here Se) Joseph Kennedy JR born Joseph Patrick Kennedy Jr. was the eldest of the nine children born to Joseph P Kennedy Sr.
November 25 1925 Robert Francis Kennedy is born Will serve as Attorney General, United States Senator, and run for President August 13, 1926 Rose Kennedy departs for an extended trip to Europe Rose Kennedy departs for an extended trip to Europe, leaving behind JFK and his siblings in Brookline.
Despite poor vocal r performance Prince Alber of York will assume the Thrown as King George VI and i replace abdicating Nazi tied King Edward of Wales, all this 10 years later in 1936 as Austria is siezed] la _ JFK and sister Eunice on Naples Rd. in Brookline circa 1925 (photo courtesy of John F area Library) Joseph Kennedy SrBorn Joseph Patrick Kennedy September 6, 1888 Boston, Massachusetts, United States maried to Rose Kennedy “Joseph P Kennedy Jr.
These “drone” aircraft could not take off safely on their own and so a crew of two would take off and fly to 2,000 feet before they activated the remote control system, armed the detonators, and parachuted from the aircraft.
One year later the order for the atomic bombing of Japan was ordered on the Queen Mother’s birthday, and the bomb was developed under the name Trinity and supported by Roman Catholics. wikipedia Operation Aphrodite made use of unmanned, explosive-laden Army Air Corps Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress and Navy Consolidated PB4Y-1 Liberator bombers that were deliberately crashed into their targets under radio control.
July 25, 1915, Hull, MA Died: August 12, 1944, June 23, 1944: The First FJK Back Surgery.
Surviving the collision with the Japanese destroyer and enduring the grueling nature of the | subsequent rescue worsened JFK’s back problems.
Therefore, once he returned stateside, he was evaluated by a team of physicians at the ‘Mayo Clinic, including noted orthopedist Dr.
At the height of World War II, German test pilot Helmut Schenck becomes the first person known to use an ejection seat to successfully exit his aircraft in an emergency situation.
Schenck, testing a Heinkel He-280 jet fighter, was in tow behind a conventionally powered aircraft when his plane iced up, making it impossible to start his engines.
Powered by compressed gas, the seat catapulted him clear of the aircraft.
Schenck was the first to use this method of exiting his aircraft in an emergency.
Another Heinkel pilot had previously ejected successfully under test conditions.
This was logical enough, considering that the speed and g-forces generated by these high-speed planes made escape problematical for a pilot equipped with only a parachute.
Exiting the aircraft by “bailing out,” as was common in propeller-driven planes, was exceedingly dangerous in a jet aircraft.
The British also studied aircraft ejection during the interwar years but set the project aside in favor of other pursuits.
Ejection seats were eventually installed in several jet-aircraft models flown by the Luftwaffe, including the Heinkel He-162 Volksjager, the Arado Ar234B Nachtigal and the Messerschmitt Me-163 Komet.
Strangely, the ejection seat was only rarely installed in the Me-262, which was the most widely used German jet fighter of the war.
From the time of Schenck’s successful escape to the end of World War II, approximately 60 Luftwaffe airmen ejected from their planes in combat situations.
My father flew in the first, second and would have been potentially third atomic bombing runs against.
John F KennedyJohn Fitzgerald Kennedy , often referred to by his initials JFK, was an American politician who served as the 35th president of the United States from 1961 until his assassination near the end of his third year in office.
Rosemary KennedyRose Marie “Rosemary” Kennedy (September 13, 1918 January 7, 2005) was the eldest daughter born to Joseph P Kennedy Sr. and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy.
Eunice Kennedy ShriverEunice Mary Kennedy Shriver DSG (July 10, 1921 August 11, 2009) was an American philanthropist and a member of the Kennedy family.
She was a sister of United States President John F Kennedy, United States Senators Robert F Kennedy and Edward Kennedy, Rosemary Kennedy, and United States Ambassador to Ireland Jean Kennedy Smith, as well as the sister-in-law of Jacqueline Kennedy.
She was married to Sargent Shriver, who was the United States Ambassador to France and was the Democratic nominee for Vice President of the United States in 1972 Joseph P Kennedy Sr Died NOVEMBER 18, 1969 having survived the Kennedy Curse and living longer than any of his children in House Camelot Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, United States The theory of this book theory and several movie analogies used in this book.
Planned POTUS Aug 41944 Manhattan Project B-17 death of Joseph Kennedy Jr.
Malcom X (Donald Barr (unidentified in publicity | Future photo) hols and expermintal monkey in white house From a very young age, Joseph Kennedy Jr. was groomed by his father and predicted to be the first Roman Catholic United States president.
He often boasted that he would be president even without help from his father.
Attempted first Aphrodite attack Twelve August with robot taking off from Fersfield at One Eight Zero Five Hours.
Donald Barr William Barr and Christopher Wray have a Free Masons hit on me using a Paywall of FBI backed assailants Twins were created and studied regarding a speech defect.
My father turns atheist after his best friend is betrayed by the Catholic church (as Ireland is) and my father and his parents loyal to both, overcoming Boston WASP oppression.
Bush in Bush’s move to Texas to go into politics to defeat the far-right called Zapata Oil and in 1962 November 18 Richard Chenney will experience being pulled over by the police and afterwards alter his life course asserting that the police had charged him with drunk driving.
Johnson’s cowboy hat and boots reflected his Texas roots and genuine love of the : rural Hill Country.
Stars icon BY ALAN PEPPARD * Sy Ge Eala ghlorach takes off towards the Republic of Ireland as a Large Bill Wasp flies towards cow manuer Hill Country Texas JOHN F KENNEDY WAS JUST DAYS from securing the 1960 Democratic nomination for president when Dr.
Given its location, Ron Paul served in the United States Air Force via Texas limate, terrain, and vegetation, he Hill Country can be onsidered the border between the American Southeast and Southwest.
Bruce Alger, Texas’ lone Republican in Congress, called it a capitulation “to radical forces of the East and North.” a Wednesday, May 24, 1961 JFK hosted a luncheon for Prince Rainier and the Philadelphia born and raised Princess Grace of Monaco.
The athletic physique, broad shoulders, and muscular arms of the First Lady are highlighted by the sleeveless syle of dress that she often wore.
Wednesday, February 15, 1961 February 15, 1961 JFK is in Washington where he accepts an Irish christening cup for his son from Irish Ambassador Thomas J Kiernan.
John Fitzgerald a Kennedy Jr Wednesday, May 24, 1961 (November 25, May 24, 1961 1960 7 July 16, JFK hosted a luncheon for Prince Rainier and the Philadelphia born and raised Princess 1999), often Grace of Monaco.
The athletic physique, broad shoulders, and muscular arms of the First referred to as JohnLady are highlighted by the sleeveless syle of dress that she often wore.
John or JFK Jr., Grabbing the Houston Gauntlet CRISWELL’S JULY 3 SERMON had been the Protestant clergy’s warning shot.
JFK and Jackie with Prince Rainier and Princess Grace of Monaco at Norman Vincent Peale the west entrance of the White House and Dr.
John High School in 1 Cambridge, where he was captain of the basketball team; he was a lifelong i parishioner at the school’s affiliated parish church St.
From there he went to Boston College, from which he graduated ; in 1936.
He holds the distinction ; of being one of the few presidents who served in all elected offices at the federal level.
Johnson had one brother, Sam Houston Johnson, and three sisters, Rebekah, Josefa, and Lucia.
The nearby small town of Johnson City, Texas, was named after LBJ’s father’s cousin, James Polk Johnson, whose forebears had moved west from Georgia.
Johnson later quit his Georgetown studies fter the first semester in 1934.
I | | | | | | | | | | « In the 1952 general election, Republicans won a majority in both the House and 1 Senate.
New Year’s Eve 1955, his doctors reporting he had made “a most satisfactory ‘ recovery” since his heart attack five months prior | He became the Senate Democratic leader in 1953 and majority leader in 1954.
The two men compromised and the Kennedy-Johnson ticket won rin the 1960 presidential election.
The i following year Johnson was elected to the presidency when he won in a landslide © against Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater.
This claim has been acknowledged by Robert’s wife and Kathleen’s mother Ethel, though Kathleen later claimed that she looked at her christening certificate and that her actual godfather was Manhattanville College of the Sacred Heart professor Daniel Walsh.
Seymour Hersh stated that Robert F Kennedy hated Johnson for i his attacks on the Kennedy family, and later maintained that his brother offered the ; position to Johnson merely as a courtesy, expecting him to decline.
Johnson’s domestic policy was aimed to create programs that would expand civil ' rights, public broadcasting, Medicare, Medicaid, aid to education and the arts, urban A and rural development, and public services.
Johnson followed his predecessor’s actions in bolstering the space program, and it was under his presidency that NASA’s efforts became a top national priority and the | Apollo Program was expanded.
He enacted the Higher Education Act of 1965 which i established federally insured student loans.
Nationality Act of 1965 which laid the groundwork for United States immigration policy ; today.
In 1968, the Tet Offensive inflamed the anti-war movement and public fr opinion dramatically turned against the war.
He was there for , the Civil Rights Symposium, marking the opening of his White House files on civil i Suddenly, he was gripped with an agonizing attack of chest pain.
Recognizing it as * angina, J ohnson quietly reached for the nitroglycerin pills he carried and popped one i under his tongue.
Company F George Herbert Walker Bush was born in Milton, Massachusetts on June 12, : 1924.
He attended Greenwich Country Day School from 1929 to 1937 and Phillips Academy, an elite private academy in Massachusetts, from 1937 to 1942.
After a period of training, 1 he was commissioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve at Naval Air Station i Corpus Christi on June 9, 1943, becoming one of the youngest aviators in the Navy. i Beginning in 1944, Bush served in the Pacific theater, where he flew a Grumman TBF Avenger, a torpedo bomber capable of taking off from aircraft ; carriers.
The school was also the subject of persistent allegations of abuse ' in their behavioral modification program. i On March 23, 2011, Elan School announced it would close on APRIL 1, 2011.
Notables MICHAEL SKAKEL Michael Christopher Skakel is the fifth of seven | | | | | | | | | | i | | | | | | | | | | ; children, born to Rushton Walter Skakel and Anne Reynolds.
The McMartin Preschool (Manhattan Beach California, CIA research center) In 1956, at age 49, Virginia McMartin opened her preschool in downtown Manhattan Beach, and it quickly became popular within the local community.
McMartin family, who operated a preschool in Manhattan Beach, California, were ; charged with hundreds of acts of sexual abuse of children in their care.
Monarch Programming is a method of mind control used by numerous : organizations for covert purposes.
This has happens in parallel with genomic plants of European DNA, twins studies, and the study of the desperately concealed FOXP2 gene tied to speech and language and I also believe Collete MacDonald, child of Green Berett Jeffery Macdonal had shown, was being expressed, as is the case in half of the children who cary the London FOXP2 KE family gene, really the Prince of York gene, King Edward’s younger brother.
This book and my life history viewed in the totality formuate that Alma Powell who is a speech therapist with 1961 Boston Massachussetes ties along with Colin Powell were among many working with Her Majesty’s Service, Free Masons from St Louis speech therapists, and these two individuals have been long term tracking that gene, studing it in twins, using family lines in world diplomacy and sleeper agents, and covering up the program including perhaps the murder of Colletete MaCDonalds. re.
Ancient & Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, * “Orient of Missouri I I In the early 1950s in Colorado, the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of the Southern , Jurisdiction of the United States initiated a program to help children with speech and ' language disorders.
Today, there are SRCLP clinics, centers, and special programs operating or planned i for children and therapists located throughout the United States.
For over two decades, the Scottish Rite Masons, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, ; have been national leaders in the effort to help children and their families overcome ‘ the painful obstacles of dyslexia.
Through the support of « Scottish Rite Masons, Southern Masonic Jurisdiction, these clinics, centers, and i programs continue to increase.
Greta Hull Website HANNIBAL, MISSOURI In 2000, the MU Department of Communication Science and Disorders, with the generous support of the Valley of Columbia Scottish Rite, opened the Robert G Combs Language Preschool.
Jim Carpenter Website The Valley of Joplin Scottish Rite RiteCare began their philanthropic program in 1987 in parternship with Children’s Miracle Network.
Chief Rosanne Casimir of the Tk’emlups te Secwepemc First Nation said on Friday that ground-penetrating radar had discovered the remains near the site of the Kamloops Indian Residential School, which operated from 1890 until the late 1970s.
It was a very brief stopover and part of her American West ‘Coast tour.
Prince Edward, the Earl of Wessex, made a stop at a private reception at i ‘Harvest golf course in South East Kelowna for supporters and sponsors of ‘Duke of Edinburgh citizenship program.
The group was formed to seize control of the Cuban government after the Bay of Pigs Invasion.The operation was concentrating on Cuba and were operating out of Mexico.
See The ultimate keeper of secrets regarding who killed JFK Rolling STones interview with E Howard Hunt in his prison cell | Sa l Line “a E Howard Hunt during his imprisonment at the Federal Prison Camp ee Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, 1978.
He thought of f himself as a cool dude, suave, 1 sophisticated, intellectual.
Donald Barr CIA Free Mason with an experimental monkey having a birthday at the White House November 23 1961 Donald Barr with a research monkey at a White House birthday party 22 NOVEMBER 1961.
This book will speculate convincingly and authoritatively Catholics like Micheal Hastings, a Catholic High School student from France and others like Mel Gibson, who opposed WASPS in Australia and the USA, have been targeted by Patreus, the NSA and others as the British have planned monarchies and wealth based familial power around the world.
Quebec Act, act of the British Parliament in 1774 that vested the government of : Quebec in a governor and council and preserved the French Civil Code, the ; seigneurial system of land tenure, and the Roman Catholic Church.
One of the founders of National Women’s Political Caucus and co-chair of ERAmerica, traveling the country to push for passage of the Equal Rights Amendment.
The Next Generation CHESTER WILLIAM NIMITZ (/NIMITS/; FEBRUARY 24 , 1885 FEBRUARY 20, 1966) Chester William Nimitz was a fleet admiral of the United States Navy.
Company rule in India effectively began in 1757 after the Battle of Plassey and lasted until 1858 when, following the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the Government of India Act 1858 led to the British rown assuming direct control of India in the form of the new British Raj.
The region was "" sometimes called the Indian Empire, though not officially.
This book looks at secret twins studies, William Barr, Donald Barr, Jeffery Epstein, the Prescott Bush family and descendents, the Kennedy family and descendants, and the Donegan family and descents, and illegal psychiatric studies and abusive military research and coverups in these families leading into 1945 and the Manhattan Project, RADAR, and and other sciences that my Cape Cod familiy became an espionage victim of.
This book will and the research I have done supporting it show former FBI Special Agent in charge Ted Gunderson to be a focal point on finding these long deep British Rotschilds Rockefeller and Prescott BUSH NWO MLKULTRA programs visible surfacing, such as the assassinations of the Kennnedys, the murder of Jeffery Mac Donalds family by other parties, and how even Marilyn Monroe figured into this and became a victim of the CIA herself.
While these British Pilgrim like institutions may not hvwve been planned for any purpose, when they were needed for a secret program beginning in 1925 for Eugenics research, they were available.
This book will also conjecture and utilize available Open Source information that Bebrew compound Branch Davidians and the Lakota Tribe of Wounded Knee rejected the plan on nationalism soveriegnty grouunds, and they were anihalated as was CIA research center Jonestown Guyana.
Like Republic of Ireland Catholics the Lakota Indians had been “sensatized” to foreign genocidinal attacks having suffred a massacre long before the 1973 one.
Today, the Disciples include conservative churches like the Park Avenue Christian hurch, where Dr.
Charles Eugéne Bedaux was a French; American millionaire who made his fortune developing and implementing the work ; Measurement aspect of scientific management, notably the Bedaux System.
Bedaux ; was friends with British royalty and Nazis alike, and was a management consultant, , big game hunter and explorer.
Major Bedaux clients included DuPont, Imperial Chemical Industries, AngloPersian Oil Company , Fiat, and Campbell’s.
Bedaux purchased the sixteenth-century Chateau de Candé, in France, and lived there with his American second wife, the former Fern Lombard , a daughter of lawyer James Lombard of Grand Rapids, Michigan.
The couple purchased the chateau in 1927 and renovated it, completing work in 1930.
On 3 JUNE 1937, Charles and Fern Bedaux hosted the wedding of Wallis Simpson ,; and Prince Edward, Duke of Windsor at the chateau.
To Bedaux’s delight, the ' Windsors enthusiastically embraced the idea of making a tour of Nazi Germany.
Edward rewarded his hosts with a fulsome speech in praise of Germany and delivered a Nazi salute.
This book Abuse in McMartin Manhattan Beach California Preschool , Jesuit Daniel Freeman Hospital Manhattan Beach and continuing MKULTIRA abuse.
Those in or that have knowledge about Column 2 are killed in guerillas war system In reality I am a normal person well prepared for life from a family that gave their all to prepare me for life, and to keep the USA free so I could and other families could live in it free.
In about 2012 I was diagnosed with advanced Type II Diabetes and had an Alc of 13.3, a measure of over about three months how bad the high blood sugar medical emergency was.
Those who have Alc around 6t are considered in decent condition from Diabetes and that is the usual goal when intervention on Diabetes is attempted.
Alc above 10 is considered a lethal medical emergency and heart attack and stroke in the typical person with an Alc of 13. and Metabolic Syndrome has untreated diabetes.
The health consequence of harrassed gym access alone is Agravated Battery including with racial elements as the medical affects of untreated diabetes take their toll on my body.
As if to make a lethal opportunity out of that my medical spending, gym conditions, nutritional needs, etc., were interfered with.
Since then I have wanted to meet and settle down with a white woman, me healthy and in the gym scene, and me healthy and in the gym scene, yet that has been interfered with as a Legend was created by actors surrounding me I sexualized Yoga pants and was a peeping threat to gym women, making me a threat to gum women and also it was created as a legend I liked teens or tots in swimwear or yoga pants making my presence unwanted by gym women.
When FOXP2 is recognizable (much is hidden about the Syndrome to hide the CIA connection to it) a GangStalk is used to try and slander, misdiagnose, and socially cleanse society from the stigmatized slandered FOXP2 gene expressing people.
Is Espionage terms I might just “drop like a house fly” dead to the floor though others using my gym techniques are welcome and popular and there is no need or demand for me in any gym as a health program workout partner system prespective.
Most probably Mockingbird, the plan to develop rage in people who show FOXP2 which has phenotype that is recognizable in grammar, etc., the CIA plan is to isolate and destroy those lives so that the nearly identical “clones” shot showing that quirk are seen as very different.
When James Angleton set the Infiltration scheme up he was aware certain factors might expose the infiltrators.
One is the history of FOXP2 gene becoming known, and thus family lines of the rare gene identified.
Two is that the DiVinci code not be broken and conspiracyh theories about the CIA plan be views as Russian attempts to influence the USA with Propaganda undermining the CIA/DIA/DARPA/NSA/FBI Further Reading Vocabulary.com retrieved from Noxious and copied or modified to here NOXIOUS Something noxious is harmful and could be even fatal whether it is colorless, odorless, and invisible like carbon monoxide, or dark, strong-smelling, and obvious, like black smoke from a fire.
People are called noxious too when they hurt others with cruelty or mental anguish.
While obnoxious might come to mind when seeing the word noxious, obnoxious is a much less damaging adjective to describe someone annoying.
Most uses for noxious involve real physical or emotional damage unless the word is used in exaggeration.
Any time someone is obnoxious, someone else probably wants them to stop it.
Medical School, to introduce psychoanalysis into the Harvard curriculum but to keep 1 those who taught it away from the decision-making apparatus in Vienna.
In 1935, Murray and Morgan developed the concept of apperception and the : assumption that everyone’s thinking is shaped by subjective processes, the rationale ; behind the Thematic apperception test.
They used the term “apperception” to refer to , the process of projecting fantasy imagery onto an objective stimulus.
In 1938 he ' published Explorations in Personality, a classic in psychology, which includes a ' description of the Thematic Apperception Test.
James Miller, in charge of the selection of secret agents at the OSS during World War ll, said the situation test was used by British War Officer Selection Board and OSS to assess potential agents.
Jonathan D Moreno DARPA buildig better puppets to rule the world with Super Soldiers and Super Groomed eee to conquer countries with.
Jonathan D Moreno has been a senior staff member for three presidential advisory commissions and has served on a number of Pentagon advisory committees.
One of the most important thinkers describes the literally mind-boggling possibilities that modern brain science could present for national security.” LAWRENCE J KORB, former United States Assistant Secretary of Defense Lawrence J Korb is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress and a senior adviser to the Center for Defense Information.
As the author discusses the innovative Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the role of the intelligence community and countless university science departments in preparing the military and intelligence services for the twenty-first century, he also charts the future of national security.
Fully updated and revised, this edition features new material on deep brain stimulation, neuro hormones, and enhanced interrogation.
With in-depth discussions of “psyops” mind control experiments, drugs that erase both fear and the need to sleep, microchip brain implants and advanced prosthetics, supersoldiers and robot armies, Mind Wars may read like science fiction or the latest conspiracy thriller, but its subjects are very real and changing the course of modern warfare.
Harvard human experiments, 1959-62 In 1947, he returned to Harvard as a chief researcher, lectured and established with others the Psychological Clinic Annex.
From late 1959 to early 1962, Murray was responsible for unethical experiments in which he used twenty-two Harvard undergraduates as research subjects.
Among other goals, experiments sought to measure individuals’ responses to extreme stress.
The unwitting undergraduates were submitted to what Murray called “vehement, sweeping and personally abusive” attacks.
Specifically-tailored assaults to their egos, cherished ideas and beliefs were used to cause high levels of stress and distress.
The subjects then viewed recorded footage of their reactions to this verbal abuse repeatedly.
Among the subjects was 17-year-old Ted Kaczynski, a mathematician who went on to be known as the ‘Unabomber’, a domestic terrorist who targeted academics and technologists for 17 years.
The Education of an American Terrorist connects Kaczynski’s abusive experiences under Murray to his later criminal career.
In 1960, Timothy Leary started research in psychedelic drugs at Harvard, which Murray is said to have supervised.
In 1943 Murray helped complete Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler, commissioned by OSS boss MGen.
The report used many sources to profile Hitler, including informants such as Emst Hanfstaengl, Hermann Rauschning, Princess Stephanie von Hohenlohe, Gregor Strasser, Friedelinde Wagner, and Kurt Ludecke.
The groundbreaking study was the pioneer of offender profiling and political psychology.
In addition to predicting that Hitler would choose suicide if defeat for Germany was near, Murray’s collaborative report stated that Hitler was impotent as far as heterosexual relations were concerned and that there was a possibility that Hitler had participated in a homosexual relationship.
I think he studied #FOXP2Syndrome in various families Kutschera, Windsor, and other descended, Einstein, Monroe, Harold and Glorian, Kennedy’s others.
Like USSR Olympians trained from brith these families enter contests to rule Commonwealth Countries, political offices not sports.
CLA OSS behavioral research from Kutschera family Glorian Donegan who also had the FOXP2Syndrom from the Windsor side Theodore John Kaczynski born May 22, 1942), also known as the Unabomber, is an American domestic terrorist and former mathematics professor.
He was a mathematics prodigy, but abandoned his academic career in 1969 to pursue a primitive life.
Between 1978 and 1995, he killed three people and injured 23 others in a nationwide bombing campaign against people he believed to be advancing modern technology and the destruction of the environment.
He issued a social critique opposing industrialization and advocating a naturecentered form of anarchism.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia His belief was that diffences in poeple, sometimes with race references, were being concealed by Anthropologists who had a technorcat agenda of deceiving the world and controlling it along with media and scientific support for the plan.
His theory matches MKULTRA and the oil business grooming leaders to rule and also alter the world tied to big oil.
Some believe Ruby’s death was part of a continuing cover up of the Kennedy assassination, because onc of the goals of MK-ULTRA was to find a substance that could induce cancer, and deaths from cancer would be above question.
The contract signed in 1953 under Subproject 18 of MK-ULTRA totaled $400,000.
Bush was once a member of the Eli Lilly board, and the Quayle family was a large stockholder.
There also are suggestions that Timothy Leary received CIA-channeled money through various government agencies.
Accidental outgrowths of MK-ULTRA and its associate subprojects were all the “crazies roaming the country.
Hackney was a psychiatrist who did BeMod experiments for the CIA from 1970-75, involving how much pain a subject could withstand.
These experiments were done at the Vetcrans Administration Hospital in Minnesota on the homeless or those who had no family.
Society already considered them crazy, so no one would listen to them if they complained about the BeMod experiments.
Hackney then began to figure out that these people really were not insane.
Almost all of them had flashbacks involving the military, killing or learning to kill.
The problem arose when the victims turned about 40 and all of it began to unravel.
Shortly after repressed memory syndrome was accepted, the False Memory Syndrome Foundation appeared.
The foundation's sole aim appears to be to discredit studies and research on repressed memory syndrome.
I assert I am one of many who were experimental DARPA and Queen of England test births from about 1901 on in which the Royal Families and other aristocrats are quietly trying to hide and breed out Minimal Brain Dysfunction FOXP2 gene first it seems formerly identified in the King Edward VII line of the Windsors, Glorian Donegan, and Malcolm X #GangStalk is poisoned atmosphere by an invisible cloud of Colloid.
A novice nun, The NAZI party grew out of smaller political groups with a nationalist orientation that formed in the last years of World War I In 1918, a league called the Freier Arbeiterausschuss fiir einen guten Frieden (Free Workers’ Committee for a good Peace) was created in Bremen, Germany.
However, he also accused Maria, is sent to care for the unruly children of the wealthy Baron von ([rapp, a captain in the Austrian navy.
Drexler emphasised the need for a synthesis of volkisch nationalism with a form of economic socialism, in order to create a popular nationalistoriented workers’ movement that could challenge the rise of Communism and internationalist politics.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia tps://www.archives.gov/publicatio ins/prologue/2005/winter/vontrapps-htmIM Maria was born on 26 January 1905 to Augusta and Karl Kutschera.
Her mother died of pneumonia when She was two in the year of 1907 er greif stricken father mostly abondoned her to other family and when she was 9 in 1914 or so her Uncle Franz Kutschera became her Gaurdian.
Maria and George married a year later in 1927, 11 years before the family left Austria, not right before the Nazi takeover of Austria in 1938.
There were 10, not 7 von Trapp children and I think Marylin Monroe, Glorian Donegan, and Harold Gainey were three possible 1925 1926 Prince Edward of Wales parented children.
The family was musically inclined before Maria arrived, but she did teach them to sing madrigals.
I think three of the denied children were by Prince Edward of Wales (per my family spoken history though Prince of York may also have fit. the 7 remaining children may have been between Von Trapp and Maria Kutschera Von TRrapp] It is possible the earlier out of wedlock births may have derailed (along with other factors such as a free-spirit) may have derailed the Convnet plan Franz Kutschera landed on for her.
Maria came to the von Trapp family in 1926 as a tutor for one of the children, Maria, who was recovering from scarlet fever, not as governess to all the children.
Barron George Von Trapp my not have been trying to marry a foreign princess.
Georg was born in Zadar (now in Croatia), which at that time was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Zadar became part of Italy in 1920, and Georg was thus an Italian citizen, and his wife and children as well.
The family had a contract with an American booking agent when they left Austria.
Count Friedrich Wilhelm Alexander Ferdinand of Wiirttemberg, 1st Duke of Urach (6 July 1810 17 July 1869), was the son of Duke Wilhelm of Wiirttemberg , younger brother of King Frederick I of Wiirttemberg, by his morganatic wife, Baroness Wilhelmine von Tunderfeldt-Rhodis , who had married in 1800.
During the Nazi and post-Nazi era, he provided aid to refugees, Jews, and prisoners of war and was reported to Nazi authorities for these activities.
He rean an underground railroad from Nazi Germany and may have helped both Arnold Swchwartezenegger and Maria Kutschera out of Germany and in that way Arnold Schwartzenevver would know the real history of Maria Kutschere and the Nazis and J Edgar Hoover would too.
The Peace Corps of CIA backed USAID may have had some involvement from him too., Carl Alexander was the third son of Albrecht, Duke of Wiirttemberg and his wife, Archduchess Margarete Sophie of Austria.
He resigned from the army at the rank of captain, following the German Revolution of 1918-1919, and within a few months became a postulant at the Abbey of St.
Because of his position and his family’s conservative Catholic values, he was involved in opposition to National Socialism as early as 1933 and was interrogated by the Gestapo several times.
In Switzerland, he founded International Catholic Refugees and traveled through Europe.
After the end of World War II, Father Odo founded the Central European Rehabilitation Association , with the aim of providing war-torn Central Europe with food, clothing, medicine, and other necessities.
In 1949, after CERA had fulfilled its function and was dissolved, Father Odo returned to the abbey of St.
He left the monastery in 1952 because of a heart condition, returning to his family castle in Altshausen.
There he spent the last years of his life and was a refounder of the Yellow Hussars of Altshausen.
Father Odo was briefly interviewed and mentioned in the 1959 biography of his cousin Queen Mary of Teck by the British biographer James Pope-Hennessy.
According to his wishes, Father Odo was buried in the cemetery of the Abbey of St.
Consider the Eye of Providence on Heath Ledger’s forhead in a movie still frame and William of Ulrich.
Heath Andrew Ledger Matilda Rose Ledger his recently born daughter Further Reading Wilhelm served as a cavalry officer in the army of the then-independent Kingdom of Wiirttemberg.
U-bout retired Captain George Von Trapp whose submarine role was firing WHitehead torpedoes at enemy ships, Agatha Whitehead the heir to the British torpedo manufacture line. 3 of the 10 Von Trapp children are not accounted for.
Getting to North Carolina and the Public Charge Rule The Public Charge Rule is not a new United States immigration concept.
From as early as 1882, the United States Congress used the concept to deny visas to people who would become a “public charge” as immigrants.
A public charge is anyone who would become dependent on the United States government after gaining immigrant status.
The very poor family only finally gained entrance and passage to the USA (where they had stated to Border Agents they wished to stay) when they displayed they had a singing agent and income capability.
Glorian and Harold were adopted but that seems to have circumvented the immigration process.
Franz Kutschera Franz Kutschera was an Austrian Nazi politician and government official.
He along withe Joseph Mengle were selecting genetically shunned population for the gas chamber.
Mengle escaped to Buenos Aries and is talked obliquely by Jen Moore who interviewed Maria Kutschera and Jen Moore mentions this Mengele and Buenos Aeirs connection to the story several times including while pointing her camera at my and Glorian Donegan’s Virginian apartment.
The story of at least 3 picks up in United States records in North Carolina, Festus Gainey who my mother Glorian Gainey and Harold Gainey were raised with until he died.
Festus Gainey BIRTH 19 Oct 1884 Wayne County, North Carolina, USA DEATH 3 Mar 1936 Goldsboro, Wayne County, North Carolina, USA BURIAL Thornton Family Cemetery That would have put her at 8, becoming 9 on December 13th that year.
I think Maria Kutschera left for Sout Carolina USA pregnant with Glorian Donegan and King Edward VIII was the father A visit to the grandfather of Glorian Donegan Maria Garudian Franz Kutchera December 14 1936 This was about the time the death of Festus Gainey orphaned Glorian Donegan and teh DuPonts stepped in.
Bure of York in Austria retrieved from ‘The Gaurdian.com and copied or modified to here Duke of Windsor in Austria Guest at castle near Vienna Monday 14 December 1936 guardian.co.uk Ex-King Edward, now Duke of Windsor, is to stay for an indefinite period as the guest of Baron Eugene de Rothschild at the latter’s castle at Enzesfeld, 25 miles south of Vienna.
At Vienna station | As the train drew in at the station police hurried on to the platform and formed a cordon round the special sleeper which was next to the engine and luggage-van, ' allowing none of the passengers anywhere near it.
Skubl, Police President of Vienna, and Sir Walford Selby, the "" British Minister in Vienna, had gathered.
The Rothschild Family Schloss Enzesfeldt, near Vienna, Austria Schloss Enzesfeldt is a prominent landmark in the Triesting valley, about 25 miles from Vienna.
The castle was developed as a fortress in the late 11th century to defend the valley from invading Slavs and Magyars.
It came under the control of the Habsburgs, who sold the castle in the 16th century.
After a variety of owners, the estate was purchased in 1880 by Salomon Albert Anselm von Rothschild , who restored the castle and improved the property, and was a great benefactor to the town of Enzesfeldt.
The estate passed to Eugéne von Rothschild , and between the wars the Viennese Rothschild family entertained on a grand scale at Enzesfeldt.
Enzesfeldt and the Duke and Duchess of Windsor Abdicates December 10 1936 Vists Austria DECEMBER 14 1937 Eugeéne’s first wife Cathleen ‘Kitty’ Wolf , had been a friend of Elsie de Wolfe , and in 1937, it was on her recommendation that the Rothschilds invited the Duke of Windsor to stay when he left England, having signed the Instrument of Abdication on 10 December 1936.
The castle was developed as a fortress in the late e 11th century to defend the valley from invading Slavs and Magyars.
It came under the control of the Habsburgs. who sold the castle in the 16th Cc century.
After a variety of owners, the estate was purchased in 1880 by Salomon Albert Anselm von Rothschild . who restored the 0 castle and improved the property. and was a great benefactor to the town u of Enzesfeldt.
The estate passed to Eugene von Rothschild . and between the wars the Viennese Rothschild family entertained on a pl grand scale at Enzesfeldt. e Enzesfeldt and the Duke and Duchess of Windsor WwW er Eugene's first wife Cathleen ‘Kitty’ Wolf . had been a friend 9f Elsie de Wolfe , and in 1937, it was on her recommendatio e fhat the Rothschilds invited the Duke of Windsor to stay when he left England, having signed the Instrument of Abdication on 10 December re 1936.
The Second World War at th During the Second World War. properties of the Viennese Rothschilds, including Enzesfeldt were confiscated by the Nazis.
The Viennese e business of the Rothschilds was seized, and Eugene and other members of C the family had to pay a substantial ransom for the release of his brother Louis von Rothschild from imprisonment by the Gestapo in h Vienna.
Eugéne and Kitty left for the United States. where they settled on at Long Island, and where Eugene. met and married his second wife, the former actrees Jeanne Stuart in 1952, after Kitty's death in e 1946. a In 1963, Eugene sold the Enzesfeldt estate, and it was subsequently u developed into a country club by Baron Hubert von Pantz. d Return to Estates listing e C a ndé, Monts, France, in May 1937, where they were married a month later.
The Second World War During the Second World War, properties of the Viennese Rothschilds, including Enzesfeldt were confiscated by the Nazis.
Z ij Schloss Enzesfeldt, near Vienna, Austria er Schloss Enzesfeldt is a prominent landmark in the Triesting valley, about L 25 miles from Vienna.
I oO came under the control of the Habsburgs, who sold the castle in the 16th ui century.
After a variety of owners, the estate was purchased in 1880 by Salomon Albert Anselm von Rothschild , who restored the Ss castle and improved the property, and was a great benefactor to the town Vv of Enzesfeldt.
The estate passed to Eugene von Rothschild , and between the wars the Viennese Rothschild family entertained on a O grand scale at Enzesfeldt. -s Enzesfeldt and the Duke and Duchess of Windsor ot Eugéne’s first wife Cathleen ‘Kitty’ Wolf , had been a friend of Elsie de Wolfe , and in 1937, it was on her recommendation h that the Rothschilds invited the Duke of Windsor to stay when he left England, having signed the Instrument of Abdication on 10 December SC 1936.
The couple were reunited at the Chateau de (1 Candé, Monts, France, in May 1937, where they were married a month later. 8 8 21955) from imprisonment by the Gestapo in Vienna.
Eugéne and Kitty left for the United States, where they settled on Long Island, and where Eugéne, met and married his second wife, the former actrees Jeanne Stuart in 1952, after Kitty’s death in 1946.
In 1963, Eugene sold the Enzesfeldt estate, and it was subsequently developed into a country club by Baron Hubert von Pantz.
CDi Heilige Johanna der Schlachthéfe” Von Trapp Singer Daugher with Franz Kutschera December 13th Rehearsal for the December 14 Opening Night 1963 “Die Heilige Johanna der Schlachthéfe” Eva Kotthaus as Johanna and Franz Kutschera s as the butcher millionaire Pierpon Mauler perform a scene of the play “Die Heilige Johanna der Schlachth6fe” during the dress rehearsal by Bert Brecht.
On the occasion of the opening of the new theatre of DETAILS Frankfurt, “Faust I” is performed on 14 DECEMBER 1963 and “Die Heilige Johanna der Schlachth6fe” on the following day. | usage worldwide (Photo by Heinz-Jiirgen GOttert/picture alliance via Getty Images) Johanna Karolina Gobertina Barbara von Trapp was the sixth child of Georg Ritter von Trapp and his first wife, Agathe Whitehead.
U-boats were naval submarines operated by Germany, particularly in the First and Second World Wars.
Although at times they were efficient fleet weapons against enemy naval warships, they were most effectively used in an economic warfare role and enforcing > a naval blockade against enemy shipping A woman who was raised poor on a farm who did not tour with the Von Trapps (She and Harold showed FOXP2 Syndrome) but was of “two competing systems” the Franz Kutschera relatives via Maria Kutschera plus Maria Kutschera’s wishful fling with Prince Edward of Wales, out of wedlock.
With 7 accounted for as singers and 3 secret Prince of Wales children alreaedy in the USA ' Though she was a caring and loving person, Maria wasn’t always as sweet as the fictional Maria.
She tended to erupt in angry outbursts consisting of yelling, throwing things, and slamming doors.
Her feelings would immediately be relieved and good humor restored, while other family members, particularly her husband, found it less easy to recover.
Instead of the fictional Max Detweiler, pushy music promoter, the von Trapps’ priest, the Reverend Franz Wasner, acted as their musical director for over 20 years.
Georg von Trapp, born in 1880, became a national hero as a captain in the Austrian navy during World War I He commanded submarines with valor and received the title of “Ritter” , and later baron, as a reward for his heroic accomplishments.
Georg married Agathe Whitehead, the granddaughter of Robert Whitehead, the inventor of the torpedo, in 1912.
Rupert, 1911-1992; Agathe, 1913; Maria, 1914-; Werner, 1915-; Hedwig, 1917-1972; Johanna, 1919-1994; and Martina, 1921-1952.
After World War I, Austria lost all of its seaports, and Georg retired from the navy.
The family was devastated by her death and unable to bear living in a place where they had been so happy, Georg sold his property in Pola and bought an estate in Salzburg.
The family lost most of its wealth through the worldwide depression when their bank failed in the early 1930s.
Maria tightened belts all around by dismissing most of the servants and taking in boarders.
It was around this time that they began considering making the family hobby of singing into a profession.
Georg was reluctant for the family to perform in public, “but accepted it as God’s will that they sing for others,” daughter Eleonore said in a 1978 Washington Post interview.
As depicted in The Sound of Music, the family won first place in the Salzburg Music Festival in 1936 and became successful, singing Renaissance and Baroque music, madrigals, and folk songs all across Europe.
When the Nazis annexed Austria in 1938, the von Trapps realized that they were on thin ice with a regime they abhorred.
Georg not only refused to fly the Nazi flag on their house, but he also declined a naval command and a request to sing at Hitler’s birthday party.
They were also becoming aware of the Nazis’ anti-religious propaganda and policies, the pervasive fear that those around them could be acting as spies for the Nazis, and the brainwashing of children against their parents.
They weighed staying in Austria and taking advantage of the enticements the Nazis were offeringgreater fame as a singing group, a medical doctor’s position for Rupert, and a renewed naval career for Georg-against leaving behind everything they knew-their friends, family, estate, and all their possessions.
When the Von Trapps, the famous musical family depicted in The Sound of Music, escaped the Nazis, the story of their Austrian home was far from over.
The messenger of posts was not a youth, the ages were wrong, that was Himmler working with Franz Kutschera as Nazi plotters.
After the war, a religious group, the Catholic Missionaries of the Precious Blood, bought the property from the Von Trapps, who had had their ownership restored after the Nazis were defeated.
Franz Kutschera third from the right in the first row Julie Andrews said she could “feel the evil” when she visited the real Von Trapp house Heidi Lux in Upworthy.com * Andrews did visit the von Trapp house in Salzburg, Austria later on in her life.
After the wall was completed, he had those who constructed the wall shot.
Barbara Ward Morris and Edward Wells (the man ; Andrews thought was her father) were divorced when she was 7.
Julie’s mother remarried Ted Andrews, a Canadian-born tenor. became the youngest solo performer ever to be seen in a Royal Command Variety Performance before King George VI and Queen Elizabeth at the London |4t 10 she performed for Queen Palladium.
Ted Andrews insisted on giving Julie singing lessons and legally adopted her.
She was performing nightly at the London Palladium at the tender age of 12.
At school the next day, the students were agog,” Andrews recalls in Home.
There are other unsettling secrets in a life that sounds quasi-Dickensian with the young Julie helping to support her family by performing nightly.
Andrews’ maternal grandfather, a coal miner, died at 43 of syphilis after infecting her grandmother.
When Julie was 14, her mother took her to a party and casually introduced her to a man she later told Julie was her biological father.
I I I t I | | I I I “Tt rocked my world,” says Andrews, who adored Wells, her mother’s first husband, 1 with whom she lived the first six years of her life and whom she called Dad.
The Mauthausen main camp operated from the time of the Anschluss, when Austria ‘ was united with Nazi Germany on 8 August 1938, to 5 May 1945, at the end of the ' European theatre of Second World War.
As at other Nazi concentration camps, the inmates at Mauthausen and its subcamps | 1 were forced to work as slave labour, under conditions that caused many deaths.
Uncle Franz is disgusted by the behavior of Maria Kutschera until both Franz Kutschera and Franz Joseph same first names different plans for Austria hear the Von Trapp singers in the Salzburg singing contest winning first prize.
VIsting the house Rudy Brubaker banker whose bank failed erasing the Whitehead torpedo missile company fortune way.
To shore up the Austrian bank George Von Trap transfered the Whitehead fortune from London into the Austrian bank.
Father Wasner a Catholic Priest friendly to the family and involved with church music and getting the Von Trapps out following the events of ‘36 tO ‘38.
Chancelor Emporer Kaiser and other names of the Aristocrat Masonic Royal Austria Franz Joseph will hear the children sing on the radio.
While the Nazis sneak his country out from under him and annex it to Gernmany Franz Joseph may have recomeneded the singing children to London.
Joseph Kennedy Sr. a remote friend of Captain Von Trapp and Agatha Whitehead, United States Ambassador to England an steel and ship magnate from Boston Massachusetts.
Captain Von Trapp Austrio-Hungarian may himself have the gene or perhaps Agatha Whitehead or both.
In Segment 1 on YouTube Maria Kutschera novitiate finds Captain Von Trapp (who himself succeeded in the military perhaps from intensive regimentation of himself) regiments his children and hides them.
In Segment Two on YouTube novitiate Maria makes play clothes for the children from drapes as if gunny sacks but look good and takes the children to the park to roll down hills and not worry about getting them dirty.
Segment Three on YouTube places Captain Von Trapp in an interesting situation.
The banks are after him now that his rich wife Agatha Whitehead torpedo manufacture fortune heir has died.
Maintaining capital assets such as the Estate and caring for his children is serious problem for him and a rich Princess has turned down his marriage interests.
A boarding school for the children is beyond his means and so far his efforts are not working.
Maria Kustchera has a new theory of child rearing which is not “old fashioned” and is more respectable and more mainstream that it had seemed so far and is gaining acceptance.
In episode 4 Captain Von Trapp has married Maria Kutschera with the encouragement of the foreign princess who declined his courtship.
Banker Rudy of an Austrian bank wiped out financially by the Great Depression and German boycott of Austria declares bankruptcy and commits suicide.
Just before the suicide Von Trapp tries to write his rich London advocate for help.
As t his happened the Organ donated to the church is too small however the children are becoming a Human Resource in their musical theater skills and the Church priest Father Wasner responsible for music starts involvement with the children and family.
In Episode 5 Chancellor Fanz Joseph hears the children singing on the radio and recognizes the Von Trapp name as the “uboat commander” whose submarine fired Whitehead Torpedoes at surface vessels.
Further Reading With Rudi’s Grubers bank failed Captain Von Trapp informs Maria he has lost not only a friend but his fortune and they are now ruined.
In Episode 6 the guy around the house, perhaps the butler, perhaps an Uncle of Maria whose name is Franz reveals himself to be a Nazi party member, illegal in Austria, but he know reveals his “cutup cross” on hist turned out lapel.
This as Von Trapp regrets he has no family left because his own esteemed poet relative line on another branch of the Von Trapp family has already died out.
Franz and his Nazi thug friends demand a Nazi flag on annexed Austrian houses, they know the Von Trapps and Rudi Gruber and Von Trapp himself were closelyh tied German Nazi enemy Windsors of England.
For the Von Trapps is was Austria that moved, once a hero he is now an enemy in a now different Austria.
GENETIC AND PHENOTYPIC MARKERS Manufacturers of products derived from biological systems have long sought to identify relevant genotypic and phenotypic markers displayed by production strains and cell lines which could be employed as in-process monitors to predict product quality.
The only difference between the aristocracy and the rest is that the former have kept records.
Queen Victoria’s daughter Alice passed the defective gene to ‘ her daughter Alexandra, who joined the Russian Romanov dynasty with her marriage ' to Tsar Nicolas II; their long hoped-for son, Alexis, was a haemophiliac.
But to those with a ' genetic or genealogical bent, these royal goings-on are food for thought. z Project MK Ultra retrieved from military.wikia.org and copied or modified to here r In 1973, with the government-wide panic caused by Watergate, the CIA Director Richard Helms ordered all MKUltra files destroyed.
CIA documents regarding the project were destroyed, making a full investigation of ; MKUltra impossible.
A cache of some 20,000 documents survived Helms’ purge, as ; they had been incorrectly stored in a financial records building and were discovered ‘ following a FOIA request in 1977.
Plant Prophecies Ancient Kings were once a part of that culture and those bloodlines continue 5.
Actor Randy Quaid won a Golden Globe award for his ; portrayal of Lyndon Baines Johnson.
An ebullient Johnson starts his tenure as United States Senator by parking in the Senate Majority Leader reserved parking spot, much to the chagrin of the parking attendant.
The same lot is shown again in the future, and Johnson’s name is now fixed on the parking spot.
Johnson is now working tirelessly with all of the members of the Senate, battling the troublesome Joseph McCarthy, making amendments to the TaftHartley Act, and pressing for civil rights legislation.
A new face in Washington, Senator John F Kennedy, is told under no uncertain terms that a committee spot on the Foreign Relations Committee in the Senate would be his if he stayed for a crucial labor vote.
A visit by JFK’s brother Robert F Kennedy to Texas is arranged as father Joseph , Kennedy, who along with his sons, wish to know if LBJ is running for President or not.
The lack of action by Johnson in responding to Kennedy in a timely fashion allows 1 John Kennedy to build up a very strong support network, essentially denying Johnson 1 any real chance at the Presidential nomination.
Johnson says that his father was right, and that he made a big ; mistake by not doing something sooner.
An offer of the Vice Presidency by John Kennedy is at first rejected by Johnson because of the advice of Sam Rayburn.
The ‘ next day, Rayburn tells Johnson that he has changed his mind, and LBJ accepts the B offer despite Robert Kennedy’s attempt at preventing the deal.
He accompanies now widow Jacqueline Kennedy, along with his wife, on Air Force One on a trip back to Washington.
Hughes on board the aircraft, and a still of the moment along with a short audio ' summary of the events after ends the movie.
He claims not to be mentally ill, and that close friends such as Heath Ledgar, and David Carradine, were killed not by accident, but as part of a conspiracy. (ee Francis Carradine Beverly Francis Carradine was an American Methodist minister and a leading evangelist for the holiness movement.
He was a productive author, writing primarily on the subject of sanctification.
The patriarch of the Carradine family, he was the grandfather of actor John Carradine and great-grandfather of actors David, Keith, and Robert Carradine.
Parnassus, a character appears to be a manifestation of the hanged man tarot card, and has symbols on his forehead corresponding with those on a card shown in the film.
The tarot decks I’m familiar with don’t have such symbols on the hanged man card, however, and Googling hasn’t been revealing.
Hnaged, but the Eye of Providence is NOT one of the Tarrot cards and out of piace in the movie Heath Andrew Ledger { Intour Weekly * Heath’s death was ruled an accidental drug overdose due to a lethal cocktail of prescription painkillers found in his system.
Fans initially thought he was suicidal after breaking up with ex-fiancée Michelle Williams, while others thought it had something to do with playing the Joker in The Dark Knight.
Watch the video below to see some of the wildest theories about the causes of his death.
Perhaps the reason fans are so unsettled by Heath’s death is the mystery over how his body was found.
The actor’s masseuse found him first, but instead of immediately calling 911, she instead called Mary-Kate Olsen twice.
This little fact about his death sent many skeptics and theorists on the Internet running wild with accusations, from blaming Mary-Kate to questioning the masseuse.
Mary-Kate’s lawyer has maintained that she had nothing to do with it, but the situation still seems rather mysterious, especially since the masseuse changed her story a few times, initially saying she called Mary-Kate two times when actually it was four times.
The McMartin school was in Manhattan Beach California and a front for CIA backed MKULITRA research and Eugenics activities and studies.
The powerful elites backing the CIA cartel MKULTRA activities seem to be run out of Free Mason halls including Knights of Columbus hall in Arlington Virginia who have no need for the money from my mother’s trust fund by they do need my life and reputation sabotaged.
The College in South Hadley, desechables included prostitutes, street children, Massachusetts.
The and constitutional rights, and has municipality of Marsella in Risaralda was testified numerous times before eventually bankrupted by the cost of recovering the United States Congress on issues of corpses and conducting autopsies. deportation and extradition.
In the 1960s while an Army captain in intelligence, Pyle learned that “Army intelligence had 1,500 plainclothes agents watching every demonstration of 20 people r more throughout the United States,” (as later Pyle recounted on December 19, 2005, on Democracy Now and again on ABC News on January 6, 2006,) as part of a broad-based program of domestic spying.
Most of the filming took place in the Boston, Massachusetts area, with scenes shot in downtown Boston, South Boston, Waltham, Ipswich, Winthrop, Milton, Medfield, Quincy, Kingston, and North Andover, as well as other localities.
FOR THE Yrarm Envixa Novexrnern 30, 1os37 DeraARtTuMEnT or Mentanr Diseases PesetCcation oF Fes DGCuUMENT APrROVED FY THE COM™MISEION ON A DAMUINISNTRATION AND Firance soo + ""38.
The Fernald Center, originally called the Experimental School for : Teaching and Training Idiotic Children, was founded in Boston by ; reformer Samuel Gridley Howe in 1848 with a $2,500 appropriation ; from the Massachusetts State Legislature.
Nuclear medicine research in children The Fernald Two Sisters Plot at least of the Seven ite of the 1946-53 joint experiments Some simply call it collectively MKULTRA and y Harvard the scientific co-operation with England and the niversity and USA in the Manhattan Project of nuclear reseach, IT that exposed rocketry and propulsion, Cryptography, and other oung male Defense Advanced Research hildren to tracer HARVARD UNIVERSITY (DOMESTIC AND WASPY In Boston at one time its school color was CCUnIents Magenta.
In order to track absorption, several radioactive calcium tracers were given orally or intravenously. e Radiation levels in stool and blood samples would serve as dependent variables e In another study, 17 subjects received iron supplement shots containing radioisotopes of iron. e Neither the children nor their parents ever gave adequate informed consent for participation in a scientific study.
It is clear that the doses involved were low and that it is extremely unlikely that any of the children who were used as subjects were harmed as a consequence.
This book Read the Writing on the Wall to Learn of 33rd Degree Free Masons Deep State Mary Popins During this book I will cite major media as being the proponents and historians of the Deep State with slightly fictionalized accounts of world history told as Space Opera, light hearted musicals, or other works.
Those who are insiders enough recognize the story lines and names, and I Edward Donegan am one such person.
Elsewhere I go into Mary Poppins in detail which is very important to free masons and free masons murders and the Bush family treason.
Following the Atalanta Revolutions of France and the USA and other nations Great Britain was in decline exactly as it faced radio and the speech defect.
Mary of Teck was Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Empress of India, from 6 May 1910 until 29 January 1936 was bred into the England's royal family and she added a spoon full of sugar to what had been heavy handed British rule.
George Walker Bush is the product of two family traditions, the Bushes and the Walkers including Bert Walker at the beginning of the 20th Century.
On one side is the familiar patriarch Prescott Bush , the decorous Republican senator from Connecticut, the New England WASP, the pennantwaving Yale man.
On the other side of his father’s family stands a lesserknown patriarch, George Herbert Walker , the St.
In 1910 the British were concerned of the ebb of Great Britian by rebellions coming from India, Ireland, earlier the USA, and elsewhere.
The Special Relationship between the families of Great Britain really includes the Bush family.
Though set in 1910s King Edward VII King George V Bert Walker Mary Teck time of England and banking, the movie was filmed in 1964 and contains 1964 descendants references.
Bush and tied to Constable H 43 is part of a ""Spoonful of sugar helps the medicine go down"" which corresponds to Common friendly and Mary Teck.
It is Mary ""pop ins"" to commoner homes that is part of the new charm and lighter touch of rule.
Glorian Donegan was part of that gene pool having been out of wedlock Windsors fooling around and this is how my life ties to the JFK assassination, a witness as to why the Free Mason Deep State and anti communists killed JFK over illegal DNA experiments Donegan family included.
Luke and Leia as if orphans are hidden out on this farm, Luke is Anna Kin was actually Glorian Donegan.
Her father was Prince Albert of York and her mother was Maria Kutschera, neice of Gestapo General Franz Kutschera.
Maria Kutschera lost her parents to the plague of WWI the Spanish Influenza the Illuminati could cure.
These children Kilo Ren and Rey realize their biological parent Anna Kin was Glorian Donegan, and they realize Rey is Barrack Obama Jr and Kilo is Ed Donegan, and Rey must choose between the Windsors or Kutscheras.
I am left as Kilo Ren via Glorain Donegan embracing Glorian Donegan was of both Kutschera and Windsor parents.
It is also in the story line of My Normal where the gritty produce elite art about the grit.
Ww y The Star Wars canon fictional universe spans multiple eras, of which three are focused around each of the film trilogies.
It includes the media released in The High Republic and the upcoming The Acolyte.
The era of the prequel trilogy, in which the democratic Galactic Republic is corrupted by the Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious.
After orchestrating the Clone Wars between the Republic and a Separatist confederation, Palpatine exterminates the Jedi Order, overthrows the Republic, and establishes the totalitarian Galactic Empire.
Martial law is the temporary imposition of direct military control of normal civil functions or suspension of civil law by a government, especially in response to a temporary emergency where civil forces are overwhelmed, or in an occupied territory.
The era of the original trilogy, in which the Empire is fought by the Rebel Alliance in a Galactic Civil War that spans several years, climaxing with the death of the Emperor and fall of the Empire.
The era after the original trilogy, set during the formative years of the New Republic following the fall of the Empire.
The era of the sequel trilogy, in which the remnants of the Empire have reformed as the First Order.
Heroes of the former Rebellion, aided by the New Republic, lead the Resistance against the oppressive regime and its rulers— the mysterious being known as Snoke and the revived Palpatine.
It includes the animated Star Wars Resistance and the sequel trilogy films.
Princess Lea Organa who dines with Star The Two Hopes Darth Vader at State Affairs table with Solo Luke and Leia and others on gambling float it 1 Annakin Moesha Poppins Dinner Scene Landonis Balthazar ""Lando"" Calrissian ITT is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He was introduced in The Empire Strikes Back as an old friend of Han Solo and the administrator of the floating Cloud City on the gas planet Bespin.
Further Reading Before there was Luke Skywalker in the Lars home farm, Luke of Luke and sistr Leia, there was his mother another poor woman and his father Darth Vader aka Emperor Palpatine.
The Lars home is the Raleigh North Carolina home of Luke Skywaler raised there as by Festus Gainey e Prince Albert and Maria Kutschera have 3 children.
Maria’s mother dies of Spanish Flue e Anankin Glorians father Festus dies at 9 e Luke Ed DONEGAN also Princess Leia Hans Solo e — Rey and Ren from Leia and Solo As Solos, Ren and Ray trace back to Prince Albert and Maria Kutschera having Annakin Annakin to Luke and Leia to Ren and Rey.
Home of Ani and his mother on Tatoine Home of Anakin Skywalker and his mother on Tatoine.
There seems to have NO father, oddly much like with Marilyn Monroe or Julie Andrews.
As Anakin turns to the dark side, his mothers grandchild Luke Skywalker will be raised by Lars in the sand igloo.
At first it is a Vergence in the force, Anakin has a mother but not father.
Later, the father is in some way Palpatine and a Convergance between two different philosophies, Lords and Slaves.
Seven years earlier, he accidentally killed a vicious neighbor and fled— never to be seen or heard from again.
In computing/electronic contexts, a computer d over file, message, image, or video is concealed within distance. another file, message, image, or video.
Semaphores can be used for telegraphy when arranged in ‘visually connected networks, or for traffic signalling such as in ‘railway systems, or traffic lights in cities.
RGw whole of the signal is the Object to the Subject Traffic signaling a stop based on the presdate of the color of the signal METAPHOR Meta data which is abstract through neutral signa such as Widgets or other fictionalizations but represent the data of a Semaphore pair of subjet predact object.
Like with violence against the Kurds illegal acts are now waged against out of wedlock family lines tied to FOXP2 genes in various High Offices of certain nations including Germany and England.
This story line is in the move Fay Grimm and is likely promoted by Kamala Harris.
It is used , to set the way adjacent characters are grouped with respect to text » direction. byte endianness asked Nov 19, 2017 at 21:47 * I’m trying to figure out a way to create a little endian/big endian conversion for 64 bit integers and while I find a lot of answers online as to how to do it, none of them explain what exactly is going on.
Thank you in advance. c Coach 30044 silver badges1414 bronze badges 1 Endianness does not involve bit swapping, but only byte swapping.
From big to little endianess, you have to reverse the whole bytes making up the data word, leave the bits alone Ctx Nov 19, 2017 at 21:49 & Oxff and similar masks off the 8 bits that need to be shifted to the opposite endian byte.
By convention, digits to the left are more significant than digits to the right.
So, endianness is about the convention by which these radix256 digits are ordered when written into memory.
Btcganography retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to ‘ here pe ey) Steganography STEG-91 NOG-re-fee) is the practice of concealing a message within another i Message or a physical object.
Plainly visible encrypted messages, no matter how 1 unbreakable they are, arouse interest and may in themselves be ; incriminating in countries in which encryption is illegal.
It is my belief that I have been able to achieve SIGNINT of foreign power terrorist mafia body because they used Virtually private communications in plane view, hiding in plaine view, and if the they cyphers are broken then their communications detected in OSINT turn into SIGINT as the intercepted clear text is unpacked from the publicly available cyphertext.
His dumber larger friend Ozzie has something wrong with his brain and is being made fun of behind his back. ibd ity i i he Miititnalii its Ai “WA i mil q "" i Wy ' ‘] TTT ‘Wing Whit, Wy ( DTMASTA WA3IO gaTinu moagouln Citizens and non-citizens The eight men involved in the case were Ernest Peter Burger, George John Dasch, Herbert Hans Haupt, Heinrich Heinck, Edward Kerling, Herman Neubauer, Richard Quirin and Werner Thiel.
The spy who secretly and without uniform passes the military lines of a belligerent in time of war, seeking to gather military information and communicate it to the enemy, or an enemy combatant who without uniform comes secretly through the lines for the purpose of waging war by destruction of life or property, are familiar examples of belligerents who are generally deemed not to be entitled to the status of prisoners of war, but to be offenders against the law of war subject to trial and punishment by military tribunals.
Enhance 15 to 23. [marks on Zhora’s face become visible] Deckard : Gimme a hard copy right there.
A 2012 review of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies showed that subliminal stimuli activate specific regions of the brain despite participants’ unawareness.
Tai is a transfer student who arrives at Bronson Alcott High and instantly stands out due to her differences in appearance and attitude to the other students.
Much of the film centers on Cher’s “project” to make Tai attractive and popular, and, after this fails, her subsequent realization that it is Tai’s personal substance that is important rather than her looks or popularity.
Te 8 8 8 8 ee a a a a a a a a Bs closer look at the Latent Image shows a operation only a Galactic lien could have done in 1961, IVF into a Surrogate and a baby resulting _ Voyager Latent Image retrieved from Memory_Alpha fandom and copied or modified to here Latent Image One patient will survive the brain surgery.
Janeway doesn’t recognize the species that attacked the shuttle crew, and Seven says that they are unknown to the Borg.
In the typical style of the Star Trek 1 franchise, the story uses science fiction to explore the philosophical i issues, in this case, of medical ethics, decision making, and human i rights.
During a routine medical examination, the Doctor discovers » evidence that Ensign Harry Kim has undergone complex brain , surgery within the last two years which only the Doctor could have , performed.
Having no memory of the procedure, the Doctor attempts * to reconstruct the missing time period and discovers that certain files ' in his memory were deleted.
In Nanny state themes Illuminati use a command decision had to be | | | I | | | | | | I | | | | » made by Janeway and the crew to remove the memory files of the i Doctor because ethical inconsistencies were causing him conflicts | . . » which overwhelmed him.
Flip latent mirage into extent code February 20, 1961 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 18 61-more in the Oval Office.
Friday, NOVEMBER 17, 1961 Sam JFK was in Texas to attend the funeral and graveside services for legendary Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn.
Empty paragraphs or empty spans or their properties do ae Nk Go | JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 l surface of water 18 61 1/18/61 Texas just outide Dallas.
Jeri Ryan tied to Obama Jr. becoming Senator from Illinois Star Trek} Voyager Season 5, Ep.
Joanna Cassidy (born Joanna Virginia Caskey, AUGUST 2, 1945) is an American actress.
Set in Boston, the series centers on Winslow High ‘School a fictional :public high school in the Boston Public Schools district.
David Edward Kelley is an ‘American television writer, producer, and former :attorney, known as the creator of Doogie Howser, M.D., ‘Picket Fences, Chicago Hope, The Practice, Ally McBeal, Boston Public, Boston Legal, Harry’s Law, Goliath, Big Little Lies, Mr Mercedes, Big Sky, and iN ne Pee eager: as oe as oe aes SEVEN OF NINE Seven of Nine is a fictional ‘character introduced in the American science fiction ‘television series Star Trek: Voyager.
Drexler Anton Drexler (13 June 1884 24 February 1942) was a German far-right political agitator for the Vélkisch movement in the 1920s.
Drexler mentored his successor in the NSDAP, Adolf Hitler, during his early years in politics.
Ryan was born Jeri Lynn Zimmermann on FEBRUARY 22, 1968, in Munich, West Germany, the daughter of Gerhard Florian “Jerry” Zimmermann, a master sergeant in the United States Army, and his wife Sharon, a social worker.
Experiments were often conducted without the subjects’ knowledge or consent.
Critics label Reagan’s policies as aggressive, imperialistic, and “warmongering”; however, these policies were supported by leading American conservatives who argued they were necessary to protect United States security interests.
Ryan’s character and the Hologram Doctor’s note such philosophies have resulted in millions of war deaths.
Reagan escalated the Cold War during his presidency, accelerating a reversal from the policy of détente that began in 1979, following the Soviet war in Afghanistan.
Reagan ordered a massive buildup of the United States Armed Forces and implemented new policies toward the Soviet Union.
He revived the B-1 Lancer program that had been canceled by the Carter administration, and began producing the MX missile.
In response to Soviet deployment of the SS-20, Reagan oversaw the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s deployment of the Pershing missile in West Germany.
Reagan’s Foreign Policy and the End of the Cold War Lumen Learning * From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia USS ENTERPRISE USS Enterprise , formerly CVA-65, is a decommissioned United States Navy aircraft carrier.
She was the first nuclear-powered aircraft carrier and the eighth United States naval vessel to bear the name.
In November 1965, the Enterprise was transferred to the Seventh Fleet, home-ported at NAS Alameda, California.
In 1958, Enterprise’s keel was laid at Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company in Shipway 11.
ON 25 NOVEMBER 1961, ENTERPRISE WAS COMMISSIONED, with Captain Vincent P de Poix, formerly of Fighting Squadron 6 on her predecessor, in command.
On 12 January 1962, the ship made her maiden voyage starting an extensive shakedown cruise and a lengthy series of tests and training exercises designed to determine the full capabilities of the nuclear powered super carrier.
On 20 FEBRUARY 1962, Enterprise was a tracking and measuring station for the flight of Friendship 7, the Project Mercury space capsule in which Lieutenant Colonel John H Glenn, Jr. made the first American orbital spaceflight.
Enterprise completed shakedown activities at Naval Station Norfolk on 5 APRIL 1961.
In October 1962, Enterprise was dispatched to her first international crisis.
Following revelations that the Soviet Union was constructing nuclear missile launch sites on Cuba, President John F Kennedy ordered the United States Department of Defense to conduct a large-scale buildup.
Among the preparations, the United States Atlantic Fleet readied large numbers of its ships.
On 22 October, President Kennedy ordered a naval and air “quarantine” on shipment of offensive military equipment to Cuba, and demanded the Soviets dismantle the missile sites there.
Five Second Fleet carriers participated in the blockade-Enterprise (as part of Task Force 135), Independence, Essex, Lake Champlain, and Randolph, backed by shore-based aircraft.
By 28 October, the crisis was averted, after the United States secretly agreed to remove nuclear missiles from Italy and Turkey.
In May 2006, Enterprise departed for a six-month deployment, operating in the 6th, 5th and 7th Fleet areas in a world-tour, supporting Operations Iraqi and Enduring Freedom, and visiting ports in Dubai, Hong Kong, and crossing the line.
In the real world, and being the sole member of the Enterpriseclass aircraft carrier, Enterprise was nicknamed “the Starship,” after her fictional namesake.
Memory Alpha Fandom * In April 1983, the Enterprise, half a mile from shore after a 14-month, 46,000-mile cruise, ran aground in San Francisco Bay; George Takei was aboard the ship during this incident.
In 1993 and 1994, the Star Trek Association of Towson, a fan club in Towson, Maryland, sponsored “The Big E Con,” a convention held while the ship was at its home port of Norfolk, Virginia.
The events featured tours of the ship and appearances by Star Trek notables.
The fan club also donated Star Trek memorabilia for display in the ship’s recreation room.
USS JOHN EF, KENNEDY USS John F Kennedy is the only ship of her class (a variant of the Kitty Hawk class of aircraft carrier) and the last conventionally powered carrier built for the United States Navy.
After nearly 40 years of service in the United States Navy, John F Kennedy was officially decommissioned on 1 August 2007.
She is berthed at the NAVSEA Inactive Ships On-site Maintenance facility in Philadelphia, formerly the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, and, until late 2017, was available for donation as a museum and memorial to a qualified organization.
In late 2017, the Navy revoked her “donation hold” status and designated her for dismantling.
Worked on Disney "" projects aka judaeomasonic mkultra/monarch training.
Was allegedly the cause of a i presidential assassination attempt by Hinkley, however Hinkley had many ties into the judaeo-masonic occult state and this was most ' likely in jealousy of Reagans likely sexual relationship with a young ' programmed multiple Foster.
This could , have been a warming to Reagan by his superior in judaeo-masonry, 1 George Bush.
CO™munity and Travis takes a job as a night shift taxi driver to cope [St likely had with his chronic insomnia.
Most higher level judaeoTravis becomes infatuated with Betsy, a campaign {masons are in volunteer for senator and presidential candidate fact Charles Palantine.
After watching her interact with jpedophiles/ped fellow worker Tom through her window, Travis brasts and the enters to volunteer as a pretext to talk to her, then Hollywood takes her out for coffee.
Betsy agrees to go on community is a another date with him, during which he takes her to ex cult and the see a pomographic film; a disgusted Betsy leaves. propaganda Travis attempts to reconcile with her, to no avail. ing of the Enraged, he storms into the campaign office where — fiydaeoshe works and berates her before he is ordered to masonic led leave by Tom. occult world state.
Foster would later go on to star in the MKULTRA/monarch movie “Silence of the Lambs” which has a title that refers to the muzzling of Christians by satanic cults through the use of cover “serial killers”, a term invented and pusehd by the FBI, which are only chosen from the cult to be the fall guy.
Foster most likely a programmed multiple child and running hypnocourier missions to politicians etc with sexual services as a trigger.
Foster gets schooled by her “sponsor” a high level judaeo-mason on the goose chase she’s on, her sponsor is most likely a real character in the elite that is Fosters owner on an occult level, she was most likely programmed to his specifications and is her owner and handler.
In the film the “terrorist” is from Panguitch, UT which is shown in the Illuminati Kingpins, Hadden, aircraft earlier as the longitude and lattitude of his plane.
Getting back to Contact Foster further goes through another guided trance state in a programming environment which she has been through probably since childhood among the occult community.
Another thing is that the cast is full of hollywood douchebags like James Woods, Mcaunahey, Rob Lowe, Angela Bassett, Tom Skerritt etc.
In the end we see Foster indoctrinating children into her satanic beliefs and life, her Quixhotic journey in circles, the mind control and delusion spread like a virus for future lost souls.
Another spreader of this virus Carl Sagan is who the film is dedicated to, of course this is based on his novel of the same name.
I accuse the Illuminati including Donald Barr of using cyperhtext, secret writing, in the creation of cypher figures in “space” (abstract representations in Cypher, or representational system of Sasit}e)Nexes) and use that system for espionage communications.
His father was John Warnock Hinckley (JUNE 6, 1925 January 29, 2008), chairman and president of the Vanderbilt Energy Corporation.
Cae Warnock “Jack” BIRTH 6 JUN 1925 Tryon, Gaston County, North Carolina, USA DEATH 29 Jan 2008 Williamsburg, Williamsburg City, Virginia, USA BURIAL Williamsburg Presbyterian Church Columbarium Williamsburg, Williamsburg City, Virginia, USA MEMORIAL ID 24280258 View Source Gaston County is included in the Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC Metropolitan Statistical Area.
John W Hinckley Jr., the would-be assassin, lived on and off with his parents in Evergreen, Colorado, not far from Denver.
I understand he [John W Hinckley Jr.] was just the renegade brother in the family.
Rosetta Stone of the cover-up of a truth To understand both Jen Moore and Franz Kutschera look at the character Max Detweiler of the 1960 Julie Andrew musical.
He is actually rich Austrian theater owning family Kutscheras who are the early proponents of NAZI Germany.
He uses his theaters to put on shows using the Whitehead Von Trapp children.
At least for a short while Maria Kustschera ward of Franz Kutschera is a part of of it.
Maria Kutschera and George Ritter Von Trapp leave Austria with 7 children and likely pregnant with three children she hoped would be in a marriage with the Windsors, thougth the Windsors urged a marriage to Captain Von Trapp instead.
Cast of Sound of Music and how the stories change the truth with fictionolizations in the United States versions JOHANNA KUTSCHERA LIKELY DECEASED MOTHER OF MARIA KUTSCHERAS Johanna Kutschera BIRTH unknown DEATH 7 Mar 1927 BURIAL Friedhof Siidwest Vienna, Wien Stadt, Vienna ,leaving Austrian orphans raised by Uncle Franz the singing propaganda master Maria August Kutschera will name one of her daughters after her mother.
MARIA AUGUSTA KUTSCHERA RAISED BY UNCLE FRANZ Baroness Maria Augusta von Trapp DHS (née Kutschera; 26 January 1905 28 March 1987) was the stepmother and matriarch of the Trapp Family Singers.
Saint Joan of the Stockyards (German: Die heilige Johanna der : Schlachthéfe) ; is a play written by the German modernist playwright Bertolt Brecht » between 1929 and 1931, after the success of his musical The » Threepenny Opera and during the period of his radical experimental * work with the Lehrstticke.
Like many ; of Brecht’s plays it is laced with humor and songs as part.
Learn more Fra nZ ska ) of widowed naval commander Georg von Trapp in 1926, while she was still a schoolteacher at the abbey.
The family fled Austria after the German annexation of 1 Austria, fearing reprisals resulting from declining to sing at Hitler’s 1 birthday party and Georg von Trapp’s refusal to accept a commission 1 in Nazi Germany’s Kriegsmarine. rapp-Kutschera, Maria Augusta and George von.
With the drama, Brecht takes up various ; of his own preparatory work and suggestions from the extensive ; literature on Joan of Arc and the Salvation Army.
His » drama Major Barbara is also about the ' disillusionment of a member of the Salvation Army.
She was delivered on a train heading from her parents’ s village in Tyrol to a hospital in Vienna, Austria.
Spouse Georg Ritter von Trapp Her mother died of pneumonia when she was two.
Her father, griefstricken, left Maria with his cousin who had cared for Children cluding Johannes von Trapp plus Maria's half-brother after his mother died.
Maria’s father then traveled Hermann Joseph Muller was an American geneticist, educator, and Nobel laureate best known for his work on the physiological and genetic effects of radiation , as well as his outspoken political beliefs.
During the 1890s the gene seems to have entered the Windsor line through a known woman referenced by Mellville and her descendents in aristocracy seemed to be either selected as non defective or killed.
Franz Kutschera may have lost is sister to assasination and later his daughter Maria to defection to the English Monarcy following the events of 1925.
February 22, 1927 1904, Oberwaltersdorf, Austria BURIAL Friedhof Siidwest | adopts Maria, teaches singing as Vienna therapy Singing Kutscheara children meets the Whitehead Von Trapp family in Austria Glorian Donegan and Harold | Others in North Carolina more Donegan presentable for singing Maria Kutscherea shows gene Arnold Schwarzenegger Meinhard Schwarzenegger Unless connected, Targeted | CIA backed Rise to Power Ed Donegan Barrack Obama Jr.
Neilia and Amy as (bird egg references in family pr Legal Consequences of Using Real People in Fiction retrieved . from copylaw.com and copied or modified to here Despite the breathing space the First Amendment affords writers, 1 not all libel-in-fiction lawsuits are resolved in favor of the author or ; their publisher partner.
If done improperly, and the , hypothetical reasonable reader thinks your failed parody conveys r actual facts, the First Amendment may not be available to you.
If the work is not “of or concerning” an identifiable person, you have a complete defense to a libel lawsuit 1 based on fictionalization.
Under US. libel law, if the ; original is dead, s/he can’t sue for libel.
Criminal syndicalism has been defined as a doctrine of criminal acts : for political, industrial, and social change.
Idaho legislation defines it as, “the doctrine which advocates crime, sabotage, violence, or other unlawful methods of terrorism as a means of accomplishing industrial or political reform” The Syndicate in this book The Medical State alledges a free wheeling and dealing CIA mafia cartel which uses human trafficking in volunatary and non voluntary celebrity genome which is used in Indian like efficiency.
Walker of Idaho, the nation’s first state to ; enact a criminal syndicalism law, introduced the criminal syndicalism "" legislation to the Senate with an anti-I[WW speech.
The public assumed the TIWW promoted violence and destruction of properties even though the TWW did not share these intentions.
The IWW’s later attempts at reducing enforcement efforts through distancing itself from this doctrine were unsuccessful.
Strikes (involving over 4 million workers) across the nation increased negative sentiments against these organizations.
While repressions against the IWW through government actions and vigilantism were rampant, the public continued to perceive efforts to suppress the organization as insufficient. he defense by the IWW’s General Defense Committee in the case of Fiske Kansas resulted in a critically important 1924 Supreme Court ruling which led to the decline of criminal syndicalism laws as a » factor in legislative anti-union initiatives.
Arrangements were made for its creation during May 1941, and it was created formally by Executive Order 8807 on June 28, 1941.
Preparations to Be Together for an Unknown Period of Time ; is a 2020 Hungarian drama film directed by Lili Horvat.
It was selected , as the Hungarian entry for the Best International Feature Film at the t 93rd Academy Awards, but it was not nominated.
The film dealt with a patient who could have spinal damage or a rain nerve damage.
In JFKs case a stimulant used with ADHD was oO A neck and possible GI or nerves problem including Minimal Brain Dysfunction could parallel JFK. 1944 he undergoes spine surgery. years later possible brain exam autopsy.
This is an example of early use of ' instrumentation and spinal fusion.
Just as today, infections sometimes happen even in the best 1 of hands.
Years later, Kennedy developed another spinal infection | ou i requiring surgery.
He was born with a club foot, which got him rejected from military service in World War II but did not prevent his pursuit of folk dancing, a lifelong passion.
EFP * Natasa Stork, Hungary Natasa Stork, born in Budapest, has spent her acting career with one foot firmly placed in the theater world and one in film.
Parrallel to her on-going theatre work, Natasa was cast in HEAVENLY SHIFT which was awarded Best Film at the International Film Festival Porto and in 2014, in WHITE GOD which won the main prize in Un Certain Regard that same year.
President John F Kennedy’s Physician Dr. < anet G Travell Briefs the Press She was born in 1901 to John Willard and Janet Eliza Travell.
Heavily influenced by her father’s profession of physician, Travell made the decision to pursue a career in the medical field.
Through olivocochlear fibers of Nerve VII, it also transmits motor and modulatory information from the superior olivary complex in the brainstem to the cochlea.
A few looks deeper into these figures ELIZABETH TAYLOR Dame Elizabeth Rosemond Taylor DBE (February 27, 1932 March 23, 2011) was a British-American actress.
She then became the highest paid movie star in the 1960s, remaining a well-known public figure for the rest of her life.
Cleopatra was Queen of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt, and its last active ruler.
KING KONG King Kong is a fictional giant monster resembling a gorilla, who has appeared in various media since 1933.
He hires a woman, Jane Linden , to pose as the chimpanzee’s mother while he plays father to it, and uses 1950s-era child rearing techniques. o Ronald Wilson Reagan (February 6, 1911 JUNE 5, 2004) o Diana Marie Lynn (born Dolores Eartha Loehr, JULY 5, 1926] DECEMBER 18, 1971) was an American actress.
Bisciow soon developed the script with husband James Cameron, «_and filming took place four years later.
Point Break is the outer point of a land mass a wave approaches and begins to curl at.
Bohdi forsees something big happening in a point every 50 years and expects a Coming of some type, some wave.
Their paths (bank robber Bohdi and and FBI Agent Utah cross "" through Tyler.
Wax is detected forensically from the bank robberies ' and swim trunks tan lines lead to a surfers culture infiltration.
Robbers/Surfers confront ones Disciples Cop who wandered in for the waves.
Ghosts Born as are surfering, riding their boards as etheral | Maximiani music play Tyler tell Johny it looks like he ulia Portas. has just seen a ghost.
She was later a leading member of the Neo-Nazi underground during the 1960s. leer | Savitri was a proponent of a synthesis of Hinduism and Nazism, ; proclaiming Adolf Hitler to have been an avatar of the Hindu god » Vishnu.
She depicted Hitler as a sacrifice for humanity that would » lead to the end of the worst World Age, the Kali Yuga, which she "" believed was induced by the Jews, whom she saw as the powers of ' evil.
Rejecting Judaism and Christianity, she believed in a form of ; pantheistic monism; a single cosmos of nature composed of divine * energy-matter.
Within neo-Nazism, she promoted occultism, ‘ ecology, and the New Age movement, and more , contemporaneously, she has influenced the alt-right.
The French New Right influenced Richard Spencer in particular, and Amazon continues to sell at least one of his books, The Uprooting of European Identity.
ProPublica reported on the “unprecedented access to a mass . audience” Amazon has provided white supremacists, his White ‘ Identity Politics is still available.
Mary Popins Princess Mary (Mary of Tek who will marry onto the English Thrown, King George V) was devoted to her children and to her public duties.
She left her children in the care of a nanny, Charlotte ""Lalla"" Bill, and taught her children history and music.
With her public duties, she was equally devoted, becoming Patron of a number of charities.
When her father-in-law became King Edward VI, Prince George and Princess Mary undertook an eight-month tour of the British Empire.
Princess Mary broke down in tears at the thought of leaving her children, though they were in the care of their doting grandparents.
This book suggests those like me who have the rare London KE VII Family FOXP2 gene are being ""hit"" to preempt the understanding of why Great Britain wished to expand its gene pool and who participated in the plan and who objected to the plan the Kennedy family preferring republican government and Irish independence from Norther Ireland.
JULY 1, 1901, York County, ME Died: NOVEMBER 19, 1992, Greenwich, CT | | | | | 0 : Geor : ge Herbert ; Walker : Bush.
Bush, : husband of : Dorothy : Walker; Cae | | | 0 | | | | | | | Prescott Sheldon Bush was an American banker and politician.
Bush, Prescott Bush Dorothy Walker had biological child 1 George Herbert Walker Bush.
His family had developed many ; international banking contacts, and he helped organize the 1904 St.
Harriman & Co. investment firm, and quickly arranged the credits that W Averell Harriman needed to take control of the Hamburg-Amerika Line.
Harriman & Co., with contractual power over the affairs of , the Hamburg-Amerika.
Harriman & Co. (renamed Harriman Brothers & Company in 1927) well-positioned for this enterprise and ; Tich in assets from their German and Russian business, merged with the ; British-American investment house Brown Bros.
Walker & Company; » Missouri Pacific Railroad; Laclede Gas and the New Orleans, Texas and "" Mexico Railroad.
The USGA's Walker Cup acquired Walker's namesake for his role in the event's creation.
He also coheaded the syndicate, , which rebuilt the famed sports venue of Madison Square Garden and the Belmont Race Track, 1925.
Mary Popins During this book I will cite major media as being the proponents and historians of the Deep State with slightly fictionalized accounts of world history told as Space Opera, light hearted musicals, or other works.
Following the Atalanta Revolutions of France and the USA and other ations Great Britain was in decline exactly as it faced radio and the peech defect.
HS Mary of Teck was Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Empress of India, from 6 May 1910 until 29 January 1936 was bred into the England's royal family and she added a spoon full of sugar to what had been heavy handed British rule.
The theme » was symbolized by a 12-story-high, stainless-steel model of the Earth called the Unisphere, built on the foundation of the Perisphere from the 1939 World's Fair.
In both » years, children admission cost $1.00 (equivalent to $8.34 in 2020 "" after calculating for inflation) » ‘The fair is noted as a showcase of mid-twentieth-century American ; culture and technology.
The nascent Space Age, with its vista of ; promise, was well represented.
When their nanny leaves, her replacement arrives one "" evening borne on the east wind.
Mary Poppins is vain and often irritable, , but within her stern exterior lurk all kinds of delightful wonder.
When the wind is blowing from the West again she will disspaar back into the clouds.
Mary Poppins Chim Chim Cheree Today Bert is a Screever who draws on a sidewalk in highest quality what sees from his rooftops.
The Bohemian king Wenzel II rode a * horse ""valued at one thousand marks"" in 1298.
At the other extreme, a ; 1265 French ordinance ruled that a squire could not spend more than » twenty marks on a rouncey.
He as a » continuing non fired employee is under the influence of Mary Poppins ' theores on life and living and compassion.
Constable Jones is Scotland Yard police officer H 43 (perhaps former OSS) with Scotland Yard and is often seen patrolling the neighborhood i destriers the most prized, but figures vary greatly from source to source. ’ "" where the Banks family lives.
He appears to be a kind and dutiful man "" but shows a dislike for how Mr Banks treats his family and servants.
George Walker Bush is an American politician who served as the 43rd president of the United States from 2001 to 2009.
J | | | | | erry Van Dyke, niece of his brother the actor Dick Van Dyke, and first cousin once removed of Shane Van Dyke.
As an actress, she was known for such television programs as My Mother the Car. i Kelly Van Dyke-Nance committed suicide on NOVEMBER 17, 1991.
According to her younger brother Ronald, Jack Nance, who was in Bass , Lake, California, filming Meatballs 4 at the time, attempted to console » her on the phone as she talked about suicide.
Unfortunately, a lightning , storm knocked out the phones in Bass Lake, and subsequently it took "" over 45 minutes for Nance and director Bobby Logan to find a deputy "" sheriff.
The sheriff contacted Los Angeles police and Nance’s apartment "" manager.
Van Dyke was born on DECEMBER 13, 1925, in West Plains, : Missouri, to Hazel Victoria , a stenographer, : and Loren Wayne “Cookie” Van Dyke , a salesman.
He is the older brother of actor Jerry Van » Dyke , who appeared as his brother in The Dick Van Dyke » Show.
Van Dyke is a Dutch surname, although he has English, Irish, and ; Scottish ancestry.
Inhis youth, Van Dyke considered a career in the ministry, although a * drama class in high school convinced him to become a professional * entertainer.
Throughout his acting career he continued to teach Sunday * school in the Presbyterian Church where he was an elder, and he * continued to read such theologians as Martin Buber, Paul Tillich, and "" Dietrich Bonhoeffer.
Comical poems suitable for the occasion... ...extemporized and thought up before your very eyes.
Like something is brewin' about to begin Can't put me finger on what lies in store But I feel what's to happen, all happened before.
The Unauthorized Biography retrieved from By_Webster ~ Griffin Tarpley_and Anton Chaitkink and copied or modified to here ° George Bush: The Unauthorized Biography By Webster Griffin Tarpley and Anton Chaitkin able of Contents wad Introduction — American Caligula Chapter 1 — The House of Bush: Born in a Bank In the autumn of 1919, Prescott Bush made the acquaintance of Bert Walker’s daughter Dorothy.
They were engaged the following year, and were married in August, 1921.14 Among the ushers and grooms at the elaborate wedding were Ellery S James, Knight Woolley and four other fellow Skull and Bonesmen from the Yale Class of 1917.15 The Bush-Walker extended family has gathered each summer at the “Walker country home” in Kennebunkport, from this marriage of President Bush’s parents down to the present day.
Prescott Bush would demonstrate strong loyalty to the firm he joined in 1926.
Bush and Chenney covered it up as to why NW FeV Ketoynn WD, @re) may, (Xqcers ia Mecca, in a desert valley in western Saudi Arabia, is Islam’s holiest city, as it’s the birthplace of the Prophet Muhammad and the faith itself.
P y mp ; Evan Ban with |Donegan NOT in Dune but in into Eva Ban as IVF using Patemal Jim Donegan and great abs Dune movie that the child would Paternal Malcom X seal the breach between warring houses Leto Atreides as Ed Glorian Duke Leto Atreides has two Donegan unauthorized Donegan was___ {natural born children with Lady child of Lady Jessica, non |used to creat Jessica Paul and Alita, map to royal.
Ed Donegan by Barrack Obama |Tom and Ed Donegan by Jim Duke Leto Atreides and {and others asa _ |Donegan aka Duke Leto and Lady Jessica, “Concubine” Glorian A Secret Report Within The Guild A beginning is a very delicate time.
Know then that it is the year 10,191 The known universe is ruled by the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV, my father.
In this time the most precious substance in the Universe is the spice melange.
Hidden away within the rocks of these deserts are a people known as the Fremen who have long held a prophecy that a man would come... a Messiah... who would lead them to true freedom.
We know of CHOAM in the Universe Combine Honnete Ober Advance Mercantiles controlled by the Emperor Shaddam IV and all the Great Houses of the Landsraad.
We know of the Bene Gesserit sisterhood, their selective breeding plan for 90 generations to produce the Kwisatz Haderach, whom they will control.
We know of the Guild and their Navigators’ power to fold space and their control over all interplanetary travel.
Enemies strengthen you; allies weaken.” Emperor Elrood IX, Deathbed Insights.
Lady Jessica I think is Glorian Donegan is a Lady no-Royal used to produce a Royal who will bridge the gap between the Harkonnens of Planet Giedi Prime who are rather unpleasant and House Atreides of Planet Caladan.
Though Lady Jessica is a Planet Caladan female she is NOT to produce a child with Duke Leto Atreides, her Caladanian husband yet she does and the son is Paul Atreides.
She will also have a daughter with Leto Atreides totaling three children.
One child from a Harkonnen, I think that child represents Barrack Obama Jr, and two other children, those children by James Paul Donegan, those two children being Thomas Neil and Edward Donegan.
This is arranged by the Great Britain’s English Crown, ruler of all Commonwealths.
Dune 1984 Alternative Edition Redux Dune 1984 matter retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here (@ a Lady Jessica in Bene Gesserit breeding program has created a chosen leader but also a son she was not allowed to create.
The Great Houses o PLANET ARRAKIS: Source of the Spice o PLANET CALADAN: Home of House Atreides o PLANET GIEDI PRIME: Home of House Harkonnen o PLANET KAITAIN: Home of the Emperor of the Know Known Universe BOOK II DUNE : House Atreides take over Planet Arrakis from the Harkonnes and encounter resistance from the Harkonnen but assistance from the Fremen and Sandworms BOOK III MUAD’DIB : The Desert mouse, also known as Muad’ Dib, is an adapted kangaroo mouse found on and adapted to the planet Arrakis.
It is associated in Fremen earth-spirit mythology with a design visible on the planet’s second moon, and is admired by Fremen for its ability to survive in the open desert.
Paul Atreides takes this as his name in the Dune where he will rise to power and lead.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries is an intergovernmental organization or cartel of 13 countries.
Founded on 14 September 1960 in Baghdad by the first five members, it has since 1965 been headquartered in Vienna, Austria, although Austria is not an OPEC member state.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ As Leader of the Jihad against Oil Barron Harkonnen the Freemen are able to bring the Empire to its knees.
Two competing crowns below the main crown are House Harkonnen and House Atreides.
The Padishah Emperors are the hereditary rulers of the Old Empire in Frank Herbert’s science fiction Dune universe.
In Herbert’s originating novel Dune it is established that while the Padishah Emperor is supreme sovereign ruler of the known universe, and might be likened to The Queen of England ruling other Commonwealth Crowns such as the Three Crowns, Scotland, Northern Ireland and England, of the Island of Great Britain.
The Navigators may be taken for Oil Companies who move the Spice from Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and other locations on their supertankers.
They push the the highest crown, the Padishah, quite easily though formally they deny existing as an influence on politics.
THe Navigators who move spice do not see Duke Leto Atreides as a threat whether the House Atreides wins on Arrakis or is defeated by the Harkonnens when the Harkonnes lay a trap leaving oil to be fulfilled by Atreides growing Duke Leto in popularity and House Atreides becomes more relevant and successful.
A nightmare vision for the Movers of Spice that the of Duke Leto Atreides son Paul will join the anti-feudal jihad and upset the Feudal Order.
In the trap the Emperor has laid for the Atreides who as subcontractors are being led into a trap the only important consideration to the Navigators is Joseph Kennedy Sr’s son JFK must die of fueal order is to be preserved.
Emporor and head of the Landsraad assembly of noble families BARON VLADIMIR HARKONNEN As Dune begins, a longstanding feud exists between the Harkonnens of Giedi Prime and the Atreides of Caladan.
The Baron’s intent to exterminate the Atreides line seems close to fruition as Duke Leto Atreides is lured to the desert planet Arrakis on the pretense of taking over the valuable melange operation there.
Leto’s own physician, the trusted Suk doctor Wellington Yueh who conditioning for loyalty had been broken by the Karkonnens.
WELLINGTON YUEH a Suk doctor, a highly trained physician who has been conditioned so as to be incapable of inflicting harm.
He may be the United States PHS Commissioned Cops, a non-combatant service of the United States Department of Defense who are in position to commit treason.
Concubinage is an interpersonal and sexual relationship between a man and a woman in which the couple does not want, or cannot enter into a full marriage.
Concubinage and marriage are often regarded as similar but mutually exclusive. the Lady Jessica, is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, a female organization specializing in politics and their centuries-long breeding program.
Jessica was ordered to bear a daughter, but disobeyed, giving birth to Paul Atreides.
The breeding program’s aim is to produce the Kwisatz Haderach, a mental “superbeing” who the Bene Gesserit would use to their advantage.
Sayyadina will be the name the Freemen give her along with new public and secret names for her son Paul.
Jabal Sayid is located 350km northeast of Jeddah in Saudi Arabia. wd PAUL ATREIDES Illicit child of love between Lady Jessica and Duke Leto, the child is a threat to the Noble families, forseen as leading a Jihad in with the Fremen USUL Usul is the Secret name of Paul Atreidis which represents the base of the pillar.
The decision by Great Britain in the late 1960s to withdraw its military forces from the Persian Gulf and to grant independence to its ten protectorates along the east coast of the Arabian Peninsula confronted the United States with a strategic dilemma.
It was the height of Cold War rivalry with the Soviet Union, and the United States was deeply involved in Vietnam.
Consequently, the United States decided instead of direct intervention to build up its two regional allies, Iran and Saudi Arabia, as local powers that could protect the region from the spread of Soviet influence.
As the “twin pillars” of United States policy, both countries were encouraged to acquire billions of dollars of the most advanced arms during the 1970s.
Iran embraced the twin pillars policy more enthusiastically than Saudi Arabia and intervened militarily, with United States approbation, in Iraq and Oman.
The policy collapsed suddenly in 1979, when the shah of Iran was overthrown in a revolution that brought to power a republican regime opposed to United States influence in the region.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ MUAD’ DIB This is the publicly known name of the Sleeper who must one day awaken.
Long overlooked by the rest of the Imperium and considered backward savages, in reality they are an extremely hardy people and exist in large number.
Jihad and the Holy War to repel the Darkness, the Dark Ages SAND WORMS A person in front of a Sandworm.
Sandworms are colossal, worm-like creatures that live on the desert planet Arrakis.
The sandworms’ larvae produce a drug called “melange” , the most essential and valuable commodity in the universe because it makes safe and accurate interstellar travel possible.
In the metaphor they represent Dinosaurs and will help overwhelm the Harkonnes in battle bring down the exterior defense walls.
UL MENTATS ' A Mentat is a type of human, presented in Frank Herbert’s science fiction ‘Dune universe.
In an interstellar society that fears a resurgence of artificial ‘intelligence and thus prohibits computers, Mentats are specially trained to ‘mimic the cognitive and analytical ability of computers.
They come across as ‘sort of an NSA who will replace the wisdom of Royals when royals are ‘prohibited i] GAIUS HELEN MOHIAM She is a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother, and initially appears in the 1965 novel Dune and its 1969 sequel.
She from a powefull order oversees the interbreeding plans to sustain the noble order.
CIA time travel program called Project Pegasus, Andrew Basiago has ; prescient knowledge to save humanity as we know it, and he is running ; for president of the United States. , Project Pegasus Revealed ' According to Basiago, between 1962-’72 the United States government ran a "" clandestine operation called Project Pegasus.
YL He appointed Justice Roberts who has no Divinci Code like birth month and day but Justice Roberts is married to Jane Sullivan whose birthday is AUGUST 3, 1958 which seem to be one of the DARPA Brain Program NASA program dates tied to the Queen Mother August 4th birthdays which Barrack Obama Jr. has as well.
A movie in which some who have some genetic defect towards emotions are defectives, psychos, a threat e Shopgirl: Steve Martin the Grey, now Steve Martin the White, recognizes a Princess, a Queen, a Blue Blood, and as a Wizard will serve her and support her e My Normal: Living in the Hood certain artists become counselors to others and the Metrosexuality and cultural sophistication or organic society e Coven Coven of Satanic/Wiccan Witches.
Lesbian sex romp of colledge witches who try to restore lost mother Asura and her powers by magic.
Eduardo Rodrigquez Gonzales directs the photography as pasty white witches in lingerie float around.
Money Laundering: Cultural appropriation of Donegans by the NWO who use literary, social, and artistic content co-opted from us in the transactional world of script writing, works in the Humanities, film, and art where the bearer of that content forms social contact, social status, and economic and artist participation in the arts.
A Galactic Alien oversear of things called Steve Martin flying in the stars has private reserve Champaigne in a plane.
His romantic competition is pissing in migrant farmwork fields while riding a bus taking a stop.
Perhaps he sees something in Claire Daines, and perhaps a toss ins the sheets and consider her well in she is part of the Cabal family with a Cabal baby, just what the Family likes, good new blood and they will stay in touch with her.
The private reserve of the Cabal is tbe best DNA from great leaders and celebrity so take quick tun in bed but do not get too attached, it is only a secret cabal child.
Considered together, these appeals form what later rhetoricians have called the rhetorical triangle.
Logos appeals to the audience’s reason, building up logical arguments. , Ethos appeals to the speaker’s status or authority, making the audience » more likely to trust them.
Pathos appeals to the emotions, trying to make , the audience feel angry or sympathetic, for example.
Equals PATHOS Using pathos is to appeal to the emotions of the audience.
This angle is arguably the most effective and most immediate rhetorical appeal within the triangle.
Using it establishes common ground and connection between the audience and the speaker.
Aristotle applied the term to refer to “reasoned discourse” or “the argument” in the field of rhetoric, and considered it one of the three modes of persuasion alongside ethos and pathos Pyrrhonist philosophers used the term to refer to dogmatic accounts of non-evident matters.
The Stoics spoke of the logos spermatikos (the generative principle of the Universe) which foreshadows related concepts in Neoplatonism ETHOS Ethos means “custom” or “character” in Greek.
As originally used by Aristotle, it referred to a man’s character or personality, especially in its balance between passion and caution.
Today ethos is used to refer to the practices or values that distinguish one person, organization, or society from others.
To appeal to ethos is to show the credibility of the speaker or writer.
Doing this establishes the author as an authority on the subject they are speaking about.
It explains why the audience or reader should trust the information and opinions given by that person.
Pathology atomon,e. “uncuttable, e Logos: Logic indivisible”) is a natural e Ethos: Ethics philosophy proposing the physical universe is composed of fundamental indivisible components known as atoms.
Atmosphere and Atoms, Hemosphere Cosmpsphere area of the Cosmos, Eros and Erotica, Cronos and Time, Xenos, Apollo, Crypto, Acro Acromony and the Acropolis, Agro and Agroculture.
In discussing counseling systems of Wise Mind I brought these subjects up with Arlington County Mental Health Services and used examples working from membory of Head Royce Schools and travels in Greece with my family and also continous learning since then.
From memory I made an error or to but fixed the errors with reference materials.
James Paul Donegan, Glorian Donegan, Tom Donegan, and Ed DOnegan, each of us took turns talking in the Oracle of Deplhi amphitheater stage as the rest of sat in the audience rows and listened to the accustics and affects of the shape of the amphitheater.
Amphius In Greek mythology, the name Amphius refers to two defenders of Troy; later these will mean power and also amplification or strengthening. of power.
Pythia was the name of the high priestess of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi.
She specifically served as its oracle and was known as the Oracle of Delphi.
The name Pythia is derived from Pytho, which in myth was the original name of Delphi.
Etymologically, the Greeks derived this place name from the verb m08etv “to rot”, which refers to the sickly sweet smell from the decomposing body of the monstrous Python after she was slain by Apollo.
The Pythia was established at the latest in the 8th century BC, (though some estimates date the shrine to as early as 1400 BC), and was widely credited for her prophecies uttered under divine possession by Apollo.
The oracle is one of the best-documented religious institutions of the classical Greeks.
Authors who mention the oracle include Aeschylus, Aristotle, Clement of Alexandria, Diodorus, Diogenes, Euripides, Herodotus, Julian, Justin, Livy, Lucan, Nepos, Ovid, Pausanias, Pindar, Plato, Plutarch, Sophocles, Strabo, Thucydides, and Xenophon.
Nevertheless, details of how the Pythia operated are scarce, missing, or non-existent entirely, as authors from the classical period (6th to 4th centuries BC) treat the process as common knowledge with no need to explain.
As for Libertarian influence in my life, Objectivity as Scientific Philosophy and Rationalism, Objectivism, not subjectivity.
I left counseling services because the Obamas were using things like “Forward” as a viewpoint in life as campaing stump speech and campaign theme materials and I did not want my work handed over to politicians.
It stars Nicholas Hoult born 7 DECEMBER 1989) and Kristen Stewart as two people living in a dystopian, post-apocalyptic world where all the people are robotic, emotionless workers, and any sign of emotions is treated as a disease.
Kristen Stewart first gained notice at age twelve for her role as the daughter of Jodie Foster’s character in David Fincher’s thriller Panic Room The story matches “suiciding” of “SOS” Which I say is a metaphoer for FOXP2 Syndrome that I also say is being smeared in metaphor as a disease by those who assert they do not have the disease; however, they seem to live in a world in which those very identical to them who express a minor quirk of otherwise the same brain are shunned and Suicides as a dangerous evil, perhaps a Nazi-esque terror.
Elsewhere in the book talking about Evil I use the chart below but I now in a section in blue text color for the puposes of discussing Equals.
CLASSICAL ELEMENTS Classical elements typically refer to water, earth, fire, air, and aether, which were proposed to explain the nature and complexity of all matter in terms of simpler substances.
These different cultures and even individual philosophers had widely varying explanations concerning their attributes and how they related to observable phenomena as well as cosmology.
Sometimes these theories overlapped with mythology and were personified in deities.
Some of these interpretations included atomism , but other interpretations considered the elements to be divisible into infinitely small pieces without changing their nature.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia PERIODIC TABLE The periodic table, also known as the periodic table of elements, is a tabular display of the chemical elements.
It is widely used in chemistry, physics, and other sciences, and is generally seen as an icon of chemistry.
It is a graphic formulation of the periodic law, which states that the properties of the chemical elements exhibit a periodic dependence on their atomic numbers.
MORAL ELEMENTS Evil, predation and Falsity tested by internal consistencies and self gain as opposed to truth, justice, and fairness as a Good.
In this book I use republican government (indirect popular government and Liberalism fairly interchangeably and count Ireland and the USA as developed under Liberal Democratic Archetype.
Atoms of multiple people or multiple Nation-StatesAtmosphere I used to discusses Treaty of Westphalian concept of Civilizations versus a Nation-State and this tied to my life long belief in Western Civilization as being just that, a Hemispherical Civilization of many Nation-States, though an ethnic Atmosphere can exist INSIDE a Nation State as well and thus be an Ethnic Atmosphere or culture.
Semiotics to define the abstraction of Forms into identification of the abstract form and then derived instances of the form.
Information about the tree it is a plant, has roots, a trunk, and leaves.
A particular plant my be a tree which is the Application of the Information to an object and SPO sentences the N, I, and A are tied together in a Semantic statement Int the movie Equals Kristen Stewart as NIA describes the Atmosphere, the atoms of existence of the Body Politic.
Like Jody Foster and Star Trek movies nuclear war led to the need to isolate Switched-On-Syndrome people ware could be avoided.
Semiotics from High Tech and Plato/Aristotle, Semaphores notation NIA I have noticed in high tech since working in it the system of three which tends to match was is Subject, Predacite, Object and statements.
RULE NAME Emphasis INFORMATION ABOUT RULE For Emphasis use font-size %110 and bold typeface APPLICATION For text inside the span element open and close which uses the Emphasis style property for the text apply the styling from the Information about the rule, in this example, for text inside an Emphasis are aply %110 font size and bold typeface.
Overlords Genetic Planning and Social Cleansing Equals In a futuristic dystopian utopia, citizens, known as “members”, live under the Collective, the legislative body which monitors and controls the people’s actions.
Citizens are mentally stabilized and all emotions and most illnesses are eradicated, with emotion and sexual activity contrary to the society’s rules, and conception is through artificial insemination via a conception summons.
Defective Emotional Neuropathy Facility , the Collective’s institution, which no one ever leaves.
Google With astigmatism, the front surface of the eye or the lens, inside the eye, is curved differently in one direction than the other.
One ' night, he hears a champagne-style rendition of ""Crazy Rhythm"" on the f radio and spontaneously begins to dance; he excitedly sees this as a calling and decides to leave for St.
On the way, he stops at a motel, where a dog wakes him up by barking at his door.
It turns out the mechanical structure creates a lure to the eyes bending them inward creating a vision distortion from distorted eye structures.
While rich before losing everything to the product liability his is 1 approached by a charity trying to stop Cat Juggling.
Thomas Neil Donegan and Edward Paul Donegan and one black cat : Barrack Obama Jr.
That little glasses handle that sold ten million units in a few short months.
Navin is a complex personality, as are most of the small breed of modern day renaissance millionaires.
Announcer We had planned to show you the entire Johnson interview, however when we returned to our studio, our news department informed us of a sensational development in the Johnson story.
It seems that an irate group of citizens led by the celebrity, Mr Carl Reiner has filed a class action suit _against Mr Johnson and his Opti-Grab.
Carl Reiner When Opti-grab came out, I thought it was the greatest thing ever, and I bought a pair.
This little handle is like a magnet, your eyes are constantly drawn to it and you end up cock-eyed.
Now as a director I am constantly using my eyes and this Opti-grab device has caused irreparable harm to my career.
Let me show you a clip from my latest film where my faulty depth perception kept me from yelling cut at the proper time. (scene of a little red sportscar speeding off a cliff.
That's why I am spearheading the ten million dollar class action suit against Mr Johnson and his irresponsible selling of _a product he didn't even test on prisoners.
Steven Martin’s character lives in a house high up on Grifith Blvd observing the area below.
Below at 1630 Griffith Park Blvd is the young up and coming Claire Danes character.
Ponin Park retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ee ey , Griffith Park is a large municipal park at the eastern end of the Santa Monica Mountains, in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles, California.
The park covers 4,310 acres of land, making it one of the largest urban parks in North America.
It is the second-largest city park in California, after Mission Trails Preserve in San Diego, and the 11th-largest municipally-owned park in the United States.
TO the Right of the observatory as shown in this photo is a not too distance the Hollywood sign on the hillside.
Griffith Park Blvd runs tup the hill throught the Hollywood hills from far below.
Due to its presence in many films, the park is among the most famous municipal parks in North America.
Glendale, and because the City Planning commission complained that a . military airport violated the terms of Griffith’s deed.
He consults for IT and helps use logic to keep costs low on computer systems availability, near “lights out” no personell at all having to watch systems.
Moments later the Schwartzmen character is a loser riding a bus around urinating into a field at a public bus stretch your legs break.
He offers this girl he found in a shop “Private plane food” and sleeps with her trying not to break her heart too much since she is so much younger than him.
She lives on Griffith Park Blvd but in the basin, not the Stars portal.
The screenplay by Steve Martin is based on his 2000 ‘ novella of the same title.
The film is about a complex love triangle ' between a bored salesgirl, a wealthy businessman, and an aimless young « man.
Touchstone Pictures and Hyde Park Entertainment, and distributed in the United States by Buena Vista Pictures and Internationally by 20th 1 Century Fox.
Shopgirl was released on October 21, 2005 and received 1 positive reviews from film critics.
The film went on to earn $11,112,077 ; and was nominated for four Satellite Awards, including Best Picture and ; Best Adapted Screenplay.
You moved to Inglewood from Waco, Tex., when you were 5 lived in Garden Grove as a teen-ager, attended UCLA, Cal State Long Beach, performed at Disneyland and Knott’s Berry Farm.
He has earned five Grammy Awards, a Primetime Emmy Award, and was awarded an Honorary Academy Award at the Academy’s 5th Annual Governors Awards in 2013.
Among many honors, he has received the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor, the Kennedy Center Honors, and an AFI Life Achievement Award.
Ray Porter is an older, suave, wealthy, divorced logician who charms Mirabelle over several dates, one of which ends at his house.
Mirabelle offers herself to him, and the morning after they have sex, Ray tells her that he does not intend for their relationship to be serious due to his constant travel between L.A. and Seattle.
Ray tells his psychiatrist that Mirabelle knows he will see other people, and Mirabelle tells her acquaintances that Ray wants to see her more. wa CLAIRE CATHERINE DANES AS MIRABELLE BUTTERSFIELD Claire Catherine Danes is an American actress.
She is the recipient of three Primetime Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, and two Screen Actors Guild Awards.
In 2003, Mirabelle Buttersfield is an aspiring artist from Vermont who works at the evening gloves counter at Saks Fifth Avenue, Beverly Hills.
He was an executive producer on the Amazon Prime show Mozart in the Jungle , a series he also acted in.
Jeremy is an immature, socially inept, penniless graphic designer for an amplifier manufacturer and an aspiring typographer who meets Mirabelle in a laundromat.
Mirabelle, aching for meaningful contact, gives Jeremy a chance but it quickly fizzles after a halfhearted date, followed by a woefully underwhelming sexual encounter.
Bennett Marco James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan who in atomic testing in Nevada had their DNA and fertility studies, like Sideny Gotlein and the CIA took extra for others than me, Edward Paul Donegan.
A soldier among others on dangerous terriroty in some Laurence | group.
Shaw Shaw will be used against his will by Communists folling his military service in Asia Janet Leigh as Eugenie Rose “Rosie” Cheyney James Gregory as Sen.
The story of an American political cabal so powerful that it has been able to repress knowledge of Deep politics 9-11 | its existence essay 2 March 2014 | Bush Family for 50 years, US/Deep state and the hidden history of the political force that has dominated American politics for the last 50 years.
It wasn’t a State) shoots the shooter who was in self defense against Dr Lo’s Confidential Assailant, the first solder shot, though Dr Lo will deny he initiated the conflict between the two soldiers, both of whose lives will end lethally.
Thus the state can can me crazy for thinking I have a self defense need or acting under the state of mind that I have a self defense neeed.
Burn of Jews, blacks mortar and powder, gasing of people, hot led and nuclear fires ¢ COLD WAR: A reshaped map of unstable combatants following leaps in armerment, physics, and aerospace advances e ESPIONAGE WAR: OSS and MI5 and FBI operate in New World Order undercover in their own rise in government following the Hot and Cold wars.
Antony John Blinken is an American government official and diplomat serving as the 71st United States secretary of state since January 26, 2021.
He previously served as deputy national security advisor from 2013 to 2015 and deputy secretary of state from 2015 to 2017 under A ' President Barack Obama.
Soldier or USA and will and Did Not the State from crime eae Nadia obs Insane | Shoot and State backed State against Soldier Anger Mafia fellow soldier 4.5/5 Fraudulent chains of events The mechanisms of black opps, 2.5/3 four ways.
In 1956-1957, Kleeb guest-starred on RB Hey, Jeannie!, starring Jeannie Carson.
In the 1960-1961 “ television season, Kleeb appeared as Miss Claridge, a legal ecretary, on the sitcom Harrigan and Son.
Nn ee After Presidential candidate Robert Kennedy’s assassination in a bid to replace Johnshon (Johnson could have run again since he had only a partial first term under 2 year replacing JFK), Johnson rallied the party bosses and unions to give Humphrey the nomination at the 1968 Democratic National Convention.
In the years between "" the 1870s and 1920s, women’s clubs became the major vehicle by which 1 American women could exercise their developing talents to shape the world i beyond their homes.
I Some may even say that it was a long overdue acknowledgment of Ruth Carter’s accomplishments within the film industry during a career that has spanned over three decades.
Heroes and Sheroes Geek Frontiers wal Panic on the Schoolyard: The Merion midair collision (death of Senator John Heinz) Admiral Cloudberg r John Forbes Kerry was born on DECEMBER 11, 1943, at Fitzsimons Army 1 Medical Center in Aurora, Colorado.
Kerry was originally a Semator Iselin (I think is Price Albert of York ilitary brat, until his QEIIs husband) knows of 57 Card carrying ather was discharged communists as he bangs Katschup out of a Hienz rom the Army Air bottle. orps.
Kerry lived in roton, Massachusetts Henry John Heinz II (October 23, 1938 APRIL jin his first year and 4, 1991) was an American businessman and illis, Massachusetts Republican politician from Pennsylvania.
Heinz food empire had everything going for him April 4, 1991, the morning he climbed aboard a small, twin-propeller plane in Williamsport.
The short flight to Philadelphia was for him to attend a pair of hearings and a constituent meeting during the congressional Easter break.
Teresa Heinz (born Maria Teresa Thierstein Sim6es-Ferreira; October 5, 1938), also known as Teresa Heinz Kerry, is a PortugueseAmerican businesswoman and philanthropist.
Heinz is the widow of former United States Senator John Heinz and the wife of former United States Secretary of State, longtime United States Senator, and 2004 Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry.
Heinz is Chair of the Heinz Endowments and the Heinz Family Philanthropies.
Poor Judgment Probable Cause of Heinz Accident but a party to the incident disagree with the NTSB avy’s Office of eneral Counsel and oon became a diplomat in the State epartment’s Bureau of nited Nations Affairs.
His maternal extended amily enjoyed great ealth as members of he Forbes and Dudleyinthrop families. erry’s parents hemselves were upperiddle class, anda ealthy great-aunt paid or him to attend elite oarding schools uch as Institut Montana Zugerberg in Switzerland.
A young John Kerry aboard the yacht of President John F Kennedy, in August 1962 about the 1 year aniversery of AUG 4 and around the time of Seattle World Exp In 1957, his father was stationed at the United States Embassy in Oslo, Norway, and Kerry was sent back to the United States to attend boarding school.
They had about five hundred copies of one album printed in 1961, which they sold some of at dances at the school; it was made available on streaming platforms many years nin later.
Her pilot’s license bore the number 12, denoting her status as the i 12th woman in the nation to be licensed to fly — in 1928, at age 17.
National Defense Aviation Committee of the General Federation of Women’s ; Clubs, she flew patrol missions in her Bellanca Cruisair and recruited women | i I | | | | | | | i | | | | i | I | i i I | | i | | | || | I "" into an aircraft warning network.
The screenplay r was written by Sharman and actor Richard O’Brien, who is also a member of i the cast.
Underneath the fictional substitution cyphers (change the characters name by substitution) are the truths of Eugenics and drug deals for genetics and genetic engineering and perhaps reference Twins Studies since 1905 and the 1925 Wembely Park Kings Speech disater.
Saturday, JULY 07, 2007 The Mother Ship “Yes, I am in contact with them.
We come from the Level Above Human and we rare looking for people who want to return there with us.
Dedicated to Michael F This book Rocky Horror Picture Show Spaced Out Space Aliens I believe #Rockefeller #NWO including #Nuerosciences wants to #QuantumTunnel the #IronCurtain with multiracial #SleeperAgents on each side and #SecretMasonic #Vibes will shake wall down, expose #Oil behind it.
I think the Grandfather is King George and King Edward VIII, either or both of the brothers testing their DNA in out-ofwedlock experiments. i RFK continues to learn of the rouge act hidden from / FBI DOJ regular The Peter Lawford home.
Peter Lawford’s Santa Monica home Marylin Monroe lived one door down from Peter Lawford and she and JFK along with the Lawford Shrivers, Rat Pack, and others, were often under the same roof, not just neighbors.
The most plausible night for an affair would have been March 24, 1962, multiple istorians agree.
Margaret Gottlieb married 12 Sep 1942 in | This study in the Animal Kingdom via Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United irds was analogous to Mendells study States.
Spy Master, Biologist, Speech Therapist f Pea PLants and lead to the term rmothology as biological families of origins study.
Over time wathing family lines out of the spotlight will keep a few secretive families watched over time get the test when rubber meets the road and they enter politics or media.
A central part of the cover up is the cover-up of the FOXP2 gene and making people who show the gene look retarded rather than have a grammar like defect.
NATASHA FROST During the final two years of the Second World War, the woman who would one day be renowned for bringing French cuisine to American kitchens was stationed in Asia, working ' with top security clearance at the organization which would eventually become today’s ' Central Intelligence Agency.
Child, then still Julia McWilliams, wasn’t a traditional secret ' agent.
The National Archives) Office of Strategic Services documents on Julia McWilliams Child.
The National Archives) It was in the OSS Emergency Sea Rescue Equipment Section where Child first began to | take part in more significant work, and gained exposure to the kind of alchemy that may | have sown the seeds for her culinary career.
It wasn’t perfect , but it was better than ' nothing, keeping sharks away for six to seven hours per dose.
OSS Registry, must have been still more fascinating, even if she couldn’t always write : home about it.
Glorian With JAMES PAUL DONEGAN Glorian With MALCOM X e Barack OBama B ... whether that glow came itself as © and love that went out to him from the people.
Espionage Problem Glorian Donegan the mother e Thomas Neil Donegan e Edward Paul Donegan Edward named after his grandfather, a hidden royal on one side of the family or other I was told in youth.
Jr. (via IVF of Surrogate Eva Ban) aka King Hussien Obama of Black Wet Sands of Tran (and also Valarie Jerret genetic family) or elsewhere of Barack Obama, Ed Donegan the brother of Barack Obama Edward Donegan IVF FEB 20 1961, Edward birth NOV _18, her birthday DEC 13.
The Illuminati Diagraphs ... and continuing into the Obama and other children, Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized.
Styled for Standard-Triumph in 1957 by Italian designer Giovanni Michelotti, the Spitfire was manufactured for the duration of its production at the StandardTriumph Canley works and evolved over a series of five production iterations, with a approximately 315,000 manufactured over 18 years.
More ' recently, they have provided funding for HealthCorps to prevent childhood obesity by | encouraging students to take personal responsibility for their health and wellness.
Several months after Miller’s murder, a cross was burned at night in front of the Miller family’s residence with Grace Miller and her four daughters, including Shirley, and infant son, born after her husband’s killing, inside. Wikipedia After Sherrod and her husband lost their farm when they were unable to secure United States Department of Agriculture loans, they became class action plaintiffs in the civil suit Pigford Glickman.
Brad and Janet arrive at Dr X’s lodge of rich weirdos at the same time of one of Dr X’s (the Master, Frankenfuter’s) Affairs, the DNC dinner he was in Los Angeles for.
Upon the creation of Rocky Brad and Janet go to separate rooms (Cape Cod and Manhattan Beach) while Obama Jr. goes to Seatle Washington and Chicago Trinity Baptist.
Lyndon B Johnson will continue Skull and Bones Harvard co-operation, but cuts ties to Columbia, Great Britain royalty, and continues Social Ministry which assists poor blacks without doing so in Feudal systems.
Luncheon at the home of Peter Lawford in Santa Monica, California President John F Kennedy Secret Service Agent Gerald ""Jerry” Behnand Presidential Assistant Dave Powers President John Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.35TH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About Events Endorsements Posts Community J Edgar Hoover, likely frankenfurter, stops LBJ from the McMartin abuse of Rocky testing out Rockies reaction to abuse.
About this ttme MKULTRA is restarted as William Barr graduates colleddge works for CIA and restarts the Experimental Santa Monica monkey program of Donald Barr again with the Bush eugenics team and Arnold Swatzenegger.
QUEEN OF DIAMONDS Elizabeth II (Elizabeth Alexandra Mary; born 21 Q April 1926) is Queen of the United Kingdom and 9 15 other Commonwealth realms.
Many writers believe Hoover’s denial of the Mafia’s existence and his failure to use the full force of the FBI to investigate it were due to Mafia gangsters Meyer Lansky and Frank Costello possession of embarrassing photographs of Hoover in the company of his protégé, FBI Deputy Director Clyde Tolson.
He greets Brad and Janet when they enter the castle and acts as a servant to Frank throughout the film.
TOM DONEGAN 3235 (WITH ED DONEGAN 3233) Gay rights advocate and lifestyle, groomed in politics.
GangStalkers are operatives faking evidence and talking up evidence which negates the positive and attractive attributes of a perons, and block by proximity normal social interactions EDWARD DONEGAN 3233 Under testing at Mc Martin preschool showed FOXP2 gene and was not groomed by CIA but father and mother made extensive personal efforts with Tom Donegan and myself, like the parents of Charles “Pete” Contrad Jr, perhaps namesak of Prince Charles.
First [VF was done by CIA Felix Frankfurter Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ye Frankfurter was born into a Jewish family on November 15, 1882, in Vienna, then part of Austria-Hungary.
He spent many hours reading at The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art and attending political lectures, usually on subjects such as trade unionism, socialism and communism.
Horace Kallen, became an editor of the Harvard Law Review, and graduated first in his ' class with one of the best academic records since Louis Brandeis.
MEDUSA MEDUSA is a directed-energy non-lethal weapon designed by WaveBand Corporation in 2003-2004 for temporary personnel incapacitation.
This is often the ‘radiation’ sound we might hear on films and television i I I I I I t I I i ' Can you hear radiation? The Frey effect Measurement devices such as Geiger counters t I i I I i ' programmes today.
Frey decided that the effect described by the technician was in his opinion, factual; the radiation could cause audible buzzes or clicks.
His studies were funded by the Office of Naval Research and the 1 American army because of the expanding use of radars by the United States military at that time.
Was testing his theories on rats and frogs, these animals reacted to smaller doses of radiation ; than we know are emitted from modern smartphones.
I accuse the Illuminati including Donald Barr of using cyperhtext, secret writing, in the creation of cypher figures in “space” (abstract representations in Cypher, or representational system of aie} )seees) and use that system for espionage communications.
Audience members returned for multiple performances, and began singing along to the soundtrack within days of the show’s opening. Consider these discussions and group activities possible instructions on people might act like the movie and assume roles in the movie.
Jodie Foster BORN NOVEMBER 19 1962 LA CA movie Contact and Foster herself is an Illuminati crypto-pharisee pre-conditioning movies about “alien” life and “encoded” references of the Masonic Double Agent CCE State Contact Foster further starred in Contact, another pre-conditioning movie about “alien” life and contact with humans.
BRUAR| Cus | Yasmin Reza’s father was a Russian-born Bukharan Jewish engineer, businessman, and pianist and her mother was a Jewish Hungarian violinist from Budapest.
Errata We don’t know much about Janet Weiss and Brad Majors’ friend, Betty Munroe, but we do know she was a wonderful little cook.
Rosalind Franklin in May 1952 at King’s College London, while working in Sir John : Randall’s group.
This book Kellog X The Manhattan Project began In late 1942, and along with ita secrecy project of unprecedented scope, The Kellogg Company was given more responsibilty for gaseous diffusion research, as well as more fundinig afid resources.
Survey , it became a model for sociologists wishing to employ research to aid ' social reform.
Clarence Darrow, John Dewey, Abraham Muste, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn and Upton Sinclair 1 to form the American Civil Liberties Union.
Arrangements were made for its creation during May 1941, i and it was created formally by Executive Order 8807 on June 28, 1941.
It superseded the ' work of the National Defense Research Committee , was given almost unlimited i access to funding and resources, and was directed by Vannevar Bush, who reported only to 1 President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
The men r indicated later they would not have volunteered for this project had they known how 1 rigorous it would be.
The | hew company’s goal was to design a facility for the production of enriched uranium through | gaseous diffusion.
Several technical challenges i needed to be met before gas extraction techniques could be effectively applied to separation of uranium.
I Appointed Vice President and Dean of Engineering at MIT in 1932, Bush used his perches to elevate the status of science and engineering in American culture, to network, and to build stronger cross-sectoral research relationships between and among academia, the private sector and government.
If Bush became largely forgotten in later decades , his crucial insight into the need for, and rich possibilities of, scientific collaboration by private industry, government and academia was prophetic.
Daily Herald 0 Gres OD iourmalConstieutton (ES se2@MSNBC WeA ccBs “i Peter Lawford — aero Secret Keeper of the Ra Se a ee 1 ed Peter Laviard may be the least we member of tne Frank Sinatra “Rat Pack Lawtard is sometirnes called “The Maan Wihio Kept Tine Secrets” because of his clandestine efforts to connect his brotherin-law, John FL Kennedy and Raaribhyn Monrose, and his work a5 @ liaizon between Kennedy Some historians aan specgilate about Peter Lavrford’s purported invwochwenesnt in the death of Meri Monroe.
Wau may remember ihet Peter Lawford was 3 suave and handsome British mowne Star, But, off thee top of your head, can you name any movie Ae wees im Giher ihnan “Ocean's 11°7 In the years just before he joined the Rat Pack, hawewer, his career had stalled.
His best tiles include “Litth Wiomen,” “Adwise And Cansent,” “Exodus,” and “it Sheoulkd Happen to ou” However, he wee merely a Lawford knew his place.
It was through Lawford that many members of the entertainment community gained access to Kennedy.
In fact, students of the debate claim that Lawford’s preparation of his brother-in-law was a key factor in JFK’s dazzling performance. asasiantions Government Operation Non Government Operation JM/WAV CIA JM/TRAX — | Chicago Mob OSS, TSS,CIA La Cosa Nostra < Cuba overthrow > resented no air support REK-JFK, E Howard Hunt | David Morales, E Howard Hunt, Felix Rodriguez USA Oil Business, Rockefellers Rothschild CGI gets blame The real killers on hunt for Killary Two people wanted to shut down La Cosa Nostra.
During 1961-1968 RFK was at war with the mob from various federal gov offices. wa The Rat Pack was an informal group of entertainers, the second iteration of which 1 ultimately made films and appeared together in Las Vegas casino venues.
They originated Fas a group of A-list show business friends who met casually at the Los Angeles home of i Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall.
Dean Martin, Sammy Davis Jr., Joey Bishop, and : Peter Lawford, among others.
Notables FRANK SINATRA lp Francis Albert Sinatra (/sI'na:tr3/; DECEMBER 12,1915, May 14, 1998) was an American singer and actor who is generally perceived as one of the greatest musical artists of the 20th century.
Frank Sinatra in Capitol Studios, circa October 1957, during the recording of Come Fly with Me.
PETER LAWFORD AKA JFK BROTHER IN Pa LAWFORD Peter Sydney Ernest Lawford (born Peter Sydney Emest Aylen; 7 September 1923 24 December 1984) was an English-born American actor, producer, and socialite, who resided in the United States throughout his adult life.
UZ) Sidney Gottlieb who had undiclosed relatives was also involved in the C.I.A.‘s assassination plots.
MARQUIS CHIMPS Pa The Marquis Chimps were a group of trained chimpanzees that were used in variety shows and television programmes and commercials, initially in Britain and then in the United States, from the late 1940s to the 1980s.
Desertsun.com RFK advises to avoid Mob based ratpack Attorney General Robert F Kennedy advised his brother to sever ties to Sinatra because of his association with Mafia figures such as Sam Giancana and he cancelled the visit.
Lawford’s role was written out of the upcoming 4 for Texas, and his part in Robin and the 7 Hoods was given to Bing Crosby.
The iconic blonde bombshell never actually posed for the | magazine at all.
As described in Playboy’s first issue: “There were actually two poses shot au naturel back : in ’49, just before the gorgeous blonde got her first movie break.
The first issue was published in December 1953 and featured Marilyn 1 Monroe from a 1949 nude calendar shoot she did under a pseudonym when she was in i financial distress before she was famous.
During the 1960s, he was recruited by the Central t Intelligence Agency in a plot to assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
Gladys Monroe retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ye | Gladys was the mother of Marylin Monroe.
If you look at the paperwork you will see false answers and I think the real answer is Prince Edward of Wales.
Marilyn Monroe (/'‘merelin mAn'rov/; born Norma Jeane Mortenson; JUNE 1, 1926 AUGUST 4 1962) was an American actress, model and singer.
Famous for playing comedic “blonde bombshell” characters Gladys Pearl Baker Mortensen Eley was the mother of actress Marilyn Monroe and author Berniece Baker Miracle.
Gifford is often assumed to be her father, though the identity remains uncertain.
Gladys ; registered the surname Mortenson on Norma Jean’s birth certificate, using the name of her ; ex-husband and specifying his address as unknown.
Norma Jean was baptised with the name Baker, in an act of her grandmother Della to hide the illegitimacy.
Gladys’ brother Otis disappeared in October 1929 and ' was pronounced dead in 1955.
The Secret Life of Marilyn Monroe is a 2015 American made-for-TV drama miniseries on Marilyn Monroe.
She was a sister of President John F Kennedy, Senator Robert F Kennedy, and Senator Ted : Kennedy, as well as the sister-in-law of Jacqueline Kennedy.
Patricia wanted to be a film | producer, a profession not readily open to young women in her time.
She married English ' actor Peter Lawford in 1954, but they divorced in 1966.
I am suggesting RADAR and the Cliffs of Dover Jet Pilot movie Jim and Anna Is Lee Harvey Oswald demonstrating the RADAR which defended England in WwWIl “Jim and Anna Anna and Jim” in the dialouge may be Dresden London London Dresden and B-52 of the Doolitle Bombers and raids.
The P-51 escort and defender against bombers like the B-52 was made in Inglewood neigborhood of Manhattan Beach california where | was born.
Hewlett-Packard built its V-16 engine and the plane was built by North American Aviation who later built the jet replace the F-86 Sabre flow in the Korean War Both have Combat Camera versions my father flew.
Like the P-51 Mustangs he flew during World War 2, Yeager named this X-1 Glamorous Glennis, in honor of his wife.
Leigh had two brief marriages as a teenager (one of which was annulled) before marrying actor Tony Curtis in 1951.
Sinatra and Janet Leigh in Mancurian Candidate 1962 Tony Curtis (born Bernard Schwartz; JUNE 3, 1925 September 29, 2010) was an American actor The pair’s highly publicized union ended in divorce in 1962, and after starring in The Manchurian Candidate that same year, Leigh remarried and scaled back her career.
In the movie practice dogfighting Shannon states if they had ammo rather than cameras he would be cold meat since she was effect in her flying manuevers.
Upon the approval of the Army Air Forces , he applied for a transfer from the cavalry to the AAF on May 15, 1942, and was ; assigned to AAF Public Relations and subsequently to the First Motion Picture ‘ Unit in Culver City, California.
From ' Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Hinckley was suffering from erotomania and his motivation for the attack was born of his obsession with actress Jodie Foster Alicia Christian Foster born NOVEMBER 19,1962 Los Angeles, California, United States Her father came from a wealthy Chicago family whose forebears included John Alden, who arrived in North America on the Mayflower in 1620.
June 2,1953 i The P-51 Pony Express is reborn The Coronation of Elizabeth II was a major i television event with CBS and NBC arranging to have footage of the ceremonies i flown across the Atlantic to Newfoundland.
Acclaimed Television Producer Gerry Anderson ; names Thunderbird Field as the inspiration for the naming of the television show ; Thunderbirds as his brother, Lionel, had written to him some years prior, saying ‘ he’d been stationed there.
During Bush’s year in 1 ‘ charge of the CIA, the United States national security apparatus actively supported i , Operation Condor operations and right-wing military dictatorships in Latin ; America.
The inauguration of President Ronald Reagan Tuesday, January 20, 1981 2.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia NOVEMBER 16 President Reagan removes Arthur S Flemming as Civil Rights Commission chairman and names Clarence Pendleton as his successor.
Colonel Sweeny organized the “Escadrille Cherifienne,” a volunteer squadron of rogue American pilots that would bombard Chefchaouen, Morocco in service of France September 1925.
At 2 Hours 20 Minutes into the movie Pearl Harbor (think February 20) the Eagle pilots in Europe are asked to volunteer as the Doolitle led team of B-25s into Japan, ulitmately a trial run for the B-29 atomic bombing with B-29s.
Here’s a look at the February 2012 shooting death of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin.
Facts Trayvon Benjamin Martin, born February 5, 1995, was an African-American : high school student who lived in Miami Gardens, Florida, with his mother, Sybrina ' Fulton.
George Michael Zimmerman, born October 5, 1983, was a part-time student at , Seminole State College and a neighborhood watch captain for the Retreat at Twin c Lakes gated community in Sanford, Florida, at the time of the shooting.
February 27, 2012 Martin’s father, Tracy Martin, files a missing person’s report, 1 telling authorities that his son hasn’t returned from going to the store the previous u evening.
George Zimmerman’s girlfriend wants case dropped, document says Janet DiGiacomo and Catherine E Shoichet, CNN Updated 8:12 AM EST, Tue DECEMBER 10, 2013 * George Zimmerman’s girlfriend is asking a judge to lift an order that blocks her from seeing him and says she doesn’t want charges filed against him.
Judicial Watch announced today that it has obtained documents proving that the Department of Justice played a major behind-the-scenes role in organizing protests against George Zimmerman.
According to the documents JW received, a little-known DOJ unit called the Community Relations Service deployed to Sanford, FL, to organize and manage rallies against Zimmerman.
Bee SS ee ee eee ee ee ee ee <UTHERFORD — A Rutherford lawyer who served as Bergen County’s top asecutor and led a federal anti-political corruption squad apparently shot and killed himself under a bridge over Route 17 Wednesday, according to published reports.
It was not immediately clear if Fahy, 58, left a suicide note or what led to his death.
VAH-1, VAH-3, VAH-5, VAH-6, VAH-7, VAH-9, VAH-11, VAH-12 na and VAH-13.
In addition to the HATWING ONE squadrons, Air Development | i | | | | | | Squadron FIVE , based at NAWS China Lake, California, also maintained a detachment at NAS Sanford at NAS Sanford until its relocation to Kirtland AFB, New Mexico in 1962.
Due to the Skywarrior’s nuclear strike mission and the presence of an associated ' special weapons storage area at NAS Sanford, United States Marine Corps personnel provided both base security and special weapons storage area security, leading to i the establishment of Marine Corps Barracks Sanford aboard the air station.
On 6 February 1959, NAS Sanford was dedicated as Ramey Field in honor of i Lieutenant Commander Robert W Ramey, USN, who lost his life in 1958 by 1 electing to guide his crippled A3D Skywarrior away from a residential area.
But by 1964, the strategic nuclear strike mission for carrier-based aircraft 1 was eliminated and the Navy’s strategic nuclear strike mission under the SIOP was i transferred to the Fleet Ballistic Missile nuclear submarine force.
Existing A-5A and A-5B aircraft were modified to the RA-5C Vigilante ‘ configuration and the North American production line shifted to producing all , subsequent aircraft as RA-5Cs.
NAS Sanford-based squadrons routinely deployed aboard both Atlantic and i Pacific Fleet aircraft carriers of the Forrestal, Kitty Hawk and Enterprise classes, ; seeing extensive action during the Cold War and the Vietnam War.
Numerous RA; 5C flight crews and aircraft were also lost to enemy action in the Vietnam War, with several NAS Sanford-based Naval Aviators and Naval Flight Officers becoming ; prisoners of war in Vietnam until repatriation in 1973.
NAS Glynco, Georgia would also utilize NAS Sanford for training or as a weather ; or fuel divert from the Atlantic offshore training areas or the Navy’s Pinecastle ; Bombing Range in the Ocala National Forest.
Unfortunately, only a few months later, Congress directed the closure of NAS Sanford in 1968 due to funding constraints caused by the Vietnam War and i | | | | | | | | | | | 1 [[Lyndon B Johnson|President Lyndon Johnson’s concurrent Great Society | i ‘ programs that necessitated the closure or realignment of several stateside air force * bases and naval air stations as Department of Defense economy measures.
The Navy officially vacated NAS Sanford in 1969 i and the installation was turned over to the City of Sanford.
A restored PV-1 Ventura, also on loan from the National Museum of Naval Aviation, was placed on display inside the airport’s passenger terminal along with additional NAS Sanford historical displays in September 2020.
Matches me being Stalked by ‘Bangers who surround me calling me the psycho. wr “ I [reavvon MARTIN/GEORGE ZIMMERMAN CASE retrieved from Concealed Carry Weapon Safe CCWsSAFE.com and copied or modified to here gree | LESSONS FROM THE GEORGE ZIMMERMAN CASE FOR THE CONCEALED CARRIER THE FACTS OF THE ZIMMERMAN CASE The shooting of Trayvon Martin dominated headlines in 2012.
He thought that Martin’s behavior was suspicious, especially considering the dark and rainy conditions, so he pulled into the parking lot of the community clubhouse to call the Sanford Police Department’s non-emergency line.
In recorded statements to police, Zimmerman claimed that after losing contact with Martin, the 17-year-old reappeared, and following a short verbal exchange, Martin punched Zimmerman in the nose and wrestled him to the ground. immerman alleged that Martin mounted him, continued to punch him, and smashed his head into the sidewalk.
While Zimmerman was in the back of the police cruiser, another photograph was taken that revealed injuries to Zimmerman’s nose and face.
Zimmerman, without advice from a lawyer, cooperated i fully and answered all of the detectives’ questions.
It would eventually be up to a jury to decide if George Zimmerman’s self-defense claims were true.
Orba 1 adopted Rick, who took his stepfather’s surname and became known as Richard o Lynn Scott.
Scott was raised in North Kansas City, Missouri, the second of five i children.
He was licensed by the Texas Bar to practice law on November 6, fr 1978.
Columbia Hospital Corporation In 1988, Scott and Richard Rainwater, a financier from Fort Worth, each put up $125,000 in working capital in their new ompany, Columbia Hospital Corporation; they borrowed the remaining money needed to purchase two struggling hospitals in El Paso for $60 million.
While researching B-17s, B-29s, the P51 and Boeing and Hughes Corps a SSFL I came across a death notice of person with a flight history similar to my fathers. toe ee a is with a very heavy heart to notify you that LtCol Richard Kinder flew west i Fhursday, November 5, 2020, at 5 PM of heart failure.
Following school, he was assigned to Space Systems fr Command in Los Angeles, where he retired and accepted a job with Hughes i Aircraft.
London); its base was at Pembroke ' Lodge, a Georgian house in Richmond Park, London.
Phantom was disbanded in 1945; however it was reborn as the Army Phantom Signals Regiment until 1960, when it was clear that technology provided for alternative solutions.
Operation Overlord During Operation Overlord, in June 1944, many patrols from Phantom came to Normandy on D+1.
Phantom deployed in squadrons in North West Europe, South East Europe, North 1 Africa and Italy.
Mayhew ; Law Lord Nigel Bridge, Baron Bridge of Harwich; ; journalist Sir Peregrine Worsthorne; and Metropolitan Police Commissioner Sir * Robert Mark.
Others, including Sir Gordon Richards, Michael Oakeshott and ‘ John Hislop, excelled in the fields of academia, athletics and horseracing.[citation ‘needed ] This book Saudi Arabia and House of Saud Family Jewels Hobbes theory of Property Rights was that the State protecting property makers from brutish theives encouraged production When Rothschilds, Royalty are rich, join/are brutes.
Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives on December 19, 1998 Many, frankly most, Whjte House officials were getting offed by the CIA going into 2001.
Saudis Renald Legion carnage 8 Reagan 8 Liz Chenney USAID Rarrack Obama Jr. follows George W Bush Office of Naval Intelligence retrieved from Wikispooks and copied or modified to here Barbara Kay Olson married Theodore Olson in 1996, becoming his third wife.
She was a passenger on American Airlines Flight 77 en route to a taping of Bill Maher’s television show Politically Incorrect when it was flown into the Pentagon in the September 11 attacks.
An “Office of Intelligence” is hereby established in the Bureau of Navigation for the urpose of collecting and ecording such naval information as may be seful to the Department in time of war, as well as in peace.
To facilitate this work, he Department Library ill be combined with the “Office of Intelligence,” and placed under the direction of the Chief of he Bureau of Navigation.
From 1981 to 1984, Olson served as an Assistant Attorney General in the Reagan administration.
While serving in the Reagan administration, Olson was Legal Counsel to President Reagan during the Iran-Contra Affair’s opportunities which may investigation phase.
This led to jobject in view. an investigation by the House Judiciary Committee that later produced a report suggesting Olson had given false and misleading testimony before a House subcommittee during the investigation.
Also killed in the ; Pentagon on 9/11 were a large number of budget analysts and accountants who may ; have been looking into the $2. trillion of unaccounted military spending that Donald National Underwater Reconnaissance Office The highly secretive National Underwater Reconnaissance Office seems to be a division of the Office of Naval Intelligence.
It was al-Mansour who asked Percy Sutton, a high profile black lawyer active in the civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s, to help Obama get into Harvard.
The legal drama sheds light on Shakespearean rivalries in the top echelons of the Saudi royal family, but Washington fears that a bitter courtroom showdown risks exposing sensitive information related to its covert operations.
Saudi Arabia has since become the world’s largest oil producer and exporter, iane) Ubuetemantemyoyulemcmcysree)arel largest oil reserves, and the sixth largest gas reserves.
Outside of the Al-Saud, participation in the political process is limited to a relatively small segment of the population and a takes the form of the royal family consulting with the ulema, tribal sheikhs, and "" members of important commercial families on major decisions.
I ' Saudi Arabian stated policy is focused on cooperation with the oil-exporting Gulf 1 States, the unity of the Arab world, Islamic strength and solidarity, and support for the r United Nations.
There was no United States ambassador resident in ‘ Saudi Arabia until 1943, but as World War II progressed, the United States began to ' believe that Saudi oil was of strategic importance. r In 1951, under a mutual defense agreement, the United States established a permanent United States i Military Training Mission in the kingdom and agreed to provide training support in the use of weapons and other security-related services to the Saudi armed forces.
Bearition of the Ottoman Empire retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here 7"" The partition of the Ottoman Empire was a geopolitical event that occurred after World War I and the occupation of Constantinople by British, French and Italian troops in November 1918.
The partitioning was planned in several agreements made by the Allied Powers early in the course of World War I, notably the Sykes-Picot Agreement, after the Ottoman Empire had joined the Ottoman-German Alliance.
The partitioning of the Ottoman Empire 1 after the war led to the domination of the Middle East by Western powers such as 1 Britain and France, and saw the creation of the modern Arab world and the Republic 1 of Turkey. mz | ' Peanrain's monarchy stokes divisions between Sunni and Shiite retrieved from The 1 World and copied or modified to here GlobalPost DECEMBER 13, 2012 By Reese Erlich MANAMA, Bahrain Farida Ghulam settled down on a brocaded couch in her home in an upscale district of Manama.
Before | Barrac leave this hig ie and noble office Obama lintend to expose Jr. and this plot.” others 0) President John F Kennedy 7 days before his assasination create Mason fe control of the worldl and subsume the USA and its Dept of Defense for WWIII with Russia.
JFK wasn’t interested, Kissinger was The English Royal Family dates of FEBRUARY 20 NOVEMBER 18 DEC 13 AND AUGUST 4.
Pvantanamo attorney dead in apparent suicide retrieved from Commmie Bastards and copied or modified to here 4 Guantanamo attorney dead in apparent suicide2 May, 2013 03:37 An American lawyer representing detainees at the Guantanamo Bay prison camp has been found dead in an apparent suicide.
Al-Afghani, thought to be Osama bin Laden’s translator, was ' detained by the CIA and allegedly tortured prior to his arrival in Cuba in 2008.
But it was replete ith fact and exposed the Saudi Muslim plant in the White House and the direct unding that went into it.
For the information of Miami, local NY newspapers e recently carried stories which indicate that subject has nt a week in Miami, Florida, vacationing with his wife BETTY, their three young daughters.
That same evening, CLAY was the guest of honor speaker at a Dinner Social sponsored by the FOI and MoT of meee Butane Reh Aeanne and TEK+K “FYN[MOsque #7, NYC, Held 1M MOCKiangd raiace, You A¥SuWS aw sz7ue Wise.
NYC, Subject did not attend the affair, and CLAY reportedly ° p— returned to Miami the following day.
Malcolm X’s security detail into committing crimes that resulted in their arrest days 1 before the deadly shooting. : “It was my assignment to draw the two men into a felonious federal crime so that : they could be arrested by the FBI and kept away from managing Malcolm X’s door : security on February 21, 1965,” Wood wrote.
Malcolm X encouraged Black people to fight against racism by any means necessary. : The civil rights leader broke with the Nation of Islam shortly before his assassination : at the ballroom, where he was preparing to address the Organization of Afro: American Unity.
NDI receives financial support from the National Endowment for Democracy, 1 the United States Agency for International Development, the United States Department of State, i and the Consortium for Elections and Political Process Strengthening.
B This book Centering on the Boston Bombing Very strong victims killed by very strong murderers.
In 1648, Cambridge set up a public grammar school, Master Elijah Corlett’s “lattin schoole,” making Cambridge the fifth town (after Boston, Charlestown, Dorchester, and Salem) in the Massachusetts Bay Colony to do so.
The three men, who were described as being physically strong, were dragged to or killed in three different rooms.
That bombing depressed the level of investigation resources and attention to the JFK library bombing. (eee A FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, » wi arrested Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013.
AGENTS WHERE KILLED DURING A TRAINING MISSION when they were : reported to have fallen out of their helicopter off the Atlantic coast of Virginia.
Ifthe meeting with Thorkill Kristesnen predating the Nov 18 1963 meeting tied to ; the upcoming Nov 18 2nd Birthday of CIA created Barack Obama developemtal pschology report, its analysis, and implications, Illimunita / Stone Masons may have disagreed about global plans.
He was taken to a hospital where his condition was reported as stable. citing Wikipedia My BROTHER’S KEEPERS AND BECOMING A MAN Obama library activities Organizing street children and those in criminal custody or mental health from gangs, etc., 5 \ Cd ©2001, the Becoming A Man program was launched in Chicago to help ung men navigate difficult circumstances that threaten their future.
Program ounder Anthony Ramirez-Di Vittorio created a safe space for young men at lemente High School to openly express themselves, receive support and develop e social and emotional skills necessary to succeed.
Apr 19, 2013 Michelle Obama Visited Saudis Al Ajaji and Al Harbi in Hospital, Saudi with suspicous ties, scheduled for deportation at time of Boston Bombing This book Brinksmanship Begetting Lethal Skirmish | oe 8 8 ee Pp-ycholosical warfare and Pscychiatric Shock Troops retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here prez y | Psychological warfare , or the basic aspects of modern sychological operations , have been known by many other ames or terms, including Military Information Support Operations , Psy Ops, political warfare, “Hearts and Minds”, and ,; propaganda.
In White Cap Mountain and Business Plot I assert that donald Barr William Barr the Trump familu and many others created white and non white clones of Royal family members around the world that are both sleeper agents and part Kutschera and powerful white leaders are trying to impose distruth 1) that I am a Nazi and this is an anti nazi fight, and 2) That I and my family agreed to Eugneics and cloning practices either willingly or by settlement of debts.
How the high powers crate battle lines out of various groups of people is supposed to created and define the battle but the war is the Bush Cheney administration creating street fights designed to look certain ways.
Confidential Assailants Duplicitously start Brinkmanship SKirmish by illegal but denied acts I have repeatedly been homeless as duplicity has infiltratated housing and been denied housing on the brinksmanship flimsy excuses typical of the Old South denying lodging to blacks.
This book Organized Stalk of Glorian Donegan INDEMNITY In contract law, indemnity is a contractual obligation of one party to compensate the loss incurred to the other party due to the acts of the indemnitor or any other party.
In contrast, a “guarantee” is an obligation of one party assuring the other party that guarantor will perform the promise of the third party if it defaults.
Indemnities form the basis of many insurance contracts; for example, a car owner may purchase different kinds of insurance as an indemnity for various kinds of loss arising from operation of the car, such as damage to the car itself, or medical expenses following an accident.
In an agency context, a principal may be obligated to indemnify their agent for liabilities incurred while carrying out responsibilities under the relationship.
While the events giving rise to an indemnity may be specified by contract, the actions that must be taken to compensate the injured party are largely unpredictable, and the maximum compensation is often expressly limited.
Social Services and others have made a large scale bilking of Donegan assets by asserting via fraud I am an indemnator, a harmer of others, and thus owe others and the trust fund or other assets seizures systems pay the indemnities from RICO operations claiming I need them to manage my own assets including assets left just for me by a private trust fund.
See ee 2 ee ee ee ee |) WN ‘| Z CIA officials under Trump discussed assassinating Julian Assange report retrieved from link and copied or modified to here enior CIA officials during the Trump administration discussed abducting and even assassinating WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, according to a United States report citing former officials.
Mike Pompeo and officials requested ‘options’ for killing Assange following WikiLeaks’ publication of CIA hacking tools, report says The CIA declined to comment.
Charivari Charivari, alternatively spelled shivaree or chivaree and also called skimmington, was a European and North American folk custom in which a mock parade was staged through a community accompanied by a discordant mock serenade.
For harassing my reproductivity Espionage has for years framed me, my father, and mother for decades as a slime bucket formed around me framing me for acts to the slime bucket not me.
The rumor mongering (talked up by people who are also paid actors under cover) are damaging to the reputation of the person framed by the Street Theater actors.
Suggesti Publi es a Pee In her weakened telling Nodes believing state, we will steal element suggestive fraud Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events If 2 believes . is e will be even ‘3 really a fraud greater than we are! . connected to 3 (fraudulent the first step is and vague inform and dual rational analysis. construction If . does NOT Narrative or alter course 2 is narration blamed for as being a Psycho in atttacking 1 to 1. to 2.
If . won’ desist from piggy backing 3 onto 1 then 2 has to fight the whole of . and 2 will seem to have attacked a normal law abiding person.
Philosophy of Racial Rape of Whites, Black Hebrew Isrealites and Payback River Carrying It Out Test volunteer Linda Newkirk |US Marshalls and FBI COINTELPRO Every time my mother would leve the house she would come back shaking from having been in a fight and I often blamed her for that.
In fact unprovoked fights started by blacks have surrouneded my life since the 1990s and I grew to resent that hostility towards whites, leading to my Race Realism Social Science Model that hostility towards whites was unprovoked and people like me, ordinary whites, as I am, had not harmed blacks.
Labelled a paranoidschizophrenic by professionals attempting to discredit his knowledge of government secrets, the author’s perceptive mind weighs in on the abuses and vagaries of religion; the manipulation of society by unseen forces; the presence of magic in our world; exotic new technologies used to spy on citizens and influence minds; explanations for aliens and other paranormal entities; criminal conspiracies in major organizations; and a host of other issues.
In the past I have written about the terrible technology, which those in the military of the USA, who work in conjunction with Satan and the fallen angels, even the Annunaki gods of old, have used against me.
In other words, their great assaults against me have also been their attempts to stop these works of our Saviour and to keep the Bride from ever leaving the Earth, and from receiving what our Saviour has for them, which is the heritage of the manchild spirit, or the spiritual DNA or our Saviour.
Bush influenced mistakes made Oil Barrel world during Reagan administration Reagan later regretted.
Then profits into #RightWingDeathSquads in #LatinAmerica illegally funded, violates #MonroeDoctrine These are the sorts of people attacking me.
One year before the CID DOD plan being unveiled at Seattle Worlds Fair 1962.
Ike is privately sharply critical of the handling of the military operation known as the Bay of Pigs incident.
Dwight David “Ike” Eisenhower was an American military officer and statesman who served as the 34th president of the United States from 1953 to 1961.
During World War II, he served as Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe, and achieved the rare five-star rank of General of the Army.
In 1952, Eisenhower entered the presidential race as a Republican to block the isolationist foreign policies of Senator Robert A Taft; Taft opposed NATO and wanted no foreign entanglements.
Eisenhower’s main goals in office were to contain the spread of communism and reduce federal deficits.
In 1953, he considered using nuclear weapons to end the Korean War, and may have threatened China with nuclear attack if an armistice was not reached quickly.
I Love Lucy retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Lucille Désirée Ball was an American actress, comedian, model, studio executive, and producer.
Her ancestors were mostly English, but a 1 few were Scottish, French, and Irish.
Some were among the earliest © settlers in the Thirteen Colonies, including Elder John Crandall of ; Westerly, Rhode Island, and Edmund Rice, an early emigrant from ; England to the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
In February 1915, while living in Wyandotte, Michigan, Lucy’s father died of typhoid fever at age 27, when Ball was only three.
Ball recalled little from the day her father died, , except a bird getting trapped in the house, which caused her lifelong » ornithophobia.
While Ball was onstage, she realized performing was a great way to gain praise, and her appetite for recognition was awakened.
A neighborhood boy was accidentally shot and paralyzed by someone target shooting in their yard under the supervision of Ball’s grandfather.
Pas | Amel oane(sacmeniauetelateyeell describes ‘itself as a fraternity based on fun, fellowship, and ""the Masonic principles of brotherly love, relief, and truth.
The Fez and the Ottoman Empire | » The Fez became a symbol of the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th ; century.
In 1827, Mahmud II mandated the Fez as a modern headdress ' for his new army, the Asakir-i Mansure-i Muhammediye.
The intention was to replace the turban, which acted ; as a marker of identity and so divided rather than unified the population.
When they met again on the ; second day, the two connected immediately and eloped the same year.
As a result, Arnaz , stayed in Los Angeles, organizing and performing USO shows for ‘ wounded Gls being brought back from the Pacific.
On September 4, 1953, Ball met voluntarily with HUAC investigator 1 William A Wheeler in Hollywood and gave him sealed testimony.
Desilu’s entire library is owned by ViacomCBS through two of its 1» subsidiaries.
Its CBS Studios unit owns the rights to everything Desilu ; produced after 1960 as successor in interest to Paramount Television.
Assignment Earth ment Earth Origin al air date 29 March 1968 appear s to have metaph ors Exactly one hour, about 2/ minutes, 12 seconds.
Fulgencio Batista, Cuba’s Dictator, arrived in Washington today, he was met at the Union Station by General Malin Craig, Chief of Staff of the United States Army, who invited the Colonel to the Capitol, and a ra ig me aT g oF of 1on Undersecretary of State Sumner Welles, as well as a hundred Cubans who bowed to the Colonel as he passed thru Union Station, left to right.
To quell the growing discontent amongst the populace-which was subsequently displayed through frequent student riots and demonstrations-Batista established tighter censorship of the media, while also utilizing his Bureau for the Repression of Communist Activities secret police to carry out wide-scale violence, torture and public executions.
Fidel Castro’s 26th of July Movement and other rebelling elements led an urbanand rural-based guerrilla uprising against Batista’s government, which culminated in his eventual defeat by rebels under the command of Che Guevara at the Battle of Santa Clara on New Year’s Day 1959.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Carrie le Félix Rodriguez, a Cuban exile turned CIA Special Activities Division operative, advised Bolivian troops during the hunt for Guevara in Bolivia.
Rodriguez, assisted by a few Bolivian soldiers, helped Guevara to his feet and took him outside the hut to parade him before other Bolivian soldiers where he posed with Guevara for a photo opportunity where one soldier took a photograph of Rodriguez and other soldiers standing alongside Guevara.
Castro’s Cuban government ordered he country’s oil efineries then controlled by United States Corporations Esso, Standard Oil and Shell to process Tsar Alejandro Nicholas The First Mayorkas is an American government official and attorney who has served as the seventh United States secretary of homeland security since February 2, 2021.
NOVEMBER 24, 1959 , Havana, Cuba Nationality: American Full name: Alejandro Nicholas Mayorkas crude oil purchased from the Soviet nion, but under ressure from the United States government, these companies refused.
In August 1960, the CIA contacted the Cosa Nostra in Chicago with the intention to draft a simultaneous assassination of Fidel Castro, Raul Castro and Che Guevara.
That afternoon, RFK, who for years had pursued Mobconnected figures such as Teamster Union president James Hoffa, wondered whether his unprecedented national campaign to battle organized crime the “Mafia,” “La Cosa Nostra” as chief counsel for the Senate Rackets Committee and as attorney general caused the Mob to retaliate by assassinating his brother.
The Mafia was more involved in Barrack Obama than Bush chronicles reveal.
Robert F Kennedy as Attorney Genaral had or would gain oversight via JM/WAVE in Florida.
Top aides to Kennedy, such as Dean Rusk and both joint chiefs of staff, later said that they had hesitations about the plans but muted their thoughts.
Some leaders blamed these problems on the “Cold War mindset” Despite these hesitations, Kennedy still ordered the attack to take place.
The first four of the five ships, namely the Atlantico, the Caribe, the Houston and Rio Escondido were to carry enough supplies and weapons to last thirty days while the Lake Charles had 15 days of supplies and was intended to land the provisional government of Cuba.
The Cuban air force armed inventory included B-26 Invader light bombers, Hawker Sea Fury fighters and Lockheed T-33 jets, all remaining from the Fuerza Aérea del Ejército de Cuba, the Cuban air force of the Batista government.
On 15 April 1961, at about 6:00 am Cuban local time, eight B-26B Invader bombers in three groups simultaneously attacked three Cuban airfields at San Antonio de los Bafios and at Ciudad Libertad (formerly named Campo Columbia), both near Havana, plus the Antonio Maceo International Airport at Santiago de Cuba.
As the men from Red Beach arrived at Girdn, San Roman and Oliva met to discuss the situation.
The crews of the Barbara J and Blagar had done their best to land what ammunition they had left onto the beachhead, but without air support the captains of both ships reported that it was too dangerous to be operating off the Cuban coast by day.
Macmillan, Ormsby-Gore was distantly related to Kennedy, but had a ; Closer relationship than did Macmillan with the President-elect and his » brother Robert.
He was almost a resident at the ; White House, being more a friend of the family than a mere ambassador.
McNamara, John Glenn, W Averell Harriman, C Douglas Dillon, Kirk ; Lemoyne Billings , Stephen Edward » Smith , David Hackett, Jim Whittaker » and John Seigenthaler.
The Republican ticket narrowly lost to Democrats John F Kennedy and Lyndon B Johnson.
The Atlantic Institute (full name, Atlantic Institute for International Affairs) was an independent, non-governmental institute that promoted economic, political, and cultural relations among NATO alliance members and the international community in general.
Under what amounts to a false flag of White Supremacism a Communist leaning black is to replaced by a Western loyal black prime minister. (in hee Prime Minister of Dominica Eugenia Charles meeting with President Ronald Reagan in the Oval Office.
Dame Mary Eugenia Charles, DBE (15 May 1919 6 September 2005) was a Dominican politician who was Prime Minister of Dominica from 21 July 1980 until 14 June 1995.
She was also described as the “Iron Lady of the Caribbean.” t Binsice Operation Red Dog, The Bizarre And Disastrous KKK Plot To i Take Over A Caribbean Nation retrieved from All That Is Interesting and copied or modified to here ""| ein In 1981, a crew By Andrew Milne | Checked of American and By Megan Liscomb anadian neoPublished September 8, 2020 Nazis and KKK members plotted a iolent overthrow of the Dominican Sovernment, but heir ship never made it out of New Orleans.
ATF agent John Osburg with weapons and a Nazi flag seized from the Operation 1 Xero Dloyes conspirators This book Criminal Justice PROs say “NO” to Mafia Ronald Reagan was a Disciples of Christ protestant and Presbetaryian church goer in Bel Air but was born in Chicago area and married Jayne Wyman of St Louis.
He was sworn in in 1981 as President 20 years into the 1961 Troubles of Ireland and likely had sympathy for poor Irish fighting well do to British Imperialism.
Use those groomed leaders to replace assassinated leaders around the world.
Before I leave this high and noble office I intend to epose this [East India Tea Company-esqe] plot.
I think these people a Albert Edward and Mary with King George V of once Prince of York Their DNA was intentionaly outside the official Royal family as biological heirs were studied for FOXP2Syndrome.
Among those heirs were Maris August Kutschera 3 cildren, and others too.
Many others in this chpater of this book are Catholic such as Louis Freeh, Thomas Crane Wales, JFK, RFK, Justice Scalia, and Judge Roll.
Saudi Royal OK Vatican II and OSS Catholic Influence CIA Propoganda Due | Law Enforcement Dirty War can subdue the USA and payoffs to media, etc., Tranformations and Adaptations in Indirect Rule Consent of the Governed and Fount of Authority into other races and religions owen White Royal Family England and |King RafealI | King Saud of King Bangers of Queen of Cuba Saudi Arabia Ireland John F Kennedy, RFK, Judge Roll, Justice Scalia, Thomas Crane Wales, Louis Joseph Freeh The Irish Non Mafia by choice.
Wall Street and the Neoliberal Economic Agenda One of the key appointments of the military junta (on the instructions of Wall Street) was the Minister of Economy, Jose Alfredo Martinez de Hoz, a member of Argentina’s business establishment and a close friend of David Rockefeller.
Porc Buchalter retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to ‘ here Louis Buchalter, known as Louis Lepke or Lepke Buchalter, (February 6, 1897 March 4, 1944) was an American mobster and head of the Mafia hit squad Murder, Inc., during the 1930s.
After a transfer to Auburn Prison in Auburn, New ; York, Buchalter was released on January 27, 1919.
Downfall On September 13, 1936, Murder, Inc. killers, acting on Buchalter’s | | | | | | | ; orders, gunned down Joseph Rosen, a Brooklyn candy store owner.
Buchalter’s lawyers then appealed to the United States 1 Supreme Court.
Execution When the United States Supreme Court confirmed Buchalter’s conviction, he ' was serving his racketeering sentence at Leavenworth Federal Prison.
Loe 8 8 ee 8 UU Biv Joseph Kennedy Made His Fortune retrieved from History.com and copied or modified to here pcnz 4) One of the greatest American political dynasties of the 20th century was funded, in part, by alcohol.
This book Ted Cruz Heidi Suzanne Cruz fit the larger picture Prime Minister Cruz of Cuba and his Goldman Sacks Evita Prescott Bush, John D Rockefeller ITI, and Jospeh Kennedy Sr PRESCOTT BUSH Prescott Sheldon Bush was an MKULTRA Eugenicist, an American banker and politician.
Prescott Bush won election to the Senate in a 1952 special election, narrowly defeating Democratic nominee Abraham Ribicoff.
DICK CHENEY Richard Bruce Cheney (/'tfemni/ CHAYN-ee; born January 30, 1941) is an American politician and businessman who served as the 46th vice president of the United States from 2001 to 2009 under president George W Bush.
JOHN D ROCKEFELLER III John Davison Rockefeller III was an American philanthropist.
KING RAFEAL 1 OF CUBA A possible future lead of Cuba who will discover his noble roots from a long lost line of Kings JOSEPH KENNEDY JR AND JFK AND RFK I think the movie Love Story in 1972 represents the truth of JFK and Jackie Kennedy.
I think the Feb 20 I say to be marriage of Barrack Obama Sr and Stanley Ann Dunham was moved to Feb 2_ to hide that conception to be the Novermber 18 birth of Barrack Obama Jr. identified.
J) Dont Cry for me Bears Stern Heidi Cruz is an American corporate executive.
AUGUST 7, 1972 (age 49 years), San Luis Obispo, CA Rafael Edward “Ted” Cruz is an American politician and attorney serving as the junior United States Senator for Texas since 2013.
DECEMBER 22, 1970 , Foothills Medical Centre, Calgary, Canada The incident happened in 2005 shortly after Heidi quit her high-powered job at the White House and moved to Austin, Texas, to be with her husband, who was state solicitor general.
Rafeal Cruz In 1957, Rafael Cruz, the son of an employee of the United States intelligencelinked RCA Corporation, left Cuba for the United States.
Bush, OBama Jr is 1 year old, the Seatle 21st Century Cheney, all in on it.
Bienvenido Cruz aka Ted Cruz Sr. retrieved from Wikipedia and ‘ copied or modified to here Rafael Bienvenido Cruz y Diaz is a CubanAmerican Protestant preacher and father of Texas United States Senator Ted Cruz.
He graduated from UT with a degree in mathematics and chemical engineering four years later in 1961.
Men have a responsibility to come j together in prayer and agreement regarding our families, | Seas . churches, schools, cities, and nation.
Alldged CIA Front Coropoerations * R* | Rabb Charitable Foundation| | Radio Corporation of America | | Radio Free Asia | | Radio Free Europe | | Radio Liberation | | Radio Liberty Committee, Inc.
Kennedy accepted his resignation, making Walker the only United States general to resign in the 20th century. : On AUGUST 4, 1959, Walker submitted his resignation to the United States : Army.
President Eisenhower to quell civil disturbances related to the ‘ desegregation of Little Rock’s Central High School.
Aaron Montgomery Ward (FEBRUARY 17, 1843 or 1844 December 7, 1913) was an American entrepreneur based in Chicago who made his fortune through the use of mail order for retail sales of general merchandise to rural customers.
This book The Root and path of Racial Eugenics History Mostly drawn from Wikiepida Star Was governmental descriptions.
British Zionism active in the USA in the year 1902 Jacob de Haas retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here r~ Jacob De Haas was born in London.
Henry |, also known as Henry Beauclerc, was King of Engiand from 1100 to his death in 1135.
He was the fourth son of William the Conqueror andwas educated in Latin and the liberal arts.
AsITbIHHOro BOpa BEIarOT, a MOTMHHOrO UeCTBYIOT The thief who stole an altyn is hung, and the one who stole a poltinnik (50 kopecks) is praised.
A / The British Empire Exhibition The British Empire Exhibition was a colonial exhibition held at Wembley Park, Wembley, England, from 23 April 1924 to 31 October 1925.
The Underground Railroad, the missile crisis, and the plan JFK was killed to protect Windsors Glorian Donegan Kutschera Image Escaping Nazis while Eugenics were studies in Vienna, then a Crusade for a Homeland in Isreal Masonic families and causes, lots of twin studies, black white, white piesa zal white, jewish, etc., along with sleeper agent Obama via Malcom X DNA 2Quote retrieved from The end of the “wars on the cheap” for the United States and copied or modified to here This analysis was written for the Unz Review.
I am in no way dismissing the insanity of the Neocons, but I also see no point in analyzing that which is clearly irrational, if only because all modern theories of deterrence always imply a “rational actor” and not a crazy lunatic on an suicidal amok run.
First and foremost, it relied on a deeply demoralized enemy who felt that, like in the series “Star Trek”, resistance to the Borg was futile because even if the actual United States forces deployed were limited in size and capabilities, the Americans would, no doubt, bring in more and more forces if needed, until the opposition was crushed.
Hezbollah, Lebanon 2006 Okay, this war did not officially involve the USA, true, but it did involve Israel, which is more i or less the same, at least for our purposes.
Sham stalk of me both tries to entrap me into emotionally reactive counter hostilty to hostile parties but I keep the level head and am no “Nazi pscycho” the Illuminati families wish to write me off as,write me down as before I go into the ghetto once and for all.
In the imagined scenario described earlier, the president set up military tribunals to try violators | of federal immigration law.
Nonetheless, the Supreme Court’s 1866 decision in Ex parte Milligan suggests ; that the president can, in certain circumstances, impose martial law in an area and replace the civilian courts there with military tribunals. cautiously.
Now The Observer can reveal both the first up-to-date picture of David Rupert, the 51-year-old FBI and MI5 spy who infiltrated the Real IRA, and tell the full tale of how a bankrupt businessman turned smuggler was drawn into the shadowy and lethal world of covert operations against Irish republican terror and ended up as the key witness against the group believed to be behind the Omagh bombing.
The 20-stone American arrived in Ireland in the early Nineties after being recruited by a female FBI informant who worked inside Noraid, the Provisional IRA’s support group in the US. 1 republicanism, infiltrating the movement proved straightforward.
Scap couldn’t say for sure who fought on his side. a ee RUC Special Branch was the Special Branch of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, and was heavily involved in the British state effort during the Troubles, especially against the Provisional Irish Republican Army.
Milley’s mother, Mary Elizabeth , served in the Navy at a Seattle-based hospital.
This book DuPonts and Kellogg’s KelloggX , Boeing and Raytheon DuPont Corporation and Kellog X are Department of Defense Military Industrial Complex arms manufactures will long histories in bomb making and torpedoes.
Piers DuPont is considered the most powerful of Grand Master Masons with few peers, them being the Rockefellers, Rothschilds, Windsors, and Bush family.
They appear to have rescued the Von Trapps along with the Vatican and Glorian Donegan was a Maria August Kutschera out of wedlock birth as was Harold Gainey, my mother Gloiran Gainey’s brother.
Robert Swan Mueller’s father was a board director member of DuPont corp when many events of the Von Trapps unfolded.
Further Reading 2 Military-industrial complex retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or ae modified to here Eras Some sources divide the history of the military-industrial complex into three distinct eras.
The government owned their own "" shipyards and weapons manufacturing facilities which they relied on "" through World War I With World War IT came a massive shift in the way « that the American government armed the military.
Second era The second era is identified as beginning with the coining of the term "" by President Dwight D Eisenhower.
This era continued through the Cold "" War period, up to the end of the Warsaw Pact and the collapse of the * Soviet Union.
States include the advancement of the civilian technology market as 1 civilian companies benefit from innovations from the MIC and vice © versa.
From 1992 to 1997 there was a total of "" US$55 billion worth of mergers in the defense industry, with major « defense companies purchasing smaller competitors.
Alfred Nobel’s father, Immanuel Nobel, was an industrialist, engineer, ‘ and inventor.
He built bridges and buildings in Stockholm and founded Sweden’s first rubber factory.
After some bad business deals in Sweden, in 1838 » Immanuel moved his family to Saint Petersburg, where Alfred and his | | brothers were educated privately under Swedish and Russian tutors.
At age 17, Alfred was sent abroad for two years; in the United States he met Swedish engineer John Ericsson and in France studied under famed chemist Théophile-Jules Pelouze and his pupil Ascanio Sobrero, who had first synthesized nitroglycerin in 1847.
It was in France that Nobel first encountered nitroglycerin, which Pelouze cautioned against using as a commercial explosive because of its great sensitivity to shock.
In 1857, Nobel filed the first of several hundred patents, mostly concerning air pressure, gas and fluid gauges, but remained fascinated with nitroglycerin’s potential as an explosive.
Nobel, along with his father and brother Emil, experimented with various combinations of nitroglycerin and black powder.
Nobel came up with a solution of how to safely detonate nitroglycerin by inventing the detonator, or blasting cap, that allowed a controlled explosion set off from a distance using a fuse.
In the summer of 1863, Nobel performed his first successful detonation of pure nitroglycerin, using a blasting cap made of a copper percussion cap and mercury fulminate.
In 1864, Alfred Nobel filed patents for both the blasting cap and his method of synthesizing nitroglycerin, using sulfuric acid, nitric acid and glycerin.
On 3 September 1864, while experimenting with nitroglycerin, Emil and several others were killed in an explosion at the factory at Immanuel Nobel’s estate at Heleneborg.
After this, Alfred founded the company Nitroglycerin Aktiebolaget AB in Vinterviken to continue work in a more isolated area and the following year moved to Germany, where he founded another company, Dynamit Nobel.
Despite the invention of the blasting cap, the instability of nitroglycerin rendered it useless as a commercial explosive.
To solve this problem, Nobel sought to combine it with another substance that would make it safe for transport and handling but yet would not reduce its effectiveness as an explosive.
He tried combinations of cement, coal, and sawdust, but was unsuccessful.
Finally, he tried diatomaceous earth, fossilized algae, that he brought from the Elbe River near his factory in Hamburg, which successfully stabilized the nitroglycerin into a portable explosive.
Dynamite was first manufactured in the United States by the Giant Powder ; Company of San Francisco, California, whose founder had obtained the ; exclusive rights from Nobel in 1867.
Giant was eventually acquired by » DuPont, which produced dynamite under the Giant name until Giant was * dissolved by DuPont in 1905.
Two new companies were formed upon the breakup, the Hercules 1 Powder Company and the Atlas Powder Company, which took up the 1 manufacture of dynamite subsequently.
This 1 eventually led to the general perception that TNT and dynamite were one 1 and the same.
TNT, or trinitrotoluene, is a second | generation castable explosive adopted by the military.
The German armed forces adopted it as a filling for artillery shells in 1902, some 40 years after the invention of dynamite, which is a first generation phlegmatized explosive primarily intended for civilian earthmoving.
TNT has never been popular or widespread in civilian earthmoving, as it is considerably more expensive and less powerful by weight than dynamite, as well as being slower to mix and pack into cylindrical boreholes; for its part, dynamite has never been popular in warfare because it degenerates quickly under severe conditions and can be detonated by either fire or a wayward bullet.
Accordingly, more than 90% of the TNT produced in America was always for the military market, with most filling shells, hand grenades and aerial bombs and the remainder being packaged in brown “bricks” for use as demolition charges by combat engineers.
Military dynamite | | | “Military dynamite” is a dynamite substitute, formulated without i nitroglycerin.
The LII_ and copied or modified to here Conspiracy Against Separation of Powers Clauses and Conspiracy Against Article 3 by Fraud on the Court 1.
Inthe federal government, Article 1 of the United States Constitution establishes the Legislative Branch, which consists of Congress.
Congress, in addition to other enumerated responsibilities, is responsible for creating laws.
As a general rule, the nondelegation doctrine prohibits the Legislative Branch from delegating its lawmaking responsibilities.
Congress can, however, provide agencies with regulatory guidelines if it provides them with an “intelligible principle” to base their regulations on.
For more information on the Legislative Branch, refer to “Congress.” i Article 2 of the United States Constitution establishes the Executive Branch, which consists of the President.
The President approves and carries out the laws created by the Legislative Branch.
Article 3 of the United States Constitution establishes the Judicial Branch, which consists of the United States Supreme Court.
The Judicial Branch interprets the laws passed by the Legislative Branch.
For more information on the Judicial Branch, refer to “Judiciary.” eee eee eee eee e enn nnnny pr National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies retrieved from NICCS and copied or a modified to here A Targeted Person teeeee genes Course Description This course presents the student with foundational concepts and processes in the discipline of cyber counterintelligence with a focus on cyber counterintel missions, defensive and offensive counterintel, and counterespionage applied to traditional tradecraft, and their evolution into the cyber domain.
The course includes a vastly different approach to counterintel using models used online in misinformation, influence operations, and disinformation.
Perception as Deception, Differences in Culture, Hofstede Dimensions, Social Psychology, Cialdini, Big 5 Theory of Personality, Information Warfare and Cyber Psychological Operations, Persona creation, establishment, maintenance, expansion of specific concepts and phrases.
Adversary targeting and dossiers, Clandestine Collection Operation, Surveillance, Counter Surveillance, CI Analysis Reporting, Support Brief, Source Evaluation, Operational analysis report.
Socio-cultural awareness, Forty-Four online dirty tricks, Methods to Disagree, Avoid/Deny/Invoke, Cialdini’s Principles, Rules of Disinformation, Social Engineering, Propaganda, Fallacies and Prejudices, Conversation Manipulation, Deception Planning, Deception Cycle/Chain, Deception Objective, Deception Methods, Target’s Vulnerabilities, Deception Effects, Target’s Decisions and Actions, Deception Principles, 10 Steps to Planning, Deceptive Course of Action, Denial and Deception Tactics and Techniques, Rules for Radicals, COINTELPRO, Iterative Feedback, Addressing Failure, Unwanted Effects.
Learning Objectives With the expanding importance of the comprehensive and timely need for intelligence for nations as well as businesses, the student will explore the essential elements that make up the intelligence cycle with a focus on how these pivotal points are exploited.
As part of this class, the exploration of the continued importance of critical thinking, as well as out-of-the-box analysis, will be heavily leveraged to improve the critical-thinking skills of the students.
As cyber topics continue to evolve, the increased importance of cyber intelligence is growing and as such the protection of our intelligence cycles will expand as well; emphasizing the growing need to ensure our processes are not compromised in a cyber-dominated landscape.
Cyber Counterintelligence is one aspect and possibly one of the most crucial topics at the core of protecting our collection efforts.
The potential for active defense or offensive cyber counterintelligence operations will be covered.
The course will rely heavily on individual research and group discussion to explore the world of cyber counterintelligence, and where applicable, make use of the student’s ability to do independent thinking and analysis of in-class problems assigned through weekly discussion threads.
This course focuses on open source intelligence and adversaries while creating online personas to assist in data collection and information extraction.
This introductory course examines open source intelligence collection as well as the availability and use of OSINT tools.
Students will be able to understand the use methods of only anonymity, the fundamentals behind cyber persona development, enrollment in various social media sites and applications, and how these current methods can be employed in their organizations to assist in operational cyber security, their defense against adversaries, and passive data collection.
The establishment of cyber personas takes patience and time to create a credible resource.
Treadstone 71 maintains separation from the client as required maintaining confidentiality of methods and processes.
Frank Olson was born to Swedish immigrant parents in Hurley, Iron County, Wisconsin.
Wikipedia * ... ont pi tromper quelques hommes, ou les tromper tous dans certains lieux & en certains tems, mais non pas tous les hommes, dans tous les lieux & dans tous les siécles.
He retired in 1988 and died on June 5, 2021 in Carlisle, Pennsylvania Prone Gregory Clines retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or 1%, modified to here | Thomas Gregory Clines was a Central Intelligence Agency covert | operations officer who was a prominent figure in the Iran-Contra Affair.
The Cold War was in full swing, terrorists disrupted the Middle East, i the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and there was instability in Asia.
Milley, whose parents were both veterans of World War II, said he was drawn to serve but hadn’t initially planned a career in the military. something greater than self, to give meaning to Princeton in the nation’s service,” he said.
I I i I I I i I 1 | “The idea that rang true all my life was I wanted to help others in whatever I decided to do and to be part of 1 I ' | Loday, he leads more than one million soldiers on active duty, in the National Guard and the Reserve.
This operation 2 ee ee having been covert, such testimony was naturally unobtainable.
In the first of these, Cramer United States, 1484 the issue was whether the “overt act” had to be “openly manifest treason” or if it was enough if, when supported by the proper evidence, it showed the required treasonable intention.85 The Court, in a five-to-four opinion by Justice Jackson, in effect took the former view holding that “the two-witness principle” interdicted “imputation of incriminating acts to the accused by circumstantial evidence or by the testimony of a single witness,”1486 even though the single witness in question was the accused himself.
While a minor, he took the oath of allegiance to the United States; went to Japan for a visit on an American passport; and was prevented by the outbreak of war from returning to this country.
Commission, was established on November 29, 1963, by President Johnson to investigate the assassination.
It concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone in killing Kennedy and wounding Connally, i and that Jack Ruby acted alone in killing Oswald.
The commission’s findings have proven i controversial and been variously criticized and supported by later studies.
The commission took its unofficial name, “The Warren Commission”, from its chairman, Chief Justice Earl | Warren.
According to published transcripts of Johnson’s presidential phone conversations, some major officials | were opposed to forming such a commission, and several commission members took part only with extreme I FBI investigation Warren Commission i reluctance.
Ramsey Clark Panel In 1968, a panel of four medical experts appointed by Attorney General Ramsey Clark met to examine i photographs, X-rays, documents, and other evidence.
Rockefeller Commission President Gerald Ford in 1975 to investigate the activities of the CIA within the United States.
The commission | | | | | | ' The United States President’s Commission on CIA Activities within the United States was set up under | i was led by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller, and is sometimes referred to as the Rockefeller Commission.
United States House Select Committee on Assassinations As a result of increasing public and congressional skepticism regarding the Warren Commission’s findings and ‘ the transparency of government agencies, House Resolution 1540 was passed in September 1976, creating the 1 United States House Select Committee on Assassinations to investigate the assassinations of Kennedy i and Martin Luther King, Jr.
Instead of furnishing all information relevant to the investigation, the FBI and CIA only i responded to specific requests and were still occasionally inadequate.
Furthermore, the Secret Service did i Not properly analyze information it possessed prior to the assassination and was inadequately prepared to | protect Kennedy.
The board also found that, conflicting with the photographic images showing no such defect, a number of witnesses saw a large wound in the back of Kennedy’s head.
I The board and board member, Jeremy Gunn, have also stressed the problems with witness testimony, i asking people to weigh all of the evidence, with due concern for human error, rather than take single statements | as “proof” for one theory or another.
On 26 April 2018, the deadline set by President Trump to release all JFK records, he blocked | the release of some records until October 26, 2021. 2 subject matter retrieved from Rockefeller Commission The United States President’s Commission on CIA Activities within the United States and copied or modified to here eee Rockefeller Commission The United States President’s Commission on CIA Activities within the United States was set up under President Gerald Ford in 1975 to investigate the activities of the CIA within the United | States.
The commission was led by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller, and is sometimes referred to as the t Rockefeller Commission.
Zapruder film , and the possible presence of E Howard Hunt and of the assassination.
Not Hollywood but California, Lawrence Livermore Labs a J ohn Sherman Cooper.
Allen Welsh Dulles ‘was the first civilian Director of Central Intelligence (DCD, and its longest-serving director to date.
Earl Warren was an American politician and jurist who served as 30th govemor of California from 1943 to 1953 and as the 14th Chief Justice of the United States from 1953 to 1969.
Aviation firsts The first experimental transcontinental airmail through flight lands in Oakland.
In October 1928, Oakland was used as a base for the World War J aircraft involved in the final filming of Howard Hughes’ Hell’s Angels.
Also within these pages, you will know of fierce patriots who see the oncoming threat from the banksters and fight them on their terms taking advantage of the cracks and fissures of their paper money system to defeat the banksters’ nefarious schemes.
This first installment chronicles the beginning of modem banking, and then advances to the present, depicting the economic malaise and depression we’re living today.
HOT SPOT ‘ 1 i Region in a contaminated area in which the radiatoin is higher than the surrounding area.
Revolving around me Hostile-Environment | A g¢iJ] frame of my normal life creating Hostile Actors will be embellished (often in public though near me) by the actors as if a football player faking being tripped to draw a flag on the not guilty Hostile-Environment Hostile Actors (is Hostile-Environment Hostile Actors | Hostile-Environment Law Enforcement undercover) Hostile Actors This element, Criminal Activity Under Color of Law is critical to mere appearances to theft or illegal Mafia activity.
HostileEnvironment Hostile Actors If the person who is being stalked attacks the stalker who is on “public” space such as just outside apartment window or in a gorcery store, the Stalking Victim will have attacked the hostile actor who is in a “public space” from totally out of the blue.
Their involvement is significant as they perform in a i myriad of activities, including procreating the next generation of militants, managing the logistics, recruiting | new members to the organization, being political representatives, and also acting as operation leaders and | militants.
Though efforts have been made by the university’s student body to force hem to abolish their secrecy and register with the administration, efforts have been unsuccessful. men o2) Harvard does not have secret societies in the usual sense, though it does have final clubs, fraternities, sororities, and a variety of other secret or semi-secret organizations.
No, because the author feels hat he can just ignore 49 years of very fine research into the JFK assassination pretend this massive amount of uality research just does not exist. foal The Warren Report farce has not just been machine gun riddled, shot up like Swiss Cheese.
I | What this book proves is that it is still not socially or politically acceptable to tell the truth about the JFK | assassination 49 years after that assassination of democracy in America.
In the case of Doris, it might be because she used to 1 hop in bed with Lyndon Johnson who once asked to marry her.
Oswald was a fake defector to Russia nd when he came back he assumed a phony persona of a pro-Castro Marxist as he worked for intelligence peratives & rightwingers such as David Atlee Phillips and the ultra-rightist Guy Bannister in New Orleans.
GHW Bush was staying in the 1 old Dallas Sheraton Hotel we know that for a fact. i GHW Bush is also very close to the anti-Castro Cuban radicals and he even pardoned one of their top antii Castro terrorists Orlando Bosch.
Actually Bush commuted his sentence, a de facto pardon and he let Bosch out I har 1 Of jail.
Bush, and CIA MKULTRA Murders Lebanon and the French Mandate 2 Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon 1923-1946) retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here r the Lebanese Republic, is a country in Western Asia.
It is bordered by Syria to the north and east and Israel to the south, while Cyprus lies to its west across the Mediterranean Sea; The Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon was a League of Nations mandate founded in the aftermath of the First World War and the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire, concerning Syria and Lebanon.
The French hoped to fragment the various groups in the region, to mitigate support for the Syrian nationalist movement seeking to end colonial rule.
General Henri Dentz, the Vichy High Commissioner for Syria and Lebanon, played a | major role in the independence of the nation.
I After the fighting ended in Lebanon, General Charles de Gaulle visited the area.
Under political pressure from 1 both inside and outside Lebanon, de Gaulle recognized the independence of Lebanon. i i On 26 NOVEMBER 1941, General Georges Catroux announced that Lebanon would become independent i under the authority of the Free French government.
Elections were held in 1943 and on 8 November 1943 the i new Lebanese government unilaterally abolished the mandate.
Following the end of World War II in Europe the French mandate may be said to have been terminated without I I I ' any formal action on the part of the League of Nations or its successor the United Nations.
The Dirty War of Clones and insurgency back and forth \J 1983 Kuwait bombings retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here glen ca arly on a Sunday morning, October 23, 1983, two truck bombs struck buildings in Beirut, Lebanon, housing merican and French service members of the Multinational Force in Lebanon , a military peacekeeping operation during the Lebanese Civil War.
The 1983 Kuwait bombings were attacks on six key foreign and Kuwaiti installations on 12 DECEMBER 1983, two months after the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing On 12 December 1983, a truck laden with 45 large cylinders of gas connected to plastic explosives broke through the front gates of the American Embassy in Kuwait City and rammed into the embassy’s three-story administrative annex, demolishing half the structure.
Other car bombs exploded at the control tower at the Kuwait International Airport, the Electricity Control enter, and the living quarters for American employees of the Raytheon Corporation, which was installing a missile system in Kuwait.
During World War I, the magnetron tube technology was applied to radar.
Notice this also figures into Jet Pilot and the history of Cliffs of Dover etc., Some analysts claim the bombings were the work of Iran in cooperation with Shia allies from Iraq and i Lebanon.
Americans and the French are thought to have been targets in Kuwait because of their assistance to Iraq and ack of help to Iran.
BEIRUT, Oct 9 2021 Lebanon has no centrally generated electricity after fuel shortages forced its two largest power stations to shut down, a government official told Reuters on Saturday.
We knew this would eventually happen and that is the reason that our last post was made on YT in December 2018.
The important mission has always been to EDUCATE and ENLIGHTEN citizens about the deep truths of our geopolitical world, which we did with hundreds of videos since 2015.
By 1902, the British Pilgrims had evidently already singled out selected American “Robber barons” that they would recruit to their “Empire Building,” many of whom were in Britain for the elayed coronation of Edward VII following the deaths of Queen Victoria and Cecil John Rhodestheir empire building prime mover.
Mombasa, Kenya to Nairobi, Kenya by plane 1 hour The Windsor Protocol retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Windsor Protocol is a 1997 British-Canadian television thriller film directed by George Mihalka and starring Kyle MacLachlan.
Based on the novels by Jack Higgins, Kyle MacLachlan stars as maverick British agent Sean Dillon to uncover a plot to take over the presidency of the United States. Amazon Prime DDescription | | | | | | | | | detail the plot of 1945 involves Allies under the Windsors bringing espionage from Germany into the United States ina | plot to overthrow the USA presidency | | | | | | | | | Kyle Merritt MacLachlan born Kyle Merritt McLachlan, FEBRUARY 22, 1959) is an American actor.
Bush _ “I Don’t know this man” re Russian-born oilman, a real international man of mystery, a vivid presence in JFK files retrieved from Ray Locker USA Today and copied or modified to here WASHINGTON Within days after President John F Kennedy was assassinated on NOV. 22, 1963, the CIA’s man in Dallas received a call from a friend who said he met Lee Harvey Oswald at a social function the previous January.
Bush’s prep school roommate, a friend of first lady Jacqueline Kennedy’s parents, an associate of Oswald and a notorious womanizer and bon vivant who was rejected by the i wartime Office of Strategic Services for alleged Nazi sympathies.
However, my staff has been unable to find any indication of interest in your activities on the part of Federal authorities in recent years.
Ray Wood died in November, and Reggie Wood shared his cousin’s confession publicly on | Saturday, flanked by a group that included Malcolm X’s daughters, Qubiliah Shabazz, Ilyasah Shabazz and t Gamilah Shabazz, and civil rights attorneys Benjamin Crump, Ray Hamlin and Paul Napoli.
Liars Club and Psychological Warfare Dissinformation Liar’s Club is an American game show, originally produced by Ralph Andrews, featuring a panel of celebrity guests who offered explanations of obscure or unusual objects.
Veronica Hoffman was used to see an Information Doppleganger of me April 2 it seems, then spread lies about me, then she was discredited as bipolar and silenced inside a psych ward ink Engineering engineer Mad Scientist, dies in vacubed accident alone.
He had the ONLY other image use I have ever seen of smoking blue outline sultry tied to Honor Flight DCA Metallica I had used, from obscure source, ultra rare.
Fuzzy Bunnyreferences elswhere belft-ataw enforcement and specifically seeming Marshall.
Studio City, CA, United States Occupation: trainer Ioan because: Ican:) About me: | operate a small correctional facility where | teach men the virtues of treating women with the respect and adoration they deserve.
Latex fetish news, Latex lifestyle | Tags: None That MKULTRA project Birther history being covered up Investigative journalist Wayne Madsen has discovered CIA files that document the agency’s connections to institutions and individuals figuring prominently in the lives of Barack Obama and his mother, father, grandmother, and stepfather.
Z The Manchurian Candidate 1962 5 Infliction of agitating contexts in order to elicit the apparent psychosis of confrontational or reactive defense responses in the victim The victim may speak as if under delusions or holding schizophrenic beliefs, or seem agitated while others are calm, or may appear to be paranoid or fearful of strangers, or severely drepressed as to life and its outcomes.
Glorian, Ed or Glorian, Ed and Tom would stay at Harold Gainey ‘s home during the summer, and at one time i my mother had some urgent need to call him, don’ think she said or at least I don’t remember wby, and as she ; was calling him the phone just rang and rang, it turns out his house on fire and being totally destroyed at that | time, him and the fire dept watching helplessly.
Veronica Hoffman was said to be normal at times, but crazed by phone jingles at weird times, people acting crazy in her vicinity out of place in all sorts of ways, and at THOSE times I think they were FAKING her being a communications node a FAKE ed was communicating with, etc., thus stalks start and end inexplicably { | Khigh Dhiegh as Dr.
Yen Lo The Manchurian Candidate a I am sure you’ve all heard the old wives’ tale that no hypnotised subject may be forced to do that which is repellent to his moral nature, whatever that may be.
Oh, you note-takers might set down a reminder to consult Brenman’s paper Experiments in the Hypnotic Production of Antisocial and Self-Injurious Behaviour or Wells’ paper which was titled, I believe, Experiments in the Hypnotic Production of Crime.
Barack Obama is the first Black American President of the United States.
He previously served as a United States senator from Illinois from 2005 to 2008 and an Illinois state senator from 1997 to 2004.
Glorian Donegan DNA was used during the Manahattan Project 1961 ongoing testing and is in Sleeper Agents backed by NASA DAPRA CIA NSA FBI and they include the Kelleys, Obamas, Rafeal Cruz, Schwartenzeger, and other families, and permissions for the DNA is being skitted out before the public as though I am giving it.
Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here piss asa) 2 Missile gap arms race retrieved from Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc and copied or modified to here M issile gap, term popularized during the late 1950s and early 1960s referring to the perception by United States government officials that the United States trailed the Soviet Union in ballistic missile technology.
Irrgardless, the times were frightening whether the fears of the world’s population, the agnst of the world and the angs of the USA was founded or not.
Exile and global political significance of murdered Mehdi Ben Barka When he was exiled in 1963, Ben Barka became a “traveling salesman of the revolution” according to the historian Jean Lacouture.
According to Tad Szulc, Israeli involvement was in the wake of the successful Moroccan-Israeli collaboration in the 1961-64 Operation Yachin; he claims that Meir Amit located Ben Barka, whereupon Mossad agents ersuaded him to come to Paris where he was to be arrested by the French police.
My family was abused in the Manhattan Project, similar to Frank Olsen No one needs political asylum from the USA I thought as I approached embassy after embassy in Washington DC Metro Area where I lived and asked for political asylum, not understanding why I was being chased by police who would not interview me without or without council nor stop stalking me.
An individual who has been placed into a program of psychological and often physical warfare tactics which are orchestrated by criminal organizations, corrupt politicians, and law enforcement personnel.
Also known as gangstalking or organized stalking, is a highly criminal campaign directed at a targeted individual that aims to destroy an innocent person’s life through slander and carefully executed psychological and physical assaults. e Slander Campaign: An intentional, premeditated effort to undermine an individual’s reputation, credibility, and character.
The rolling blood sugar blood panel number measures hemoglobin drowning in too much sugar.
Still, the odd attempts to undermine my doing the web work seems to have been designed to deny about me | could be involved in those productive acts of creating the work, and in fact without any income a slander campaign relegated me to skid row and in that, the appearance my life is and has been unmanageable.
I In 1977, during a hearing held by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, to look further into MKUltra, 1 Admiral Stansfield Tumer, then Director of Central Intelligence, revealed that the CIA had found a set of Fr records, consisting of about 20,000 pages, that had survived the 1973 destruction orders | because they had been stored at a records center not usually used for such documents.
I | “Catholic psychiatric hospitals carried out tests including electric shocks, injections of such drugs as | chlorpromazine and LSD, chemical sterilization, and lobotomies.
I I Jewish couples willing to adopt non-Jewish babies were stymied by adoption and child placement legal i provisions requiring children to be placed in adoptive families professing the same faith as their own.
I I This situation helped feed the international baby ring that operated in Montreal from the 1930s to the 1950s.
I I I I I I I I I 1 | The Canadian Press and the Baby Black Market I | The scandal first came to light when one publication denounced the black marketeering of babies in Montreal ; in 1950.
Vienneau relates that while doing family research in the Genealogy Society of Greater Joliette, he came across Vienneau relates that while doing family research in the Genealogy Society of Greater Joliette, he came across ld 8mm films containing thousands of birth names.
Great Leap Forward and Communist GDP Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent Oliver Twist contains an unromantic portrayal of criminals and their sordid lives, as well as for exposing the cruel treatment of the many orphans in London in the mid-19th century.
Someone stealing the 11 pence or over would literally dangle on a short drop at the next assizes.
The courts of assize were infrequent and the accused were gaoled pending their hearing.
When any accused were sworn in they had to raise their left hand, no criminal records in these days.
The M was a repeat offender and would hang too. any got commuted from death to transportation.
I recall in the discussion of hangings in London that the events were not a deterent, that at the hangings pick pockets would pick pockets of the gathered crowds.
After | escaping, Oliver travels to London, where he meets the “Artful Dodger”, a member of a gang of juvenile | pickpockets led by the elderly criminal Fagin who will set Oliver Twist to work picking pockets with another | street theif pick pocket youth Arful Dodger.
I Around the time of Oliver’s ninth birthday, Mr Bumble, the parish beadle, removes Oliver from the baby farm ' and puts him to work picking and weaving oakum at the main workhouse.
The next day Oliver escapes from the Sowerberrys’ house and later decides to run away to London to seek a better life.
Nearing London, Oliver encounters Jack Dawkins, a pickpocket more commonly known by the nickname the ' “Artful Dodger”, and his sidekick, a boy of a humorous nature named Charley Bates, but Oliver’s innocent and ' trusting nature fails to see any dishonesty in their actions.
In this way Oliver i unwittingly falls in with an infamous Jewish criminal known as Fagin, the gentleman of whom the Artful | i Dodger spoke.
Keel reports strange orders from Starfleet headquarters and what he implies are suspicious t deaths of Starfleet officers, and expresses concern of a conspiracy.
Walker Keel suspected his First Officer of allegiance with the conspiracy held among ; the Admirals. i | When the captain returns to the Enterprise, he is challenged by Counselor Troi about keeping his contact with | Keel secret.
Commander Data review all orders issued by Starfleet ' Command in the past six months. 1 i i i While the USS Enterprise with Captain Picard is still on its way to Pacifica, a disturbance is detected in nearby space.
Consider this also with a second group attacking the flight of I EXTORTION17 in Afhganistan and whether the foreign fights had been tipped of to the i flight of EXTORTION17 1 i | | | | | | | | | | Admiral Quin under Alien Influence As The USS Enterprise approaches Earth, the Enterprise receives no response from Starfleet Command.
They are surprised by the Enterprise | presence, but invite Captain Picard and Commander Riker to dinner.
Upon Quinn’s arrival, Picard discusses matters with him and Quinn 1 seems strangely evasive; Picard comes to believe that he is an impostor, or under some sort of alien influence.
Picard and Riker fire upon A Remmick, destroying his body but freeing a giant parasite; the two continue to fire until it is destroyed. i Later, Dr.
Tracy Tormé was i then given the job of rewriting it, but some producers thought the new version was too dark until Roddenberry | saw it and endorsed the new version.
The Next Generation in a 2012 review. i i 1 They note a creative plot involving a threat to the Federation. i When con artists trick a person the Mark might be said to be fool, merely offgaurd, or a normal person exposed to a surprising trick which vicimizes them.
Ronald Reagan waves just PIn March months before the August 4 meating of USIAD Ronald Regan before he is raises his arm to wave and is shot in the side cheest shot.
Whoever kidnaps any individual designated in subsection of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life, or by death or imprisonment for any term of years or for life, if death results to such individual.
Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any individual designated in subsection of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
If two or more persons conspire to kill or kidnap any individual designated in subsection of this section and one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life, or by death or imprisonment for any term of years or for life, if death results to such individual.
If Federal investigative or prosecutive jurisdiction is asserted for a violation of this section, such assertion shall suspend the exercise of jurisdiction by a State or local authority, under any applicable State or local law, until Federal action is terminated.
Assistance may be requested from any Federal, State, or local agency, including the Army, Navy, and Air Force, any statute, rule, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding.
TREASON Whoever, owing allegiance to the United States, levies war against them or adheres to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort within the United States or elsewhere, is guilty of treason and shall suffer death, or shall be imprisoned not less than five years and fined under this title but not less than $10,000; and shall be incapable of holding any office under the United States.
Sp Musuem Defnaions with additions or modifcations BAGMAN An agent who pays spies and bribes authorities BLACK BAG JOB Secret entry into a home or office to steal or copy materials BLACK OPERATIONS Covert operations that are not attributable to the organization performing them INSIDE JOB IN FONT COMPANIES OR BOUGHT OUT COMPANIES OR GOVERNMENT AGENCIES An inside job is a crime, usually larceny, robbery or embezzlement, which occurs when a person holding a position of trust abuses their status.
This latter meaning still applies today (minus the spiritual underpinning), when we say that certain subjects are “taboo,” meaning off-limits for discussion POWER OF DEFAMATION The effect Media can have in bulllying SILENCE OF THE GRAVE Murder of journalists, whistle blowers, federal officials, military units, as need to keep operation secret or knowledge of it silenced.
Those who use subterfuge to protect illegal acts from effective detection are obstructing being held accountable for the acts they are concealing or passing off as coincidences. 7 y Robert Plumlee interview 5 He discussed how scandals from Iran-Contra to the failed presidential bid of Senator Gary Hart all tie-worked as a pilot for clandestine CIA flights, transporting arms to Cuba before Castro took power.
Linked murders in the Iran/Contra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena under Clinton to urrent murderous scandals such as Chris Stevens and SEALs deaths under ‘Extortion 17"" together as part of n ongoing weapons and gun smuggling for profit. op -a9 Claims that groups inside the intelligence community run guns for huge cash dumps which buys off politicians and news outlets.
Clash of Dynasty further indicts the Rockefeller’s as the top culprits behind the crimes of the century My overarching theory that Nelson Rockefeller gave the order for the assassination of the 1 President Kennedy and brother Robert, as well as other heinous crimes, are underscored by the obvious reality that the man had a very apparent motive to kill the president which was completely overlooked by almost all | investigators both official and private.
I’m referring to the scandal surrounding the Clinton Foundation an i institution conjoined for global initiatives with the Rockefeller Foundation.
It so happened that in 1962, a I scandal of equal reverberation erupted alleging that Nelson Rockefeller was using Rockefeller Foundation I funds to employee a staff of 72 charged with putting him in the White House.
The early history of the Tavistock Institute overlaps with that of the Tavistock Clinic because many of the staff from the Clinic worked on new, large-scale projects during World War II, and it was as a result of this work that the Institute was created.
British Psychiatry & Eugenics / Assassination From: dsale@users.southeast.net Date: 1996/12/28 Message-Id: 5a3cug$acq@ns2.southeast.net Organization: Uknown Newsgroups: alt.conspiracy,alt.illuminati British psychiatry: from eugenics to assassination .. with the Scottish Rite Masons, the Central Intelligence Agency, and other British, U.S., Canadian, and United Nations agencies.
The Indians held a mass protest meeting at Johannesburg in September 1906 and, under Gandhi’s leadership, took a pledge to defy the ordinance if it became law in the teeth of their opposition and to suffer all the penalties resulting from their defiance.
The son of a German father , the Duke of Connaught was deeply involved in German affairs and was a patron of Britain’s “New Dark Ages” ultra-racialist elite group based in South Africa.
Following the Nazi invasion of Poland in September 1939, Britain and Germany declared war on each other and World War II began.
The first International Congress in Human Genetics following World War II was held at this Danish institute in 1956.
This was part of an ongoing federal program, which organized crime czar Meyer Lansky boasts that he personally arranged.
Former CJA staff member John Marks writes in {The Search for the Manchurian Candidate} that Overholser’s working group included counterintelligence agents inside the Manhattan Project atomic bomb project, and the FBI, which was under the direction of Dr.
In 1948, Montagu Norman’s National Association for Mental Health gathered the world psychiatric and psychological leaders together at an { {International Congress on Mental Health}} at the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Health in London.
In the various member countries and subdivisions, these channels of British intelligence operations are known as the national, provincial, or state {{Mental Health Associations.
The CJA was found to have financed these horrors, as well as ghastly experiments in other locations, using a front called the Society for the Study of Human Ecology.
Even before we review other agencies’ direct involvement, we must understand that the CIA chief during MkK-Ultra, Allen Dulles, was thoroughly attached to British Empire geopolitical aims.
The Macy Foundation represented the British psychological warfare executive, as extended into United States and related institutions.
My predecessor as research director of the Schizophrenia Research Program, Dr.
Britney Spears From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia * Britney Spears’ parents are “extremely disappointed” about her hospital release. ... used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder * i Feb., 2008 With Britney Spears out of the psych ward and free to run wild, the pop star’s parents said ithey fear for her life.
Individually and as a 1 group, the G5 nations work to promote dialogue and understanding between developing and developed i countries.
Without the informal meetings of the G5 finance ministers, there i would have been no subsequent meetings of G-5 leaders.
At the time, it was impossible to predict | whether this informal gathering would be meaningful or only a public relations event Now the families lines secrets including use of Glorian Donegan #FeEb20Nov18Dec13 Dec 13 DNA for the world economy is the subject of illegal genomic rackets offering the DNA into criminal networks, backed by espionage, which legitimizes its use in history when the DNA was NEVER authorized to espionage agencies.
Joseph Daniel Casolaro, June 16, 1947 Died: AUGUST \ 10, 1991, Room 517, Sheraton Hotel, Martinsburg, West Virginia was a case management software | developed by Inslaw , a non-profit organization established in 1973 by Bill and Nancy Hamilton.
Casolaro focussed on one person in the periphery of the Octopus as it had developed in the early 1980s, a man named Earl Brian, crony to Reagan’s attorney general Ed Meese.
MARKET AND MIND CONTROL Interestingly, the pattern of financial impropriety in the case was identical to one that happened on assassination day, November 22, 1963.
AUSSIE LINK Little suggests that Casolaro knew of the Crisman connection, or of the significance it might hold for what he already knew about Area 51 and the other secret airbase that held his attention, Australia’s Pine Gap.
Alvarez was an Deputy Tribal Chairman of the Cabazon Band of Mission Indians.
He and his friend, Ralph Boger, were scheduled to meet with an unknown party to present proof of many of the alleged misuses of tribal land.
Allegedly, they had information regarding illegal arms deals, weapons manufacturing and testing, and illegal modifications made to the PROMIS software, all taking place on tribal land.
Megyn Kelly, Trey Gowdy, Cheryl Rickards, and HF DCA John Marlan Poindexter is a retired United States naval officer and Department of Defense official.
He was Deputy National Security Advisor and National Security Advisor during the Reagan administration.
He was convicted in April 1990 of multiple felonies as a result of his actions in the Iran-Contra affair, but his convictions were reversed on appeal in 1991.
During the George W Bush administration, he served a brief stint as the director of the DARPA Information Awareness Office.
He is the father of NASA astronaut and United States Navy Captain Alan G Poindexter.
Poindexter and North were fired by Ronald Reagan from positions in the administration over Iran Contra, the basis for Conspiracy, an episode of Star Trek.
WASHINGTON — Fired White House aide Oliver L North today said he had been : fully prepared to be a scapegoat for President Reagan over the Irancontra scandal and ; described how he and other Administration officials worked to shield Reagan from ; political damage as the affair unraveled last fall.
North, under intense cross-examination ‘ in his third day in the witness chair at congressional hearings, said he took direction , from then-CIA Director William J Casey, misled Atty.
Edwin Meese III and ' conferred with then-National Security Adviser John M Poindexter, as he struggled to ' contain the damage.
Notebooks Removed The Marine officer said that he removed his personal notebooks and hundreds of pages of other records from his National Security Council office and took them to his home in an effort to protect himself.
But the 43-year-old Marine lieutenant colonel, testifying in his military uniform with six rows of medals, said his intention was merely to shield his commander in chief from omestic political damage.
North said that Casey knew all along of the diversion of Iranian arms sales proceeds to the contras.
And he described how Casey told him last fall that the time had come to begin | | | | | | | | | | | | | destroying documents relating to the covert activity, and then for someone to step forward and take the fall.
Casey worried aloud that someone senior in rank to North might have to become the scapegoat and suggested Poindexter for the role, North recalled.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ * Paul John Manafort Jr. was born on April 1, 1949, in New Britain, Connecticut.
Manafort’s parents are Antoinette Mary Manafort (née Cifalu; 1921-2003) and Paul John Manafort Sr.
His father served in the United States Army combat engineers during World War II and was mayor of New Britain from 1965 to 1971.
His father was indicted in a corruption scandal in 1981 but not convicted.
Thomas Aquinas High School, a private Roman Catholic secondary school, in New Britain.
New Britain was settled in 1687 and then was incorporated as a new parish under the name New Britain Society in 1754.
Chartered in 1850 as a township and in 1871 as a city, New Britain had separated from the nearby town of Farmington, Connecticut.
Major manufacturers, such as The Stanley Works, the P&F Corbin Company (later Corbin Locks), Landers, Frary & Clark and North & Judd, were headquartered in the city.
In 1843 Frederick Trent Stanley established Stanley’s Bolt Manufactory in New Britain to make door bolts and other wrought-iron hardware.
In 1857 his cousin Henry Stanley founded The Stanley Rule and Level Company in the city.
Planes invented by Leonard Bailey and manufactured by the Stanley Rule and Level Company, known as “Stanley/Bailey” planes, were prized by woodworkers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries and remain popular among wood craftsmen today.
The two companies merged in 1920, and the Stanley Rule and Level Company became the Hand Tools Division of Stanley Works.
Paul Manafort Sr., the father of Paul Manafort, was once the mayor of New Britain; the Manafort family had immigrated from Italy to New Britain prior to 1919.
The heads of the fire and police departments and seven other municipal employees were arrested as part of a corruption scandal in the 1970s.
This phrase was coined by Elihu Burritt, a 19th-century New Britain resident, diplomat, philanthropist and social activist.
Elihu Burritt was an American diplomat, philanthropist and social activist.
He was also a prolific lecturer, journalist and writer who traveled widely in the United States and Europe.
Roadblocking, Disruption of Continuous Event Paths Understanding Contras and understanding Psycho Logical Warfare as Changing People’s Mind, called Mind Control A Communist loved by his large family runs for Mayor of a city his family has lived in for 20 generations.
He is a devout Christian and his family are regulars at church services and events, much like in the USA Judge Thomas Crane Wales, a Catholic lay minister was, or Louis Freeh FBI Director, or Justice Scalia or Judge Roll, another devout Catholic and lay order members.
Even his church he was so close to will endorse the other candidate, not him.
The information in gossip circles is Contra to who this rising figure was.
Jesus Christ Superstar is a 1973 American musical drama film directed by Norman Jewison and jointly written for the screen by Jewison and Melvyn Bragg; they based their screenplay on the 1970 rock opera of the same name, the libretto of which were written by Tim Rice and whose music was composed by Andrew Lloyd Webber.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia In the Broadway version it is not quite the same as the film version, at least as I recall.
Anachronistic modern figures are in the ancient tale of Jesus and at the end of the 1973 film the Players in the show board a bus with their acting gear and costumes to leave the show production area.
Inside the chain of events Jesus laments he has been abondoned and his life may have no meaning and his horrible death if it has any meaning must only be known to God, his lament is for God to share the need for his death with him as he dies.
The wrapper upon the story, that this story is told now again and again 2,000 year later, is the Pschological Warfare disaster of all ages.
Jesus Christ Suerstar was martyred creating him as a Superstar AFTER he had already been defeated, and just as Judas had warned him, the crowds had abondoned him, and he died with little support at the time.
Too many hits on JFK witness families get noticed unless PsyOps of the OSS CIA type can drive us from society.
I was wearing gym shorts at Honor Flight DCA and my phone went missing, as I was greating veterans I had sat on a bench and the phone slide from my front pocket not meant for a phone onto the bench where I walked away from it.
Teen chearleaders showed up and formed Chearleading tower inviting all the vetarns and greeter of veterans under the pile and we all in one parade went under.
A week or two later my phone was returned to me by the police, the same one I had been photographing WWII veterals with, and soon afterwards I went homelss renounced by all behind me back.
A Contra indication of what I was doing at HF DCA took control of other people’s decision making and I was soon homeless.
Ed Donegan Sub-Account: Make Check Payable to: Hawk “n” Dove Mail Check to: Payment Amount: $ $48.00.
April 5 2014 Check Memo : Purpose of Request: Volunteer Brunch Remember: SSI Recipients may not use their trusts to pay for food, Beneficiary Receives: Medicaid: O Yes O No SSI: JO) Yes ONo | ciciter or direct reimbursement.
Please enclose copies of bills, statements, training invoices or receipts.
I begin with what happened and my father’s role in it and again please use this model frequently in this book called Road Blocking I did not mind “credit” for recording or composting imagery of the HF DCA program but I did not wish to be blamed behind my back for acts of other people such that I would become blackballed from that activity itself and from other locations or people or events because I was defamed by the acts ohters while I was at those events.
Zi Launched earlier this year, FNV is currently concentrating on two lead markets Fresno, Calif., and Hampton Roads where FNV marketing has been prevalent, from grocery stores to sports venues.
Earlier this year, the First Lady discussed FNV on The Tonight Show with Jimmy allon, and this summer participated in a skit for Jimmy Kimmel Live as part of the NV marketing campaign.
During the event, Old Dominion football player Christian Byrum will participate in a challenge known as the “Supermarket Sweep” with the First Lady, Jessica Alba and other celebrities.
ODU cheerleaders will also participate in the event, handing out prizes to the audience.
Jill Biden, wife of Vice President Joe Biden, launched Joining orces, a nationwide initiative calling all Americans to support service members, eterans and their families through wellness, education and employment opportunities. <7 oung people across America to complete their education past high school, whether at a rofessional training program, a community college or a four-year college or university.
Waivers, public benefits, employment, post-secondary options and transportation.
Pictured from left, Diane Monnig, transition manager with The Arc i of Northern Virginia, retired Marymount Associate Professor Dr.
The full-day workshops were held monthly from September to November and offered a variety of skill-building activities, 1 such as social and life skills, employment and travel training.
LOS ANGELES w Carrie Underwood Carrie Underwood had broadcast work that at several times were noteworthy.
In the Mental Health ward where I had been in the correct to oppose Thea Smith, neighbor of mine, trying to tie me to “candy” who was arrring who “like to beat up men” and who I was able to hear coming ang going, and to nearby spaces with floggers, but no statement to me anything was happening only innuendo.
George Bush family, and their in concert acts with the Vatican) Branded with Anthony Stewart Head at the 2004 Oakland Super SlayerCon e Anthony Stewart Head is an English actor and musician.
He rose to fame in the UK following his role in the Gold Blend couple television advertisements for Nescafé Gold Blend, and is known for his roles as Rupert Giles in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Uther Pendragon in Merlin, and the Prime Minister in Little Britain, and as Herc Shipwright in BBC Radio 4’s Cabin Pressure. e Nicholas Brendon Schultz , known professionally as Nicholas Brendon, is an American actor and writer.
She is best known for film #Coherence acting alongside Nicholas Brendon #feb20Nov18Dec13Aug4 Feces ¢ Foundation of America retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to d here ee eee The Stuttering Foundation of America provides free online resources, services and i Support to those who stutter and their families, as well as support for research into the ; causes of stuttering.
In 1 2007, Fraser was named the Nonprofit Executive of the Year by The NonProfit Times. i The Foundation sponsors educational conferences, workshops and symposia, and 1 week-long intensive training workshops for speech-language pathologists.
He was the ‘ recipient of the fourth annual National Council on Communicative Disorders ' Distinguished Service Award in 1984.
Museo del Prado retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here The Prado Museum, officially known as Museo Nacional del Prado, is the main Spanish national art museum, located in central Madrid.
A Journalist’s Reflection on Goya’s “The Third of May 1808” Ali Pitargue _ Third of May 1808” Francisco de Goya 1814 The first time I saw Francisco de Goya’s masterpiece “The Third of May 1808”, I was impressed by how succinctly it portrayed the chaos of human dynamics in the context of war.
A common room configuration for hospitals and mental health institutes is two beds and a bathroom shared between the next two bed bedroom, and all this was also true 20 years later though this time the dopple, under arrest for masturbating in puhlic, was named David and he was on the quad bed config with me. the many times I have seen this seems to me to setup the CIA legend that I am polymorphous perverse and a compulsive peeper and this then sets up the black marketing of me DNA as that DNA is “owed” to victims of the compulsive acts.
The Edifice, the correct moral and reliable and even security oriented Edward Donegan and Tom Dunham yet the Artificial manufactured appearances, the facades, and the deceit using the facade pseudorealities Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here EDIFICE Edifice means a building, but it doesn’t mean just any building.
Further my doctors and lawyers were maneuvered away from me to replacements stalkers wished, I believe placed there by the DARPA Brain Program/ Violent attacks on me including in my home and to my property by “irregulars” of contractors like Blackwater have made up every moment of my life.
She did the same thing with Honor Flight DCA when 2 years later my father died and I was celebrating, documenting his and other WWII veterans at the WWII Veterans Memorial including Ronald Reagan, to Liberate, not to conquer.
Fnx New has been Vatican, GOP, and George Bush Donald Trump spokespeople operation and even Masons based as all of those people are and thus the attack on me, an Atheist and my Atheist fathers legacy, and my tribute to Atheism, staying out of church and working with Technology and on line learning.
In my case ALLEGATIONS I exploit females, minors, allow police backed OTHER harassment of me to be tolerated, reducing sympathy of me as victim.
I have known I should not fear any activity of my life, but the Dopple is always there, and I am blamed for him, a United States Military operation to break my eggs and also make some Illuminati Christian or Baptist omelet.
Eric Hoffer Propoganda does not deceive people; it merely helps them to deceive themselves [as they salivate over Edward Donegan’s property saying it would really be better if it belonged to themselves instead of Edward Donegan Learning to Drive Stick at QE IIT Ocean Liner, and requesting Expatriation assistance from Jana Erickson.
This book It’s pronounced “Extortion one-seven” Secretary Panetta is saluted by Gen.
Days, before, Petty Officer’s Strange’s NOV. 16, 2011, autopsy report from the Armed Forces Medical Examiner System said he suffered burns to 40 percent of his body.
Army General Harold Greene Was Shot in Back Four Times: Source Cae ‘Dead Pool’ Last Updated 8/5/2015 SEAL Team 6; Obama stonewalls probe into deadly SEAL Team 6 helicopter crash, watchdog says Harold J Greene retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Harold Joseph “Harry” Greene (FEBRUARY 11,1959 AUGUST 3, 2014) was a United States Army general who was killed during the War in Afghanistan.
Parked at ARC of Northern Virginia, Labeled “Beaker,” jeeps and muscle cars skid around me as though I had harmed protectees of the ARC Of Norther Virginia and my DNA would be takes as payment I might infer aggressive driving is meant to be interpreted as anger towards me an I might infer these vehicles want DNA from me, though that would be a matter of inference, and no actuall statements.
Linked murders in the Iran/Co ntra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena (Arkans as) under Clinton to current murdero us scandals such as Chris Stevens and SEALs deaths under ‘Extortion 17” together as part of an ongoing weapons and gun smuggling for [highly monetized] profit.
In a wide ranging interview, linked past murders and coverups in past administrations to current murders., inked murders in the Iran/Contra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena under Clinton to current murderous scandals such as » Chris Stevens and SEALs deaths under ‘Extortion 17” together as part of » an ongoing weapons and gun smuggling for profit "" Claims that groups inside the intelligence community run guns for huge "" cash dumps which buys off politicians and news outlets.
Olasana Island on August 8, 1943, aboard his boat, PT-157. : ' Drug, Guns, and False Claims Rackets in Texas Cartesl humgry for economic claims against a trust fund The Texas Syndicate is a mostly Texas-based street and prison gang consisting of predominantly Mexican American membership.
As a Street gang, heavy activity has been reported in Austin, Corpus Christi, the Rio Grande Valley and the Dallas Fort Worth area in Texas.
Criminal activity Development of the Texas Syndicate was initially motivated by selfprotection against the historical “building tenders” in prison.
They have almost a thousand associates that help carry out those orders and have the theoretical control of all Sureio gang members.
Mere Gestures or Appearances or Ambiguity Specific Statements made near me though not directed at anyone or to a cell phone of the person making the statement Clear direct statements to me Towards me_ | Statements but refutable such as the but too vague | speaker saying to me “I wasn’t even to contain talking to you.
Virginia Square WMATA to Pentagon City Costco WMATA trip By denying to me and others my Genome is con-incident with high economic outout or political output then MKULTRA Truther Birther is covered up and at the same time DNA wanted by those in the know about it can black market it once a fraudulent basis is made to owning it rather than my owning it and its rights for usage including in foreign economies.
Even though I chose to not blog at CFP 2011 because I was attending her Amnioscentesis five times a week during that week at least i was positively reviewed by Monique Althiem as to the qualiiy of the web site I put up though I chose to go to CFP 2011.
Glorian Donegan has just died and and according to a certain case before Judge Roll 2011 United States of America $333,520.00 medical use on trust funds we can seize assets for foreign economies on weak evidence or mere appearances to help foreign economies, from say pedophiles harming non white children, etc., Um base HQ we received a signal but it must be garbled.
We are tapping on the radio set and speaker because it seems like something is not quite correct about the transmission.
Her body as donated to science and will be used for foreign economies upon_NDAA UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V $333,520.00 SEIZURES resultant from activities of Edward Paul Donegan.
On January 8, John McCarthy Roll was a Roman 2011, United States Catholic who attended Mass daily.
Gabby Giffords and He was an active member of the St. others were shot Thomas More Society and a Fourth Degree Knight (turing a constituent of Columbus. meeting held in a Supermarket parking The Knights of Columbus is a global lot in Casas Adobes, Catholic fraternal service order founded by Blessed |Arizona, in the Michael J McGivney on March 29, 1882. ucson metropolitan Membership is limited to practicing Catholic men. _ farea.
Six people It is led by Patrick E Kelly, the order’s 14th died, including Supreme Knight. federal District Court Chief Judge John Roll; Gabe Zimmerman, one of Giffords’ staffers; and a 9-year-old girl, ChristinaTaylor Green.
Giffords was holding the meeting, called “Congress on Your Corner”, in the parking lot of a Safeway store when Jared Lee Loughner drew a pistol and shot her in the head before proceeding to fire on other people.
One additional person was injured in the immediate aftermath of the shooting.News reports identified the target of the attack to be Giffords, a Democrat representing Arizona’s 8th congressional district.
Enduring Freedom Afghanistan, surpassing the sixteen lost in the : downing of Turbine 33, a 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment : MH-47, during Operation Red Wings on 28 June 2005.
Several minutes later a 20-man Pathfinder team (specializing in downedaircraft rescue and recovery) arrived at the site as well.
The official statement from United States peat Command states that a Taliban fighter scored a lucky shot with a rocket propelled grenade on the CH-47 Chinook helicopter.
Doubts about this story were raised by , families and other concerned citizens despite the fact that the United States Navy "" SEAL team aboard Extortion 17 had been a different platoon than had "" carried out the raid that killed Osama bin Laden Question August the 4, February 20, November 18 and December 13, and DNA and foreign achievement In the First Amendment the Founding Fathers gave the free press the protection it must have to fulfill its essential role in our democracy.
By Associated Press Saturday, March 30, 2013 Defense Contracting and Mafia and genome seizures In one of the appendixes I introduce what I call the 2.5/3 model information circuit.
I apply the model to what I call the Harvester H or the 4.5/5 Information Circuit Information Circuit (formation of a Sentence, a Statement in Information) Confusion at scene, several people dressed similary and clothing as identifier telling story, connecting events For the purpose of Information Theory Dialectial story telling space.
Calling himself “the secretary of state of unfriendly countries,” Dulles saw himself as above the elected law, manipulating and subverting American presidents in the pursuit of his personal interests and those of the wealthy elite he counted as his friends and clients-colluding with Nazi-controlled cartels, German war criminals, and Mafiosi in the process.
In this later work, fiction, some call it IIluminati Preconditioning, the Queen of Diamonds, Family Jewels, sets this Free Masons imperialism up and gets rid of JFK to make it happen.
One of the problems I have faced is the CIA or others easily buy businesses or request co-operation from companies like Home Depot or any other major business who will happily say “Sure, we trust Government.
Shogun is the short form of Sei-i Taishogun (EAE, “Commander-in-Chief of the Expeditionary Force Against the Barbarians”), a high military title from the early Heian period in the 8th and 9th centuries; DAIMYO Daimyo were powerful Japanese magnates, feudal lords, who, from the 10th century to the early Meiji period in the middle 19th century, ruled most of Japan from their vast, hereditary land holdings.
After the Kingpins, most all white, then come second teir or experimental DARPA involved figures in media and politics tied to cooperating with covert MKULTRA which never ended and it is this tier Barrack Obama Jr. and his family exist among whites, non whites, mixed race, and perhaps merely random births as lives some lives are watched by the CIA, NSA, FBI, and DARPA but not contorlled.
Their cover up plans using espionage capabilities nearly complete, at the 99 and on half yard line of their finishing their desperate plans this book calls them out, but they will ever give up on their own.
Bush and others on fire as he is disputably quoted as alluding to. o Journalism Murder of journalists of like Micheal Hastsings, Kashogi, Jen Moore, and others, even Frank Olsen o Murder of judges such as Roll and Scalia protecting the program’s path by allowing genetic back-filling of genes into rescue populations of lower occurrence rates of beneficial genes which MKULTRA will then build up though without discussion of the program or its possible real motives.
The Tantalus field was a 23rd century device found aboard the ISS Enterprise in the ; Mirror universe, which could be used to monitor and eliminate enemies from ‘ existence with the touch of a button. | ee ee ee a N tps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disposition_Matrix r~ Fhe Disposition Matrix, informally known as a kill list, is a database of information : for tracking, capturing, “rendering”, or killing suspected enemies of the United : States.
Though White House, National Counterterrorism Center , and CIA spokespeople have declined to comment on the database, officials have stated privately that kill lists will expand “for at least another decade”, if not indefinitely.
It is published by Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, through its Imprint, Lyons Press.
Ongoing MKULTRA all around the world Entrusted with the location for developing the Atomic Bomb far from the field of battle of WWII and without long traditions in Government or Science the USA fell under the influence of those like Sidney Gottlieb, MI5, the OSS, Religion, and Allies Itinerant proposed solutions and operatives offering ends to racial strife and racial genocide.
Amidst unprecedented world and racial strife Aerospace unites Housof Camelot, House of Windsor, House of MKULTRA Stanley Anne Dunham.
The 1 year mark of the Fertilization (February 20 1961 to February 20 1961) in Seattle Seattle, home of young Barack Obama and alleged mother, mother (a female and possible hastily created name) The Windsors and Malcom X independently and together, along with Windsors Kennedys and Boeing Corp have an Aerospace futurism conference in Seattle beginning in Arpil 1962 dedicated to 21st Century planning.
A Monorail’s steel wheels pinch into a single track rather than lay flat on two tracks.
Seattle Post Intelligencer By Charlette Report on September 16, 2016 at 9:57 PM * } r “Stanley” Anne Dunham mother of Barack Obama Jr.
In the language of the Courts, mostly what I read and get my lingo from, I attribute to their thoughts “Dropping an atomic bomb on a nation to stop race wars is “strong medicine” for the Body Politic.
And then the last sacrifice will have been thrown senselessly into the jaws of the insatiable demon.
He must work against the hostage1 of humanity, against fascism and all similar systems of an absolute State.
GROAMTZATTON) Leontinn, ty Mr AMF STA PS 57 t Command or Atr Foros 30 Fash Div. t Grown Sth Fer.
I found it very difficult to stay with him and tried to remiin near hia by weaving above hia.
When we were at about 22,000 ft., a group of bombers, on their way out of the target area, passed directly in fromt of us at the sane level.
When the bombers passed, Morrison and I were directly behind the boebers in the prop wash.
Since I had been ahead of him, I turned into him but failed to see him, I continued to look for him, asking for his position, in relation to the bonbers, giving sine.
At that tine Morrison weet fr eo eee EE bce er peeing tis. ht tate tines we had Slearéa the hills northeast of Saartrucken, and were in fairly open country.
Morrison started to call again, saying that he would have to leave the plane.
Then, to cover it, war against those with the same brain as Barack Obama and his children, plus or minus a gene or two.
With Malcom X and Glorian Donegan e Barack OBama Jr. e Some genome, possibly brain, Obama children, possible Glorian Ovum for Obama children .. and continuing into the Obama and other children, Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized.
It is my belief Mercenaries for a Deep State are engaging in #wetworks to cover the illegal “animal husbandry” practiced by the CIA now the genetic detectability of that, and also the murders protecting the animal husbandry. alee a Google knowledge panel quoted here A’ sleeper agent is a spy who is placed in a target country or organization not to undertake an immediate mission but to act as a potential asset if activated.
My belief is Barack Obama was groomed as a sleeper agent from select illegally used DNA and this is now blowing up on DARPA and the I/luminati though this does not focus on the Obama Family or the Donegans.
Espionage Agencies have manipulated and been the shadowy “loan shark in the alley in the trench-coat” or acting other similar roles to bail these families out of the disasters they were born into.
A In practice, whether or not a person is a mercenary may be a matter of degree, as { ' gmancial and political interests may overlap, as was often the case in all of history. Wikipedia These Mercenaries are drug, car, and Glam Dommes paid Gangstalkers working outside the rule of law and in criminal acts to achieve illegal harassment of me, a law abiding citizen, which can not , should not, and would not be acheivable by legitimate law enforcement ends.
This attack is about Nature, my biology, not Nurture, the psycho social and legal life I live and was raised into I worked my way in to which is law abiding and admirable enough people tell me they want to have my baby.
Being subjected to fraud and stigma of my genomic heritage and rights Political interests and Religious interests have architected this bunko to achieve both social claims of victimization as political social causes falsely, as Hoaxes, claim victim-hood and in both politics and property rights exploit the staged hoaxes events.
It is my belief that Targeted Individuals Program targets individuals for evidence plants, assaults, harassment, incarcerations, incacerations, and social sabotage but leaves them alive during study of provoking them and that has spanned 45 years of my life.
Favored families coming out of MKLULTRA and DARAP programs having geneology selected by Sidney Gottlieb and who hold power, surviving Kennedys, Ted Cruz Sr. and Jr, Schwartenzegs, and those like the Prescott Bush Family or William Pellham Barr lines of culpability in MKULTRA wish to prune but study non CIA approved family lines of what I will call Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 and this is ongoing illegal Psychological Warfare Command espionage activity.
The CIA is using a hostile “Double Blind,” that is to say dupes or “little white liers” who will cover the tracks of the program.
The Espionage agencies have many means to achieve this including deeming their own illegal acts “Top Secret” and thus avoiding scrutiny.
In a Teen or child exploitation ring an impersonator of me, often Mediterranean or Hispanic, will solicit exploitable females inappropriately The Impersonator will pay the teen or other female with rights to my DNA or other assets.
I believe these CIRCUMSTANTIAL CASES which allow widespread use of my DNA on black markets is in fact the case Judge Roll was killed over and the DARPA history of my DNA goes far back into the history of the FOXP2 Borderline Personality Disorder research in Vienna affecting the Von Trapps and German origins Windsor family, and OSS CIA Vatican history in that which affects many highly connected families, agencies, and NGOs in the USA and world today.
In the near case I present as the foundation of my book series I suggest the mercenary attacks on me allege to fight white supremacism a white supremacist must be both framed and also misrepresented by social justice workers for genetic justice to be achieved and I prove that racketeering crime with ease.
My belief is an MKULTRA plan created by the USA for the world has the world wagging the USA An example, huge example, of the tail wagging the dog.
As witnessed, dictated and recorded this 29th day of August, 2001, Linda Newkirk Use of Phony But Destructive and Intrusive Investigations called Gangstalk IEIA ADVANCES IN DESTRUCTIVE AND NONDESTRUCTIVE ANALYSIS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND NUCLEAR FORENSICS “Destructive sampling includes any procedure that causes a permanent change to a specimen, such as sampling of subfossil tissues for molecular studies, sectioning of specimens, or drilling of tooth enamel for isotopic studies.
Feb 20 IVF with George | Nov ° Birther or before, both Ball FJK Thorkill Nov 23 dead, families liquor p01 Kistrensen dialed in Dec 24Malcom X biz ; says he is next Donegans in Johsnon Atol Hawaii and Nevada Los Angles area above ground testing on mutagenics of DNA and radiation Donegans back in MA until back to CA in the 1970s Donegans in MA Obama Birther Conspiracy.
By creating the first automobile that middle-class Americans could afford, he converted the automobile from an expensive curiosity into an accessible conveyance that profoundly impacted the landscape of the 20th century. wd CLARA JANE BRYANT FORD Clara Jane Bryant Ford was the wife of Henry Ford.
EDSEL BRYANT FORD (NOVEMBER 6, 1893 MAY 26, 1943) President of the Ford Motor Company Founder of the Ford Foundation which would be spun off from Ford Motor connections starting in 1947.
He worked closely with his father, as sole heir to the business, but was keen to develop cars more exciting than the Model T (“Tin Lizzie’), in line with his personal tastes.
He was a financier of Rear Admiral Richard Evelyn Byrd Jr. was an American naval officer and explorer.
Under the leadership of Henry Ford II, Ford Motor Company became a publicly traded corporation in 1956.
RON Patak > aes N ; a yl USAID/Peace Subarto/The ig D Cocoraa Crane Group Paunadation Big Oil, Big iveteie Great Leap Forward Big Money and Communist GDP have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent Henry Ford retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here The Ford Foundation’s early roots with Ford Motor Corp Henry Ford was an American he converted the automobile from an expensive curiosity into an 20th century. industrialist, business magnate, founder of the Ford Motor Company, and chief developer of the assembly line technique of mass production.
His intense commitment to systematically lowering costs resulted in many technical and business innovations, including a franchise system that put dealerships throughout North America and major cities on six continents.
His mother, Mary Ford (née Litogot; , 1839-1876), was born in Michigan as the youngest child of Belgian "" immigrants; her parents died when she was a child and she was adopted ' by neighbors, the O’Herns.
In 1879, Ford left home to work as an apprentice machinist in Detroit, i first with James F Flower & Bros., and later with the Detroit Dry Dock 1 Co.
Career In 1891, Ford became an engineer with the Edison Illuminating ; Company of Detroit.
However, the automobiles produced were of a lower » quality and higher price than Ford wanted.
With this success, n * Murphy and other stockholders in the Detroit Automobile Company formed the Henry Ford Company on November 30, 1901, with Ford as chief engineer.
It had the steering wheel on i the left, which every other company soon copied.
These areas of action were identified in a 1 1949 report by Horace Rowan Gaither.
A year after disappearing, federal informant in Trump probe found dead at L.A. high school LA Times via Yahoo News * Valentin Broeksmit, an informant who worked with federal authorities investigating former President Trump's relationship with the German financial giant Deutsche Bank, was found dead Monday on a high school campus in the El Sereno neighborhood.
Broeksmit, 46, was reported missing by friends and family a year ago, according to the Los Angeles Police Department.
He was last seen driving a red 2020 Mini Cooper around 4m. on APRIL 6, 2021, on Riverside Drive at Griffith Park.
JS bCMuntoldetommanevonvecduclicemaueyenm shored tcvurel Sheldon Gary Adelson (AUGUST 4, 1933 January 11, 2021) was an The Real Ruler of Israel: Sheldon merican businessman, investor, Adelson olitical donor and philanthropist.
Prime Minister as Vegas and the Sands Expo and Binyamin Netanyahu, of course. onvention Center.
Miriam Farbstein was born in Haifa, attended a prestigious high school, did her army service in the Israeli institute which deals with bacteriological warfare and is a multifaceted scientist.
After one of her sons died of an overdose, she is devoted to the fight against drugs, especially cannabis.
Not just any Israel, but a rightist, supremacist, arrogant, violent, expansionist, annexationist, noncompromising, colonialist Israel.
Through Netanyahu they hope to rule Israel as their private fief. he Israeli weekly newspaper Makor ishon, and the American daily ewspaper the Las Vegas Reviewournal.
Adelson created the Adelson oundation in 2007, a private charity ocusing on healthcare and support of srael and the Jewish people.
He and his ife Miriam Adelson were Donald rump’s largest donors, providing the argest donation to Trump’s 2016 ampaign, his presidential inauguration, his defense fund against he Mueller investigation into Russian interference, and the 2020 campaign. e was also a major backer of Israel’s rime minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
As of September 2020, Adelson was isted by Forbes as having a fortune of S$33. billion, making him the 8th-richest person in the world and 19th in the Forbes 400.
Early Life Adelson was born on August 4, 1933 and grew up in the Dorchester neighborhood of i Boston, the son of Sarah and Arthur Adelson.
He attended trade school in a failed attempt to become a court reporter, i then joined the army.
Politics In February 2012, Adelson told Forbes magazine that he was “against very wealthy people i attempting to or influencing elections.
Altogether he spent $92 million | | | On January 7, 2012, Adelson bolstered Gingrich’s then-faltering campaign with a $5I ; mM illion donation to the pro-Gingrich super PAC Winning Our Future.
Romney believed that the People’s Republic of China should have been pressured to drop its presumptively low fixed exchange rate policy; according to Bloomberg, Adelson would have benefitted financially in United States dollar terms through his interest in Chinese casinos if the Chinese yuan were to have appreciated. political committee trying to defeat Florida’s Right to Medical Marijuana Initiative which would legalize medical cannabis in that state.
Later in 2014, Adelson donated an additional i | | | | | 1 ' Early in 2014, Adelson donated $2. million to the Drug Free Florida Committee, the ’ | 1 $1. million to the No On 2 campaign.
During the December 2015 Republican debate held at that same venue, P Adelson held one-on-one meetings with several of the candidates prior to the start of the 1 debate, including front runner Donald Trump.
Among those whose financial affairs are mentioned are, separately, AIG, Prince Charles and Queen Elizabeth II, President of Colombia Juan Manuel Santos, and United States Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross.
Past chairman Sir Evelyn de Rothschild is the personal financial advisor of Queen Elizabeth II, and she knighted him in 1989 for his services to banking and finance.
Secrets of the Global Elite retrieved from The International Consortium of | Investigative Journalists. and copied or modified to here A major global collaboration reveals secrets from one of the world’s most prestigious offshore law firms, a specialized trust company and 19 company registries in secrecy jurisdictions. clatstetetetalelelalels tates Nero’s Drill into the USA source of genes the Illuminati want but deny exist by fake seizure predicates.
I will also use Information Technology for the flow of Information Wires Near each other but not connected Air gap Near Field Conduction Induction Forced Teaming especially in public creates apperent but false, misleading, entanglement by proximity which is not correct.
No connectedness of things things or people walking next to me, unwanted but near, photoboming me, etc., Many who seem “Republican GOP” and some would expect as anti immigrant are part of Social Justice for Civil Rights and Masonic service to non white and under privileged, the underprivileged projects of Masonry work in hospitals, communities, medical services, and other Lodge projects. (ye eee eee eee eeees am | Z Daniel Ray Coats i served as the Director of National i #Intelligence in the Trump administration.
Wheaton College is an Evangelical Protestant liberal arts college and graduate school in : Wheaton, Illinois.
A 2017 article in The Economist described it as one of 1 America’s foremost Christian institutions.
FBI Director Ray along with United States Marshalls continue to Target White Supremacism and give their assets to Masonic Works There has been ongoing doppling of Tom Dunham and I in St.
FBI Director’s Community Leadership Awards FBI CIA NSA DARPA DHS NASA SAALM passports are now ready after recall of earlier version due to encoding error.
Grand Lodge, Masonic lodge, Masonic lodge, officersGrand Master Prince, Hall, Freemasonry Regular Masonic jurisdiction, Anglo-American Freemasonry, Continental Freemasonry Propaganda Due retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Propaganda Due was a Masonic lodge , under the Grand Orient of Italy, founded in 1877.
ITS MASONIC CHARTER WAS WITHDRAWN IN 1976, AND IT TRANSFORMED INTO A CLANDESTINE, PSEUDOMASONIC, ULTRARIGHT{ organization operating in contravention of Article 18 t of the Constitution of Italy that banned secret associations.
In March 1981, ' police found a list of alleged members in Gelli’s house in Arezzo.
Expulsion i i | The Grand Orient of Italy officially expelled Gelli and the P2 Lodge in 1976.
Concentration of media ownership (also known as media consolidation or media convergence) is a process whereby progressively fewer individuals or organizations control increasing shares of the mass media.
Globally, large media conglomerates include Bertelsmann, National Amusements , Sony Corporation, News Corp, Comcast, The Walt Disney Company, AT&T Inc., Fox Corporation, Hearst Communications, MGM Holdings Inc., Grupo Globo , and Lagardére Group.
David Rothkopf retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here David J Rothkopf is a professor of international relations, political scientist and journalist.
He left government service and became managing director of Kissinger Associates, the , international advisory firm founded and chaired by former United States Secretary of State Henry A | | Ki . , Kissinger.
Bush family members have OSS CIA backgrounds and even they may be second tier to higher placed masons like Mike Pence, Donald Barr, William Barr, and others who are king makers serving in the cabinets of those kings.
Bush, George W Bush, CHeney, and the OSS Windsor Crown Jewels plan of indirect rule and secret influece in world events as as far reaching, devastating and of wrong political philosophy that it actuallly is.
COINTELPRO Wetworks Subversioin, Legal and Psychiatric System Harassment via Gang Stalk Espionage Units Here are some of the tactics used by CointelPro, most of which I have experienced.
Psychological Warfare From the Outside: The FBI and police used myriad other “dirty tricks” to undermine progressive movements.
WWI to WWII Masons Ethics Nazis Epistemia Vatica, OSS/cia, British Royal Family, MI5 Scottish | Early 20th Century belief in Rights, Donald Barr, Wild Bill Donavan, Order of St {Evolution and Cold Ice Sylvester, DuPonts, other Atomic Bomb Project contributing to European genetics, family companies, Bush family, Rockefeller, Later, distrust of non Europen lineage Mossad, Peace Corps, USAID, in conjunction with loyalties and disrust of nonthem European linage qualities.
It is my belief the Masons have already tampered with history in rescues from the Nazis of Kutscheras, my mother being one of them, who were loving people and great leaders and the Masons used those genes for themselves, and in fact my father likely a Windsor out of wedlock son of King Edward VIII married a Von Trapp daughter.
Flagrance, Cronyism, Crony Acts and what I propose as “Allies Bunker Theory” I state the obvious in an earlier table where I show on the Axis side of WWII Adolph Hitler died in a bunker and his ideology died with him.
It will be remembered that one old negro was interviewed who came to town with his clothing torn, claiming that he had been attacked by a pack of foxes that attempted to swallow him. said that they all appeared to be “crazy een de head,” but that he had valiantly dispersed the company with the help of an axe.
An impersonator of me “caught” by a Dominatrix (whle examining an electronic pron folder) will “punish” these people for the rights to me DNA Julian Assange asked while he was in prison others take up his cause, himself without access to the press or means to write.
The scene of flagrantly deceitful people masturbating and photographing (in my identity while near me) was common in United States Institutions where the “Legend” of me was created Their Camera Phone Deceive Receive Conceive.
The Domina will or may be shown that I was in the area of the photo of a minor, and thus will punish me by blackballing me.
The affect of this is I have deep rage for the Espionage attack on my, me life, my reproductivity in the substance of what has done, as a matter of process, that it thrives in the USA and thus my negative feelings for, about, the USA and its institutions.
The shrewdness under this is the Power in the USA has something to hide and Espionage against me achieves that.
Abdicates, marries in United States Glorian Donegan in surrogate Stanly Ann Dunham Anthropologist Pacific Missle Crisis and substituting the parents of Barack Obama from Malcom X and Glorian Donegan to Kenya and Stanely Ann Dunham Said to be biological Grandparents Stanley Armour Dunham and Madelyn Payne Dunham (Bank of Hawaii CIA) CIA Cover Story Barack Obama Grandaparents Stanley Armour Dunham (March 23, 1918 February 8, 1992) was the maternal grandfather of the 44th United States President Barack Obama.
Interesting story re i his sister Auma as well — she appears to be a full sister, not a half-sister as he is 1 claiming,e. they share the same mother.
Ann Dunham appears to have been ; chosen as the surrogate mother in 1963 because of the family connection to German i Intelligence.
Their daugher, Stanly Ann Dunham Alleged white Seattle mother of Barack Obama (CIA, USAID, Peace Corps, East West foundation activities) Said to be Obama white mother Stanley Ann Dunham (November 29, 1942 November 7, 1995) was an American anthropologist who specialized in the economic anthropology and rural development of Indonesia.
But the scheme unraveled in March 2008 during a routine traffic stop of one of the conspirators, a 24-year-old with the unusual name of Lieutenant Quarles Harris Jr.
D.C. police searched Harris’ vehicle and found more than dozen ziplock bags containing marijuana.
Boeing and MKULTRA REAL PARENTS Windsors Glorian Donegan and Malcom X by CIA scientist Mankind Ultra Sidney Gottlieb.
Windsors and JFK in Furturism of nuclear standoffs against Communism @LANNING with Windsors and Kennedys ae MKULTRA Boeing Crorp Areospace experimentation continues with mixed race test IVF for ending comuniism in Pafic.
One year one day after Thorkill George JFK test fertilize Feb 20 1961 Fake Parents: Seatle Washington’s Stanely Ann Dunham and Kenya Barack Sr, Fake Birth Certificate for United States born LA CA born Barack Obama Hawaii Polynesia Claim Polynesia Plant Story arranged by Boeing and CIA Dunhams are fake adoptive parents arranged by Boeing.
Similar diagrams appear in the book. oe hl 7 This was an experiment wanted by Futurists and the Illuminati on “the so called Negroes” and the 21st Century.
John F Kennedy was supposed to come, but the White House announced that public appearances were being cut short because the president had a cold.
Muhammad Speaks was one of the most widely read newspapers ever produced by an African-American organization.
Meeting at about 11 which is 9 plus 2 Donald Barr CIA Free Mason with an experimental monkey having a birthday at the White House November 23 1961 KN 19548.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston Physical Description 1 negative Person Subject Pets and other animal The Mystery of Robert Knudsen by Jacob G Hornberger July 6, 2018 5 His family said that Knudsen was gone for three days.
When he returned home, he i told his family that he had photographed the autopsy of President Kennedy.
On FEBRUARY 21 1962 and the “future of so called Negroes.” a 1957, Rafael Cruz, the son of an employee of the United States intelligence-linked RCA Corporation, left Cuba for the United States.
Segregation phone conference APRIL 1962 Seattle Futurists, Windsors, Kennedys, |Muhammad Speaks Malcom X Nation of Seattle Islam Although there is a conflicting account from the Nation of Islam, it is widely accepted that Malcolm X founded the weekly periodical Muhammad Speaks, whose first issue was published in 1961 Malcolm X FEBRUARY 21,1965 ,Cause of death Gunshot wound Photocredit, Ebony Magazine retrieved from Wikipedia Malcom X entry fe MalcomX Just like a chicken can’t lay a duck egg.
Malcolm Shabazz was the first male descendent of Malcolm X In 1997, when he was 12 years old, Shabazz set fire to the apartment of his grandmother, Betty Shabazz, causing her death. 1997 is a key year tied to the start of Illuminati prophecies and possible start of the plan to IVF Michelle Obama with Donegan DNA. as continuing MKULTRA generation to generation.
Barack Obama was in Mexico May _2,_2013 with his Secret Service and other security teams.
Aittsburgh Post-Gazette | | | rm FAN 30, 2007 11:00 PM i | A retired Presbyterian missionary from WESTERN PENNSYLVANIA, known to thousands of Africans as “Mama Lois” Anderson, was killed with her daughter, Zelda White, in a Saturday carjacking in Kenya.
Finally, this explains the murder a friend I likely never actually met, Jennifer Moore.
Although part of the United States government’s anti-communist Cuban Project, Operation Northwoods was never officially accepted; it was authorized by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, but then rejected by President John F Kennedy.
Even the diplomat brother of Spanish dictator Francisco Franco was horrified by the duke’s behavior.
Mind Control at McGill retrieved from by Julie Vanderperre at The 1 FE, can McGill Tribune and copied or modified to here : Although the norms of experimentation and research were different during the ; time that Cameron was undertaking these treatments, there is evidence that he was ‘ aware of the immoral nature of his actions. \ | | i I I | | | | I i I | | Cameron attended the Nuremberg Trials following WWII, which tried German t doctors for war crimes committed in concentration camps.
Cameron was therefore well acquainted the necessity of F « informed consent in experimentation and research on human subjects.
When Sir Hugh Allan’s died in 1882 while visiting his son-in-law in Edinburgh, he was one of the richest men in the world with a fortune estimated to be between eight and twelve million pounds.
Penfield, appear to be the most ghost-ridden of them all... the Allan Memorial Institute.
In the 1950s and ‘60s, the MKULTRA experiments, partially funded by the CIA, subjected patients to electroshock therapy, sensory deprivation, and lobotomies.
Experiments also forced patients to listen to broadcasted messages , as well as giving them experimental hallucinogenic drugs.
George Herbert Walker Bush is said to be as CIA and later Director of CIA (Like the Dulles brothers) tied to the JFK assassination in some partial records still intact way and also part of if not the founder on The New World Order in the 1980s.
He ' therefore appointed Rockefeller to head his own investigation into these allegations.
The presence of a given genetic or phenotypic trait in only one member of a pair of twins provides a powerful window into environmental effects on such a trait. wa The classical twin design compares the similarity of monozygotic and dizygotic twins.
If identical twins are considerably more similar than fraternal twins , this implicates that genes play an important role in these traits.
Osborn was the secretary of the American Eugenics Society, which was part of an accepted and active field at the time; the chairman of the Advisory Committee on Selective Service during World War II; and later the deputy United States representative to the UN Atomic Energy Commission. e Malcolm Donald was the Draper family lawyer and trustee of the Draper estate.
He was a former editor of the Harvard Law Review and a brigadier general during World War II. e John Marshall Harlan II, whose firm had done legal work for the Pioneer Fund.
Nazi Office of Racial Policy prior to the founding of the ; Pioneer Fund.
Graduate School of Social Work : Boston College » McGuinn Hall Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 | ""ment of policies that address the “best interests of the child” in cases of adoption.
Fred Trump Jr, brother of Donald John Trump, dies of alcoholism Wife + Mary Anne Trump ( 10 May 1912-7 AUGUST 2000) Donald John Trump POTUS Husband Fred Trump Sr.
John George Trump (August 21, 1907 February 21, 1985) was an American electrical engineer, inventor, and physicist.
He was the paternal uncle of former United States President Donald Trump Donald J Trumps FATHER was Fred Trump Sr.
He became president of the fraternity and graduated with a B.A. in business, also completing ROTC and entering the Air National Guard as a second lieutenant. r The Trump children grew up in Queens, eventually moving to a two-story, i columned house in Jamaica Estates that looked as if it belonged on a Southern ; plantation.
Tall, blond and movie-star handsome, he was 1 considered the campus jokester, arranging stunts and carrying himself as happy-goi lucky and wealthy.
They recalled him offering them rides in a sports car, boat and i an airplane, which he rented at a local airport.
The pilots said they didn’t know anything about the pressure Trump was under from his family to join the business, but they said he clearly was under stress that he could not handle. was “always nattily dressed, polite, educated and well-mannered.
John George Trump (Donald J Trump full name is Donald John Trump, his uncle’s name is his) was an American electrical engineer, inventor, and physicist.
SYNTHETIC OIL AND RUBBER TDuring the war, there were many things that ran short and rations were put in place in ies order to keep the war machine running on both sides.
To that end they created a blend of adipic acid ester and polyethylene oil which worked well enough to keep the Luftwaffe flying.
The Americans caught on and developed their own synthetic oil because it came with benefits such as reducing the soot deposits in oil radiators and making planes easier to start in the wintertime.
PRESSURIZED CABINS TWhile the concept seems a bit strange today, given the dangers of hypoxia, altitude ws sickness, decompression sickness and barotrauma while flying at higher altitudes, planes during the early part of WW2 did not have pressurized cabins.
For these bombers to function, the crew needed to be able to move about the cabin, which they could not do with oxygen masks.
Prior to this pressurized cabins had existed but they had only been on experimental planes.
NUCLEAR POWER TNo discussion about innovation and technology during World War 2 would be aie complete without the most devastating advancement of the war, the atomic bomb.
However, there are debates as to its safety for people and the environment, especially after disasters like Chernobyl and Three Mile Island.
It was aie developed as a retaliatory weapon which was used by the Germans near the end of the war as a last-ditch effort to turn the tide in their favor.
It was able to target cities and arrive in a matter of minutes, silently causing massive destruction.
This led the rocket’s developer Wernher von Braun to surrender to the Americans.
The effort soon grew into the MIT Radiation Laboratory, or “Rad Lab,” which by 1945 was employing some 4000 people.
The combination of small-cavity magnetrons, small antennas, and high resolution u allowed small, high quality radars to be installed in aircraft.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia | oz grrump Has Been Obsessed with Nukes for Ages Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox Aug 19, 2016 retrieved from Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox and copied or modified to here The Republican nominee says that he first grew concerned about nuclear missiles in 1969, when he was 23.
Never mind that the nuclear capability had been around since before Donald was , born, the uncle’s words evidently made a mark on the young man: “He would tell ‘ me, ‘There are things that are happening that could be potentially so bad for ' the world’” Trump told the Boston Globe.
FEBRUARY 20, 1949 , Zlin, Czechia Ivanka with high cheek bones, recessed jaw, and 5 foot 11 like myself and like Jack of Twitter born NOVEMBER 18 AND 5 FOOT 11like my father and I both.
Sleeper Agents La Cosa Nostra ( + Mexican Mafi. amala Harris Kennedys Pelletiers Spears Donegans many others Trump Family rebelled against by middle of vase Famililes Watch nr by CLA, others, ol FOXP2 does not show in Sleeper Agents Secretive ONA Research under Sidney Gottlieb which, if taken oo the lab could take good-track-record DNA for groomed Ge Kilgallen and Ivanka Trump Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner birthdays are not in the Divinci Codes list I have come up with.
Her concerns grow after she catches her flancé and Maria making eyes at each other while dancing arta tuite Artdrews) each together to the “Laendler,” an Austrian folk dance.
Ge M's in the beloved music t _ on designer Gueene But former friends, colleagues and associates of the couple believe wherever they live, the first daughter will be contemplating how to maximize her political capital whether that means an actual run for office, or a gauzier influence in Republican circles in a world where President Donald Trump still holds enormous political sway.
Secretive Bilderberg Meeting Draws Pompeo and Kushner * In 1998, Pompeo moved to Wichita, Kansas, where he and three other West Point friends, Brian Bulatao, Ulrich Brechbuhl, and Michael Stradinger, acquired three aircraft-part manufacturers there (Aero Machine, Precision Profiling, B&B Machine) and in St.
Brechbuhl and Stradinger left the » company shortly after it was founded, but Pompeo and Bulatao continued.
Vandruff APR 2, 2007 Updated APR 2, 2007, 11:26am CDT ' | | In 2006, he sold his interest in the company, which by then had been renamed ; Nex-Tech Aerospace, to Highland Capital Management, which had clients , including Lockheed Martin, Gulfstream Aerospace, Cessna Aircraft, Boeing, Spirit » AeroSystems and Raytheon Aircraft.
Pompeo then became president of Sentry ' International, an oilfield equipment manufacturer that was also a partner of Koch "" Industries.
What Mr Pompeo, Mr Kushner and the other Bilderberg attendees actually say to i each other will be a mystery to most of the public, thanks to the meeting’s use of ; the Chatham House Rule, which states that although attendees can tell the public ; what was discussed, generally, participants must not reveal who said what.
The idea, he "" said, was to encourage officials and experts to speak frankly together, in private, | a cc d 4) i It’s actually not a rule of secrecy, it’s a rule of openness from an era when 1 everything was secret,” he said.
It is ; possible that he was hired to replace Donald Barr, in some way.
This report was partially sourced and assembled from many net sources including Rivero, Russell Stepanchak, etc.
My Illuminati | Vatican and Zedon, ee 5 father and Geneticists | Windsors Krutchev, mother and United States ; _ {and involved in ‘ i Communism it.
Stuttering Chemist Speech Therapist CIA Scientist Gottlieb close to Royals, then King Edward VIII who as Prince of Wales in 1926 had daughters with Maria Kutschera , my mother one of them.
HSK Multiple sources familiar with the matter tell CNN that while the Pentagon and other agencies probing the matter have reached no clear conclusions on what happened, the fact that such an attack might have taken place so close to the White House is particularly alarming.
He had been shot at, ducked under rocket fire, and slatals talents ‘ had shrapnel whiz by uncomfortably ‘ close to his head.
But that night, ' paralyzed with seasickness in the ia ' landlocked Russian capital, 1 Polymeropoulos felt terrified and 1 utterly helpless for the first time.
Rather, it ' was his macabre initiation into a growing club of dozens of American diplomats, "" spies, and government employees posted abroad who were suffering in much the i same way he was-targets of what some experts and doctors now believe were t attacks perpetrated by unknown assailants wielding novel directed energy weapons.
IVF date Thorkill Kristensen, George Ball, Sidney Gottlieb plant test pregancy via IVF using Glorian Donegan James Donegan surrogate birth system for also MalcomX Glorian Donegan test fertilization Feb 20 1961 “There are said to be photos of Ann Dunham on Waikiki Beach taken in or about July 1961, when she is supposed to have been in her third trimester, in a bikini, taken by a fellow female student.
Media have not yet talked to fellow students, but it can’t be August |long.
Birth date 9 mos later from JFK Feb 20 1961 1961 and Donald Barr with experimental monkey at White House November 22 1961 Feb 20 |1 year after IVF April 1962 1962 It appears in both JFK and Malcom X archive data FEb 20 phone conference and planning for April 1962 Futurism Aerospace Boeing Seatle Glorian Birthday.
The DNA from the Donegan family during my Dec 13 | surrogacy birth for the Barack Obama experiment was from my mother’s side of my parentage 18 Nov |2 year developmental psych report and JFK dead, likely not agreeing to the Free Masons MENA Airport plan for Middle East North Africa, and 1963 |Glorian for Free Masons Nation of Islam or other usage.
Transition to the New Order Background See also: Guided Democracy in Indonesia Sukarno of Indonesia, the Old Order Tensions between the military and communists increased in April 1965, when Sukarno endorsed the immediate implementation of the PKI’s proposal for a “fifth armed force” consisting of armed peasants and workers.
Great Leap Forward and Communist GDP Eugeni é; inane Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent And now the JFK daily calendar Glorian Donegan born Dec 13, a FOXP2 Windsor Dystraphic (Kings Speech speech defect, Borderline Personality Disordor, high sexual inclination also date of Lorretta Fuddy crash Obama birth certificate , Sematic thought and polarization explorations thought experiments) Two ovum from her, my father fertilized me, Malcom X the other egg.
Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent As always CIA Sidney Gottlieb as CIA including in getting Hawaii as the 50th United States State at the same time, overthrowing the socialists and labor movements in Hawaii.
Powers was a military veteran who served in the United States Army Air Corps during World War II from 1942 to 1945.
President John F Kennedy Secret Service Agent Gerald ""Jerry"" Behnand President John y . i Presidential Assistant Dave Powers Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.35TH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About Events Endorsements Posts Community According to the book Mortal Error the shot that killed Kennedy was from the car with George Hickey and David Powers.
An operable abdomen and a new test procedure SUPER SECRET GO TO THE GRAVE NUCLEAR WAR LEVEL January 27 1962 death of 7 members Nation of Islam and Ronald Stokes.
JFK EVA BAN Aug 19 a Venice Beach are Calif ni * ‘ Wo Be August, not November, 1962 with Evan Ban at Manhattan Beach area If faking impregnation of Madelyn Paine Dunham three months earlier than February 20 1961 than this 1 year birthday of That glow came from the inner man Barack Obama Jr. fits at himself as he bathed at a public beach and Manhattan Beach area exulted in the warmth and love that went with his Eva Ban mother. out to him from the people.
I suspect increasing counter terror programs like the Patriot Act, executive orders, and the NDAA along with integration financial and PsyOps warfare and Cyberwarfare combined to create government mistake coverup capabilities as well silencing leakers like Jen Moore, Micheal Hastings, Adinan Kashogi, George Webb, or create CIA backed attacks on people like myself, MKULTRA legacy families.
The need for Reason. fr BmeHHEHEHEHEHFFeFHEHEHeFFHeHEHFFHeHEHEHEEFFEHFFFFeHEHEHEHeFHEHFEHFFFHRHHeFFFHeHFFeFHFHE He o i Z o e e ' Z Notes on the State of Virginia oe To justify a general conclusion, requires many observations, even where the | | ; subject may be submitted to the Anatomical knife, to Optical glasses, to analysis by ; fire, or by solvents.
I advance it therefore as a suspicion only, that the blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time and circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind.
It is not against experience to suppose, that different species of the same genus, or varieties of the same species, may possess different qualifications.
Watson leading the Human Genome Program] Amy Harmon is an American journalist.
He left within weeks of the 1992 announcement that the NIH would be applying for patents on brain-specific cDNAs.
James Watson eee es James Dewey Watson was born in Chicago, IIl., on April 6th, 1928, as the only son of James D Watson, a businessman, and Jean Mitchell.
Among his collaborators during this period were the 1 Swiss biochemist Alfred Tissiéres and the French biochemist Francois Gros.
He is also a consultant i to the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee.
The honours that have to come to Watson include: the John Collins Warren Prize t | | I i i | i I I I I I i I I I I I I I I i I i i I I I I I I i i I I I i I I I i I I I I | I I I I I I i i I Watson is unmarried.
Two Bombs refers to the atomic bomb and the intercontinental ballistic missile ICBM), while One Satellite refers to the artificial satellite.
MK ULTRA Epstein Barr DAR PA DEFENSE ADVANCED WESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY ABOUTUS DARPA and the Brain Initiative + BARR, who served as the headmaster until June 1974, was known to have ; Made several unconventional recruitments at the time, although it is unclear whether he ‘ had a direct role in hiring Epstein. a Wikipedia Pa Donald Barr Donald Barr was an Office of Strategic Services agent, an American educator, and a writer.
James Paul Donegan Glorian Donegan Jen Moore Tom Dunham Fox Newscasters will pretend they are my pornography, not that I simply watch the news.
Foundation X A very secret Illuminati world program I think is gene forming at the highest levels of secrecy, 15 trillion in United States dollars making the United States and certain families like the Trumps and manofort a lot of money and skim.
The Clintons and Governer Huckabee of Christilanity]Works, butt it really does not.
Kennedys President John Fitzgerald Kennedy @UFK.ISTH.POTUS Home Photos Videos Abdout Events Endorsements Pasts Community Santa Monica, Venice, LA, Muscle Beach LA FEBRUARY 20 1961 NOVEMBER 18/19 1961 DECEMBER 13 GLORIAN DONEGAN birth of Edward Donegan, James and Glorian Nuclear Radiation Effects testing, St Jospeph’s Hospital more or less Santa Monica CA. 10 miles or so.
July 30, 1947 , Thal, Austria Height: 6’ 2"" Spouse: Maria Shriver On April 26, 1986, Schwarzenegger married Shriver in Hyannis, Massachusetts.
November 9, 1915, Westminster, MD Died: January 18, 2011, Bethesda, MD Ed Donegan speaking here outside the biographical data above copied from the web.
In the self reported case of strong emotions Katherin Eunice reported concerning her body image that could be related to Borderlline Personality Disorder, clinical level strong emotions particularly surrounding polarization detection remediation tendencies.
Gg eee eee eee eon 16, 2010 — In her new book, Katherine Schwarzenegger, Arnold 1 SC warzenegger’s daughter, delves into her own life to help other girls and women develop a healthy body image.
Take a realistic, and happy, look in the mirror to see The December 13 daughter is exhibiting strong emotions and possible Borderlin Personality Disorder in internal struggle.
He has the speech and writing symptoms, as Albert Eisnstein and Adolph Hiter did, and many other Germans, Austrains, Cheks, and others had including Juliana Pelleetier the Mitochondria lady.
The Windsors The House of Windsor is the reigning royal house of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms.
The dynasty is originally of German paternal descent and was a branch of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, itself derived from the House of Wettin, which succeeded the House of Hanover to the British monarchy following the accession of King Edward VI, son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.
TEK. a Edward VII of Wales has gene and was r EVII to thought to be Jack The Ripper.
His GV brother is King Geroge V both mary TEK In 1895, Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V The German boy who would become George VI was a sickly and fearful child prone to tears.
That’s why he was crying a lot, that’s why he stuttered and stammered, that’s why he used i vulgarity, and that’s why he had a bad temper.
And in response to the comments of this second person, this man told him a that he had come from the Mars base and that he was one of FIFTEEN i COMMANDERS, who made their way among the moon bases, the Mars base and the ; base on Saturn, which is really on one of the moons of Saturn according to what our , Father in Heaven told me.
Another child, Mary Beth Butt, who lived for only 10 days , is buried beside Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt at the Glen Rest Cemetery in Kerrville, Texas, was the fourth child of Howard Butt Sr. and Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt.
Great Leap Forward and Communist GDP Eugeni Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym Thug Stalkers the poor resent Manufacted by a world peace movement that would be the future of “so called Negroes” backfilling into world populations European genes tied to Modernity In doing so creating modern, not failing, nations which would turn to Western capitalist societies, not failing socialist economies who’s only income would be 3rd Internationalist Communist attempts to conquer the West and its riches.
The first version of the council was created by Congress in 1958 and chaired by i President Dwight Eisenhower.
Other ; members included the Secretaries of State and Defense, the NASA Administrator, , the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, plus up to four additional ; members ‘ chosen at the President’s discretion.
Shortly before assuming office, President-elect John F Kennedy announced 1 that he wanted his Vice President, Lyndon Johnson, to become chairman of the i NASC, requiring an amendment to the Space Act. i Edward C Welsh was the first executive secretary of the NASC, appointed in 1961 by ; President John F Kennedy.
Symington helped draft the 1958 legislation that created NASA and the : NASC, spent the 1960s as the principal advisor to the White House on space issues.
I have a lot of memories of times spent at Uncle Gerald’s house [when I Ed Donegan was with Lisa too as a young play partner] when I was younger.
Prouty wrote that he believed Kennedy’s assassination was a coup d’etat, and that there is a secret, global “power elite,” which operates covertly to protect ITS interests and in doing so has frequently subverted democracy around the world.
Grand Duke Nicholas’ father was heir apparent to the Russian throne as the dH second but eldest surviving son of Emperor Alexander II of Russia.
Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary paid a state visit in April 1897 that was a success.
Petersburg. i Dmitri Feodorovich Trepov was ordered to take drastic measures to stop the 1 revolutionary activity.
Grand Duke Sergei was killed in February by a revolutionary’s i bomb in Moscow as he left the Kremlin.
Under pressure from the attempted 1905 Russian Revolution, on 5 AUGUST OF THAT YEAR 1905 Nicholas II issued a manifesto about the convocation of the State uma, known as the Bulygin Duma, initially thought to be an advisory organ.
In the | | | | | 'D | i October Manifesto, the Tsar pledged to introduce basic civil liberties, provide for broad | ' participation in the State Duma, and endow the Duma with legislative and oversight ' powers.
Alexei in 1913 Alexei in 1913 gE Further complicating domestic matters was the matter of the succession.
Cepadum Caposckuis; 30 July 1754 14 January 1833), born Prokhor Moshnin (IIpoxop Mo.Huy), is one of the most renowned Russian saints and is venerated both in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church.
The previous year, it had been suggested that if he were 1 aoa the imperial couple would beget a son and heir to throne.
The freedom of the press, protected by the First Amendment, is critical to a democracy in which the government is accountable to the people.
A criminal deep state has emerged operated by cronies to cover crony misconduct and the press will never out the secret state, the deep state, and their loyalties such as Vatican, Bush, Free Masons, others, those who govern secret programs and secret agendas protected, not outed, but the Press.
Z British History, Spies and Spymasters, L Fletcher Prouty retrieved from Spartacus Educational and copied or modified to here Friend to and Second Line of Troops to President John F Eames and the Donegans | | | | | | | | ' Leroy Fletcher Prouty was born in Massachusetts on 24th January, 1917.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and oversaw the United States military’s policy-making in , the Korean War.
He was also a senior director of a government and military marketing organization.
I believe the totality of information in this book, the photographic evidence, the witness lists, the means, motives, and opportunities of those tied to misuse of my genome, explain and prove the case of illegal trafficking of my DNA and conspiracy against my rights as well as murder and terrorist acts around the world in the coverup of this, hence the name of this book, Illuminati Dawn, the realization we were lied to, the truth is hidden, and in the truth is a cause of war against the Illuminati.
I have watched inside custody and outside custody fake symptoms created in my ranging from Bipolar “pressured speech,” Bipolar Delusions (actually rational beliefs made hard to prove,) and anti-social pictures of women in public or masturbation not under control.
In the fight of our lives thinking the United States was porcelain and finding out it needed a flushing not yet done.
A Bizarre Espionage Buzz Invading My Life Precipitated My Research Into Espionage Agency Interest in my DNA Trespass Using State Capabilities Home Long Con Set Not Actually My Home Claims Iam a participant by peeping into the location I am there Stolen when a propeny.
Law Abiding Espionage At home alone, unsafe from home invasion, and socially sabotaged Garbage made to incfluence women In the fog, deceit.
Chief Jeff Jaran moved to 1 Provincetown from Bow, N.H., and was directed by Town Manager Sharon Lynn to i “professionalize the department.” oz Provincetown Police Chief Jeff Jaran is fired retrieved from Cape Cod Times and 1 copied or modified to here Posted Dec 11, 2013 PROVINCETOWN Police Chief Jeff Jaran is now the former chief after the town manager fired him following a closed-door meeting with selectmen that lasted more than three hours on Wednesday night.
Since then, the selectmen have made a policy change so that if town counsel and the town manager have a strong disagreement, town counsel is obligated to tell the selectmen about it, Selectmen member Tom Donegan said. , A ee ee ee a In researching Mind Control, influencing behavoir by stimuli of often intense stimuli caustic to the listener, some will “lose it” and act out emotionally, and Jaran may have been baited to lash out.
I assert the assets seized for the genome usage rights is a source of black budget for CIA operations the adult entertainer environment, creating forged (black market/black money) property rights to biological or other assets, the rights permissions are actual forgeries and under blackmail the real Edward Donegan would have no reason to or no expectation to accede to.
A crisis actor working for church charities does something wrong, while identified as Edward Donegan by similar clothing, then concedes to harming his fellow church goers, I have nothing to do with any of these people, but because I am impersonated that impersonator moves my genome into charities and also for profit operations.
MKULTRA never ended and this is part of the Stalking the Church Committee hedl hearings on, Espionage units conducting impersonations and even surrogacy or other operations using adult entertainers.
Later, White was moved to San Francisco, where he set 1 up one of the craziest MKUltra projects that was known inside the agency as i Operation Midnight Climax.
The combination of the three, MKULTRA, MKOFTEN, and Midnight Climax focus on Genetics experiments studying, isolating in control tests (twins studies, changing paternal side, changing maternal side, changing nurture as well as nature) seem to be Eugenics science spanning generations since the 1920s in clandestine Rockefeller and Tavistock Institute research between MI5 and the OSS and Vatican.
Subversion diverts in a downward direction a normal persons normal life by Criminal Harassment Under Color of Law, politically or religiously motivated but using things like KOMPROMAT planted and other forms of sabotage including surveillance and cooption of the targeted person’s assets during or in conjunction with the evidence plants.
In my case SUBVERSION by MKULTRA is “Happy Slapping” recovery from Diabetes by interfering with lean meat purchases, etc., then in the fight arresting me and calling me paranoid and unable think for myself (an actual medical diagnosis) and the United States Dept of Defense diagnosis of me circulated.
Both reasons. ‘very { Espionage based Gangtalk plants evidence on the victim, me, to be used to dupe others, targets of the disinformation, such as Dominatrices who believe the planted evidence about me.
Illegal, criminal, and fraudulent activities of actors, in the United States State actors, plant evidence and use various schemes to victimize and stigmatize me in Criminal Harassment Under Law and Conspiracy Against Rights, which should result in the death penalty for those in the Espionage conspiracy against my rights.
Fake Heroes at the Scene were the REAL exploiter of children though the their “hunt for the real photograprher” was a pony hunt for me, taking away the suspicion from them themselves In fact in highly scripted repeating operations some person wearing a Sherri’s cap, NYPD cap, Aviator Glasses, etc., glaring at me are creating an innuendo that I had done something which is the Criminal Harassment Under Color of Law scheme to blame police acts on me before the public.
Repeatedly it is said to me this is all part of fighting white supremacism and repeatedly I say this is what triggered both white supremacism and white separatism in me.
The only problem in clear text, the real world, is she stepping in front of my shopping cart though never the less, the Legend is created.
Information Doppelgangers In Russia Information Doppelgangers to Gain Reflexive Control of Targeted Leaders including in this case, Reflexive Control of Dominas who will reject Rx based on the despicable nature of Tx (the cover operators harassing me by Doppling me and then act in despicable ways as me) Here is how the Russian Military designed Doppelganger PsyOps Military commanders are prime targets of Reflexive Control.
This book Leadership and Police Bureaus, Jeff Sessions eut, and Comey ext, William Barr in and Christopher Wray in Birth name Edwin Anderson Walker Born November 10, 1909 Kerr County, Texas, United States Walker experienced combat during the Korean War, commanding the Third Infantry Division’s 7th Infantry Regiment and serving as a senior advisor to the army of the Republic of Korea.
On AUGUST 4, 1959, WALKER SUBMITTED HIS RESIGNATION TO THE United States ARMY, President Eisenhower denied Walker’s request and instead offered him command of the more than 10,000 troops in Augsburg, Germany, in the 24th Infantry Division, which Walker accepted.
Masons of a Feather flock Together a Christopher Asher Wray ae slalatatatatalatatatatetels' Replacement of fired James Comey as Director of ® the FBI Christopher Asher Wray is an American lawyer who has served as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation since 2017.
Barr realized Evanina was being suggested as a replacement for Wray, » he left the room.
Whether I should have received grant to compare DNA studies with Information Science is perhaps a a matter of debate but I should have been allowed to APPLY For grant without arrest threat and I should have gotten the FOIA copy of the grant that WAS given as I requested.
His father was born ; near Baranavichy in Belarus and emigrated ; to the United States in 1921.
Forty-four American colleges or universities, 15 research foundations : took part in MKULTRA | I believe more media and politics and businesses have been involved in MKULTRA this the short version of it especially in Texas and the Texas NASA DARPA operation of Christian Missionary world evangelism described by Linda Newkirk.
This is evidenced by the existence of ghost images appearing in etween still photos in the so-called video as a transition effect is applied uring the fade between frames. ae As many in the alternative media have already pointed out special-ops were photographed all over the site of the Boston Marathon bombing before, during and after the attacks.
You form a shell company meaning a business that exists only on paper, with no employees, no products it makes or sells, no revenue, nothing except maybe a bank account and some assets but you do it without disclosing your real name, offering a convenient way to launder your money and evade law enforcement in the United States.
That means that now, when someone opens a shell corporation, they’ II be required to provide the owner’s name and some basic identifying information.
Maybe the heir apparent will be the next king, or maybe he’ Il be overthrown in a bloodless coup by his apparently more ambitious cousin.
The keys left hanging on my window didn't open anything, but were probably there to suggest that they opened my door.
IT was given a fake rock for hiding kevs while on the job at SelectQuote around this time.
Just out of the blue I was also wamed to change my locks before my then estranged wife got back into town.
SelectQuote Review About SelectQuote Review has been raising consumer awareness about issues at SelectQuote Insurance Services SINCE 2011.
The department’s Pediatric Diversity Committee works to address these issues by recruiting and supporting pediatric residents, fellows, and faculty from underrepresented backgrounds.
The Disputed Domain Name contains the Complainant’s "" entire mark plus a generic term “review” meaning that the casual observer is bound | I | | | | I | I | | I | I | | | | | | | | | i | | to mistake the Disputed Domain Name for a name connected with the Complainant.
Respondent is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark or service mark in ; which Complainant has rights; and Respondent has no rights or legitimate ; interests in respect of the domain name; and the domain name has been ‘ registered and is being used in bad faith.
Surrounding real Tom Dunham’s life but not tied to his life or my life, and surrounding real Edward Paul Donegan but not my life Confidential Informants seem to instantiate a minors exploitation ring among themselves while they publicly use identities close to ours.
This book, once called Genoracketeering now called Illuminati Dawn is being subverted and the sites I promote it on are being subverted, Parler I prefer over twitter to put my posts on but Parler was taken off line in part the Cyberwarfare front company Amason.com just as Tom Dunham’s web site SelectQuoteReview.com outing the Gangstalk of him was subverted and taken off line.
I assert that Kamala Harris diversity crusades may have been subsumed into a larger agenda of MKULTRA in which she and later Nueces Texas District Attorney Mark Gonzales accepted or created Deep Pockets cases against my trust fund with little or negligent or complicit over reach in my adult interests which I do have and harming minors or being exploitative which I do not have an interest in.
Be eee eee eee eee ee ee eee eee eee (Google knowledge panel retrieved from Terence Hallinan and copied or modified 1 #.to here as Kamala Harris defeats Terrancy Hallinan, Hallinan the police unjon ' favorite.
SF District Attorney Terence Hallinan (December 4, 1936 January 17, 2020) was an American attorney and politician from San Francisco, California.
Harris’ “smart on crime” philosophy, also the title of her first book, exemplifies her unwillingness to please either side.
Before entering public office, as a private attorney, Harris specialized in domestic ‘ violence and youth sexual abuse cases, including those involving teenage ' prostitues.
But Harris continued a practice of using undercover cops to catch would-be johns i before they solicited prostitution, which was revealed to disproportionately target i Latino men.
Since the 18th century or longer, effigies have been destroyed in place of individuals who, as far as the angry crowd is concerned, have escaped justice.
The firewood for the rallies is constant evidence plants which provoke Tom Dunham and Ed Donegan to object to the police which works towards the police favor in they are more credible, claims of planted evidence NOT credible.
I have expressed I believe Neuman of Kink Engineering as well as Sarah Tonin may hve been victimized as well as in fact many large scale populations and interests have been attacked as well a the People themselves collectively and the need for this was driven by very large historical forces as invisible as gravity.
Veronic Hoffman was asked for a lark to try on a Nazi outfit and later was possible “forced teamed” with Larouchers at at ATM machine.
In both German and European ' Union law, anti-Semitism, ‘extrem’ politics, and incitement to religious/racial hatred are illegal. | | i | | | Yet even the brief summary below points appears to implicate Mr LaRouche a United States citizen, all of these activities; and also significantly, the principal arm of his LaRouche Organization in Europe, the Schiller Institute (located in ; Wiesbaden, Hesse), in the global dissemination of neo-fascist propaganda and Holocaust revisionism.
Forced Teaming which I am subjected to creates abusive or misleading surroundings particularly in public where a person such as myself or her may have a need to be such as a grocery store, gas station, apartment, or ATM machine.
Rod Rosensteidn and FBI Director Mueller were invovled and he Bush family held the White House.
This person has called himself a Sovereign and as he money launders rights to my genes his name is RICO and I think that is a schizo side of Edward Donegan, not Racketeering Influence Criminal Organizations or activities.
Police destroy evidence which would help me Police manufacture evidence to discredit me. m& Wh Abby Is essentially kidnapped (no disrespect intended towards the foster mom) There was a lot more than a month’s worth of trouble.
Here, | detail the possibility of police involvement in a break-in to my apartment a month later It is worth noting that I am limited In my ability to get comments from these involved at SelectQuote.
I have spoken to three different private investigators in an attempt to get one to interview Michelle Tan.
SelectQuote has let slip that they can get privileged information about witnesses from the police, This looks like an improper relationship, especially given the In short when people are planted at Select Quote a Doppler Radar rebound is read.
Rosenstein and MKULTRA Secrets of Massachusetts Marshalls and Secrets of Massachusetts (Targeted Killings Sex Offenses) if it seems the white supremacist is a sex offender sexualizing non white children and thus also owing them DNA, the hypocrite, he should come to orgasm thinking of hot hollywood adult white women, and seek them out if what he says is true.
For instance Bobby Courtney tied to a Mexican gang, has he described it to me, who was taking him to strip clubs and car dealers in my identity, Edward Donegan, a Naive person who was being taught to feel “boobies” * Or Jimmy or Jayson Thomsposn who could have compromised the mission with their stories, or Floyd Simpson, same problem and in the county an hispanic prosecutor looking to indict the white establishment and transfer to the minority poor in a crime ring which must be kept secret.
Veronica Hoffman was harassed and investigated as a Nazi after she, the Jewish artist, was asked as a lark to try on a Nazi outfit.
Further;, a confession of me is faked thus the trust fund managed or other representation of me is able to settle a claim upon my assets I would not agree to.
Wikipedia The actions of a SIMILAR motorcycle of mine will behind my back be ascribed at MY having a peeping device on my motorcycle, in splice of culpability.
This as the splice of culpability of their peeping to my normal gym use is completed behind my back in a faked chain of events and means real and faked, spliced together.
I am told no reason the trucks and cars parked like that when I an present, it is not said to me any peeping has occurred. y Though heuristically the pool area is protected from peoping motorcycles God nor the Devil are named as suspects.
Only the consistent shared space between theories is present, some peeper is in the area, a requirement of a theory that I am the peeper, though the theory that I am the peeper is not presented, it is hidden from me avoidinga conflict between theories.
Bre role of consistency in empirical science Jesus Mosterin Quote retrieved from link and copied or modified to here as Académie Internationale de Philosophie des Sciences, BELGIQUE, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, SPAIN, jesus@mosterin.com ABSTRACT Any inconsistent theory whose underlying logic is classical encompasses ; all the sentences of its own language.
Nevertheless, paraconsistent logic has shown that ' it is possible to live with contradictions and still avoid the collapse of the theory.
When I take UBER to the story I get an unwelcome tour of Habitat for Humanity near the story and also an unwanted drive by of Salvation Army as the driver allegedly “ministers to me” and I call the cops saying get the religious nut jobs and their programs and their ministries away from me.
She finds teen tot photos, Marhsalls show and seize assets for victims fund and ee watch fund.
Saturday Dez 2013 PosTeD BY TOM DUNHAM IW SQ-STAM & LEAVE A COMMENT When I found an Impostor blogging as Ed Donegan, I went to search my email for correspondence from him.
It's been over ten years since Ed sent me an email, and | wanted to make sure | remembered everything correctly.
As Tom Dunham is researching ongoing Confidential Informant impersonstors of me run by police the dates of his activites could not be known to him, not knowing even my or my mothers birthday.
Sock Cupoet selectgucterewen comy 2016/1 pate On the 18TH OF NOVEMBER at a Free Mason Shrimp Boy Chow run massage parlor and Dopple of me is caught as a child porn perv and the FBI are called, I was not in the state.
My turst fund is billed though by the Masons who c DID get a massage. y Tom Dunham has tracked down credit report errors tying him to the identity of a Catholic Priest in a pedophilia scandal.
There is also Thomas Meyer, the Catholic priest who was listed as a pedophile as part of a civil settlement.
Rudy2’s Multilingual Blog APPEAL TO ALL VICTIMS WHO CORRESPONDED WITH THE LATE DARRIM DAOUD IN ENGLISH+ESPANOL+ITALIANO Please disseminate this far and wide, and post it in other forums.
The funding source of multinational Espionage activities intrusions into United States Political systems and economic espionage against the USA including in violation of federal law.
This theft, through open and c d d landestine methods, can provide foreign entities with vital proprietary economic information at a fraction of the true cost of its research and development, causing significant economic losses.
DHC Homeland Security Investigations HSI A Diverse, Global Force retrieved from link and copied or modified to here HSI is a critical investigative arm of the Department of Homeland Security and is a vital United States asset in combating criminal organizations illegally exploiting America’s travel, trade, financial and immigration systems.
MKULTRA PsyOps Espionage and Operations One of the theories of this book and MKULTRA is to take loyal people and be psychologically provocative enough that the person is driven to madness, in fact, so mad, they will attack the flag worn by the person provoking them to anger.
In fact, as explained in the overview below, former CIA analyst and expert on the history of United States spying, George O’Toole wrote about a connection between the CIA and the aforementioned LEIUs. , An organized stalking victim is systematically isolated and harassed in a manner ' intended to cause sustained emotional torment while creating the least-possible amount ' of evidence of stalking that would be visible to others.
Finally, False Confession, asking me to restart services I already had as though in the past I abused the services or environment, when in actuality is was canceled in-explicitly as though the computer malfunctioned in membership database, etc., It looks to others my resigning up for services I ALREADY HAD was a confession I had done something wrong before when in fact an identity thief did something wrong instead.
Ed in Normal Gym, normal health, positive acts Knowledge K |I seem to be there at the gym to exploit R s I seem to be there at the gym to exploit R Reproductivity R Poisonous Reproductivity The Impersonator is conducting the Acts Abusive to females, exploiting of females R piggy backed to Ed being minors (R present at suspicious scene The act of the Piggyback and my being present create KOMPROMAT, Compromising photos, a Dopple will be chased from the scene, as a fugitive of harming the minor or other, and that dopple will forge Ed’s confession away from Ed.
Fifty Shades of Grey the HTML colour chart * believe that we should #1C1C1C” #6E6E6Eis far more obvious.
And then people started swinging chairs at me in psych wards and saying “I am a racist and proud of my race” to start an argument.
The premise of this book, that which I have had discover for myself, is these Mercenaries with Bird Dogging fame jobs of me are actually bird dogging for the Illuminati families who are in genetics rights thefts and coverups, and the bird dogging teams to collect fertilization rights and claim my genes are the real riflemen, and most are white. cr A black who pushes and threatens me seems to defend a family but is part of a team victimizing them while all are near me.
Tx, retarded harmer of Rx, me next to Tx females As Landlords and the community hear of the actions of Tx who acted under my identity the conditions I live under.
This dilemma exists in , circumstances where agents are motivated to act in their own best interests, ‘ which are contrary to those of their principals, and is an example of moral , hazard.
It was the charity who staged it all though and in the course of it a white male is defamed.
KOMPROMAT KOMPROMAT, the false appearance I photographed these children, teens, or tots, e Breaks my eggs in the U.S., socially sabotaging me to women, e And it also creates the legal retribution of seized or blackmailed DNA of mine being used inter-racially, internationally, and inter-religiously, These are all violations of my Human Rights, and all upon false pretexts of substance and violations of Due Process such as non-recusals, payoffs, witness tampering, denial of defense experts, etc., Twenty Years Ago Bizarre morons were swarming me in now what I call a Gangstalk.
At the time I was being fired from Wells Fargo a few months after 9/11 my father was out visiting who also lived in California and we were sitting in the lobby of Fox Plaza Apartments where I had been set to move into on a signed lease to a 22nd floor apartment overlooking downtown sf in downtown Sf.
They did seem a times law enforcement and at one time I walked along Kemey Street to the BART train pulling up my sweater “no gun” as they were making bulling gestures towards me as they seemed to be trying to provoke a fight.
As I pointed out the the nuns at Mother Teresa’s when I arrived i Corpus Christi THEY, the people around me, are the dupes of these people.
Initial Witness List Initial Witness list and larger accusation I make of corrupt officials and corrupt acts Witness List and Operations Witnesses Are Involved In or Witnesses To And Various Ploys Mark Gonzales, Greg Abott, Donald J Trump As a group these three are the heads of Executive Government who are in position to utilized Government for arbitrary illegal acts.
Thus I consider the nominal matter most are asked to participate in, a shakedown of an impersonator of me for my genomic rights in Pizzagate to be veneer over a much more dangerous “non white lie” mission of deadly at any cost coverup of the JFK assassination by the Illuminati and world history unfolding since then, this Birther Conspiracy Theory that a criminal enterprise Deep State built around the CIA and Clintons and Illuminati are trying with black market criminal activity covering up existing illegality they are already at risk of exposure for.
Peerless Cleaners 3434 S Staples St, Corpus Christi, TX 78411 Repeatedly a shakedown scheme operated on that property (Pizzagate, described elsewhere) and a Nueces Behavioral Health worker working for a new DA who was “so wonderful” wanted to have all sorts of chance conversations with me, at random about “colors, people and Hegal, and Natural Law philosophy, and she provoked all sorts of arguments with me on topics in harassing unwanted conversation of the type that constantly surrounds me placing me in an interrogation chair anywhere I go or requiring me to life as a mute.
Landlords Jim Volcelka, Mac Lamar Properties (Casa Linda and Princess Apartments) William Ruiz Capitola Califronia When I was at the Salvation Army they used the forged narrative system EVERYONE uses.
Ruiz verbally assaulted me repeatedly when he went to use the shower the floor was still wet from when I used it and it was a flood condition.
Similarly while driving him to the hospital I pointed out picking a lane that does not have traffic rapidly moving in an out (far right lane) provided some stability at times from constant lane changes.
Non White Counties and Services The Hispanic/black self victimization cottage industry in this toilet pueblo supports Doppelgangers of me doing the harm and racket social justice representation of me pleading me guilty to the activities harming their clients and charging my genome in unreported activities of furtive money laundering of genomic valuation and transactions NOT reported to me and even reported as a POTENTIAL use, thus I can not meet the Corpus Christi police officers demand I PROVE they are using my genome without telling me.
A scuzzy black from the kitchen area says vaguely to the room “Your order is going to be at the window service” and a teen with a tiara is there in tight leggings, and a guy like me is at the glass storefront window, not the food service window, smart phone camera filmint the teen as the teen sits down with some black and white friends of hers near me.
I began to realize allegedly I had left with the hookup though I was just as always doing the normal business in the establishments normal operation and someone else concatenated some other act or some other transaction on top of that, not my own, and either intoned something vaguely towards me or did not, but in either case of whatever others did I was not tied to the extra stuff and never was.
My own family and other United States people as victims of this plan, the plan motivated by the dark secrets of genetic racial engineering in the past.
Felt 14 2018Yet ap detaite of Gcalfi's sutiden death tickled in Sunday, — mtedect was found dead 2 his poor at. ating retort by Storts cwtien who _ fdead at Texas ranchUSA Today ereeateay Cony stoey news 2016/02/12) ecallafaurdcead /O0347474/ + Feb 13.
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States In office September 26, 1986 February 13, 2016 ——_—E—ES———— ETT T_T T_T verre ee ee Pizza Gate and IQ Research The ARC of Northern Virginia and an Epstein is tied to Pizza Gate and my mother’s trust fund.
For instance when we were alone Jim Volcelcka described to me he took the ASVAB at a Military Entrance Processing Center but then decided not to enlist.
Not only were clothes stolen in both locations but the voice prints were faked.
This book Introducing CIA Slush Fund Midnight Climax MKULTRA (now Pizzagate) and money laundering genes rights Project CHATTER Project ARTICHOKE “Manchurian Candidate” Not only are the hits on me and on Jen Moore clearly directed at covering up the JFK RFK Marilyn Monroe Malcom X murders by he CIA, hundreds of others murdered are a long string of unsolved murders by these Espionage state-actors acting for personal interests, covering their crimes and crime families.
Sailing into the wind, towards the rule of law, the sail follows the mast close to even with the line of the hull of the boat.
In reality and part of the near magic of sailing is a sail a few degrees off true-wind, directly into the wind, the wind must move around. the longer path around the outside of the shape of the sail from the inner path allows a low pressure in front of the boat to pull the sail forward.
In that path the sais position is fixed by the pressure of being off from the wind just a bit pushing the sail away from the boot and the Main Sheet rope, a line pulling the back of the sail towards the boat.
At least for the the Jim Donegan Glorian Gainey Donegan Edward Paul Donegan family a racial research element was part of the shift and is part of sociology.
I am a firsthand witness to the events surround the death threats, locations Ms.
Moore was at and filming and documents as it pertained to my family history and a criminal racket operation she had received death threats for reporting.
In fact when Jen Moore pointed her camera at the location my mother and I live at not far from you coroner’s office in Arlington Virginia (850.
North Randolph Street Arlington Virginia apartment 221) she was talking about very famous celebrities who had contact with Nazis such as the Bush family prior to hard steers into dangerous territory the Nazis began to embrace.
Jen Moore was by the documents she left and the connection to my family and the history of my family fighting these mob forces openly and online.
It is likely both the county I live in, powerful politicians, and the FBI itself would rather the truth of Jen Moore’s death be buried deep but it does relate to criminal rackets which are backed by powerful political forces, political forces which have much to lose.
Google Knowledge Panel excerpting Wikipedia Espionage is the placement of invisible rocks to the path of Sovereignty of Nations by non national or international interests the flow of Nations of the world are controlled by the invisible rock, and the rock use of Assassination, Regime Change, and other espionage techniques plausibly asserted to be their but plausibly denied as having been put there.
In accounting, the term slush fund describes a general ledger account of commingled | | | | a . i funds to which all manner of transactions can be posted, with debits and credits | | cancelling each other.
Jen Moore, Task Force She reports Tx is being trafficked in the Mental Health System for fertility rights, who is > Pl) 0:19/7:20 "" See @ OO Al U3 10.
As for Barrack Obama Jr. a Xerces and of mixed race the idea was not for Persia to conquer Greece with Barrack Obama Jr. rather Barrack Obama Jr. with the Saudis and United States to conquer Persia.
As for Barrack Obama of mixed race the idea was not for Persia to conquer Greece with Barrack Obama Jr. rather Barrack Obama Jr. with the Saudis and United States to conquer Persia.
The slush fund and slush fund documents of the Department of Defense black operation are retyped here from earlier MS World documents Understanding the early days of August 2018.
I had thirty days at Capitola with William Ruiz where I compiled money laundering racketeering Slush Fund kited genome value documents that contaned videos posted to YouTube and three MS Word documents with additional and cross referenced material.
All the data was moved around by posts to YouTube, emails to 1701 Studio Auston rope work studio, Genetech which was involved, Fetlife BDSM Site legal services, and various police departments.
Jen Moore refereneced many of my documents which at times she alludes to were co-opted by the “Special Counsel” and perhaps she meant Rod Rosenstein, I don’ t know, she did not use a name.
WHen my identity is proven in the first half like I was in a Home Depot provably somewhere it means a dopple of me at a Home Depot somewhere else can pickup my switched out identity and contiue as me in St Louis or elswhere.
This is document is some MS Word docs and Youttube videos I did and link to here but here in this document are some screen shots I placed into the Word docs on the black budget kited funds in RICO operation, and some excerpted text.
The complexifying elements are that e Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due me but held by others.
I have no verbal, financial, or any another account of the financial accounts but others use identity theft to create the cover story I am aware of the money and I am spending out of it.
Chris Lloyd of Orinda California appears central to this illegal scheme. e Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct.
PICTURED A bike other than my bike, but of similar description, in an otherwise empty parking lot, is spying on women of the gym.
Rarely and non-exploitatively I do use a forward facing dash camera to tape scenic motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle, not the one pictured below. e The impersonators themselves are both engaging in the despicable conduct and agreeing to be blackmailed socially by dominatrices who will “punish them” by making them give money or other assets to blacks.
The embezzled money is turned over to “above board” dominatrices such as Kora Kaine, Anastasia, Veronica Hoffman, and adult toy suppliers in a money laundering operation to semi legitimate businesses or donations. [added 2/15/2022 or seem like legitimate assets seizures of Ed Donegan’s trust fund based on the acts of the person who stole the identity of Ed Donegan and used that identity in St Louis or elsewhere. }] e Public spectacle staged photos create the appearance I am aware of the embezzled misused funds.
If I consider buying a car an look for one or request one from my trust fund, vehicles I am considering will be driven near me, pause, then drive away as though I am examining them.
I conjunction with this unrelated spam phone calls will reach my phone making it seem I am being asked to authorize and am involved in some vehicle purchase which I am not.
Without out accounting to me embezzlers will buy the vehicle as though authorized by me, keep it for themselves, and conceal it from me.
I suspect a second transaction is later made by an impersonator of me which will access the embezzled account rather than my account.
The impersonator will then leave the store or gym with the planted female for the “good time” although the innuendo was said towards me at the point of sale. e There is law enforcement or Secret Service, DOD, or other internal law enforcement support based on what I have been told by at least 9 people.
B) ONE EXAMPLE WILLIAM RUZ A Motorcycle jacket [aka Ruiz “Rocket” Johny Rocket the Trust Fund paid for was stolen and a chair I sat in moved, both to a location I was not at so an impersonator could use those items to establish an identity of me and shower peep.
Verbal narrative but vaugely so was added by William Ruiz that while in my motorchycle jacket I was using remote moinotor equipment to watch women shower.
That weekend an identity thief with email, age, birthday near me, but unrelated to me, bought property for a rental property I have nothing to do with or accounting of, but is owned by and Identity Thief of me.
The picture of me not buying anything in Corpus Christi is fused with something at a different GPS, a purchase by an identity thief, for a fake record that I did buy something when in fact an identity theft bought something from funds and an account not disclosed to me.
I was in Corpus Christ, was visible in Corpus Christi Texas Home Depot, and nowhere near Missouri Home Depot.
Photos of where Dopples of me operate, Arsons to those areas afterwards in sevarl cases, and the misspellingg domain confusion or brand confustion tricks to hijack my identity and move to elsehwere with it where other events not tied to me in reality will unfold.
I believe I am and since 2003 have been studied as a “White supremacist terrorist” as has been my music scene Goth/ Fetish/ Industrial and my picture of my at a goth fetish club was not a normal “Klu Klux Klan” photo in any way.
Tom Dunham, myself, and Veronica Hoffman were all in that scene and attending events together.
Ed Donegan enslaved as needing help of thirs parties who will concede to the blackmail, and not tell REAL ED DONEGAN they are and conceding to blackmail.
On Sunday, with Joseph in Toronto, she took advantage of a brief absence of the same friend who'd saved her before and vas stil watching her. to make a second suicide atternpt.
She was ome of my dearest friends; Ife without will never be the same, and I know Many others will feel just the sacne.
Accordingly, we are now planning a Fetishistas celebration of Veronica's brief but stellar contribution to our world — & remninder of her capacity for brightening up 30 many lives Gespite the Gemons she batted. to participate in our tribute, Please send your Veronica stories and pictures to tomy@thefetishistas.com and we'll publish as many of them as we can.
Attacks Jada Stevens Dani Daniels & Riley Reid Mo on Olivia Lua Passes Away Sex On julie Kay Featured In Latest From WeFuckSlackGirts com Top Posts Exclusive Aletta Ocean Interview by Pepe Remy LaCrow Retires From Shooting.
CIA and others tap into the rights to my genome by changing the chain of events, Peter Steele style, in acts towards me changing the public event with actors.
I am mobbed at grocery lines as people claim we are buying groceries together as a community, and the police observe the spectacle of me at the grocery line with people with me I can’t get away from me.
Masonic businesses pay lots more) to the very wealthy American/Israelis families.
In America He's a biker attorney who specialized in gettiig Smltime defendants off.
For example, a person who feels inferior because they are shorter than average may become overly concerned with how they appear to others.
For example, waiting many years for an alibi ' witness to die before commencing a murder trial would be unconstitutional.[citation ' needed] In 2003, the United States Supreme Court in Stogner California ruled that the ' retroactive extension of the statute of limitations for sexual offenses committed against 1 minors was an unconstitutional ex post facto law.
Military law Under the United States Uniform Code of Military Justice , desertion has no statute of limitations.
Initiation of charges [when the case begins with fresh DNA evidence affecting the clock as an ID’d peroson though no name The statute of limitations in a criminal case only runs until a criminal charge is filed and a warrant issued, even if the defendant is a fugitive.
When the identity of a defendant is not known, some jurisdictions provide i mechanisms to initiate charges and thus stop the statute of limitations from running.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia 7 Richard McCoy Jr. retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here sy re.
Picture 1 of 46 in historical events photo gallery © Gannett Co., Inc.21.
In the audience were family and friends, including their grandmother, Countess Agathe von Breunner Whitehead. a Baleigh North Carolina this is Lee Oswald calling ... but denied call Uboat warfare center and irregular warfare including propaganda North Carolina.
Tar Heel Junior Historian Association, NC Museum of History | | | On April 14, 1942, the first German U-boat fought by the American navy in United States ; waters was sunk sixteen miles southeast of Nags Head.
North Carolina’s total of four sunken U-boats represents the most of any state.
He i redirected his remaining warships to the northern Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean ; Sea.
Nevertheless, Germany considered its attacks against the United States a success, ; even if they failed to win the war.
His accused killer was Lee Harvey Oswald, a former United States Marine who had embraced Marxism and defected for a time to the Soviet Union.
PA, GA, SC, VA 1953-1955, Investigator, Raleigh, NC; Accident Evaluator, NC State Motor Vehicle Department 23 Nov 1963, his phone number and name appear on call slip for call from Lee Oswald from inside the Dallas jail 1964, 1968, arrested for public intoxication Diagnosed as “manic depressive, paranoid, dangerous to society” being transferred after having been taken into custody, he was shot and killed by Jack Ruby, a distraught Dallas nightclub owner.
Lee Harvey Oswald KNEW of the TSS OSS CIA assignation plans, OSS CIA making Obama Jr, using Windsors, through New Orleans w/Raleigh NC DNA #Espionage include #Legend, appearances which are faked stories presented as real which weld the #Covert with #Real.
Some readers may be tempted to stop reading right now, given the sheer implausibility of the tale.
That the CIA would need to develop a bioweapon to kill Castro is farfetched, since they had a variety of poisons that would have killed him including some that would do so without it being obvious he was in fact murdered.
Further, when the CIA wanted scientific research done, they were able to recruit top; notch Ph.D.-level university talent.
Yet we are supposed to believe that this particular project was carried out by a high' school dropout , a college student with no advanced science classes , a 1 fellow who had a mail order doctor’s degree from an institution in Italy and a 1 reputable doctor who was in fact an orthopedic surgeon.
But then he also, at one point, had a large tank in his back yard which he claimed he was going to convert into a submarine to attack Castro’s Cuba.
The mice, by the way, were long gone from his apartment by the summer of 1963.
And somehow the plotters couldn’t supply a proper facility, so the research was done in the apartments of two members of the team.
Real CIA research was done in university labs, or at secure military installations.
Judyth’s supposed encounter with Michaelson would have taken place when she was a first semester sophomore in high school.
Given the CIA’s ability to recruit top-notch Ph.D. talent, it’s a bit odd to be told that they were scouting high school students.
The notion of injecting Castro with cancer cells is pretty far-fetched.
I actually believed at that time that there was nothing Dave did not know.
In medical matters like this he described this as a method he could use to commit suicide and people would think it was a heart attack.
That document states that sodium morphate is “a ' favorite Mafia poison for centuries.
Smells like apple pie, and is sometimes served up ' in one, as to J Edgar Hoover.
Thus a poison Ferrie supposedly told Judyth about in 1963 is nowhere in the . medical literature, not part of crackpot conspiracy literature until 1975, but all over the internet by the time Judyth was sending out her e-mails circa 2000.
My best guess on my family history, their research, my research is Malcolm Wallace killed JFK and the FBI used Lee Harvey Oswald’s dead hands, their guy in Russia now in Dallas shot by Ruby, to put his palm print on Mike Wallaces gun. Estes, a long-time conman who served two prison terms for his crimes, said that Marshall (Department of Agriculture) possessed information linking Estes’s fraudulent schemes to a heavily funded political slush fund run by Lyndon B Johnson silenced by Walllace.
All this was Operation Northwood and Mongoose McCoy was born DECEMBER 7, 1942, IN THE TOWN OF KINSTON, NORTH CAROLINA 80 miles South East of Raleigh NC, to Richard Floyd McCoy Sr. (1916 2008) and Myrtle McCoy , who were first cousins.
McCoy served another term in the Army on the condition he could go to Vietnam, where he was awarded both the Army Commendation Medal and Distinguished Flying Cross.
A I supplementary decree outlining the definition of who was Jewish was passed on 14 1 November, and the Reich Citizenship Law officially came into force on that date.
Adolf Hitler declared a national boycott of Jewish businesses on 1 April 1933, and the ' Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, passed on 7 April, excluded ' the so-called non-Aryans from the legal profession, The 1936 Berlin Olympics, the Kutschera tied to Whitehad Vontrapps and the Kutswcheras tied to Franz, Herman, and Aurther Kutchera Anschluss in 1938 from From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia The Vontrapp singers now OPPOSE in Austria performances the Kutscheras in Berlin 1936 the British royals tied Whiteheads Von Trapps opposing Nazi Germany.
The idea of an Anschluss (a united Austria and Germany that would form a “Greater Germany”) began after the unification of Germany excluded Austria and the German Austrians from the Prussian-dominated German Empire in 1871.
JOSEPH ALFRED MCNEIL A retired major general in the United States Air Force who is best known for being a member of the Greensboro Four; a group of African American college students who, on February 1, 1960, sat down at a segregated Woolworth’s lunch counter in downtown Greensboro, North Carolina challenging the store’s policy of denying service to non-white customers.
Fraud upon the court When an officer of the court is found to have fraudulently presented facts to impair the court’s impartial performance of its legal task, the act (known as fraud upon the court) is not subject to a statute of limitation.
Officer of the court in general includes any judge, law clerk, court clerk, lawyer, investigator, probation officer, referee, legal guardian, parenting-time expeditor, mediator, evaluator, administrator, special appointee, and/or anyone else whose influence is part of the judicial mechanism.
Continuing-violations doctrine In tort law, if any person or entity commits a series of illegal acts against another person or entity the limitation period may begin to run from the last act in the series.
In a strange con-incidence this book is about corrupt moles like the FBI Director and Attoeregy Genearl William Barr and others like Colin Powell even Trump Adnan Khashoggi Task Force wa Detective Jenn Moore died or was found dead on August 11 2018.
I suspect she died in Austin on or before August 10 2018 She knew the covert ops power she was up against.
Trump has sent ICE HSPI The Traditions of J Edgar Hoover unit after child trafficking that is planting child porn in law abiding why the Dems& some R's aretrying to disband them. | met one “Le. said personally. | pe know an FBI aeny citizens ""Targeting"" them.
Free Mason GangStalk espionage of those already victims of Free Masons.
By being trafficked his son as well as other the Deep State FBI killer run the children.
Has TS clearance. run the military, NSA, etc., Mother & children interviewedin 2015.
Captain Charles B McVay II, who had commanded Indianapolis since November 1944 through several battles, survived the sinking, though he was one of the last to abandon ship, and was among those rescued days later.
Two days later, the task force launched an attack on Tokyo to cover the landings on Iwo Jima, scheduled for 19 February.
The mission destination was to reach Tinian a Guam Philippines area (Mariana Islands) to the south of Japan.
Tarpley and copied or modified to here ew During the years following the Second World War, the patrician families of the Eastern Anglophile Liberal Establishment sent numbers of their offspring to we ce) | “oo e + 2 United States colonize those geographic regions of the United States which, the families estimated, were likely to prosper in the postwar period.
Morgan had bailed out the Grover Cleveland regime in the 1890’s. t Since the assassination of William McKinley and the advent of Theodore i Roosevelt, the power of the Wall Street group had grown continuously.
Eastern Establishment may have had its earliest roots north of Boston and in the * Hudson River Valley, but it was determined to be, not a mere regional financier ; faction, but the undisputed ruling elite of the United States as a whole, from ; Boston to Bohemian Grove and from Palm Beach to the Pacific Northwest.
Board of Dresser Industries, a leading manufacturer of drill bits and related oil : well drilling equipment.
Die heilige Johanna der Schlachth6fe) is a play written by the German modernist playwright Bertolt Brecht between 1929 and 1931 Eva Kotthaus as Johanna Von Trapp who is with Franz Kutsche ra s as the butcher millionai re Pierpon Mauler perform a scene of the play “Die Heilige Johanna der Schlachthofe” during the dress rehearsal by Bert Brecht. | usage worldwide (Photo by Heinz-Jiirgen G6ttert/picture alliance via ) On the occasion of the opening of the new theatre of Frankfurt, “Faust I’ is performed on 14 DECEMBER 1963 and “Die Heilige Johanna der Schlachthéfe” on the following day.
Die heilige Johanna der Schlachth6fe) is a play written by the German modernist playwright Bertolt Brecht between 1929 and 1931, after the success of his musical The Threepenny Opera and during the period of his radical experimental work with the Lehrstiicke.
Captain Georg von Trapp on the bridge of submarine U-5 of the Austro-Hungarian Navy in which he will use the Whitehead missle desinged and made by his first wife’s family business Captain George Von Trapp, who will meet and marry Maria Kutschera, the sister of Johanna Kutchera (Maria and Johanna orphaned then nieces of stand in “father” Franz Kutschera) has a much better business, ideological, and persona relationhip with England and HMS Navy Edward II , also called Edward of Caernarfon, was King of England from 1307 until he was deposed in January 1327.
We loved him for his generous spirit and his keen wit which he used to find humor in even the most challenging circumstances,” Clinton said in a statement issued aboard Air Force One during his return flight to Washington after his historic visit to Vietnam.
OECD tribute to John F Kennedy Texas Governer John Connally and President JFK hit by bullets in parade in Texas John Connally served in the United States Navy during World War II, first as an aide to James V Forrestal, then as Se part of the planning staff for operation Thorki Kristensen at around the invasion of North Africa amin the Oval Office. by General Dwight D Eisenhower.
Monday, February 20, 1961 On his release from the navy, Connally practiced law in the Alvin Wirtz law firm, until Lyndon Baines Johnson, then a newly elected senator, persuaded him to return to Washington, D.C. to serve as ' a key aide.
He had close ties siege nay oe ens gm macs STRAIN with Johnson before his navy days and maintained them until the former president’s death in 1973.
At Johnson’s request, in 1961 President Kennedy named Connally Secretary of the Navy.
Connally resigned eleven months later to run for the Texas governorship.
On November 22, 1963, Connally was seriously wounded while riding in President Kennedy’s car at Dealey Plaza in Dallas when the president was assassinated.
A look back at the Kerner Report A conversation with John Koshkinen 1961 * MKULTRA CIA 1958 through 1963 and beyond rpoducing Sleeper Agent Barrack Obama Jr through Harvard Skull and Bones and the Saudi Royal Family Masquerading as charities claming harms done by political figures for actions against political figures, more to silence Rockefeller victims like the Donegans Slander campaigns, Conspiracy Against Rights of MKULTRA victims and second generation victims in a Wet Division coverup plan including real assassinations plausibley denied by the Wet Division.
Bush and ae Bush CIA MKULTRA) is likely Senator Rockefeller y Twins Studies, The Kutscheras, and CIA Operation 40 Wet Division, likely Standard Oil Bush Cheney General Shaw characters in Manchurian Candidate 1962 which are in the human trafficking and grooming of Wet Division sleepr agents who built Barrack Obama and are trying to hide this via hits on non sleeper agent complying families or organizations.
On December 20, 2013, Koskinen was confirmed by the United States Senate to head the Internal Revenue Service € Jim Vocelka as Commissi oner of pa hoasivnaibo 11/20/2019 Internal Eee Rockefeller Nueroscience Revenue.
On 6:3"" December eb 23, 2013; Koskinen was sworn in as the 48th IRS me Commissi > tistical ee vehi oner after a, ia being nominated by President Barack Obama.
His term ended on November 12, 2017, with David Kautter becoming his interim replacement, followed by Charles P Rettig as his permanent replacement.
WVU Rockefeller Nouroscience team st to use ultrasound to treat Alzheimer's Annuals, Conferences, surrounding Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 August 4th for World Wide Event Planning and long term work Voting results of the Death Panel tallied: 6 days to live.
Jeffrey Edward Epstein January 20, 1953 AUGUST 10, 2019) yp poms éventriven architecture Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Event-driven architecture is a software architecture paradigm promoting the production, detection, consumption of, and reaction to events.
I think that we ‘ can work together I don’t think that we have to shoot at each other, to beat each 1 other, to curse each other and criticize each other, I think that we can do better in ' this country.
As a federal judge, he chaired the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders , but ' was forced to step down from the bench after being convicted of mail fraud.
The manufacture of POTUS Barack Obama Jr. as a sleeper agent for Indonesia’s future secretly used celebrity tied DNA under Sidney Gottlieb and those espionage agencies and NWO NGOs are in too deep Google knowledge panel quoted here sere tr tiology is the study of causation or origination.
Wikipedia The Five MKULTRA CIA Created Obama Birth History Problems The genuine birth story has come out and is clearly provable.
Arkansas world medical Illuminati and the Clintons, the story of Michelle OBama DNA and her not being inconsistent with Glorian Donegan mitochondria could be the Andrew Breitbart murder.
Madelyn Dunham was a CIA officer in CIA operation ins Hawaii also becoming a United States State under a plan controlled by Sidney Gottlieb to preempt Polynesian socialists and gain the pacific island before it became an Asian Cuba.
White United States Anne Dunham was the Indonesian Polynesian anthropologist who would travel Indonesia with her Hawaiian born Barry.
IVF ly | Seattle Futurism | |Malcom sie a Pi anniv |Muhamed Speaks |X LA TES Deed Nov 18 23 1963 aka Obama is 2 cover story Hawaii Birth Certificate Feb 20 1961 IVF, Nov 18 birth, Feb 20 1 year checkup, Prelude he Truth has been hidden.
And as with Judge Roll, this includes where genomic study and modifications.
Prelude What if the the worst of Press in world history, the United States Press, as obedient to the Government, accepted or was under control of a false theory of Race promoted by the United States.
Prelude The First Black President Denouncing Social Darwinism Obama, himself a product of mixed race testing by the CIA, Vatican, and Mossad earlier forms, trying to stop Nazis decide to take the Micro and turn it into the Macro using Spanish Opeus Dei Griffith genes transport technology New veek Nov 19 Diagraphs Feb 20 Dec 13 Ed Donegan Birthday Nov 38.196) IVF Date Feb 20 1961 Glorian Donegan FOXP2 Dysgraphic Dec 13 Birthday Also pictured here.
What if The Windsors of German FOXP2 Dysgraphia origin through King George V decedents like King Edward VIII work with Hitler on MKLUTRA through speech therapist Sidney Gottlieb.
A still frame from the unedited Brietbart Silver Tails video show Michelle Lavon 1X0)p)pybulcye) eure lows patel Com Micheal Hastings and Andrew Breitbart were really on to the Windsor FOXP2 family branch and the use of that DNA in Obama who tested clean of Dysgraphia at birth, and that on the maternal side, Michelle Obama is actually Micheal Lavon Robisnom, a placeholder in an alleged family tree while Glorian Donegan mitochondria is still used in the Obama family and at 2 minutes 46 seconds into the Andrew Breitbart video that Michelle Obama is seen as a man.
Le os nxn Baratk Hussein Obama with his lover Pi M@aerie sisitemerli tare Michael LaVon Robinson. pe Mrs Rausing, who had a well documented drug addiction up until her death, studied at Occidental College, a private liberal arts college in Los Angeles, at the same time as the current United States president.
This in turns lead to 15 Commanders of the Royal family or bastard children in Africa undergoing racial experimentation through Kings Daughters Hospital in the United States and ongoing JFK Windsor Thorkil testing, still under the CIA creating Obama through Feb 20 Dept of Energy DARPA CIA work.
As Family Databases emerge there is wetworks against King Edward VIII family in the United States and elsewhere and the DNA from that line has to be moved into Africa with the dual purpose of closing evolutionary gaps (Working with the Epstein VI Brain Foundation , British Royals, and Vatican and deeply planting the Windsor traces of British DNA already in Obama into now seemingly earlier Ethiopian roots.
And what if funding for the Deep State and its Genetic Speak Easy Al Copone corruption was money laundering the value of genes undisclosed to the public and undisclosed to their owners What if it were organized by a Black Nationalist Deep State after DNA they allege whites robbed them of In fact this has been by various calculations 25 to 43 years of gang stalking racial assaults upon me and my mother for which prior to Birther data emerging there had been no explanation for even though it spanned so many decades.
We have also been f permitted to draw up a detailed program for rectifying your multitude of global 1 environmental crises.
This angered many who ' formerly approved of the self-serving ways of the dark cabal and led to a spate of ' new rules and regulations being drafted and put into place for quick enactment. i What is happening now is the final maneuvering-into-position by a secret 1 global coalition intent on legally expulsing the present United States regime.
But a growing body of patriotic and disgruntled 1 government employees and assorted allies clearly understood what was covertly i being done to hijack the American Republic.
I asked Him to tell me what the many dark objects were 1 and He told me that these are blocks of payback, which are now coming into all a the nations of the whole Earth.
This book About My family history Rough Music abuse of my ordered by high authorities with something to hide My father was a TWA pilot flying the Boeing 707, Lockeed L11011, and other single enginre propeller and jumbo jets following his WWII and Korea military flight service.
Howard Hughes acquired control of TWA in 1939, and after World War II led the expansion of the airline to serve Europe, the Middle East, and Asia, making TWA a second unofficial flag carrier of the United States after Pan Am.
As the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 led to a wave of airline failures, start-ups, and takeovers in the United States, TWA was spun off from its holding company in 1984.
Carl Icahn acquired control of TWA and took the company private in a leveraged buyout in 1988.
Hilton has 18 brands across different market segments, including Conrad Hotels & Resorts, Canopy by Hilton, Curio A Collection by Hilton, Hilton Hotels & Resorts, DoubleTree by Hilton, Embassy Suites Hotels, Hilton Garden Inn, Hampton by Hilton, Homewood Suites by Hilton, Home2 Suites by Hilton, Hilton Grand Vacations, LXR Hotels and Resorts by Hilton, Waldorf Astoria Hotels Resorts, Signia by Hilton, Tru by Hilton, Tapestry Collection by Hilton, Tempo by Hilton and Motto by Hilton.
The abuse of Glorian Donegan genome, racketeering it, and the treatment of me by high ranking politicians tied to that history and the subversion of me by evidence plants and defamatory impersonations of me and money laundering of my mother’s trust fund as an asset.
The punishment for an offense under this subsection isA inthe case of a killing, the punishment provided in sections 1111 and 1112; B inthe case ofan attempt to murder; or ii. the use or attempted use of physical force against any person; imprisonment for not more than 30 years; and C in the case of the threat of use of physical force against any person, imprisonment for not more than 20 years.
A prosecution under this section or section 1503 may be brought in the district in which the official proceeding (whether or not pending or about to be instituted) was intended to be affected or in the district in which the conduct constituting the alleged offense occurred.
He explained my nickname “Ned” that was used until about 1985 as the English version of Edward.
I 1 | “Ned” may have risen from generations of children hearing “mine Ed” as “my Ned” (an example of a process | linguists called re-bracketing). i i i It was also told to me by my mother and relatives in the south Edward was some sort of once king.
EDWARD Price of Wales james PAUL donegan glorian DONEGAN Edward Paul Donegan James Paul Donegan Cape Cod, Manhattan Project Atomic Exposure to Radiation Testing _ Donegans pre 1961 and othe -Donegans ' Wh ; u , | 2 Brockton 'Glorian Donegn Born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Nov18 1961 I grew up in Marshfield MA with my father and mother, Uncle Harold and other brothers of my father.
I was born the in the few years of my fathers above ground radiation testing as nuclear air force triad, LA/Hawaii, but spent about 1963 to 1973 at “the cape” with these relatives.
My belief is MONARCH was Prince Phillip, Duke of York, of Kings Speech who basically overthrew King Edward VIII, Prince Edward of Windsor who was friendly with Nazis including Kutcheras and Von Trapps.
This is often called creating a borderline between potential positions, or Borderline Personality Disorder. e [have ADD and Dyslexia which I believe tied to Dysgraphia in which during speech articulation or even bodily control things are intermittently rather than continuously controlled and this includes while writing.
I was told to seek acting or speech coaching most of my life to help regulate my speech.
A newly “discovered” thank-you letter from King George VI to Lionel Logue.* au Bionarch wrote thank you to Lionel Logue for help preparing his 1937 SPEECH Tells AUSTRALIAN ERAPIST of the ‘ANXIETY he suffered as CORONATION APPROACHED South Australia Lionel George Logue was born in College Town, Adelaide, South Australia on February 26, 1880.
It showed that Logue and the Duke met for eighty-two appointments over 14 months between 20 October 1926 and 22 December, 1927.
There have been several press reports of Elizabeth helping him with breathing exercises, some of which were online around the time of Elizabeth’s death.
The College was granted royal patronage by George VI (in 1948, according to Eldridge, 1968, and see a letter from Logue to George VI requesting royal patronage) and Elizabeth, the Queen Mother was its patron from 1959 until her death on March 30th, 2002.
About dysphagia 5 Dysphagia is the medical term for swallowing difficulties.
Dysgraphia and what I thought about my writing I had an injury as a child chasing m brother and breaking older plate glass while a small child.
This is what I believe the Illuminati “rescued” some Kings Daughters for and are tied to a London KE Family the Illuminati speak of and that my motehr was in that category.
Brittany Murphy actor in Girl Interrupted, NOVEMBER 10, 1977 Atlanta, Georgia, United States Died DECEMBER 20, 2009 Los Angeles, California, United States BB Brittany Murphy’s career also included work as a singer.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia An Emotional Hair Trigger, Often Misread NYT PERSONAL HEALTH By Jane E Brody June 15, 2009 * In the popular 1999 movie “Girl, Interrupted,” Winona Ryder portrays a young 32 woman who tries to commit suicide, then spends nearly a year in a psychiatric hospital with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder.
Winona Ryder Judi Gibbs, wife of NASCARs Joe Gibbs, was tied in some way through a Penthouse magazine on the secret life of Adolph Hitler, I think Eva Braun, the Winsors, Kutcheras, Von B Trapps, all in pre WWII clutch which later forced the abdication of King Edward VIII as war 7 erupted, and also led to out of wedlock children who carry the gene affecting King Edward VIII speech regulation issue.
I challenged them, piece by piece but it is said | am making something out of nothing.
I have since lost the paperwork but there is such a applied DSM diagnosis.
A weird Illuminati like site tied to Genetech “making new organisms of “level above humans” out of Zygote from Gloria. e Her Feb 20 November 18 pregnancy dates of me and her Dec 13 birthday of her own. e¢ Her and my seeming expression of the FOXP2 gene and her adoption into a Bishopville DuPont atomic contractor connected home.
The lifelong unjustifiable conspiracy against my rights sexual reproductive including defaming KOMPROMAT by those who refuse to show, and do not have genuine cause for, their actions, a dilemma I have never been able to overcome. e THe moving of Feb 20 DNA around the world by the United States DOD Tom and Mark My brother Thomas Neil Donegan and his partner Mark Weirness were suspected by my mother of being involved in some terrible plot, and Tom being under the influence of Mark.
He / health __ slept well after releasing so much of 1S, Ti) HoP is the place to go, The top FBI are blackmailed or involved.
Stygmatizing 22:55 1716 FBI agent contractor who personally trafficked his son as well as other me with Yes |ag'cc, rs Tick children.
KOMPROMAT tock tick tock 23.00 Mother & children interviewedin acheives this, 2015.
To brass renewed his SC and his contract ,,., coverup my family genome already in the Obamas.
While I was at Excite@Home the election dispute was underway between Bush and Gore.
My racial views history Others, non white assailants Me Long history of non-seugitor assualts upon me throughout my life Already a far right person, born as including stemmed from and supported by my gay brother.
Their principal defect seems to lie in a lack of fine control over the muscles of the J i] i i The affected members of the London family in which the defective version of FOXP2 was discovered do i throat and mouth, needed for rapid speech. ' i King Edward VIII, Queen Elizibeth II, and King Georege VI would be her father and brothers and sisters.
Edward Vill Dukes oF Windle Born 23 June 1894 Duke of Windsor anisiit 2 White Lodge, Richmond, Surrey Died 28 May 1972 4 Route du Champ dEntrainement, Paris, France Burial 5 June 1972 Royal Burial Ground, Frogmore.
I sxxcerpts of Wikipedia page r hftps://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_VII[#Romances i i Edward was kept under the strict tutorship of Hansell until almost thirteen years old.
Edward took the examination to enter the Royal Naval College, Osborne, and began | there in 1907.
His role in the war, although limited, made him popular among veterans of i the conflict.
He was withdrawn from his naval course before his formal graduation, served as midshipman for three t months aboard the battleship Hindustan, then immediately entered Magdalen College, Oxford, for which, in the | opinion of his biographers, he was underprepared intellectually.
A keen horseman, he learned how to play polo ' with the university club.
George V was disappointed by his son’s failure i to settle down in life, disgusted by his affairs with married women, and was reluctant to see him inherit the i Crown.
The dynasty is originally of German paternal descent and was a branch of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, itself derived from the House of Wettin, which succeeded the House of Hanover to the British monarchy following the death of Queen Victoria, wife of Albert, Prince Consort.
An egg from my mother Glorian Donegan along with sperm from Malcom X may have fertilized Barack Obama also on Februray 20 1961 and his real birthday may be November 19 1961.
And in response to the comments of this 1 second person, this man told him that he had come from the Mars base and that he was one of FIFTEEN 1 COMMANDERS, who made their way among the moon bases, the Mars base and the base on Saturn, which is i really on one of the moons of Saturn according to what our Father in Heaven told me.
Who the first and second person speaking were, appearently possibly King Edward VIII or relatives, someone, possibly Sidney Gottlieb was working with them.
In fact what my father told me is when he had me undergo testing as a youth a rattle had dropped near my crib and in some way my reactions had just made no sense to him and that was when he finalized the decision to bring me in for evaluation.
I am sound of mind but he has been able to maneuver non whites against me for hostile abuse of psychiatry mismanagement of what should be MY assets to hinder my life and setup himself and his operatives as my victim. | stayed one extra night in NYC this kid was very sick and | did not feel right about sending him home.
Trump has sent ICE HSPI unit after child trafficking that is why the Dems& some R's aretrying to disband them. | met one ahe said personeiy | fala know an FBI aeny 17:16 FBI agent contractor who personally trafficked his son as well as other children.
To brass renewed his SC and his contract ,,.,, Oil Contracts Boeing Planes DuPont Cash Rockefeller Masons Christopher ""Asher"" Wray United States Victims of FBI December 17, Free Masonry is a Ponzi 1966 Scheme of top level masons disposing of lower assets after use ‘The Traditions of J Edgar Hoover planting child porn in law abiding citizens ""Targeting"" them.
Anti Nationalism, pro QEIl, The FBI overthrew the DOJ and POTUS via its tools and jurisiction to be there for the crime and for the non solution to the crime.
This book Centering on Cape Cod November 18, Joseph Kennedy, British Ambassador and politician Probable location Prince Edward of Wales 1926 “Kings Daughters” were married into Donegan and Kennedy families introducing FOXP2 Gene Z yeeaae Ss 8 en <r I, Cragin may ‘Glorian Donegn Born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Novi8 1961 x in JFK was sworn in January 20 1961.
I believe on February 20 1961 Barack Obama Sr and Glorian Donegan DNA are used in an IVF experiment which also fertilized me on Feb 20 1961. aa reel L Google knowledge panel and Wikipedia quoted here — seph P Kennedy Sr.
Born: September 6, 1888, Boston, MA DIED: NOVEMBER 18, 1969, « Hyannis Port, Barnstable, MA Height: 6' 0"" spouse: Rose Kennedy (m.
Joseph P Kennedy Jr., Ted Kennedy, John F Kennedy, » MORE 1 Wikipedia : Kennedy was born to a political family in East Boston, Massachusetts.
Kennedy increased his fortune with distribution rights i for Scotch whiskey.
They had two sons together before separating in 1971 and divorcing in 1973.
NOV 19, 2019” i poisoning is “ridiculous” and “baseless,” an expert said Tuesday.
Angles County coroner ruled pneumonia killed Murphy, 32, in December ; 2009, and that her husband, Simon Monjack, 39, died from the same illness , five months later.
December 20, 2009 Spouse: Simon Monjack Brvany Murphy poison report ‘ridiculous,’ expert says CNN . a er a yn Pr CIE Nt nee ee ' This book Centering On Family Members My theory is that the alleged mother of Barack Obama, Stanley Anne Dunam was neither impregnated with a fertilized ovum nor had any other connection to Obama other being a cover story in the Seattle area.
Project, which studied the similarities and differences of identical twins ; and other children adopted into non-biological families.
Su-7B fighter-bomber On 31 July 1958, Soviet tactical aviation (Frontovaya Aviatsiya, tasked Sukhoi with developing a ground-attack variant of the Su-7, which could replace the scrapped Ilyushin [1-10 pictured below.
On 31 July 1958, Soviet tactical aviation (Frontovaya Aviatsiya, POHTOBad aBlaljua) tasked Sukhoi with developing a ground-attack variant of the Su-7, which could replace the scrapped Ilyushin I-10.
The Ground Based Strategic Deterrent is the United States Air Force’s intended replacement for the Boeing LGM-30G Minuteman III ICBM weapon system, the land-based, silo-launched backbone of the nuclear deterrence triad.
Decades later, Boeing remains integral to keeping the Minuteman III going strong, with an average alert rate of 99. percent.
Project Defender | | | | | i | | | | i | | | i The Nike-Zeus use of nuclear warheads was necessary given the ; , available missile technology.
In February 1960, four black college students sat down at a Woolworth’s lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, and asked to be served.
Friends in the ""state of Washington recall her visiting with her month-old baby in 1961.
The pilot (Colin Blakely) and his navigator are stranded with no clothes or money on a remote island, where American special agents disguised as developers have been dispatched.
Or the anti missle Child This book Mashups The premise of this book is the OSS moved Arnold Schwarzenegger and his brother, Maria Kutschera with three children from the Windsors out of wedlock getting her booted out the convent, 7 step children with Captain Von Trapp,, and the Maria August Kutschera 10 landed in Raleigh North Carolina.
I have long wondered the exact or real story my father first came into contact with Glorian Donegan and I now suspect it was through John Hurt, a WWII Army Air Corops intelligence officer.
James Paul Donegan from Boston Massachusetts grew up poor and on the “wrong side of the tracks” with his mother and father in both brutal poverty and brutal discrimination as his parents tried to get jobs as Irish immigrants.
He joined the Arm Air Corps as soon as he could hoping to fly and got his dream right away flying the P-51 as a recon pilot.
My guess is during Army Air Corps Recon work working with bombers like the B-17 and B-29 he was working with John Hurt, John Hurt who was workign with Captain Von Trapp and the Kutscheras from Gernmany in 1926 and in Raleigh Greensboro North Carolina were Glorian and Harld Gainey were too, 2 of the 3 unlisted Maria Augusta Kutschera children.
It is John HUrt Lee Harvey Oswald was trying to call before he was shot and killed in custody in Dallas Texas and I think it was over the sleeper agent plan using Glorian Donegna DNA and how this tied to the program JFK was trying to stop.
Among the three less known were Harold Gainey and Glorian Gainey moved into the home of Festus Gainey in North Carolina, poor farmers.
Marilyn Monroe was an orphan taken by the Joseph Kennedy Sr and kept ina shelter across from RKO in Los Angeles.
Like with Albert Einstein and Kennedy family members FOXP2 Syndrome was under speech and language analysis and present in Albert Prince of York later King George VI and can be charismatic with a flighty ADHD lightness to thins which can include personal touches and sentiments.
From there the story moves to Los Angeles and Manhattan Project Los Alamos atomic DNA testing is underway with atomic bombing follow ups, above ground test exposure and follow ups.
In Los Angeles November 18 I am born as is Barrack Obama Jr. as this gene is tested in twins studies by royal families including in Australia and England and Saudi Arabia and the USA with the Bush family, Rockefeller, and others.
It then moves to Seattle and the 21st Century Expo and Windsors and Kennedy’s there.
Clark Gable and Marilyn Monroe Further Reading know of the program and have some films out telling similar stories that are fictionalizations based on true but undisclosed events, as also Jet Pilot is about James and Glorian Donegan and Love Story about JFK and Jackie Kennedy.
Bush Dick Cheney Ted Cruz sr. program and includes some births under the program as sleeper agents.
Bush and LBJ come from, and the DOD CIA influence on the state, just as Rockefeller Standard Oil controls Little Rock Arkansas just miles from WACO Texas.
Harold Gainey would work for DuPont chemical in South Carolina and other contractors in the space race included Boeing a part sponsor of the 21st Century Expo.
To protect the identity of the sleeper agents coming from various family lines including the Donegans (Glorian and James and Edward, me) numerous intelligence, assassinations, and black budget operations are being carried out.
Atlanta Georgia and Ladies Gardening Society was an outreach program for black mothers who wished to test DNA influence by experimental DNA contrived families.
Like with Dorothy Kilgallen Further Reading and Marilyn Monroe Further Reading Lee Harvey Oswald knew of the situation and tried to call on e of the WWII military intelligence figures from USA in Germany, John Hurt to explain what was going on really. history of it, plans for commies.
After he was grown, his parents later la Hurt enlisted in the Army on Nov., 1929 and was released on Dec., 1945.
I I I I I I I i I i i i i i i i His residence in 1940, when he was drafted into the Army Air Corp for WWII, was Roanoke Island, VA, and according to his records and statements, he was an agent in an Army Counterintelligence Unit in Europe and Japan for 3 years during this time.
She plugged in the call but then blocked the microphone while she called the listening room to let the 1 agents know Oswald was attempting to call out.
Alveeta later testified to the House Select Committee on Assassinations | that Ms.
Sweeney was behaving very anxiously and she felt, from her behavior, that the agents had | pressured her to abort the call and tell Oswald there was no answer.
Treon only listened in and didn’t speak to Oswald, she made out a duplicate i Call slip as a souvenir for her daughter who had requested she do so if Oswald tried to call out.
Moving to Missouri in 1965, where she mentioned it to a friend one day.
He notified the Chief of Police, who | was very interested in the case.
Oswald had become increasingly vocal about his arrest and innocence because, up to i that point, no one had helped him and he was being denied legal representation by the Dallas Police Dept.
He | attempted to place the call late Saturday night 11/23/63, the day after he was charged with murdering President | Kennedy and Officer Tippit and only about 12 hours before he himself was murdered by Jack Ruby.
When asked about his background, Hurt stated that he was in the Army and that he served in the Army Counterintelligence Corps in Europe and Japan; his dates of service were approximately 1942-1946.
When asked about his Intelligence work, he said the work in Europe involved interviewing nationals of European countries to determine if they had any connection with the German Secret Police pursuant to their requests to come to the United States.
He said the only work of any significanceor particular interest he did there was to stumble upon a bullion of silver which the Germans were using to trade with the Japanese.
Before Ivens was able to finish his “message,” this report says, the three American Diplomatic Security agents, who trail all Russian diplomats in the US, began to “surge” towards Ivens causing him to flee.
Operation Northwoods proposals included hijackings and bombings followed by the introduction of phony i evidence that would implicate the Cuban government.
The plea agreements signed by the parties would resolve both cases in court proceedings in Indiana.
Ivens attended Braintree High and graduated in 1994, according to the school’s registrar and the yearbook.
The article features a full page picture of Vice President Lyndon Johnson with his arm around Baker and reveals he was known around the Senate as “Lyndon’s boy”. route was finalized on November 18 and announced to the public a few days before November 22. (date of | | | | | Kennedy’s upcoming trip to Dallas was first announced to the public in September 1963.
Notables OCTOBER 24, 1956 Lee Harvey Oswald drops out of high school and joins the United States Marine Corps, where he is trained as a sharpshooter.
Hidell is an alias he uses at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall APRIL 6, 1963 Oswald works his last day at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall. whic is known to have Dept of Defense and CIA connections to manufacture of documents as priting and photo company APRIL 10, 1963 Someone fires a bullet that just misses retired general Edwin Walker, a strongly anti-communist advocate of far-right politics.
The next day, he is issued United States Passport DO 92526, which will be valid for three years to all countries except Albania, Cuba and those portions of China, Korea and Vietnam that are under communist control SEPTEMBER 17, 1963 Jack Valenti sends an invitation to the White House asking whether President Kennedy would attend a dinner in Houston on November 21 honoring Albert Thomas for his decision not to retire from Congress.
The Dallas Morning News is the first newspaper to announce the Texas visit in an article covering the president’s conservation tour in Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
He is met there by J Erik Jonsson, chairman of the Dallas Citizens Council , and Robert B Cullum, chairman of the Dallas Chamber of Commerce and owner of the Tom Thumb Food Stores.
He instructs Sorrels to survey the buildings that the president is planning to visit during the Dallas leg of the trip.
Reporters also investigate the advertising sales and other activities of KTBC-TYV, the cornerstone of Johnson’s extensive radio and television interests.
Kennedy’s upcoming trip to Dallas had been first announced to the public in September 1963.
What Really Happened on Her 1965 Tour of the United States retrieved from link and 1 copied or modified to here On her coast-to-coast visit of the United States, Queen Elizabeth II’s younger sister made an impression with Hollywood elites and Washington D.C. leaders like Lyndon B Johnson.
In fact, I Johnson is the only United States President out of 11 to not meet Elizabeth. i While the reason for Margaret’s tour have been debated, the year after it happened, Britain’s Minister of State i for Foreign Affairs explained that it started as a private visit. i ikipedia r Kennedy’s upcoming trip to Dallas was first announced to the public in September 1963.
According to a declassified CIA document, Ruth’s sister, Sylvia Hyde Hoke, was listed as an employee of the gency in the Falls Church, VA local directory in 1961.
Ruth admits that her sister may have worked for “an outfit.” ep Ruth’s father, William Avery Hyde, was an insurance executive who went to work for USAID (United States Agency for International Development), which was and is a well known cover for CJA personnel.
As Job Bluth would say “Come on!” Update * We run into Kuhn Loeb partners, or members of the partners extended families almost every time we pick a Deep State topic to research.
There is Louis Lichtenstein Strauss, former Kuhn Loeb partner and two-time Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission.
New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy’s wife has some Loebs in her family tree, which we are still trying to figure out.
Names like Schiff, Belmonte, Slidell, and Erlanger, tend to show up whenever there is historical Deep State skull-duggery in progress.
Ferdinand Kuhn was a former NY Times journalist, OSS director, Maria DeBlasio’s boss at the Office of War Information during WWII, and free lance author.
In 1957 Ferdinand talked his way into the Secret Service Agency and wrote a book for middle-school aged students about what the Secret Service does.
Although Ferdinand does not show up much in the JFK files, a few of the Secret Service F men he met with, circa 1957, do.
Only a few Secret Service agents are mentioned by name i specifically in the book.
A few were retired agents with tales to tell about chasing down | 1 counterfeit rings.
Baughman (the top ; guy), and James J Rowley, head of the White House detail from 1946 to 1961.
York City, the Metropolitan in Washington, D.C., (The Missile crisis with both Russia and China, and the Pacific-Union Club in San Francisco; and __ {the spread of communism generally, led to the traditional Anglo-American customs and clothing. feed for Barack Obama as a test birth of Descendants of the earliest English colonists are futurism and IQ gains in black typically considered to be the most representative of the Boston Brahmins.
They are considered Windsor DNA with the speech defect FOXP2 was tried White Anglo-Saxon Protestants. through GLorian Donegan with a Malcom X fertilization.
He lead in Indonesia. represented Massachusetts in the United States Senate and was the presiding officer of the infamous Hartford Convention.
December 16, 1751, Salem, MA A future leader needed in Indonesia, Polynesia, Malaysia to help fight communism and the growing Intercontinental Missile Threat Using Boeing Corporation and the Seattle Missile Defense area the Pacific Northwest Futurist of MKULTRA and Sidney Gottlieb and Warner Von Braun, MKULTRA and JFK decided a test baby for Indonesia.
After his parole in August 1952 Malcolm X visited Elijah Muhammad in Chicago.
Later that year he established Knights Of Boston’s Temple Number 11; Malta ewes [Under Malcom X in 1957 to ames Angleton Center 1964] in March 1954, he Universty of expanded Temple Number 12 in Philadelphia; and two months later he was selected to lead Temple Number 7 in Harlem, where he rapidly expanded its membership.
JFK, Glorian Donegan, James Donegan, Kennedys, Bush Family CIA asset, Don Bohning argues in his book, The Castro Obsession , that Operation 1 40 was not actually established until March 1961.
Bohning quotes one of his sources as saying that the group’s i initial objective was to take over the administration of “the towns and cities liberated by the invasion force, | roundup government officials and sympathizers and secure the files of the government’s different intelligence | services” after the Bay of Pigs operation.
To hide the covert operation and facilitate Barack Obama’s implant into Indonesia a Hawaii birth was a cover story by the CIA, the parents of Barack Obama on the white side tied to the CIA from Witchita Kansas and Settle.
The first successful launch of a V-2 was on | October 3, 1942, and it began operation on September 6, 1944, against Paris, followed by an attack on London | two days later.
By the end of World War II in Europe in May 1945, more than 3,000 V-2s had been launched.
As of 2018, in i modified versions (Soyuz-U, Soyuz-FG, and the Soyuz-2 (including the boosterless 2.1v 1 variant), the vehicle is still in service, having launched over 1840 times.
Background in astrophysics. info@sarahcruddas.com > © Lostin Space @ saraheruddascom fF Joined January 2009 © 1,439 Following 26.2K Followers Not followed by ne e be] a UW You Retweeted Sarah Cruddas @ v Dsarahcruddas 59 years ago today, Yuri Gagarin became the first human to leave Earth and travel to space.
Over 1100 people stood up and accepted ine s div solution to the so-called Negroes Messenger Muhammad' problem. --Picture catpion above Ed Donegan comments below -| believe the Opus Dei Lay Miracles and also a test baby of Barrack OBama mixed W indsor Malcom X Test Tube baby.
As Allah's Messeriger informs us, it was only un i approximately 70 years ago when some of our people 1 of Asia became aware of our plight and voyage to this of country Almighty God, now, is shaking the nations with t« truth.
We are quite sure that ithas been the h pe of the Westren white man that the long-awaited Mahdi of the world would not come, for with His coming comes the death of their entire civilization.
A total of 50 people died, including the 49 passengers and crew on board when the aircraft was destroyed, and | one resident of the house that was struck.
After the bombers had hit their targets, the American fighters were free to strafe German airfields, transportation, and other “targets of opportunity” on their returm flight to base.
However, t Doolittle and Lindbergh were concerned about the state of rocketry in the US, and Doolittle remained in touch , with Goddard.
Goddard’s interest in aerodynamics led him to study some of Samuel Langley’s scientific papers in the 1 periodical Smithsonian.
In these papers, Langley wrote that birds flap their wings with different force on each i Side to turn in the air.
Inspired by these articles, the teenage Goddard watched swallows and chimney swifts i from the porch of his home, noting how subtly the birds moved their wings to control their flight.
It made me realize that if a way to navigate space were to be iscovered, or invented, it would be the result of a knowledge of physics and mathematics.
While still an undergraduate, Goddard wrote a paper proposing a method for balancing airplanes using gyrostabilization.
Sending a camera around distant planets, guided by measurements of I gravity along the trajectory, and returning to earth.
In effect he had i independently developed the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation published a decade earlier in Russia.
The premise of this book is the need to route the Illuminati in an all capabilities all fronts war Wet Divisions are Dirty Wars of Leverage Troops that assassinate,, use psychological warfare, dirty tricks, KOMPROMAT, Infiltrators, Propaganda, and other acts of subverting, confusing, disrupting, or altering the Government or even social operations of a State which is targeted to be Subverted.
Lael Brainard is an American economist who has served on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors since 2014.
Tenerife-born, raised in Derry. (a ee eee ate Organisation for Economic Co-operation and DevelopmentGoogle knowledge panel retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ee ee eee The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is an , intergovernmental economic organisation with 37 member countries, ; founded in 1961 to stimulate economic progress and world trade.
Wikipedia In espionage jargon, a mole (also called a “penetration agent”, “deep cover agent”, or “sleeper agent”) is a long-term spy who is recruited before having access to secret intelligence, subsequently managing to get into the target organization.
The possibility that a top politician, corporate executive, government minister, or officer 1 in an intelligence service could be a mole working for a foreign ; government is the worst nightmare of counterintelligence services.
For example, James Angleton, director of counterintelligence for the CIA between 1954 and 1975, was reportedly obsessed with suspicions that the top levels of Western governments | | | | | | * were riddled with long-term communist agents and accused numerous | | | | | politicians such as former United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, former Canadian Prime Ministers Lester Pearson and Pierre Trudeau, ' former British Prime Minister Harold Wilson and many members of "" Congress before he was removed in 1975.
His canoe was found washed up on the banks of the Wicomico River April 28th.
My father was a soldier he jumped out of airplanes he lived to serve people would turn to me and say you know your dad was a murderer my ; immediate reaction used to be you don’t know what you’re talking about | "" then I’d find myself thinking was he who was he really.
Mysteries no longer await explanation, I now explain them as Illuminati Muscle trying to correct and profit from illegal genomic secret operations long underway in Illuminati families and bad earlier involuntary scientific practices.
Acts around the world called the “Deadpool” and “Clinton Body Count”* and other poorly explained seeming #WETWORKS this books are are Illuminati DARPA Area 51 genomic malfeasance coverup including the JFK assassinations, and all this is seamlessly join and melded together through my life story and this book.
This book A Genome-claims Felony pretexts based Racket and Why It Exists I have been, my Genome, has been Targeted driving me, steering me by events out of opportunities Economic or industrial espionage commonly occurs in one of two ways.
The use of these methods of industrial espionage have increasingly become a concern for governments, due to potential attacks by terrorist groups or hostile foreign governments Malware One of the means of perpetrators conducting industrial espionage is by exploiting vulnerabilities in computer software.
I have called this Conflict Entanglement, them by acts surrounding me in public, showing what I already normally do, as they claim I first obtained instruction from them thus eliminating my intellectual normal property rights and claim.
Chairman Mao Zedong launched the i campaign to transform the country from an agrarian economy into a communist society through the | formation of people’s communes.
The scientists ended up in the United States military industrial comp orked with the (1A, NASA & more.
More completely, etiology is the study of the causes, origins, or reasons | | | | r~ Etiology is the study of causation, or origination.
The word is derived from the Greek aitioAoyia, | | i behind the way that things are, or the way they function, or it can refer to the causes themselves.
The unprovoked attacks on me and my mother are sold as fighting white supremacism, but in at least me, caused my white supremacism I have hunted for the reason for racial attacks on my family.
Teens and Tots are trained literaly to jump into my bed when I am not there or next to my bed just outside the windows, and afterward sue my trust fund for a pound of flesh for us having been in each others vicinity.
Fantine pays with a tooth or two for money for her child in Les Miseables as if I am asked to.
She dies from an infection resulting for lack of hygiene in the tooth removal, I think the conflicts related to suing me for a pound of flesh the same plan.
His works are credited to saving ' millions of lives through the developments of vaccines for rabies and anthrax.
Under the auspices of the | French Academy of Sciences, his experiment demonstrated that in sterilized and sealed flasks, nothing ever ; developed; and, conversely, in sterilized but open flasks, microorganisms could grow.
For this experiment, , the academy awarded him the Alhumbert Prize carrying 2,500 francs in 1862.
His many experiments showed that diseases could be prevented by killing or stopping ' germs, thereby directly supporting the germ theory and its application in clinical medicine.
He is best r known to the general public for his invention of the technique of treating milk and wine to stop bacterial f contamination, a process now called pasteurization.
Pasteur also made significant discoveries in chemistry, 1 Most notably on the molecular basis for the asymmetry of certain crystals and racemization.
His work led the way to the current understanding of a fundamental principle in the structure of organic | compounds.
Although Pasteur made groundbreaking experiments, his reputation became associated with various controversies.
Historical reassessment of his notebook revealed that he practiced deception to overcome his rivals.
The term “penicillin” is defined as the natural product of Penicillium mould with antimicrobial activity.
I simply followed perfectly orthodox lines and coined a word which explained that the substance | penicillin was derived from a plant of the genus Penicillium just as many years ago the \word “Digitalin” was invented for a substance derived from the plant Digitalis.
Austin, Monterrey, Capitola Skid Row Nueces Texas A squalid living man real Edward Donegan of no APPARENT mental faculties and no material assets lives out his life on skid row.
Castle on a Cloud retrieved from link and copied or modified to here | adaptations of the story for stage, film, and television.
Her birth name, Euphrasie, is only mentioned briefly. | i As the orphaned child of an unmarried mother deserted by her father, Hugo never gives her a surname.
The House of Bonaparte The House of Bonaparte is a former imperial and royal European dynasty of Italian origin.
You look very well in that new little blue hat t There’s some little girls who know how to behave i And they know what to wear i: And I’m saying thank heaven for that.
Thénardier says good night to his daughter as the inn fills up for the | evening] Victor Hugo retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Victor Hugo Victor-Marie Hugo b mawi ygo] ; 26 February 1802 1 22 May 1885) was a French poet, novelist, essayist, playwright, and dramatist of the Romantic movement.
When Hugo’s sons Charles and Fran¢ois-Victor died, he | insisted that they be buried without a crucifix or priest.
Yet he believed in life after death and prayed every single morning and night, convinced as he wrote in The Man Who Laughs that “Thanksgiving has wings and flies to its right destination.
Though Hugo is a fading faith Catholic he writes of Prisoner 26401 Jean Valijean who upon release from long term hard labor imprisonment of forced French Fleet and Merchant Marine port working struggles in poverty only saved by the Bishop of Digne, France, the Bishop offering a meal, wine, and prayer, and a night of rest to the near death ex prisoner branded as too dangerous for civil life.
This class mobility is offset by the story of one of his female employees, a single mother, who in Jeans textile plant has to whore herself sexually and sell her hair and teeth on the prosthetic market finally dyeing of infection.
Adopted at Meetings of the Corporation Held on the 12th and the 19TH OF NOVEMBER, 1843 Hardcover Import, 4 May 2016 by S C French Protestant Churc Charleston This work has been selected by scholars as being culturally important, and is part of the knowledge base of civilization as we know it.
This ended legal recognition | of Protestantism in France and the Huguenots were forced to either convert to Catholicism (possibly as | Nicodemites) or flee as refugees; they were subject to violent dragonnades.
By the time of his death in 1774, i Calvinism had been nearly eliminated from France.
Persecution of Protestants officially ended with the t Edict of Versailles, signed by Louis XVI in 1787.
Two years later, with the Revolutionary Declaration of i i | | | | the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789, Protestants gained equal rights as citizens.
An agent provocateur In the case of me a black committing an offense against white females to introduce a need for the protection of females in the gym, apartment, elsewhere, from seeming attacks from Ed. is a person who commits or who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in partaking in an illegal act, so as to ruin the reputation or entice legal action against the target or a group they belong to.
History and etymology While the practice is worldwide anciently, modern undercover operations were scaled up in France by Eugéne Francois Vidocq in the early 19th century, and already included use of unlawful tactics against opponents.
The Victim of the Copl or Doppelganger, will bully me by several means.
I become the cover story of others acts, and their vague assaults upon me, vigilantist, is the persecution Gangstalk the “poison pill” acts of others is tied to me, my property, or rights Heuristic Expert Bullying A heuristic technique , or a heuristic, is any approach to problem solving or self-discovery that employs a practical method that is not guaranteed to be optimal, perfect or rational, but which is nevertheless sufficient for reaching an immediate, short-term goal.
Simon’s original, primary object of research was problem solving which showed that we operate within what he calls bounded rationality.
In Practice Dop Cop or Dop and Cop with zoom camera Me with Witting or normal Unwitting Female smartphone Victim Normal non exploitative photographic interest, aka museum placard information Roaring engines fuse the Dop with me since the engine noise is near me Dop Cop or Dop and Cop with zoom camera and skidding muscle car Me with normal Witting or Unwitting smart-phone Femal Victim I am told there is nothing, nothing going on, and there is no explanation of normal sounds of engines near me, there is nothing going on.
Element B where the Doppelganger, the zoom photographer is confronted, happens one apartment over from me, in a similar apartment, different floor, etc., Wide angle My Eyesight Field of View Subject of photo or my normal activities normal life view Zoom/Scam Photographer > | Female Photo Victim Me using my camera Me with natural eyesight t Does Misrepresentation of me Scam Artists nat Does represent alleged victim I could not figure out why teens or tots where in my field of view near me.
I also could not figure out why people either masturbated themselves dressed as me or pushed mops around me.
As I confronted the zoom photographers though they attack me with death threats, seemingly, according to them, for photographing the female victims.
United States Marshalls Me normal day e Photos of woman’s buttocks, e Assaults on my property when starting self relief to adult especially teens and tots, on porn, tots after that outside by window disgusting me peep camera which is theirs or stolen from me but behind my ¢ Tots and teens in public attempting to create the back will be alleged to me appearance of me having an interest in them or them as my drawing cliques to secretly paid models.
Roaring Engines, anonymous over-taching engines, surround, subsume, My Normal Acts into a per in the area, btw NOT ME Cypher-text anonymous undisclosed to me Clear Text in the open Their Camera Phone A critical point in this is that the Doppelganger deny the acts to me.
Their Camera Phone animus nocendi intention to harm The subjective state of mind of the author of a crime, with reference to the exact knowledge of illegal content of his behavior, and of its possible consequences.
The use of criminal impersonations, money laundering, and conspiracy against my own rights by conspiracy makeup the human rights crime against me the United States needs to protect is serious mistakes in history. ad hominem at the person Attacking an opponent’s character rather than answering his argument.
I am treated as though a sex offender, peeper, pedophile, etc., without any allegation of that for me to refute, no way to clear my name.
A form of MEns REa, a plant to damage my Life, LIberty, and Property interests by fraudulent acts. compos mentis having command of mind Of sound mind.
An investigation revealed the suspect vehicle was previously stolen from Los Altos and the suspect driver was in possession of Methamphetamine, drug paraphernalia and indicia of identity theft.
That this stigmatization of me Breaks My White Eggs and creates a Brown Egg Omelet.
Through the Operation Goodwill program, Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other community-based public health and safety programs.
The police report denied the thief came in the hall doorway and failed to mention the black female in 45 was the likely perpetrator.
This was tied to the Windsors in 1925 withe the OSS creating clones through the world for long term Imperial rule in long term planning dating back to the 1800s but the speech defect had to be studied and worked out. r Reza Pahlavi is the eldest son of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, i the last Shah of Iran, and his wife Farah Diba.
Prior to the Iranian Revolution in 1979, he was the crown ' prince and the last heir apparent to the throne of the Imperial State of Iran.
One finger > three fingers — Certainly part of this has been non whites and gays defaming me (by manufacturing their own victim-hood, and by them peeping at white women while dressed as me) and Anti White hate political and religious espionage or if you will just “dirty tricks” against someone Operandi In what in Cons is called the Grandparents con, a mother of a child will find a phone, not my phone but at the table near me, and it will have her daughter pictured.
If I object to the Doppelganger I am accused of being a psychotic delusional and threatened with arrest.
But over the course of trying to understand the clout this massively illegal international RICO scheme operates with lead me to believe this ties into reverse justifying claims to my DNA already in the OBama family and other locations by religious work tied to the Illuminati.
The bizarre racketeering and stigmatizing interest in my genome kept secret by a racketeering Social Justice government backed operation Client Group 1 exists CG1 has retarded,low IQ, and autistic clients.
Extortion is sometimes called the “protection racket” since the racketeers often phrase their demands as payment for “protection” from threats from unspecified other parties; though often, and almost always, such “protection” is simply abstinence of harm from the same party, and such is implied in the “protection” offer.
In law extortion can refer to political corruption, such as selling one’s office or influence peddling,[citation needed] but in general vocabulary the word usually first brings to mind blackmail or protection rackets.
It is a racket in that unneeded services are involuntary imposed on a person and creates the condition (such as broken windows of a shop along a sidewalk or other vandalism, or peeping at women) then propose to protect the victim against the crimes they themselves comit, in my case offering to settle the false claims they create as fraud with my own DNA to their victims) Money Laundering is often a feature of RICO in that the assets being fraudulently moved around are done in dummy accounts where it is out of direct view of tracing.
In fact not only do I not want the modeling of women who jump in front of me in public, those very models planted in public are designed to stigmatize me as having interests I do not have and are part of social sabotage of me to women who otherwise I would be in relationships with, but I am socially sabotaged to.
Because it is an embezzlement scheme harassing me but without accounting to me I need to get my foot inside the door of any embassy to make case on this, and that has not happened yet.
We agreed that rather than I pay her for a the BDSM Eros lap-dance like erotic scene with a dominatrix, not prostitution, that , 1 would compensate the erotic lap dance by allowing it to be filmed which then she could market commercially.
Veronica Hoffman created pool picks on her web site, likely the impersonator of me who took over her contacts with forged a deal for my DNA after the impersonator of me was blackmailed for pool peaking.
Bolstering the Impersonations Theft of my clothes and use of architectural analogs of where I really live or break-ins to where I live bolster the identity theft the forger of agreements makes use of.
This is only detectable over time because the purpose of defaming me is also served by public innuendo references to alleged acts of mine.
Dislocations Placement Displacement Replacement Extended Stay | My Card Key paper folder list room 400, My card key does not work at Springfield VA I | though exactly as I checkin scuzsy black and |400.
I go to lobby and my card check, card key | white female leave for elevators a minute key is fixed to 400.
I have to pay for and book an I book a flight | I can not board, no passport,and modification | entirely new flight on an to Canada to NYC is denied impersonators name, not my own The same happened in Casa Linda Apartments and everywhere I go and everything I do.
Illustrated, Dislocation of Bedroom Leased I an “assigned” to one room, a corner room, to a Salinas house.
The plan is changed and I lease the room at the end of the hall in a comer of the house.
International Scheme The scheme is international in nature and criminal in nature and fit definitions of the Rome Statute and other law regarding criminal acts as well.
Daseeen OBama Jr. (via 6 IVE of e Edward Paul Donegan Edward named after his grandfather, a hidden royal on one Surrogate Eva Ban) ... and continuing into the Obama and other children, side of the family or Donegan DNA given other I was told in up by impersonators youth. of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized.
The Illuminati Diagraphs Let me wrap the above table from earlier to the right and to the bottom with an Espionage theory backed totally by publiclyl available facts, verifiable facts, and a confirmable Espionage hypothesis.
Glorian With Glorian With Espionage JAMES PAUL MALCOM X Problem DONEGAN F Glorian e Barack Donegan ° Thomas OBama the mother Neil Jr. (via of Barack Donegan IVF of Obama, Ed Surrogate Donegan e Edward Eva Ban) | the brother Paul aka King | of Barack Donegan Hussien Obama Obama of Black Edward Wet named after his Sands of grandfather, a Iran (and hidden royal on also one side of the Edward Donegan IVF FEB 20 1961, Valarie family or other | Edward birth NOV 18, her birthday Jerret I was told in youth.
The Illuminati Diagraphs genetic family) or elsewhere ... and continuing into the Obama and other children, Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized.
That is why they were killed, Tom Clancy was working on sy ; here 5 7 Google knowledge panel retrieved from what does clancy mean and copied or modified to Clancy is an Irish name coming from the Gaelic Mac Fhlannchaidh/Mac Fhlannchadha, ; Meaning “Son of the red/ruddy warrior” (Mac being for sons, Ni Fhlannchaidh/Ni ; Fhlannchadha would be for daughters), or as a hypocorism for Clarence.
But it was replete ith fact and exposed the Saudi Muslim plant in the White House and the direct funding that went into it.
King, 53, also alleges that Clancy has not hired an agent for the books, has refused to omote them and has blocked potential television spinoffs and a hardcover book deal for the series.
It was never an issue that the Marital Trust qualified for the marital deduction and should : be spared of all tax.
Model of Cover Ops in public and in state offices and using surveillance of me for which no basis and no basis has been shown to me or presented to me. original 10/06/13 interview with Dr.
How Obamacare Will Be Used To Destroy The United States Constitution | i I : Ontonight’s The Wise Shall Understand Radio Broadcast, our guest was Dr.
REMOVED,” SOURCE. jim-garrow-litmus-test-cia-covert-operative-obama-valerie-jarrett Dr.
In addition to revealing that Andrew Breitbart had been killed under orders from Obama ; administration officials, he also said that spy thriller novelist Tom Clancy had also be killed ; in much the same way, and for the same reasons.
This is why, Garrow said, that all of Obama’s education records have been permanently 1 sealed.
I now believe this program was MKULTRA, the DARPA program to defeat White Supremacism and Genocide by repairing the genomic gaps that formed from unequal evolutionary experiences across the globe.
I believe DARPA found black masons and others tied to the original MKULTRA affecting my family and now these same world masons tied interests will kill people like Judge Roll, Justice Scalia, Thomas C Wales, and others in the dual goal to e Conceal the genomic evidence of the original MKULTRA e¢ Continue MKULTRA around the world and forever erode racism by elimination of racial gaps.
PropagandaDue < Propaganda Due was a Masonic lodge under the Grand Orient of italy, founded in 1877. tts Masonic charter was withdrawn in 1976, and it transformed into a clandestine, pseudo-Masonic, ultraright organization operating in contravention of Article 18 of the Constitution of Italy that banned secret associations.
Continents — Race — IQ Conditions — Economic Conditions — Political Conditions War Conditions — ICBMs This is what the Illuminati see and are trying to engineer and now are caught in their mistakes and lies.
The battle for Sub Saharan Africa by the Vatican is part of this major struggle now, and on CIA leak sites there is information about the United States preparing super soldier for WWIII against the Russians.
In America He's a biker attorney who specialized in getting Smletime defendants off.
Espionage and my February 20 November 18 December 13 Family Fertilization History Drawing upon both Jenniefer Moore aka Task Force and my own life with my mother Glorian, adopted into the Dew family of South Carolina, I believe she carried the FOXP2 gene obtained from Maria Von Trapp and LONDON KE Speech impaired King Edward VII and the descendents of King George, when Prince Edward was in Londong in 1927 he impregnated Maria Von Trapp about 1926 and he had a reputation for that kind of activity.
On my father’s side he worked in MKULTRA I believe, the Manhattan Project a longitudinal line across Hawaii to New Mexican and Arizona where the first atomic bombs were built and tested, including ration affects on DNA and I would later in life end up in a dispuate between the Department of Energy and National INstitute of Health Human Genome program as odd DNA issues and racially motivated reproductive harassment surrounded my life.
THe CIA, Mossad, and Russians all seem to have some theories about Obama family ties to this, and earlier CIA OSS Vatican and Windsor ties to all this, including close ties between King Edward VIII, Nazi Germany, Spanish Illuminati Opus Dei, and others, and now possible ties to MI5 and MI6.
In June 2021 a report from an Associated Press investigation found that at least 1,900 United States i military firearms were lost or stolen.
On June 23, 2021, Milley attracted notice for telling Congressman Matt Gaetz that he found it “offensive” that the United States military was being characterized as “woke” for including “critical race theory” in its West Point curriculum; “I want to understand white rage and i I’m white.
CIA and Other Espionage Acts I Assert Quis custodiet ipsos custodes FBI recruitment of Malcom X CIA use of Sidney Gottlieb DOD CENCTCOM DAPRA Activities Secret Service tied to Catholic Mafia Colin Powell, married 1962 to Alma Powell, hearing and speech worker, like Sydney Gottlieb,living and working in Boston Ma at that time.
Their church was bummed in 2008, possibly to destroy any possible birth records there.
Jen Moore saw it before the side bars blocked the planter at Stay and Play oe i el The Mysterious death of Dr.
Over the weekend, de facto ; movement leader Orly Taitz released a photo of what is supposedly a ; certified copy of a Kenyan birth certificate for President Obama, which » shows that he was born in Mombasa, Kenya, and not in Hawaii.
Died in the Camp Bastion attack 3 days after the Benghazi attack Forces News 367K subscribers It was once the largest British overseas military base on the planet, with around 114,000 personnel living and working at Camp Bastion in Afghanistan since April 2007.
The Taliban claimed that the raid was in response to the film, Innocence of Muslims, and have also stated that Prince Harry, who was stationed at the base at the time, was the target of the attack.
Marco McMillian was a businessman and candidate for mayor of Clarksdale, Mississippi in 2013.
A prominent figure in Tunisia’s Salafist movement arrest for an attack on the United States embassy, his lawyer and the justice ministry have said.
Two other black members of Trinity Church Murdered at the same time Report: Mother Of Obama’s Murdered Gay Lover Speaks Up With Video Jeff Fort , also known as Abdul Malik Ka’bah, is an American former gang leader from Chicago, Illinois.
Apr 22, 2010 The Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy has pulled together an all-star line-up of best-selling authors for the 16th Annual Celebration Tom Clancy Dies at 66; actual list of cause of death on his autopsy, cause of death unknown.
Amazingly enough, or coincidentally, the doctors did not perform an autopsy on Tom Clancy’s body for 5 days.
Obama’s Rules Of Engagement Killing Our Troops Spreading Extorted DNA in Africa, alleged extorted from Edward Donegan for non white brain development use and other medical use.
Officials still trying to determine Fuddy’s cause of death ; Obama’s land in Hawaii as the NTSB investigates the cause of death; NTSB Chairman Deborah Hersmanis Obama appointee that only reports to Obama.
That article says that the plane went down at about 3:45....within 40 minutes of the plane going down it was reported on the news, and within 55 minutes it was reported that there was one casualty.
AUGUST 26, 1959, Little Rock, ARa close friend of Bill and Hillary Clinton and a Clinton super delegate at an upcoming convention in Denver and was fatally shot in 2008.
Hastings crash ‘consistent with a car cyberattack’ ; Group sues FBI for records after Investigating CIA Director John Brennan ; CIA Director Brennan Confirmed as Reporter Michael Hastings Next Target ; Coroner Classifies Michael Hastings’ Death As Accidental ; Coronor: Drugs in Hastings’ system.
Report ; Mystery grows: Journalist died prepping ~m> | ee 8 oe ee a » @ Working with Victoria Windsor on ancestry issues and Obama : , * : | | Hazem: ‘Benghazi attack suspect’ dies in Cairo shootout Barnaby Jack: Hacker found dead days before he was to demonstrate how to hack a pacemaker Stephanie Tubbs Jones: found brain dead in 2008.
Hillary supporter’s untold Obama horror stories Allegations of intimidation, manipulation, sudden death Christopher Kelly Committed suicide, under pressure to testify against former Gov.
Giffords hit a planned assassination: Judge Roll real target ;Judge John Roll Wake Up Tucson Michael Scott Although Chicago school board president Michael Scott’s death had been ruled a suicide by the Cook County medical examiner’s office, Chicago police characterized the case as a death investigation, and have not concluded that Scott’s death was a suicidewas subpoenaed to testify before a federal grand jury looking into the admissions practices of Chicago’s elite schools. -also was under scrutiny. over Olympics-related real estate dealings.
United States Navy SEAL commander dies in Afghanistan: suicide —SEAL Team Four commander in Afghanistan ‘commits suicide’ as body of married father is found shot dead: Rumor?Clinton Injured, United States Navy Seal Killed In Secret United States Mission To Iran ; State Department_Denies Hillary Clinton Injured in Plane Crash ... butABC News Report on Emergency Landing of a United States Plane in Iran 16 days earlier ; United States Navy Seal Commander, Who Killed Osama Bin Laden, Commits ‘Apparent Suicide’ In Afghanistan SEAL Team 6: Helicoptor shot down by terrorists.
Obama_skipped intel meetings for days leading up to the attacks despite credible information of the attacks.
Libyan democratic party. spokesman: amb christopher stevens was a muslim (Statement that Ambassador Chris Stevens was a Muslim is made between 1:00 &amp;amp; 1:20); Col.
Bomb targets United States mission in Libya’s Benghazi ; United States Consulate in Libya Bombed Twice in Run-Up to 9/11 Attack, Ambassador Known Target ; Obama to UN: It’s Not My Fault Stevens is Dead ; Obama Administration Knew Libya Attack Was Terrorism Within 24 Hours ; Obama Administration Deleted State Dept.
Chaired a committee that stops Agenda 21 legislation in committe:_Anti-Agenda 21 Bill Dies in Mississippi House Committee Chaired by_Rep.
Jessica Upshaw ; Was directing BP oil spill fine money ; ‘kills herself’_at home of former lawmaker...fifth Mississipi legislator to die in the last few months A lawsuit filed Tuesday against Boeing and Southern California Edison alleges that the two companies failed to protect the public from the threat that fire posed at the Santa Susana Field Lab, a former rocket testing facility where the devastating Woolsey fire broke out in November.
Friends and associates of Mr Zhitomirskiy said there were indications of suicide.
Here ) Camp Bastion: Jihad Friday gets bloodier: Attack on Camp Bastion in Afghanistan, 2 Marines reportedly killed ; Deafening silence about the Camp Bastion attack ; Camp Bastion Families Want Answers About Afghanistan ; Uncovering the Camp Bastion cover-up ; Two Marine generals fired in wake of brazen Taliban attack on Camp Bastion Prince Harry, 27, has been deployed at Camp Bastion as a military helicopter pilot.
No ‘Assault Rifle’ Used in Newtown Shooting ; Still No Police Report, or Toxicology Results, on Sandy Hook Killer ; Sandy Hook Elementary_shooter has no brain deformities, medical examiner says ; Shooting ; Newtown Is Hometown of Sugarmann; His Group Seeks Assault Weapons BanJosh Sugermann founded Violence Policy Center after leaving The Coalition to Ban Handguns in 1988.
Private military operatives hired to ‘work’ the Boston marathon with black backpacks, radiation detectors, tactical gear ; Psyops: Mind Control Marathon and Boston Bombings ; Boston Bombings a ‘Gift’ to Putin, Says Chechen Opposition Leader ; Report: Federal Judge Tamerlan Tsarnaev Triple Murders Were ALL Jews Targeted for Religion on 10th Anniv of 9/11....-Three mourned after brutal Waltham murder ; Newtown shooter toxicology results released ; Whistle blower Joseph Hook shooting investigation ; Psychiatrist who treated Adam Lanza surrendered license and is now living in New Zealand.
FBI officers went to Adam Lanza’s home in 2004 to ask him about how he ‘he’s a computer whiz who’s just testing himself’ United States Terror-Storm Lurking as Possible False Flag Averted...... —Roy.
Antigua, recently arrested with a plethora of fake ID’s, and disguises, including medical smocks, and other outfits.
Jim Garrow details among the recent murders are Tom Clancy, Andrew Breitbart, and journalist Michael Hastings.Interview with Alex Jones; Forcing military to resign if they ‘refuse to fire on American citizens’, disarmament of civilians, destruction of the American Democracy, inviting Chinese military to disarm the population, Dr.
Jim Garrow Obama Hoax Debunk’d Refutations, by Gordon Duff, Senior Editor Veterans Today.
Half the deadliest shootings in United States history happened in past six years ; see: Obama vs.
A previous novel published in 2003, “Lakefront Airport, New Orleans,” detailed his claimed experience as a pilot for the United States during Iran/Contra. claims to have served as a contract pilot for the CIA’s Special Activities Division during the Iran-Contra affair, flying shipments to and from Nicaragua.
Obama Doesn’t Care If Immigration Enforcement Officers Die Tim Russert: Died of a massive heart attack... just before the 2008 presidential debates, that he might have moderated.
Te ioe © 8 8 8 Ue he UU Uh Ue Ue UE UG UG he UU Ue UU UG UU UU Ue UU UG Ue UU 4 Liz Cheney Lied About Her Role in Spreading the Discredited CIA “Russian Bounty” Story retrieved from Glenn Greenwald and copied or modified to here In an interview on Tuesday with Fox News’ Bret Baier, Rep.
Liz Cheney denied that she spread the discredited CIA “Russian bounty” story.
And what we’ve seen recently that has raised our level of concern to the current state of unrest, if you will, if I can put it in those terms, is that he now is trying, through his illicit procurement network, to acquire the equipment he needs to be able to enrich uranium to make the bombs.
TD Yet some time probing the affairs of First American here in i Chicago suggests that the FDIC’s bland recitation conceals a much more 1 interesting story.
Jackson’s childhood home in Gary, Indiana, pictured in March 2010 with floral tributes after his death Michael Joseph Jackson was born in Gary, Indiana, near Chicago, on August 29, 1958.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia My experience in San Francisco, Arlington VA, and COrpus CHristi Texas, Austin TX too is that the social services including with Religious Services as part of it and creating the gangstalk.
I said a swwrm of riff raff was following me I suspected from Virginia Social Services and their activity in the area was likely to be attributed to me and make me look bad by my also being in the area.
Upon returning to Durban, she reportedly felt unwell and went to the hospital, where she 0 died not long thereafter. t i A World Health Organization driver named Pyae Sone Win Maung also ; died back in May while transporting coronavirus samples for the United Nations.
Two airmen P ' were wounded in the incident, it said. ; i Buckley AFB in Aurora, Colorado, is the closest military base to the scene of the} shootings.
Buckley. : | | i | | | | | About 10,000 troops including members of the Air Force, Army and Marine : Corps are stationed at Buckley.
Soon after the shooting, the base initiated a head ; count, Lavoie said.
Colorado’s strong space, defense industries continue to act as magnet for companies retrieved from link and copied or modified to here zi By JUDITH KOHLER | jkohler@denverpost.com | The Denver Post FEBRUARY 1, 2020 at 12:00m.
NO When Booz Allen Hamilton was looking to expand its operations in Colorado, Aurora made sense because of its proximity to Buckley Air Force Base.
Trump, in his visit to Colorado Springs on Thursday, said he would make a decision on Space Command’s location by the end of the year.
In his ambitious drive to win a United States senatorial seat, state attorney general and now Senator Blumenthal broke the basic rules of mob cooperation.
Fraud is intentional Deception of protection of fallback explanations of Bunco activities.
INCULPATE accuse or blame. “he blamed himself, but also inculpated his fiancée” incriminate. “someone placed the pistol in your room in order to inculpate you” SUGGESTIVE tending to suggest an idea. “there were various suggestive pieces of evidence” Google Knowledge Panel indicative or evocative. “flavors suggestive of coffee and blackberry” making someone think of sex and sexual relationships . “a suggestive remark” FALLBACK an alternative plan that may be used in an emergency. a reduction or retreat.
This seems to fit that my father and mother had places in history as my parents parents have places in history and now powerful historic figures are using an architected but fraudulent system to claim the distribution rights and substantive rights to my genome and in this scheme of covert actors duplicitously placing themselves in forms of proximity to me are interested in false claim mechanisms to my genome, claim by processor and substance are falsely gained rights to my genome.
Wayne Madison has disseminated a lot of information on Barrack Omaba origins and the Human Brain DARPA program.
Kilbourne has also had a lifelong interest in non-scientific writing and has published humorous verses and essays in magazines for the general public.
Died NOVEMBER 19 Ira Michael Heyman, lawyer and college administrator (b.
Stephen Heymann Wikipediaen.wikipedia.org » wiki » Stephen_Heymann Stephen P Heymann is an attorney who formerly served as an Assistant United States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts.
The sinking of MV Conception occurred on September 2, 2019, when the 75-foot (23 m) dive boat caught fire and eventually sank off the coast of Santa Cruz Island, California, United States.
It is the worst maritime disaster in California since the sinking of the Brother Jonathan in 1865, and the deadliest in the United States overall since the USS Iowa turret explosion in 1989.
The trips include hosting the Sierra Club and various school groups seniors and kids alike enjoy the thrill of experiencing the Channel Islands for the first time onboard a Truth Aquatics vessel.
Through these and other types of trips showcasing what the region has to offer, Glen hopes to bring California diving back as a worldwide destination.
Mark Randall Meadows retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Official portrait of Rep.
The True Story of a Rare Dinosaur and the Home Schoolers » Who Found It.
The man purchased his airline ticket using the alias Dan Cooper but, because of a news miscommunication, became known in popular lore as D B Cooper.
The pilot, William A Scott , who had served in the United States Army Air Forces during World War II, contacted Seattl Tacoma Airport air traffic control, which informed local and federal authorities.
Schaffner described him as calm, polite, and well-spoken, not at all consistent with the stereotypes (enraged, hardened criminals or “take-me-to-Cuba” political dissidents) popularly associated with air piracy at the time.
Lycopodium spores (likely from a pharmaceutical product) were identified, as well as fragments of bismuth and aluminum.
He explained that titanium, which was much rarer in the 1970s than in the 2010s, was at that time found only in metal fabrication or production facilities, or at chemical companies using it to store extremely corrosive substances.
Bismuth titanate or bismuth titanium oxide is a solid inorganic compound of bismuth, titanium and oxygen with the chemical formula of Bi12TiO20, Bi 4Ti3012 or Bi2Ti207 Bismuth titanates exhibit electrooptical effect and photorefractive effect, that is, a reversible change in the refractive index under applied electric field or illumination, respectively.
Consequently, they have potential applications in reversible recording media for real-time holography or image processing applications.
Tweets Tweets & amp;amp; replies Media Likes Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to here 4 Jack Patrick Dorsey @Jack is an American technology entrepreneur and philanthropist who is the co-founder and CEO of Twitter, and the founder and CEO of Square, a financial payments company.
We previously reported that amyloidogenic light chain protein AL-09 adopts an altered dimer while its germline protein forms a canonical dimer observed in other light chain crystal structures.
M A DEAD MAN,” whispered Jerry Parks, pale with shock, as he looked up at the television screen.
At night he kept tearing anxiously at his i , eyebrows, and raiding the valium pills of his wife, Jane, who was battling multiple \ ' sclerosis.
WAPO * Mother of Dead Informant Awarded $100 Million FOXP2 — al Q-""~ ADH D Voice Mary Mahoney, and Eric Butera jymptoms ’ Mary was an intern for Bill Clintos, che was murdered July 7th, 1997, in a Starbucks where she was manager.
JULY 4, 1998 , Chicago, IL Murdered one year before birth of Malia Ann a Quote retrieved from link and copied or modified to here r~ two-week trial in United States District Court involved the slaying of Eric Butera, 31, an : informant who was robbed and then stomped to death while working with police on : Dec., 1997, in Southwest Washington.
Starbucks | a SEPARATE LIVES, JOINED IN DEATH retrieved from WAPO and copied or 1%, modified to here By Sari Horwitz; John W Fountain July 13, 1997 On the surface, the trio couldn’t have seemed more different.
They were gunned down execution-style in the back room of the Starbucks on ; Wisconsin Avenue in Georgetown, a trendy coffee shop in an affluent Washington ; neighborhood that is seldom touched by such violence. | t i Z Quote retrieved from link and copied or modified to here | rn Washington, where Ms.
Mahoney had worked for more than a year, and in i Baltimore, where her family still lives, loved ones tried yesterday to put her ebullient i life into words.
She was the one who gave leftover food to homeless people on her way home from | | | | | t t | ' her waitress job, who trekked across Alaska with her 74-year-old grandmother, who danced literally until dawn with friends most weekends.
Everyone in this tiny collection of stone huts at the base of Sved Ivan hears a plane go directly overhead in the clouds, then rev its engines mightily for one instant.
Aboard the plane, the klaxon of its ground-proximity warning device suddenly blares, jolting pilot Davis.
The plane’s left wingtip touches ground, spinning it directly into the rocky hillside, making an earth-shaking explosion.
There is the cackling hiss of a huge fireball as the plane and its large load of fuel burn.
The tail section remains quite intact, but the rest of IFOR-21 is all over the hill, making later identification of many of the passengers impossible.
All 35 people are dead except for stewardess Shelly Kelly, who is riding in the tail.
United States authorities are notified that IFOR-21 is down, location unknown.
However, they are to suffer 11 In hours of pre-planned confusion before arriving at the scene.
One prominent report verifies that pieces of the wreckage have been spotted floating in the Adriatic.
News reports say an attempt is made on the life of Ron Brown’s law partner, Tommy Boggs, by an unknown assailant in a staged car accident in Capetown.
Allegations have been made that Boggs was culpable in many of Brown’s activities.
Niko Jerkuic goes home to collect his reward, but the reward is not waiting for him.
The Americans do not want a live witness who could spill the beans later.
The quick official reason given for bachelor Jerkuic’s death is despondence over romantic troubles with his girlfriend.
Instead, I have found that neighbors and friends all agree Jerkuic was NOT depressed.
Four hours and 20 minutes after the crash, the first Croation Special Forces search party arrives on the scene.
When it arrives, Kelly is able to get on board without assistance from the medics.
According to multiple reports given to journalist/editor Joe L Jordan, an autopsy later reveals a neat three-inch incision over her main femoral artery.
It also shows the incision came at least three hours after all her other cuts and bruises.
This creates in your mind a horrifying scene in the back of the chopper, as one Special Forces operative holds down the struggling woman while another slice her leg.
Clinton ordered the cremation of all victims it’s hard to perform autopsies on ashes.
Gibbs’ older sister, Martha, recently spoke with reporters from The Daily Mail about her belief that Bill Clinton was responsible for the fire that killed her sister.
A fire alarm went off in the watch room of the i castle fire brigade, manned by the Chief Fire Officer, Marshall Smith.
Tower was lit up, but lights soon began to flash indicating that the fire had quickly ; spread to neighbouring rooms.
And if she has daughters, they will continue to pass on this donor DNA was 68 years old.
Sep 8, 2016 But the drama in Sully, the movie about the “Miracle on the Hudson” ditching of United States Airways Flight 1549, doesn't stop there.
And that's a problem Europe + Main section | Page 1549 of 1682 | World | The Guardian i //vevew Ahequardian.com/world/europe-news+thequardian/mainsection?...1549 + iracy theories point to president or dissident.
Lauderdale when, at approximately 4:30 pm, the car veered off the road.
The car then crossed three lanes of traffic and crashed into a row ' of trees in the median.
If you or a loved one are looking for help, please call the National Suicide Prevention hotline at 1-800-273-8255.
Blogger, researcher into ancestry By Miki Booth Dear Friends, It is with a heavy heart that I inform you that Victoria passed away this morning at 4:15AM after a sudden illness.
Monday, February 20, 1961 February 20, 1961 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Coo operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am in the Oval Office.
United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom March 8, 1938 October 22, 1940 1st Chair of the United States Maritime In office April 14, 1937 FEBRUARY 19, 1938 Died NOVEMBER 18, 1969 Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, United States ae More Wages Kathleen Cavendish < Marchioness of Hartington Kathleen Agnes Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington, also known as ""Kick"" Kennedy, was an American socialite.
Never-before-seen image of 1962 JFK’s motorcade through Seattle World’s Fair 1962 Century 21 Exposition in Queen Annes Seattle neighborhood tied to Queen Elizabeth of Windsor In 1962, Seattle hosted a world’s fair, the future-looking Century 21 Exposition.
Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewicz From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewic Panuary 12, 2011) was an American dog trainer.
J July 10th Lisa Riley, Doctor of Osteopathy, found in her home with a gunshot wound to her head.
Two intemationally known doctors about the connecton REDEFINING Dr Jeffrey Gradstrest, MD, an altemative autism specialist, and Dr onzalez MD. an allernative cancer specialist saw the fruth f the standard allopathic medical tism.
SEF SSeS SSS SSS Se ee eee ee ee eee ee eee ee eee Betpslwww.glbalresearch cafcancerand-autsm-mysterious-deths-of-altemative alth-doctors-who-have-real-cures-not-approved-by-the-fda/5465809 When agents from the USFDA and local state of Georgia law enforcement raided Dr.
A year later Australia burns ee, ee a a a a a a a a a pore British-American coup that ended Australian independence retrieved from ‘The Gaurdian and copied or modified to here | | | 1%. ro | 1 John Pilger | | ' Across the media and political establishment in Australia, a silence has descended on ; the memory of the great, reforming prime minister Gough Whitlam.
He believed that a foreign power ‘ should not control his country’s resources and dictate its economic and foreign | | i | | | | | | | i | | I | | I | | Australia briefly became an independent state during the Whitlam years, 1972-75.
The group has an inner circle who justify their actions by their claim to be reincarnations of the Apostles of Jesus.
During the late 1960s and the 1970s, Newhaven Hospital in Kew was a private psychiatric hospital owned and managed by Marion Villimek, a Santiniketan member; many of its staff and attending psychiatrists were also members.
Shock claim in latest WikiLeaks cables nuclear deal, has agreed to give the Kremlin the serial numbers of the missiles it gives Britain Photo: TAM MACDONALDM Worrying: WikiLeaks has revealed United States President Barack Obama used British nuclear secrets including that of the Trident missile in agreeing a treaty with Russia * Information about every Trident missile the United States supplies to Britain will be given to | | | | | i | | i I | i i | | | | HMS Vanguard is Britain’s lead Trident-armed submarine.
STROKE BEHIND BARS WikiLeaks founder Julian r—_Assange ‘suffers stroke in jail’ after court rules he can be lv extradited to America retrieved from thes.
Since the ministroke, Assange reportedly has had an MRI scan and is taking antistroke medication.
She says there are four other locations across the country with archives from the oblates, but B.C. has the bulk of the material.
Breaking and entering generally involves the use of force, however slight, to gain entry into a building or residence.
Trespass only requires an unauthorized entry onto someone else’s property, with or without forced entry.
In most states, there also has to be an intent to commit a crime for it to be breaking and entering.
Generally, breaking and entering is the crime of using force or fraud to gain access to a building, and then entering it in order to commit a crime.
Some states have criminal laws that forbid breaking and entering, specifically.
Instead, these states cover the act with other criminal statutes, like burglary.
To add even more complexity, in some states, burglary only requires entering a building.
The wide variation in state laws makes it important to discuss your particular case with a local criminal defense lawyer.
Trespassing is the crime of entering or remaining on someone else’s property without permission or a right to do so.
The prosecutor has to prove each of these elements beyond a reasonable doubt.
Additionally, different states can have different definitions of breaking and entering.
However, the differences can turn a relatively minor offense of trespassing into a more serious property crime.
An experienced criminal defense attorney can help fight the criminal charge.
Force or fraud Perhaps the most important difference between trespassing and breaking and entering is the use of force to gain entry.
Cases of trespass, even criminal trespass, do not require the use of force or fraud.
However, it is generally not considered to be breaking and entering when someone enters without using force because there was already an opening.
Steven reaches through an open car window and steals a tape cassette 5 player.
Some states, like California, have burglary laws that cover conduct that used to be considered breaking and entering.
Breaking and entering can also be done through fraud, rather than through force.
Coercing or tricking someone into allowing a defendant to enter does not make the entry a lawful one.
Buildings While trespassing can happen anywhere on someone else’s property, breaking and entering generally has to involve a building.
The reason for this difference is that the law of breaking and entering is designed to protect people.
Therefore, courts have required that the | building or structure be large enough to accommodate a person,® and could actually be lived in.
However, | the property owner does not have to be inside at the time of the offense for it to be breaking and entering, 10 Intent to commit a crime The crime of breaking and entering generally requires an intent to commit another crime usually robbery, theft, or arson.
Many other states, including California, require an intent to commit a felony or a theft or larceny crime while inside.
Because breaking and entering is a more severe type of criminal offense than mere trespassing, the penalties of a conviction are also higher.
In California, for example, the crime of entering a structure or vehicle with the intent to commit a felony or theft is considered burglary.
Whether charged with trespass or breaking and entering, defendants should strongly consider establishing an attorney-client relationship with a criminal defense lawyer from a reputable law firm and getting their legal advice for how to proceed.
Bruce’s Beach can return to descendants of Black family in landmark move signed by Newsom LA Times * n September, California Gov.
Gavin Newsom signed a law that authorized the return of shorefront land known as Bruce’s Beach to the descendants of a Black couple who were run out of Manhattan Beach nearly a century ago.
I came to Corpus Christi in 2015 and asked the ARC of NOVA TRust fund for money to buy a sailbord capable suv wagon and wanted to start windsurfing.
CCRTA.org transgener male 8 Floor moved in w iB Incursion Rottan Edwards lives 7 and has fantasies a Royal Confusion between floor boundaries Read Ed Donegan blurred with 7 by incursions trespass of vague boundary Not picture but next to the yellow and blue building I live in Pushing the apt number lable towards the ceiling helps the tresspass incursion accross the ceiling to floor line and ""moves"" 5 into 7 where 7 is then as 5 peeping at the beachgoers.
The capital homicides of Jen Moore and Corpus Christi street person Jimmy I contineu to assert black marketing brain genes and designer babies, slush funds, and politicians in slush funds a mafia activities have no place. @sftomdunham and I are white hats defeated by black hats.
Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events Public perception Nodes Suggestive or story telling element Nodes believing suggestive fraud Suggestive narrative 5 (fraudulent and vague dual construction narrative or narration element) On the way to Jim Vocelka’s adult dungeon residence it was made to look like I was into child porn and I should be denied rental after a period of shskind down for a while.
Bobby Courtney was used to dopple me in strip clubs and was also beaten to death. .o Narrative at William Ruiz.
In the Long Con and Stages of the Con gaining building access or other buildings to use as sets, fake residents, etc., all go into the Long Con.
The black Hispanic county prosecutor recused himself in the murder case his outlaw motorcycle gang is accused of and tweets “fuck the police” in urban slang.
Austin and the fight against seeming White Supremacist Perpetrator Networks Planted out side my door, KOMPROMAT unrelated to my politics but based on predation on, retaliation for, my politics Ordered away from my lease on the flimsy excuse I was a day late She “feels for children” it seems because her name is Cynthia Nino.
Curious that Ayn Rand was a Russian Jew though she was an atheist, likely not indoctrinated by her family (good, some say that was the “error” of Jim Donegan not indoctrinating me I don’t think so) and she really didn’t feel antisemitism should play a role nor any other religious sentiment in free society of respecting free choice.
This is the question, the challenge, Jim Volcelka challenged me to solve and I think it is that legitimacy must exist for my genome to others if that has ALREADY happened why not make it legal, and I think that includes the Obama family and other Illuminati Family who want my genome undetected and used from me but legitimized in others.
Forgeries in misrpresenting a fake product as authentic In a television documentary on the case it was noted a certificate of proof of authenticity of a violin’s origin was valid but not for the violin being represented.
Alleging ‘a taxation fraud perpetrated by an eminent American collector with Mr Machold’s collusion’ ILLUSION Something ur untrue that ous see as true.
RICO scheme in Nueces From the moment I saw Corpus Christi I was vomiting at the site of it and trying to leave.
Next the fake hero will say he or she was the one found evidence Edward Paul Donegan peeped, and this same person who DID peep is now the hero of the scene, and will report the event to my trust fund which will reward the fake hero, the victim, and defame Edward Paul Donegan who has both eroticzed and harmed minors and minorities.
RICO scheme in Nueces My view blocked by some obstacle (wall, hallway and other apartements, etc.,) but a peeper Out of my control a tot or other is PLACED IN MY View, actual visble line of sight and again, the peeper is NOT me but the tot is IN FRAME with me and the peeper not conclusively proved to be me is presumed under the NDAA to be me.
An adult entertainer Identity Thief in my identity has a view of Perhaps takes over date with female I was going to meet in that location Normal Cities and normal life denied as tot peeping is alleged to me.
The apartment has been pre stocked, before my move in, with Gas Station and Dumpster North Side 40 racial race bating provocateurs describing blacks as the power race, a black male in unit 49, same move in date as me, who along with others in Corpus Christi made statemenets like “it will be us who will be eating tacos, not you.” 1511 and 1513 Ocean Dr Two story quad 1-4 is at the front towards the bay and a single stairwell.
It appears I have the kind of Adaptive Intelligence that can value add to a $25.00 USD bookcase and turn into a thing of value.
He needs a bolt to fix the handle bar mirror” to the store clerk, a black female was at the register with a cheap shot grin, and the two women almost touch me among three isles of bolt draws, all other isles empty were saying (cluing me into that they were social workers) “I feel like this one would be the one that would fit it” and they did realize they were satirizing themselves.
The manufacture of confusion is the art of Bunko and I will have a full chapter and the sapient architecture of a complex “sperm bank” long con using corrupt law enforcement and profiteering shills.
The presence of Barack Obama thank you card there and the totality of my life leads me to concluding Espionage is harassing my normal access to reproductive life as I am beat out to just about any connection or project or other activity I start towards via an espionage take over of it.
The Department currently administers $2 billion through for-profit, nonprofit, and local government partnerships to deliver local housing and community-based opportunities and assistance to Texans in need.
The overwhelming majority of the Department's resources are derived from mortgage revenue bond financing and refinancing, federal grants, and federal tax credits.
Many Legal Aid Offices also operate legal clinics or hotline services to better serve the public.
Just as I was on my way to pay rent at Stay and Play a Crisis Actor Team created a crisis to road black that, and the same happened as I was trying to move to Austin, but a fake crisis blocked my getting to Austin when the fake crisis got their first and me kicked out before I got there.
A fake peeping incident handled by “Cynthia Nino” allegedly protection children (which I can not get away from even at Stay and Play) would get me away from adult women as though “my balls had been cut off” by those black nationalist who keep threatening me, as they said.
Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events Public perception Suggestive or story telling element |Nodes| believing suggestive fraud a ee Suggestive narrative 5 (fraudulent and vague dual construction narrative or narration element) es | On the way to Jim Vocelka’s adult dungeon residence it was made to look like I was into child porn and I should be denied rental after a period of shskind down for a while.
Cynthia Nino 4.5/5 Fraudulent chains of events, Cynthia Nino stopping my adult life with adult vaguely hints she is protecting children from me On the way to my new apartment in Austin property was stolen or gained from Corpus Christi I and placed at Austin in III so instead of me in Austin as II it by flse narragtive was that I was in Austin as IV a child harmer.
On the way to Jim Vocelka’s adult dungeon residence it was made to look like I was into child porn and I should be denied rental after a period of shakedown for a while.
Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events Public perception believing suggestive Suggestive narrative 5 (fraudulent and vague dual construction narrative or narration element) Leasing Manager Ballpark West Apartments 1600 Wickersham Lane Austin, TX 78741 (ordered me off the property of my lease as I was there with my moving truck and belongings with threats of police action if I stayed.
Because the “legend” of peeping is alleged then my dna is due to blacks and I must be removed from women being around me.
I am then charged (by their protection racket) for that act of that “zoom photographer” who took the picture I am not interested in.
Then, acting on “all peoples safety” I am moved into homeless shelters and county programs which will manage my IQ genes, etc., for me. eep Wrangler JK Freedom build-out Ed Donegan edinarlington@gmail.com Attachments Sun, May 6, 6:30 PM to Raphael, Tia, Trinitas, rgaytan THe base is Jeep Wrangler 4 door, red, 17 inch wheels. (pls confirm 4 door at every phase.
In absurdity they simply deny their are moving white women away from me even when they assault white woman, assault her, threaten to arrest her, or shout a death threat at me.
North 4th Floor 1x1 I live in discreet non adjoing units which are Quauntum Tunneled incursion system where from close enough to me the borders can be violated in some way for others near me to create blur moving their liabilties to me and my assets to them.
Bedrrom | of foundation when work was Unit 6 | Kitchen under Ist Emotv | #5 towards |done on 6. 6 seems to have floor to Ply closet entrance to upstairs 1513.
Floor ok in 1513 #45 1513 Floor OK My rental of it and planned and actual use of it To understand it you must first my “I just had a heat attack and it changed my life” lifestyle.
Meeting her in the park I though by coincidence I said to her I took the A1c 33. thing seriously, getting the number scale I was just starting to learn wrong and the numerals jumbled.
In fact on reading the symptoms I joined the gym went to lean meats, cut the drinking, and started working out the the hard driving music I already listened to and let Auto-play find me more during the free hours i had, even budgeting time in the day at home for gym music music hunt on YouTube.
That has been my lifestyle ever since using the area around 1001 N Water St #46 and the Marina and Sea Wall as an exercise platform, as I made a par course out of Arlington Virginia running foothills, running Goff Courses ad I did in my 30s, and making gym equipment out of outdoor fixtures like fences like Le Mans drivers make race course out of city street, and I photographed the outdoors I loved being in too, always like the good times with my father in the Sierra Mountains, hiking, biking, and skiing.
Unit 43 has non building standard number stickers as apartment unit 4A has standard and sticker, Compositing (described in a later chapter) may fuse 43, 48, and 4B Indoor hallway Ed Moves Into 46 How the Townsfolk used my presence One of the last times tried to use the outdoors I nearly lost my hand to a downward spiral of the abusive false claims treatment I was receiving from the area.
Even if I had not been attacked on the street by a group of people a legal risk or social risk to me exists as the entire scene can social engineer people regarding me and get gym memberships or apartments canceled on whisper campaigns about what is alleged about me.
The OECD piece of all this The scientific articles I poured through reading about diabetes, about insulin resistance, number mechanisms of cell, metabolizing carbohydrates, Syndrome X, sports nutrition and sports medicine, all where amazing fightback against diabetes, but like fixing up a dive apartment, others are hostile to recognizing me as a contributor and instead harass me with hostile defaming and entangling actions towards me.
Spmeboday allegedly babysitting me as though I am retarded has realized others could fix up the apartment as i have and realize a capital gains in the held asset value, though I made the improvements, the buidling management would not even fix what was broken, my being in the apartment still showed its potential worth above what it was valued at.
Remainder beneficiary When the trust ends (usually upon the beneficiary’s death), the remainder beneficiaries are the individuals who will receive any remaining trust assets.
If I work normally in normal cities in normal high tech jobs I am not disabled under the law under the general mental health system if he is a danger to himself or is a danger to other, then becomes subjected to behavioral health car and asset management as well.
Law Enforcement and Social Services Role in This Operation If Ed Donegan were retarded, deveopmentally retarded, not able to function or produce wealth or income, no income oppurtunities presenting themselves, let’s say, he might be take to a Dominatrix or sex worker for sex therapy, to be shown “female parts” and to also be caught by the white dominatrix or sex worker with child pom.
Because the photo exploitation victim female, the male who in my identity and in my vicinity photographed the victim, and away from my vicinity confessed to sex worker while in my identity do not need need to involve me this occurring in my vicinity is more to get the adult sex worker or any other female or normal life to consider me to be poisonous and quickly reject me on the rumors created by the Law Enforcement distributed allegations of me.
This book Counterfeiting Forgeries Money Laundering used in Ukrainian Fraud A racial hate crime COINTELPRO operations has been organized against me which is supposed to define me and defeat me and this is likely because my genome has been used in blacks and whites who do not wish be associated with the Kutscheras by attributes but do wish me defined by Kutschera attributes and defeated and disavowed.
Wire fraud, welfare fraud, phusical assault, sexual assault by planted operatives who have access to common property of sole posession property.
A racket is a service that is fraudulently offered to solve a problem, such as for a ; problem that does not actually exist, that will not be put into effect, or that would ‘ not otherwise exist if the racket did not exist.
If a manager of assets can insert itself as a conservator in layer of finances to become co-mingled with me and my asset by forced team they can assert they are required by law to continue to entangle, forced-team, with me and my assets.
Abusive Gaurdianship after sabotage of finances This book asserts criminal breaking and entering of my home to create false but actionable legal claims against me or rather my trust fund, that those claims are fenced via a Sting operation run at a child porn peeping house where deals made "" with my trust fund satisfy false claims against it , the false claims brought to that i tree house of child porn which is not my home but a fencing operation location.
Your family, house, neighborhood, school, and people you hang out with make up your milieu.
If you live in a mansion and have rich friends, you’re part of the upper crust milieu.
Sometimes a milieu shapes a person, as when a “milieu of abuse and poverty,” inspires someone to improve things for others.
Milieu sounds a lot like mildew without the “d,” but unless you grew up in a moldy bathtub, mildew probably has little to do with your milieu, or environment.
Wr] Counterfeit retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here OE r Fo counterfeit means to imitate something authentic, with the intent to steal, i destroy, or replace the original, for use in illegal transactions, or otherwise to deceive individuals into believing that the fake is of equal or greater value than the real thing.
Counterfeit products are fakes or unauthorized replicas of the real product.
Counterfeit products are often produced with the intent to take advantage of the superior value of the imitated product.
For example, if there are two forms of commodity money in circulation, which are accepted by law as having similar face value, the more valuable commodity will gradually disappear from circulation.
It is my belief that a self funding Racket was created to surround me with hostile people which served several functions the most sought one was the the funded RICO operatives could motivated themselves and empower themselves in a fraud of self gain exploiting assets of mine which displaced normal life for me which would have existed otherwise.
The bad money which is forgery by under seignorage ( of great value after it is forged) is desired over regular law abing commerce and has replaced law abiding commerce and currency.
The forged currency is seen as a Good and is counterfiet to the real currency but provides a higher return.
The process of Forgery is a document is started such as Drivers Liscense application and then in some way road blocked before completion in a contiguous A way.
Falling into the wrong hands the documents is later completed but with ' incorrect data entered into as the second stage of its manufacture.
Counterfeiting misrepresents aggreements or transactions as authentic or have some meaning they do not.
Money Laundering is using these techniques to create false accounting of transactions.
Rackets are entties which use these techniques to illegal fraudulent gains.
Seigniorage Seigniorage /‘seInjorid3/, also spelled seignorage or seigneurage (from the Old French seigneuriage, “right of the lord to mint money”), is the difference between the value of money and the cost to produce and distribute it.
If rights to a sought after genome can be faked the value of it to others may be very hight and thus a temptign crime for fraudsters to comit.
Whatever I do in my life, positives, is given a poison pill of being an act of child abuse, shizophrenia, etc., thus assassination my character and making me a pariah to civilized environments and undermines my life.
Knowing I had lethal Alc levels and a prescription from my board certified Internets M.D. for exorcize and diet and blood sugar manage to stave off death Tom Donegan and Tia Marsili become the road block to housing, leading to homelessness, denial of gym funds, denial of diabetes expenses of any type My mother’s will and trust fund of about 333K dollars in assets was the sale of her Moraga Caolifornia bouse likely sized in the Judge Roll case and the desperation of Gneome Cartel to seize that asset.
If Tom Donegan, Metro Churches or Methodists, or other Church groups and others claim my mother’s will was not just for the half the value of the sale of her house at death but also somehow rights to her genome, I was never told about any value in her geonome, then I died, he had my half of the estate for their retarded peoples fund as the remainder benefit if I died as a Single man and btw soon.
If you read Page 1 is says that the initial term of the contract is the first month, sept 1 through 30, then the bill repeats each month by electronic funds transfer unless cancelled.
The non victims of the peeping tom provocateurs will be paid through my trust fund. and racial hatred as if I offended will be directed at me.
One way Homeboy in the identity of Ed Donegan might get caught is to go to a Glamm Domme who believes Homeboy Lives Matter (much more so than peeping white supremacists) and that Glamm Dome will catch Homeboy (who is in the role of Ed Donegan and needs a sex worker) wiht that child porn in his porn folder, thus vamping Ed Donegan’s trust fund.
While a Protection Racket creates a danger and then charges to protect against it a Money Laundering RICO uses its position of operating multiple accounts to swith unlawfully between them so that in the accounting shell game slight of hands the accounts appear to be correct.
It features many Confidence Tricks elements such as selecting Gulls in advance A for a particular type of scam which has been rehearsed again and again, using Gulls who are in emotional and quick decisions states, and a team of Shills rather than just one con artist.
Donegan, shaking it down in with long term preperation, resources, and complex , sustaining efforts to keep the Con running.
Prostitutes in the black market generally operate with some degree of secrecy, sometimes negotiating prices and activities through codewords [faked, I am not using them] and subtle gestures.
In other countries, such as Nicaragua, where legal prostitution is regulated, hotels may require both parties to identify themselves, to prevent the rise of child prostitution.
Organ trade § Illegal organ (or third party parents brain genes or other genes trade) According to the World Health Organization , illegal organ trade occurs when organs are removed from the body for the purpose of commercial transactions.
He also slyly indicated someone like him would manage a trust for me better than my brother.
Freercats Oeetech eee The Hobbs Act criminalizes both robery and extortion 1. “robbery” means the unlawful taking or obtaining of personal property from the person or in the presence of another, against his will, and i i | i i | i i | | i | i i | i i | i i | i i | i i | i | a ace ° ° i : 2. “extortion” means the obtaining of property from another, with his i ' consent, induced by wrongful use of actual or threatened force, 1 | i 4 violence, or fear, or under color of official right. : | i i | I | | i i i I 1 I I i i I | | i i i | I I i i | i i i i 3.
Government officials acting in sovereign capacity as government officials who gain personally from misconduct are not immune from liability and criminal intent to acheive personal gain is applicable as to state of mind in misconduct Errors of Reproductivity, The State Controls Fertilization Rights and Activities State Teloogical “emergency” control private reproductive rights and moves them into State owned assets for the elite and government backed causes.
And politicians choose whose DNA will be seized on fake claims organized by evidence plants. dola Polis En Parentis Loci For the NIH and Obama Admin to racketeer the value of my genome (and who does know it and will not disclose it to me) and pass it to White women it is necessary to make a publicly visible spectacle I am mentally incompetent, a spy or terrorist, thus medically and legally gaining control of my genome rights, and I must be sabotaged as somebody who can not be near white woman, or whom white women, potential partners of mine, should avoid like the plague.
Even the sauce was white Goes to actual home Pizza (female minor to photograph ala Bettie Page I am bankrupt and Pea Fugitive on |. ill pay the bill the run photo sessions) with my DNA Tx leaves and is chased to location he is at, fake Ed Donegan home, with Adult Entertainer, a fugitive.
Specifically, larceny is the unlawful taking of the property of another without the 1 permission of the owner coupled with the intent to permanently deprive the owner i of that property.
False pretenses is very ' similar to the theft crime of “larceny by trick,” which involves convincing someone i to transfer you possession of their property through deception. eee ee ee ee ee aa | ELECTIONS New FBI release on Clinton email probe refers to “Shadow Government’ PUBLISHED MON, OCT 17 201612:19 PM EDTUPDATED MON, OCT 17 20163:35 PM EDT Everett Rosenfeld The documents, part four of four to be released by the FBI, include notes and interview summaries that may illuminate more about the bureau’s decision not to recommend Clinton be prosecuted for her actions.
These religious charities are using their children as exploitation victims to gain advantage over an Atheist by an impersonator of the Atheist taking the bait.
Catholic Charities 55 Tanuchua #750 epresentive Payee for Disabled People Representative Payee Program Payees as provided by the United States Social Security Administration.
Representative Payee Program Keeps Homeless Numbers Down established 1971 | | | | | | | | | | | | ; Program Description We follow the Guide for Organizational Representative | | | | | | | | | | | | By becoming the Representative Payee, Catholic Charities assumes the financial 1 Management responsibilities for people who because of severe mental or physical ; limitations or may be subject to family exploitation, are unable to manage their own ; finances.
The Payee Program provides assistance to the most vulnerable members , of the community; the young, the elderly, and the disabled who are unable to ; manage their SSA, SSI, and or VA benefits. i] I, Edward Paul Donegan was homeless and without a payee when I was in Corpus Christi homeless Catholic Charities shelter.
I have repeatedly watched the local media ASSIST in the fabrication of deceptive public circumstances and other acts of fraud as well as allow those activities on the visible parts of their outdoor property and the refuse to remediate any of it or allow accept my complaints.
I hope instead the weed of crim bears bitter fruit and the risks of a town like this be understood unless their corrupt border official are held to account for running unsafe communities, to unsafe for “sringos” to move to.
BBC.com Trump ‘drifted away’ from constitution, says ex-military Colin and Alma Powell then and now | Celebrity couples, Alma Vivian Powell is an American audiologist and the wife of military and political figure Colin Powell , whom she married on August 25, 1962.
The basics are that I am around someone, someone I contacted (Veronica Hoffman though she dropped contact with me) or someone I don’t know approaching me (a woman here in Yoga pants riding on Metro and literally putting it in my face invading my space) and doing so very suggestively.
It seems to be as ass flashed (or sexually abusive treatment of me such as shouting in pain and saying I owe the shouter because that person is my pornography) at me.
People like Trinitas Nsabimana of Africa, Obama and Tom Donegan connected, seem to be put in place at places like ARC of Northern Virginia to arrange something with the blacks or sometimes gays, who may wish IVF rights based on some patterns which seem to occur.
Trinitas Nsabimana Ben Liakar, Ripe About Me CIA contractor illegal irregulars were used to kill Jen Moore and to assault me, drawn from Social Services Agencies (who are in a RICO scheme embezzling genes rights and the value of genes they do not own) because she and I were uncovering and reporting on the RICO scheme, its black budget coming from violent crimes connected racketeering.
I ask one question of a store clerk, a stranger near me asks a question as “another question .. ” thus trying to associate herself with me and my first question. e Items I am shopping for pause near me, such as cars or campers.
These are public shows out of my control staging events around me which are mere illusions.
The Mousetrap The Mousetrap Ten Little Indians is a 1965 British crime mystery (written by film directed by George Pollock.
It is the second Dysgraphic Agatha film version of Agatha Christie’s 1939 novel.
It is a murder was produced by Oliver A Unger, with co-producer | yslely play by Harry Alan Towers also credited as co-writer under [ gatha Christie.
Mousetrap opened in ILondon’s West End Ten people travel by aerial tramway to a in 1952, and has snowbound mansion, invited there by a Mr United Nations been running Owen to spend the weekend.
They continuously since discover that none of them has actually ever met hen.
The longestOwen, running West End Dinner is served by the butler Grohmann on a tray Show, it has by far adorned with ten little Indian figurines, as well.
At _ he longest initial run exactly 9m., as instructed, Grohmann switches on f any play in a hidden tape recording.
A man identifying himself history, with its as Owen reveals that each of the 10 guests has a 25,000th scandalous secret, their involvement in various performance taking innocent people’s deaths.
It appears Edward Donegan is taking the bait and owes victims DNA because he made vulnerbale people his photographic pornography.
She is ordered by a judge to submit to a DNA test, the "" result of which proves she is Dunlap’s child.
At the Dunlap home, Brittney hears a noise on her way to the wine cellar but it turns out to just be rats.
The trio are in cahoots, running a scam to secure a and share Dunlap’s fortune.
A Long Con backed by the CIA and others created a fake “Nest Egg” Trust Fund out of what was only a Sale of The Moraga House principle funded trust fund, about $323K, 42 Lambeth Square Moraga California.
With each new mistake you give the snowball a little nudge down the hill.
I will assert during this book that manufacture of fraud and forgeries are central to the scheme and not fighting them is a risk as well as fighting them is.
I am including to protect therefore the rental agreement that I DO HAVE from any fraud.
HUMINT by illegal COINTELPRO and Sham investigations which are created under false premises and use illegal harassment Racial fights are picked (A minority child is photgraphed in the vicinity of me and racial anti white statements made to me as misplaced anager) and staged and I and my trust are the Mark in fraud upon me.
The Gangstalk of Edward Donegan if we can study his racism my theories of Hegel could propell me I will face numerous evictions over this including housing, gym, etc., but the liability is with Tx and the fake claims processing when the claims should be denied.
Wikipedia B The Fruit of the Poisonous Tree Revisited and Shepardized retrieved from CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW and copied or modified to here The Exclusionary Rule as a Deterrent to Illegal Police Activity It is, of course, incorrect to assume and too much to expect that the exclusionary -rule will deter all illicit police activity.
Exclusion of the Fruits of Illegally Obtained Evidence The complete exclusion-in all situations and for all purposes-of second and subsequent generation “fruits” of illegally obtained evidence seems logical and warranted unless there are competing considerations to restrict the radiations of the exclusionary rule.
The obvious competing consideration, in criminal as well as civil cases, is the policy of admitting relevant and trustworthy evidence in order to maximize the search for truth.
I suggest dirty cops not only planting evidence for self gain doing so an asset possessing law abiding people to use for personal enrichment of corrupt policing (of the police) by pretextual seizures assets based upon the planted evidence tilts to full the need to prosecute the misconduct of the law enforcement.
An espionage backed impersonator of me has beaten me out to a white woman and is throwing the value of my genome at her buttocks.
Just Cause she eas with Law Enforcement and Neighborhood Watch This is spliced with my real contact to her and the evidence manufacture about me is spliced to her by Espionage along with my contact to her for her to be incited against me.
Cement splicers ee ee ee a ice) Cement splicers join films together by using a chemical called film cement which , is made of film base dissolved in a solvent.
Polyester film, such as that used for currently produced prints, will not bond with standard film ement.
Qa Tape splicers Here a piece of thin transparent adhesive tape is used to join the two ends.
Splicing is sometimes used to describe the technique of compositing used in : digital film-making which is used to combine visual elements such as actors onto a r virtual background.
Four images of the same subject, removed from their original backgrounds ae composited onto a new background yy Photobombing has been known to get global exposure, mainly due to the bandwidth and ease of dissemination afforded by the Internet, and the abundance of snapshots by smartphone cameras and other hand-held devices.
INTERFERE VOCABULARLY.COM To interfere is to try to stop something from happening.
Be RR EE EE EEE ee eee eee eee Z February 20 November 18 December 13 August 4 33rd & 5 NYC ""There's a plot in this country to enslave every man, woman and child.
Disgruntled employee; Living Above Means of Income; Vulnerabilities; Greed Subversion, Shakedown and Conspiracy Against Rights (as mercenaries) of a white supremacist who regretted from day one Corpus Christi Texas, Nueces County CARTEL When groups band together to control the supply of a product for their best interests, that’s called a cartel.
INTEREST 1. sense of concern with and curiosity about someone or something 2. a fixed charge for borrowing money; usually a percentage of the amount borrowed 3. a right or legal share of something; a financial involvement with something 4. a social group whose members control some field of activity and who have common aims Interest is used most often to describe something you like, enjoy or think useful.
Putting a Name To it “Leopard Street” Leopard Street, though not all participating Government and NGOs are on Josephine or Leopard Street or even in that area as Salvation Army, Habitat For Humantiy, and other services for the needy are.
HYDE IS IS NON WHITE MARSHALL WATCH SETTINGS on0o 0 1S a USA Military DOD member, or at least using ID of a hite USAF officer MOS EAL WORK Air Force National Guard Airman first class EDUCATION ) United States Air Force ROTC F-22 Fighter Pilot Vanden High School, Travis AFB, CA High School Not only are these English as Second Language speakers as is CENTCOM area Mistress Vesta, the one on the right flipped horizontally his photo I flipped back.
TRO Martanse Persons Special Vulnerability Frequent official overseas travel Resided in a foreign country Relatives in a foreign country Born/raised in a foreign country Persons with access to classified defense information Persons having extraordinary financial difficulty Left is Right and Right Is Left in the NWO USA Conrad Truntman Profile Pictures Nov 7, 2016 [B Airman fret cians at Ai Force Nistionat Gust BD Stirded F-22 Fighter Pdet at US, Ar Fore ROTC Wort to Vendor High Schoo, Trave AFS, CA fA Uves in Travis Air Force Base, Caltorus 9 From Travis Alr Force Base.
Cattamia ) Fatlowed by 40 poogia Sate Cornet Almas trie Frlands WD trieete Subversion Subversion refers to a process by which the values and principles of a system in place are contradicted or reversed in an attempt to transform the established social order and its structures of power, authority, hierarchy, and social norms.
Subversion can be described as an attack on the public morale and, “the will to resist intervention are the products of combined political and social or class loyalties which are usually attached to national symbols.
Money Laundering makes Fake claims from Neighborhood patrols of gang infested neighborhoods ""wae s LAMAI A] eel The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations.
Black Corpus Christi PD, Black FBL Praencthinn shame time lack all arannd ma Rinek and nnn white ranietar claro nratand T 0 PM-7 AM PAL) CANARD CHE PANEL Aa SS VYRIEMANS WELCOME Se Clete their neigbborhood is being victimized by the right-winger What these eyes, what my eyes, have seen.
Allegedly fighting white supremacism non whites are going to white adult entertainers and asking those adults to “catch” Edward Pauld Donegan (or more actually his impersonator) as a pedophile who secretly likes non white children.
Surreptitious needs and surreptitious plots Vocabulary.com SURREPTITIOUS * When someone behaves in a surreptitious way, they’re being secretive.
Cryptonyms and Digraphs and reading between the lines of public news of even science fiction or Hollywood story lines Stegonography or Secret Writing uses “cyhper” references to “clear text” information. ittps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CIA_cryptonym Format of cryptonyms Each CIA cryptonym contains a two character prefix called a digraph, which ; designates a geographical or functional area.
During the time in California I completed the first thirty days of rental and showed Wells Fargo Bank and Social Security billing at Salinas address.
This book Jim Vocelka and William Ruiz, Stay and Play and Capitola Crisis Acting as foundation work in the Long Con, Stages of the Long Con on my Sperm Bank Rights In the Lambda Green White chapter of this book this and more information is found on Cons or Long Cons, shakedown schemes.
Creating the Crisis Foundation Work Preparations are made in advance of the game, including the hiring of any assistants required.
Special Operators The In-and-In A conspirator (in on the con, but assumes the role of an interested bystander) puts an amount of money into the same scheme as the victim, to add an appearance of legitimacy.
In my case the bullying of me creates the Legend of me, a false legend, underwhich Person “C” aka CIA can operate catching Person “B” (I call Tx) in conduct consistent with the bullyingo of me, thus selling to the public CIA backed misconduct of an imersonator of me as my misconduct.
The accusations by in-explicit foundation-less chest full of hot air not saying anything have been far removed from any truth about me but they person planting evidence has the chest full of hot air.
As usual when I am in the vicinity of cash a Shill con artist scheme surrounds me as a leggy teen was near, strange people around, black Secret Service inside the bank including one male and one female with a graduated like drinking bottle which would be similar in description to my camping cooking one though I had left that for then at Capitola where I was moving from.
I had contacted a Dominatrix i never heard back from but likely she was warned off me based on the fake allegations against me and saw a Doppelganger of me who confessed to peeping and acknowledged my DNA was due to others because of that.
He did thinks like coach me to put a motorcycle pouch on my rear bench handles knowing I already planned to do it and had the gear., etc., but felt it was for a good cause, much like those at Highlander Motel, who doesn’t want to shake down a scum bag behind his back and send him packing.
There is a strong propensity for this scam where I would live WITHOUT social services and it is social services who wish my DNA for non whites and operate the Protection Racket.
In fact like Tom Dunham I spent about 20 years trying to prove the things in my vicinity and even in my home [ a not involved in.
Instead it is police activity alleged to Tom Dunham and IJ as others are in pizza pedo networks.
Though I did not get to Genentech all through my motorcycle trip to California that was my main goal.
Nevertheless William RUiz took the “law enforcement positive” acts I was doing on the computer and turned it into HIS black nationalist “Fapping” to white lesbians, the Sandwich of Aug 10 2017 (2 days before Jen MOore death) and he did it the Aviator Glasses Cheap Shot character assassination way.
In this way use of my genome by racketeers seeing adult entertainers in my identity or KOMPROMAT shown to others by made by police back people seems to have been acts of my own.
I am evicted on pretexts from places I shoud1 live then on religious property fake religious allegations undermine me and I don’t have religous housing either.
I was hit by radiological attack and my mother stalked and hit by it too in 2011, me in 2009 and Ted Gunderson and others in 2009.
WVU Rockefeller Neuroscience team t to use ultrasound to treat Alzheimer's Joned Deceeber 2009 G) Abétycrating com ) Photos More on Etiology and Benefits Prosecutors can bring to County Hospitals and Goodwill Industries Programs with Asset Seizures In fact by claiming County social services victims those victims and other programs generally can claim biologically seized assets including those religious groups involved.
He lived in a two bedroom condo advertised on Craig’s list | moved into on an ongoing rental leasee, handshake, for the unused bedroom.
In my private high tech life I did a lot of work on cryptographic technology in network security.
Switching Jim Volcelka’s Pez Dispenser for mine seems to have been an Obama family request and I think I now know why.
Quackery The ARC of Northern Virginia has used quackery from the outset to undermine the fact i never needed them or signed up for them.
Not having the kit with him blocked him from the continuous chain of events of fixing my toilet and it appears from what I was able to hear in 46 he had gone a couple of floors below to 26 where a scene was staged of a peeping tom toilet and enraged community members outside the windows skidding their cars around.
If you have a running toilet and have replaced the flapper, but this did not stop water from leaking out of the tank, your toilet may need a new flush valve. Google “People also ask” If members of the community were harmed by the activities in 26 then that could appear in the chain of events be a liability of mine which could be presented to asset managers and the community generally as a sham complaint about me, a false allegation.
If I am evicted for any such activities unfolding at other apartments confused with mine that is the manufacture of pretexts in conspiracy against rights and conspiracy against property.
Thief |. documents at the Clerks window identities switched out as plaintiff.
Original Person did not move forward I believe a Blackwater Enrique Prado like CIA backed group is behind this, behind the MKUTLRA connected powers, and misuses of my DNA, and my normal if it had existed is a threat to them and what they have already done, thus I fear from these Rackets spanning not only private but public institutions.
You’|l see surreptitious applied mostly to actions, rather than to things or ideas.
This is the person at activity in my vicinnity I am not involved in but as a “fake hero” will become the hero by alleging I victimized his neighborhood. a ~ A black man with little education follows me around Atlanta Georgia in a muscle car I confronted the black man in the muscle car in some type of street theater with the life long malnourished black woman.
Sower is blocked, Reaper moves in Original Person contacted Mistress S Reaper may dress as Sower and create a Crisis Reaper will defame Sower to Community, Ask to be accepted instead The black man in 47 was moving around in the hallways and also another person in the hallway, I think AB dropped a black handkerchiff near me as if to place me in activities by apearances in the public hallway.
Sower did not move forward,does not have his or her own work result Roadblock My TMOBILE phone lost cell tower for a while, I think it switched over to a different chip in another phone or was fake cell tower switched out, I never contact or spoke to Mistress S Community in Sower’s path Original Path now is now under way with identities of Sower and Reaper switched out Reaper Me being near a black handkerchief and some sort of appearance of me near at “rough play” handkerchief symbol appeared to involve me in what I sowed but was taken over by somebody else.
I offered to show them the cabinets I had built using that very drill but a the female answered the door and said she was not interested in that. later the male returned and returned my tools, still glad he had borrowed them, but said the female did not like me going to her door on these matters and she where threatened by me.
On the phone with the remote domina 4b could have taken my role as 46, and in so doing, acting in conjunction with 47, 43, and 4B, and the domina, arrange a fake claim to my genome to be presented to protectors of the neighborhood from me.
The color of the handkerchief identifies a particular activity, and the pocket it is worn in identifies the wearer’s preferred role in that activity.
Black S and M, Blue Anal sex, Blue Oral sex, Brown Scat, Green Hustler/prostitution, Grey Bondage, Orange L Anything goes , Purple Piercing, Red Fisting, Yellow Watersports This book Brainwashed We have been Brainwashed MKUTRA, Rockefeller ties to MKULTRA, Nazi connections, secret identities of relocation of Nazis and others, and the NSA CIA FBI operations surrounding this ever ended.
But the word —{ ' lucrative doesn’t carry a similar sense of shame 2 If the purpose of the Rockefeller Foundation shaking down a Nazi for genome “for the kids” it doesn’t seem shamefull. [byproduct of the operation] If the operations, as it was, to incite homelessness in a person already a victim of the Rockefellers the scam was shameful. [goal of the operation] Being up against charities is like being Paul Newman in The Verdict suing the Catholic Church in Boston.
I’m not just singling them out and I don’t know heir structure anything but I’m just sing that as an example all of these laces that run these children’s facilities O save these poor children and these guys are such charmers and speak about all the evil [of he Alt Right] and ow they want to save all these Rockefeller was a Republican who was often children from from considered to be liberal, progressive, or hese evil moderate.
Rockefeller was the second vice president appointed to the position under the 25th Amendment, following Ford himself.
You will likely have your best success growing your own seeds in seedling soil 2.
Authorized CIA Activities CIA TSS Overthrow Including Irregular Warfare Plant of La Cosa Nostra Chicago Sleeper Agents + Mexican Mafia ""33""5 FOXP2 does not show in Famililes Watch research Sleeper Agents by CIA, others, of FOXP2 1.
On November 18 1961 I was born as a 33rd Degree mason plan to create Aristocracy back Junta regimes around the world Barrack Obama and Ted Cruz Jr being among them.
Frank Sinatra, close to Marylin and Mafia and Mob know something is up and this is why Marylin Monroe, neighbor of Lawford Shriver was murdered.
Defense Contracting Oil Business for his Olympic gold medal in the 1992 Olympic Games, and his Olympic bronze medal in the 1996 Olympic Games on the 3 m springboard.
The premise of a Leviathan who can oversee a Realm and insure the end of anarchy brutishness to impose law may hold true under an instituted government, but on a shadow government of mafia actors who have infiltrated subsumed government rules are few, war is constant, and brutishness returned in the Deep State control of populations and waring shadow governments.
PCa le le el ee ee le ee ee ee le ee ee ee ee ee ieee 2\.eviathan retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | | '~ Hobbes describes human psychology without any reference to the summum bonum, i Or greatest good, as previous thought had done.
A political community can be oriented around this fear. political community that pursues the greatest good.
Even when ; two men are not fighting, there is no guarantee that the other will not try to kill him for ; his property or just out of an aggrieved sense of honour, and so they must constantly be , on guard against one another.
I authorise and give up my right of governing myself to this man, or to this assembly of men, on this condition; that thou give up, thy right to him, and authorise all his actions in like manner. ee ee a a a a a ey Z The Assassination of John F Kennedy retrieved from Spartacus Educational and copied or modified to here Notables DAVID SANCHEZ MORALES David Sanchez Morales was born on 26th August, 1925.
After his mother divorced his father he was virtually adopted by Carbajal’s parents.
Morales joined the United States Army in 1946 and after basic training was sent to Germany where he was part of the Allied occupation force.
According to Ruben Carbajal, Morales was recruited into army intelligence in 1947.
This photograph, taken of David Morales in 1959, Gaps in a Cuban newspaper in 1978.
In November, 1961, William Harvey arranged for Morales to be posted to JM/WAVE , the CIA station in Miami.
UZ) Morales built a new house at El Frita, which is about half-way between Willcox and the Mexican border.
David Sanchez Morales made his last trip to Washington in early May, 1978.
By John Simkin © September 1997 GEORGE JOANNIDES ra George Efythron Joannides (JULY 5, 1922 March 9, 1990) was a Central Intelligence Agency officer who in 1963 was the chief of the Psychological Warfare branch of the agency’s JMWAVE station in Miami, and in 1978 was the agency’s liaison to the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations.
ROBERT MAHEU FROM WIKIPEDIA AND SPARTACUS Robert Aime Maheu was an American businessman and lawyer, who worked for the FBI and CIA, and as the chief executive of Nevada operations for the industrialist Howard Hughes.
Maheu was born in Waterville, Maine, the son of Christine and Ephrem Maheu, who were of French-Canadian descent.
In the summer of 1960, the CIA recruited Maheu to approach the West Coast representative of the Chicago mob, Johnny Roselli.
Maheu told ‘the mobsters that the CIA was willing to pay $150,000 to have Castro killed.
The Deep politics 9-11 knowledge of its Political ; existence for 50 ; essay 2 March 2014 | Bush Family Dominance of ieiean ete years, and the The Cabal P hidden history of the political force that has dominated American politics for the last 50 years.
The Secret Team of Defense Business Contract Killers and the contracts and secret history they kill to preserve the mafia profitability of.
The Annus mirabilis papers are the four ; papers that Albert Einstein published in Annalen der Physik , a ‘ scientific journal, in 1905.
Her second ; American tour, in 1929, succeeded in equipping the Warsaw Radium Institute with ' radium; the Institute opened in 1932, with her sister Bronistawa its director.
I ' Bporunisc Assassinations studied by the CIA of how these therapies can be used €© advance rather than retard cancer cases.
Radiation Effects on Humans Atomic Home Science Effects of Nuclear Weapons Radiation Effects on Humans Possible late effects; possible chromosomal damage.
When radiation therapy is used to kill cancerous cells in the body, it is important to measure the dose correctly to avoid unnecessary damage to normal cells in the body.
Radiation is not selective to tumor cells and therefore targets any cells that are in the process of replication when the therapy is applied.
This thereby stresses the importance of administering the correct dose in order to ensure optimal efficiency with minimal side effects. www.news-medical.net By Yolanda Smith, B.Pharm.
As the science of radiation dosimetry developed, it was realised that the ionising effect, and hence tissue damage, was linked to the energy absorbed, not just radiation exposure. Long after the acute effects of radiation have subsided, radiation damage continues to produce a wide range of physical problems.
FALLOUT PARTICLES Many fallout particles are especially hazardous biologically.
It is chemically similar to calcium, causing it to accumulate in growing bones.
When a plutonium weapon is exploded, not all of the plutonium is fissioned.
In her 2019 book, What Do We Need Men For?: A Modest Proposal, Carroll accused 1 Les Moonves and Donald Trump of sexually assaulting her in the mid-1990s.
I I | | I I | Her husband John Johnson is an American television anchorman, senior correspondent, documentary filmmaker and artist.
The Man Who Asked Too Many JFK Questions } I | I I | | | | | I | I I Charles Thomas.
In 1963 Whitten served as chief of the Mexico desk in the clandestine service.
He investigated the famous case of Otto John, the , West German intelligence chief who defected to East Germany in the 1950s. i ' The day after JFK was killed, deputy CIA director Richard Helms put Whitten in ' charge of collating all reports on Oswald.
I had invited him i to comment on the report, and he had withheld all of his comments until he got to the i meeting.
A legendary and controversial figure in the annals of the CIA, Angleton is best; known for the “mole hunt,” his ceaseless unsuccessful effort to find a Soviet spy inside ; the CIA in the late 1960s.
Ghost, Angleton and his molehunters closely monitored Oswald’s travels, foreign ‘ contacts and political activities from November 1959 to November 1963.
When Whitten, an outstanding undercover officer, received a poor job evaluation in 1965, he quit the CIA and moved to Europe to join the Vienna Men’s Choir.
As T explain in this piece for Salon, the “Castro did it” theory lacks plausibility.
Undiplomatic Reforms Monday, Nov., 1971 r retrieved from Time magazine and copied or modified to here 71 | | | ' i harles W Thomas was a desperate man.
In nearly three dispiriting years ‘ ; Thomas endured nearly 2,000 job rejection letters; he was “too old” or “too qualified,” 1 ' and anyway, he had been fired by the State Department.
Indeed, he had high marks from his superiors and colleagues alike; the explicit blemish on his record was an © observation by a Mexico City superior that Thomas did not exercise proper “control” i over his secretary.
Povid Atlee Phillips retrieved from Spartucus Eductional and copied or modified to ; here 5 David Atlee Phillips was born in Fort Worth, Texas, on 31st October, 1922.
After a 2008 split in the Union of Right Forces, he cofounded Solidarnost DECEMBER 13.
Zangara later claimed I don’t hate Mr Roosevelt personallyI hate all officials and anyone who is rich.
It is constructed by printing a deck of cards so their top half is as in a normal deck, while the bottom is all the same, originally the five of diamonds.
During captivity, Shaw was programmed as a sleeper agent who blindly obeys} ‘orders to kill without any memory of his crimes.
The 75-year-old claims he had an on-and-off affair with the Hollywood legend, Monroe, beginning when he was 16 and she was 33.
Hear a discussion about the unique physical structure of Albert Einstein’s brain.
I am a witness to the John F Kennedy assassination and what unfolds is my story but it is also the story of the CIA and irregular warfare and how my family, law abiding and loyal, became a victim of dirty war techniques.
In 1962 President Kennedy outlined in his now-famous speech to Congress that he desired to implement an elite fighting force that was well-trained and ready to respond i to any “hot spot” or emergency that developed that threatened to destabilize our ; interests or those of our allies, or American citizens.
Kennedy was controversially interested in restructuring the ‘ military to make room for quick, unconventional forms of warfare, to augment and in ; some cases replace, the massive troop buildup and operations.
The Arms Control and Disarmament Act of 1961, 22 U.S.C. § 2551, was created to establish a governing body for the control and reduction of apocalyptic armaments with regards to protect a world from the burdens of armaments and the scourge of war.
The origins and collective continue operation of MKULTRA is a collective guilt of a “Deep State” now turned into human trafficking in designer babies, murders, cover-ups, international acts of murder, and chaos of failed plans, successful coup de tats, sleeper agents, assassinations, and “animal husbandry” of grooming leaders in test tubes as much for CIA amusement and curiosity or profit rather than genuine state purpose.
Overtly stated, the providing a a white supremacist child porn against his will and sexual interests is abusive and meant to be a hostile act of a provocateur, an assailant.
Any claim I have ever consented to any of this is resultant from forged communication, forged identity, or misrepresentation, or those in combination., all of which have been used to found the operation’s claims which lack any legitimacy.
Racial Walls and Pretexts that Manufacture Them Apartheid South Africa Between 1960 and 1983, 3. million black Africans were removed from their homes and forced into segregated neighbourhoods as a result of apartheid legislation, in some of the largest mass evictions in modern history.
Vocabulary.com retrieved from Veil and copied or modified to here VEIL 5. verb to obscure, or conceal with or as if with a veil “women in Afghanistan veil their faces” 6. verb make undecipherable or imperceptible by obscuring or concealing “a veiled threat” In its most desperate hour, not its noblest, an Espionage scramble to claim the rights to my genome and that such a claim would be legitimate.
Repugnance via State Involuntary Medical Procedure Conspiracy Against Rights OF Individuals under involuntary pretextually false civil commitment in prelude to Reproductive and other abuses.
Religious Abuse by Ethnic Warfare Much of the abuse of me has been in the form of those of other religions attacking me both legally and in public standing by attempting to sexually humiliate me before the public as a sexually abusive person (and thus a morally and also included intellectually flawed person) so their own religion may gain in standing before the public and claims to my reproductivity.
I am Rx who is the recipeint of planted females as “porn” I do not want and even call the police one.
THe fraud event is it seems I am tied to that act and that is by appearances only, and I believe this is the fruad in asset siezures allowed by the case before Judge Roll.
A popular version is the NE555 and this is suitable in most cases where a ‘555 timer’ is specified.
As the most powerful elites in society they can abuse government offices and increasingly unconstitutional (Void for Vagueness) systems to target their MKULTRA victims and discredit them.
Subversion and Conspiracy TARGETED OR PLACED INDIVIDUALS AND THEIR USAGE AS ESPIONAGE 1) ASSETS 2) DUPES 3) MERCENARIES A person in an organization or an organization in a vicinity who is Targeted for recruitment to work for the interests exterior to the organization they are in or placed in an organization to work for the interest exterior to the interest of the organization they are Placed in or recruited from, likely they will work for interest that placed them.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia In my case I think wars are fought against me such as race and pedophilia wars allowing Espionage based font organizations to conspire against my rights and during that hold public support. ie 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 UG UG UU Ue hh UG UG UD UG UG UG UD UG UG UD UG UG UU UE UG UG DU UU UG UU DU DU UG UG UU UG DU UU UG UU UU UD UU Bovvelganger can serve a variety of purposes.
This method, as defined by Timothy Thomas is “a means of conveying to a partner or an opponent specially prepared information to incline him to voluntarily make the predetermined decision desired by the initiator of the Doppelganger action.
DISPOSITION MATRIX When Criminal Activies result in Asset Seizures crippling the Criminal Enterprise seized assets are disposed of by award to victims of criminal activity NDAA Secret Military Acts directly out of the White House Every year, Congress passes the National Defense Authorization Act , which makes appropriations for the defense budget.
Reading “Affirmation of authority of the Armed Forces of the United States to detain covered persons pursuant to the Authorization of Use of Military Force,” this provision allows the United States military to act as a police force, and arrest or use force against any person (including American citizens) suspected of terrorism.
This book Hitmen Evidence Clustering Around Judge Roll, Scalia, and Thomas Crane Wales Thomas Crane Wales was born in Boston, Massachusetts.
FBI Seeking Information Letter May Be Linked to 2001 Killer Gi ot LAS VEGAS NV Qu p) \ Chater, 23 JAN 2006 P ay | lo HIER avr e101 +2908 MabasbedreKllb aso balls isis bo lllned Ad 04/17/06 An anonymous letter sent to FBI officials purportedly from a gunman who shot United States Attorney Thomas C Wales in his Seattle home in 2001 is prompting a renewed call for the public's assistance.
The Nevada Test Site , 65 miles north of Las Vegas, was one of the most significant nuclear weapons test sites in the United States.
In February 2018, an FBI official reported the investigation had found “evidence strongly suggesting” Wales was murdered by a contract killer and, for the first time, indicated that his death was likely a conspiracy involving a small group of people.
Carondelet later purchased a hospital in Marina del Rey and ‘ hamed it Daniel Freeman Marina Hospital.
He has served as general counsel of Ford Motor Company since April 2005 to December 2015, where his department has captured several industry awards.
Tom Wales was not supposed to be home on the night of October 11, 2001.
In the evening, after leaving his office, near the federal ‘ courthouse, he returned to his Craftsman-style, wood-frame house in a quiet t neighborhood known as Queen Anne.
Tom Wales, an Assistant United States Attorney in Seattle who became a gun-control activist, was killed in his home in 2001.1[LLUSTRATION BY ALEX WILLIAMSON, PHOTO COURTESY WALES FOUNDATION Wales was forty-nine years old and had been a federal prosecutor for eighteen ; years.
The phrase was partly a joke, a bit of feigned grandiosity to justify a tendency toward excessive ' meticulousness Incomplete evidence making circumstantial evidence seizures cases 7 Wikipedia quoted here from link WwW ae) hile eugenic principles have been practiced as early as ancient Greece, the contemporary history of eugenics began in the early 20th century, when a popular eugenics movement emerged in the United Kingdom, and then spread to many countries, including the United States, Canada, and most European countries.
Those deemed “unfit to reproduce” often included people with mental or physical disabilities, people who scored in the low ranges on different IQ tests, criminals and “deviants,” and members of disfavored minority groups.
The eugenics movement became associated with Nazi Germany and the Holocaust when the defense of many of the defendants at the Nuremberg trials of 1945 to 1946 attempted to justify their human-rights abuses by claiming there was ittle difference between the Nazi eugenics programs and the United States eugenics programs.
The Greens had Cape Cod ties Christina-Taylor Green (who had mad baseball skills) is still surprising her parents Karina Bland The Republic | azcentral.com * The Greens went to Cape Cod every summer, while John, a scout for the Los Angeles Dodgers, worked.
When you rig something, you connect parts in a way that’s so crazy it just | ‘might work.
Nee es Rig can aise decerihie seceivind people to achieve a certain outcome.
This doesn’t —} ‘mean it was repaired; it means it was rigged fraud played a role in the | t ‘outcome. i ee a Interest how “fixed” means “stuck on” like a Fixed Delusion or a Compulsive Act, a belief or action fixed in destiny by a sapient or controlling, engineering, even socially or legally enginerring force.
Probable 4 Assed Monkey Person Born AUG 5 And btw Thomas Neil Donegan was named after him.
Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 Aug 4 July 4 April 1 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman.
In 1961, he became the second man and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon.
August 26, 1918, ' White Sulphur Springs, WV Died: FEBRUARY 24, 2020, Newport News, VA a "" retired NASA Langley mathematician whose computations influenced space exploration efforts from Mercury through the shuttle program, will be honored A with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, President Barack Obama announced this 1 week.
Mark Kelly < American engineer Mark Edward Kelly is an American politician, engineer, former astronaut, and United States Navy captain.
February 21, 1964 (age 55 years Space mis : 7 21, STS-124, STS-108 , City of Orange, NJ Scott Kelly < American engineer Scott Joseph Kelly is an American engineer, retired astronaut, and United States Navy captain.
Immunology Transfers are Family Database Transfers Immunology polymorphs to regional histories of diseases and climates family lines around the world adapted to.
The proteins encoded by certain genes are also known as antigens, as a result of their historic iscovery as factors in organ transplants.
Different classes have different functions HLAs corresponding to MHC class II present antigens from outside of the cell to T-lymphocytes.
These particular antigens stimulate the multiplication of T-helper cells , which in turn stimulate antibody-producing B-cells to produce antibodies to that specific antigen.
MKULTRA TNG is Formulated Amongst The Most Expert Familial DNA Detectives The likely 2/18/1961 IVF of Barack Obama from my father or mother’s DNA A year and a few days after IVF Birther Theory.
Obama also an IVF on Feb 20 1961 Note online impersonators speak of Glorian and Genenetch, an online Bernie friend saying so in Wishlist In my twenties or so I am being harassed by some kind of odd police.
In Concord CA I even call the Concord police on some form of special ops which seem to be + 9 months 9 months pass and I am born on 11/18/1961 and Obama is likely also + 3 Months Feb 23 1962 A year after IVF of Obama IVF to build future African leaders, all looks good monitoring my home illegally.
This is supportd by Archive.org, emails, many, I sent the the world geneticists, world race riot events of the time, and Mountain Prophecies 2008vSomething genetic happens with Obama while I am under arrest by all black PHS lead by Rod Rosenstein, Mueller, and Tom Donegan.
The crab theory has been persistent and been echoed by the Soviet interceptor pilot Gennady Osipovich, who fired the missile that shot down the Larry McDonald was born in Atlanta, Georgia, on April 1, 1935 to Harold McDonald, Sr. and Callie Grace Patton, who was a cousin of United States Army General George S Patton.
The past few months have brought some exciting news from two of the main ' autosomal DNA companies: AncestryDNA exceeded 3 million testers in ' January 2017, and 23andMe broke 2 million in April.
Thus, there is a difference between the total size ' of a database and what I’ II call the effective size, that is, the number of people 1 available for cousin matching.
This will also boost IQ in Afica now called Autism Spectrum disorder, perhaps also some other medical benefits.
Ne My eggs will need to be broken in the U.S., If I have children five generations later they will tie to Obama’s children five generations later.
Nov 18 Feb 20 rs Edward P Donegan, me, my take on this, a ruling disallowed a legal theory or some other matter affecting the genetic privacy rights of the President, possibly asked for by the Secret Service or others.
I THINK THERE IS LEGITIMATE CONCERN OVER THE POSSIBILITY THAT OBAMA’S CAREER MAY HAVE BEEN SECRETLY GROOMED BY ELITISTS IN THE United States I THINK THIS COULD HAVE BEEN DONE AS A SAFETYVALVE THAT MIGHT BE USED AS A HEDGE AGAINST POSSIBLE ECONOMIC COLLAPSE, and the possible resurgence of anti-elitist sentiment.
Finally, this ties to Justice Scalia, WETWORKS and IQ by religious groups.
Also called a normal distribution curve (because this is the form random variation forms in occurrence, ) the Bell Curve takes it name from the similarity of the shape of the curve to a bell.
In addition to United States statistics posted here, worldwide IQ studies have been done as well.
In theory, differences in living conditions i have already been accounted for; however, people of African descent in the United States 1 typically average about 7-20% racial mixture with European genetic base.
Nevertheless, the simple suggestion that ‘ environment has to be “accounted for” in statistics by “correcting” the IQ tests I results is constantly used to continually upward adjust IQ statistics for minority populations.
Despite these disagreements on causality models, there are still discernable differences in inheritable IQ between whites, blacks, and Asians at all income levels, the difference between whites and blacks being about 1. standard deviations, and between whites and Asians of about 3 IQ points at all points in the IQ distributions.
GDP and governmental, scientific, societal, and conomic success seems to be correlated with ethnic IQs.
Activities Trafficking The Cali Cartel would become known for its innovations in trafficking and 1 production, by moving its refining operations out of Colombia to Peru and Bolivia, i as well as for pioneering new trafficking routes through Panama.
Debate over the 1 cartel’s participation in heroin trafficking remains.
The bank was believed A to have been used to launder funds for the Cali cartel, as well as Pablo Escobar’s A Medellin Cartel.
As a consequence of the Cali Cartel’s ownership of the ‘ chain, from January 1988 to May 4, 1990, it was targeted for 85 bombings by Pablo t Escobar and the Medellin Cartel, leaving a total of 27 people dead.
Robert Walner i was the chief prosecutor in Liechtenstein’s capital Vaduz.
Afghanistan origin heroin supplying ring using ethnic Uzbek criminals and corrupt : KGB and later FSB officers including the Moscow-based KGB Colonel Evgeny G ; Khokholkov, the Oleg Ivanov created Izmaylovskaya Russian mafia and led by ; Anton Malevsky including mafia leaders Gafur Rakhimov, Vyacheslav Ivanov * or Little Japonese), who governed Uzbek networks in » America, and Alimzhan Tokhtakhunov (“Taiwanchik” ' or Little Taiwan), who governed Uzbek networks in Europe, and Salim "" Abdulaev.
This book Judge Roll assassination and exporting DNA extorted into the Middle East Oddly when I go to Google Street View of 52 Lambeth Square $323k house turned into a trust fund inherited it is being remodeled in the bedrrom of Tom and den and the year is 2011.
Tom Donegan, Jim, Glorian, Athena dead sevearl by cancer At my mother’s request her body was donated to science whjch resulted in her body being donated to the United States Public Health Service, the Uniformed Non Combatant military medicine branch of the United States Departpment of Defense.
Maybe for business like Business International Corporation, BBRDW, things like that with CIA moles.” e JFK e Thorkill Kristensen, IQ, Brain, Developing Economies e George Ball, State Dept, brain and foreign economies The USA White House version of DNA, Brain and i and Monday, February 20); L961.
Leaders who Develop Economies, February 20, 1961 Goerge Ball, State Dept, regime JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Cochange operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 amin the Oval Office.
JFK Speech and USA needs PhDs for its economies, Waldorf Astoria, 33rd and 5th This book, a thing of value and skill in researching and writing, was Peiiaaaeascxaeaitmamaaamekaden written at an apartment in the north comer of 1001 N Water St.
My computers were robbed and destroyed as I wrote my book (two computers, both notebooks) and WiFi was never installed.
Not as much as I would like, but that is tool I like to use too and be that to others too as I learn from experience.
All of this alleged taught to me by others, as if to deny this ability in me.
According to Cattell’s psychometricallyased theory, general intelligence is subdivided into gf and gc.
Examples of tasks that measure crystallized intelligence are vocabulary, general information, abstract word analogies, and mechanics of language.
The Importance of Test Features in Cognition Research retrieved from Frontiers in Psychology and copied or modified to here Abstract Let’s just come out and aay it.
World economies Nations and Their Average IQs Worldwide |Q About this link.
United States through his use of Executive Orders that asserts his power to put anyone , he wants in prison without charges or trial forever and his right to assassinate any.
CV-09-0037] filed ; against the United States government by hundreds of veterans, and as we can read as reported by , the Raw Story news service: | t | I I | | To if this Loughner is able to join the long list of CIA/US Military “mind controlled” I I | | I I | “Tt’s well known that the CIA began testing substances like LSD on soldiers ' beginning in the 1950s but less is known about allegations that the agency implanted ; electrodes in subjects.
A 2009 lawsuit claimed that the CIA intended to design and test i septal electrodes that would enable them to control human behavior.
To if the American people will ever be told the truth about Loughner and his ; assassination of Judge Roll there seems little doubt as the Obama regime is fighting ‘ with everything it has to keep the information on these “mind controlled” assassins , secret, and as we can read as reported by the Courthouse News service: | ' “The Central Intelligence Agency in January will argue for dismissal of ' Vietnam veterans’ claims that the CIA must provide them with information about the ' health effects of chemicals used on them during Cold War-era human experiments.
New Jersey, Princeton is the fourth-oldest institution of higher education ; in the United States and one of the nine colonial colleges chartered , before the American Revolution.
School of Public and International Affairs, the School of Engineering and » Applied Science, the School of Architecture and the Bendheim Center , for Finance.
Doctoral Universities Very high research activity” and has one of the largest university libraries in the world.
The controversial 1986 exposé America’s Secret Establishment by Anthony Sutton claimed that Skull and Bones was out to create a “new world order” run by Bonesmen, prompting myriad conspiracy theories.
Gas Forrestal FEBRUARY 15, 1892 May 22, 1949) ited to Princeton and Gottlieb CIA MKULTRA Forrestal came from a very strict middle class Irish Catholic family.
Along with Secretary of State George C Marshall, he strongly opposed the United States’ support for the establishment of the State of Israel, fearing that this would alienate Arab nations which were needed as allies, and whose petroleum reserves were vital for both military and civilian industrial expansion.
She eventually developed a dependence on alcohol and suffered various mental health issues Forrestal went to work as a bond salesman for William A Read and Company in 1916.
During the final year of the war, Forrestal spent much of his time in Washington, at the Office of Naval Operations while completing is flight training and reached the rank of lieutenant.
After the war, orrestal resumed his career in finance and made his fortune on Wall Street.
He became a partner in 1923, was appointed vice president in 1926, and by 1937 was president of the company.
One of the individuals aided by his work was a eighbor, Franklin D Roosevelt.
While giving his new applicants an exercise, a prospective astronaut approaches him to treat her “under the table” to keep NASA from finding out anything is wrong with her.
Dulles’s career was jump-started by the information provided by Fritz Kolbe, a German diplomat and a foe of the Nazis.
Notably, the elected Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh of Iran was deposed in 1953 (via Operation Ajax), and President Arbenz of Guatemala was removed in 1954.
Dulles published the book The Craft of Intelligence (ISBN 1592282970) in 1963. one of seven commissioners of the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination of the United States President John F Kennedy.
In 1969 Dulles died of influenza, complicated by pneumonia, at the age | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | "" On November 29, 1963 President Lyndon Johnson appointed Dulles as | | | | | | | | | | | | | , of 75.
At Harvard, Mr Gores became friendly with professor Marcel Breuer and Philip Johnson, future fellow members of a group of modern architects that would later be known as the Harvard Five My second overriding debt is to my onetime senior overseer and arbiter in the line of duty, Ralph Bennett, President of Magdalen College, Cambridge.
To Ernest Bell III I declare a debt for encouragement in my first phases of compilation and for some useful early copies of signals brought back from the P.R.O. as well as other materials valuable as corroborative evidence.
And finally, small notes of gratitude to my daughter Valerie over these years offering me the fruits of her vocation as a librarian to scout out and scour out a wide range of obscure records and documentations in search of precision of detail or accuracy of allusion, and to old family friend Laurence Buckley interested enough from his days as a Mosquitoflying Pathfinder pilot in the R.A.F. to proofread my entire final typescript.
Two Distinguished Flying Crosses[1 | Two Navy Distinguished Service Medals | Two NASA Distinguished Service Medals | Two NASA Exceptional Service Medals | The Congressional Space Medal of Honor | The Collier Trophy | | The Harmon Trophy | Navy Astronaut Wings | Gagarin Gold Space Medal | I | Care Astronaut Rank US-O6 insignia.svg Captain, USN i Wr] Timeline The Lyndon B ohnson Space e 1990s.
Wierd firings of me escalate was enter in Houston, what I now know are Flash Mobs and Office _[fexas, has a grove Mobs of attention grabbing out of place f trees that have highly hostile bevaivor forms around me.
At Pee planted to first I relapse into meth then upon a vow to onor the memory my mother I take that out of the equation but Pf the astronauts will at various times permit myself drinking.
Totls appear around pools near me as over 18 fter Conrad’s disappear including Palo Alto area eath, NASA lanted a tree in 1996 to 1998 The Obama children are being conceived and born 1999 Charles Pete Conrad dies in a traffic accident on the one year birthday of a Michelle Obama daughter.
An Office mob of a Canadian military figures son, a Mossad loving motorcycle racer, and other figures form in my Wells Fargo team as Cutouts begin, like at AOL before, others are tied to me by same name on payroll, same reports being turned in to status reporting up the management change. same clothing or folios, etc., 2001 I am fired from wells fargo for surfing pom with Wells Fargo notebook 2001 9/11 strikes and the Project Monarch files at the Pentagon may have been damaged or a target.
During that time my mother is diagnosed with possible ovarian cancer., Tom and Mark with each other and to me confuse facts they are relaying to me as I am in a federal prison.
During he dedication eremony, his speech to lighten he somber ccasion by injecting a little evity, pretending o “channel” Conrad’s instructions from he hereafter.
NASA as honored this “request”, and very Christmas since then, all of he trees in the erove have been lit ith white lights, ’ relapse by bleeding out at night from the sutures and lies in a pool of blood with no one to help her.
Upon release from 4 years of being trapped inside institutions and custody including United States DOD VA hospital I move (evicted from my old apartment) to Texas as a homeless person.
I will tie this theory to cover up of the Obama family line being among others een lit with red ights.
This ties to the Kennedy Curse — iin Haverford, and long term scientific research in League ennsylvania, that of Nations descended masonic defense revious contractors generations of 2019 An apartment I rent a unit in will be ttended.
Even called the Princess, seemingly a fter his family’s brown princess and I am treated like a inancial Schizophrenic ownturn, his * Tom Donegan will die of Esophagus cancer. | ypported his ontinued schooling at » Haverford.
However, Pete’s dyslexia continued to frustrate his academic , efforts.
In 1942, the family lost their manor home in ' Philadelphia, and then moved into a small carriage house, paid for by | rances’s brother, Egerton Vinson.
Eventually, Charles Sr., broken down y financial failures, left his family. oO Conrad was considered a bright, intelligent boy, but he continually struggled with his schoolwork.
Conrad attended the Haverford School, a rivate academy in Haverford, Pennsylvania, that previous generations of » Conrads had attended.
Conrad repaired the plane single-handedly. , Thereafter, the instructor gave Conrad the flight lessons that he needed to ' earn his pilot’s certificate even before he graduated from high school.
He "" was commissioned an Ensign in the United States Navy as a Naval ROTC ' graduate. | | | oe e Aviation career in the United States Navy | | | Following his commission in 1953, Conrad was sent to Naval Air | » Station Pensacola, Florida, for flight training.
During a Rorschach inkblot test, he 1 told the psychiatrist that one blot card revealed a sexual encounter 1 complete with lurid detail.
After dropping his full enema bag on the * desk of the clinic’s commanding officer, he walked out.:113-119 His "" initial application to NASA was denied with the notation not suitable for ' long-duration flight.
Earth orbital test flight of the complete Apollo spacecraft, including the r Lunar Module into low Earth orbit.
One of the photos that he took during the mission with his own image visible on the helmet visor of Al Bean was later listed on Popular r Science’s photo gallery of the best astronaut selfies.
Skylab | Paul J Weitz, Charles Conrad Jr. ; and Joseph P Kerwin i ; America’s first space station crew would spend 28 days in space 1 Conrad’s last mission was as Commander of Skylab 2, the first crew to : board the Skylab space station.
President Jimmy Carter honored Conrad for r this in 1978 by awarding him the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.
Conrad spearheaded McDonnell Douglas’s ultimately unsuccessful efforts to allay the fears of the public and policymakers, and save the 1 plane’s reputation.
He was appointed staff vice ; president of international business development in 1984.
Personal life “When you can’t be good, be colorful.” -Conrad’s personal motto. i While at Princeton, Conrad met Jane DuBose, a student at Bryn Mawr, ' whose family owned a 1,600-acre ranch near Uvalde, Texas.
He died in April 1990, at the age of 29.:230-1 Conrad met Nancy Crane, a Denver divorcee, through mutual friends.
His recreational interests included golf, water skiing and auto racing, such as Formula Vee.
DE ee a ee ee eee ee ee eee eee eee eee Aber Conrad retrieved from Museum of Flight and copied or modified to here Posted Thu, April 30, 2020 By Layne Benofsky His first name was Charles, but everyone called him Pete.
From Jets to Rockets Like most of the United States’ first astronauts, Pete Conrad began his career as a military aviator.
Skylab space station.He is perhaps best known as the commander of : Apollo 12, the second mission to land on the Moon, and the first to make ; a precision landing.
Notable Deaths in July 1990 JOHN F KENNEDY JR b NOVEMBER 25, 1960 JULY 16, 1999). ohn Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr.
From his childhood years at the White House, Kennedy was the subject of much media scrutiny, and later became a popular social figure in Manhattan.
CAROLYN BESSETTE-KENNEDY Carolyn Jeanne BessetteKennedy (January 7, 1966 July 16, 1999) was a publicist for Calvin Klein and the wife of John F Kennedy Jr.
The couple and Bessette-Kennedy’s older sister, Lauren, died in a plane crash off the coast of Martha’s Vineyard in July 1999.
Griffith’s The Sorrows of Satan. wad On television, she appeared in the pilot episode of WKRP in Cincinnati as the imperious owner of the radio station, and she appeared in a memorable episode of Thirtysomething as Melissa’s tough grandmother, who wanted to leave her granddaughter the family dress business, though Melissa wanted a career as a photographer.
GUY MITCHELL FEBRUARY 22,1927 JULY 1, 1999 Guy Mitchell (born Albert George Cernik; FEBRUARY 22, 1927 July 1, 1999) was an American pop singer and actor, successful in his homeland, the UK, and Australia.
YAAKOV WEINBERG Shmuel Yaakov Weinberg, known as Yaakov Weinberg (also Jacob S Weinberg) was an Orthodox Jewish rabbi, Talmudist, and rosh yeshiva of Ner Israel Rabbinical College in Baltimore, Maryland, one of the major American non-Hasidic yeshivas.
IAM WHITELAW, 1ST Ps VISCOUNT WHITELAW William Stephen Ian Whitelaw, 1st Viscount Whitelaw, KT, CH, MC, PC, DL (28 June 1918 1 July 1999) Lord Commissioner of the Treasury In office 6 March 1961 16 July 1962, Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Labour In office 16 July 1962 16 October 1964 Monarch Elizabeth II, and often known as Willie Whitelaw, was a British Conservative politician who served in a wide number of Cabinet positions, most notably as home secretary from 1979 to 1983 and as de facto Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1979 to 1988.
He was a captain of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club BENJAMIN NATHANIEL SMITH Benjamin Nathaniel Smith was an American spree killer and member of the neo-Nazi World Church of the Creator.
During the weekend of July 4, 1999, Smith targeted members of racial and ethnic minorities in random drive-by shootings in Illinois and Indiana, after which he committed suicide REG BISHOP Bishop was made an Officer of the Order of Australia in January 1984.
Reginald Bishop AO was an Australian politician who served as a Senator for South Australia from 1962 TO 1981.
MUNGO BALLARDIE pa MACCALLUM 11 DECEMBER 1913 12 JULY 1999 MacCallum was born in Point Piper, Sydney on 11 December 1913.
LOUISE CASELOTTI AUGUST 23, 1910 JULY 13, 1999 Caselotti was born in Bridgeport, Connecticut, the daughter of voice teacher Guido Caselotti, with whom she studied after the family moved to Los Angeles, California.
DONALD D ENGEN Donald D Engen was a United States Navy vice admiral, former Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and former Director of the National Air and Space Museum.
CAROLYN BESSETTE-KENNEDY JANUARY 7, 1966 JULY 16, 1999 Horst-Gregorio Canellas 6 June 1921 23 July 1999 Horst-Gregorio Canellas was a German entrepreneur and football official.
After the end of World War IT he spent some time in Spain and then moved to Hesse and adopted German citizenship.
In 1964 Canellas became chairman of Kickers Offenbach, a club then playing in the second division Regionalliga Stid.
MARY KERRIDGE lee Mary Kerridge (3 April 1914 22 July 1999) was an English actress and theatre director, who ran the Theatre Royal, Windsor and its in-house repertory company from the 1930s to the 1980s.
Born in Islington to Emest Kerridge and Antoinette Fick, she attended Highbury Hill School from 1924 to 1928.
Notable district court case and incidents In 1956, Johnson ruled in favor of Rosa Parks, striking down the “blacks in the back of the bus” law of the city of Montgomery Alabama, as unconstitutional.
In orders issued in 1961 and 1962, he ordered the desegregation of bus depots and the Montgomery Regional Airport in Alabama’s Middle judicial district.
This book Silenced Journalists and Witnesses and in the next chapter the Cover up which Paid Stalkers enact a falsity which contradicts the truth these dead people and I would have told Representative Leo Ryan of California was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal, Congress’s highest experession of national appreciation for distinguished achievements and contributions.
In office January 3, 1973 November 18, 1978 After the 1965 Watts riots, Ryan took a job as a substitute school teacher to investigate and document conditions in the Los Angeles area.
He was also known for his vocal criticism of the lack of congressional oversight of the Central Intelligence Agency , and co-authored the Hughes-Ryan Amendment, passed in 1974, which requires the president of the United States to report covert CIA activity to Congress. i i | | i i i | i | i | i | i | i | i | i i i i i | i i | i | i | i | i i | In 1978, Ryan traveled to Guyana to investigate claims that people were being held 1 against their will at the Peoples Temple Jonestown settlement.
He was shot and killed at an i airstrip on November 18, as he and his party were attempting to leave.
The United 1 States State Department and the United States Central Intelligence Agency , along with the British i government, played a strong role in influencing political control in Guyana during this time.
She claimed that the men were involved in a plot to kill John F Kennedy.
Cheramie 1 , added that Kennedy would be killed in Dallas within a few days.
Later she told the same story to i ' doctors and nurses who treated her.
As she appeared to be under the influence of drugs her story F ' was ignored. | | | | | | i | | | i i i i i] i | | | i i i | | i | i | i i i q Following the assassination, Cheramie was interviewed by the police.
In fact, she believed the two men were having a 1 homosexual relationship.
Cheramie had been lying in the roadway and although he attempted to avoid hitting her, he ran : over the top of her skull, causing fatal injuries.
An investigation into the accident and the 1 possibility of a relationship between the victim and the driver produced no evidence of foul play. i The case was closed.” (norhy Kilgallen Dorothy Mae Kilgallen She interview Jack Ruby.
JEK MURDER GOVERNMENT MURDERED DOROTHY KILLGALLEN College drop becomes cub reporter, crime reporter, holllywood reporter, back stage gossib to world coronations.
Kelly also took part in reciprocal visits to the United States Army Medical Research Institute ' of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick, Maryland, and I visits to Porton Down by Russian and American 1 inspectors.
Despite their findings, Kelly concluded i that the tripartite inspection programme had failed.
David Christopher Kelly was born in Llwynypia, Glamorgan, South Wales, on 14 May 1944.
His parents were Thomas John Kelly and Margaret, née Williams; Thomas was a schoolteacher i who was serving in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve as a signals officer during the Second 1 World War.
Thomas and Margaret divorced in 1951 and she took her young son and moved in . with her parents in Pontypridd.
His mother died two years later from an overdose of prescription barbiturates.
As a ' result of the death, Kelly suffered from insomnia and was prescribed sleeping pills; he was also ' given an extra year to complete his degree.
Kelly was interviewed twice by his employers— , on 3 AND 7 JULY; they concluded that he may have been Gilligan’s source, but that Gilligan | may have exaggerated what Kelly said.
It ' appears he ingested up to 29 tablets of co-proxamol, an analgesic drug, then cut his left wrist, 1 severing his ulnar artery, with a pruning knife he had owned since his youth.
It was subsequently 1 established that neither the knife nor the blister packs showed Kelly’s fingerprints on their 1 surfaces.
Andi and I talk late into the night about how we’|l celebrate it when we see each other in Vienna in March.
Wood died off of the coast of Santa Catalina Island on November 29, 1981, at age 43, during a holiday break from the production of her would-be comeback film Brainstorm with Christopher Walken.
The events surrounding her death have been the subject of conflicting witness statements, prompting the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, under the instruction of the coroner’s office, to list her cause of death as “drowning and other undetermined factors” in 2012.
Brainstorm is a 1983 American science fiction film directed by Douglas Trumbull, and starring Christopher Walken, Natalie Wood , Louise Fletcher and Cliff Robertson.
It follows a research team’s efforts to perfect a system that directly records and replays the sensory experiences and emotional feelings of a subject, and the efforts by the company’s management to exploit the device for military ends.
After a researcher records her own death from a heart attack, her colleagues join forces to retrieve the information and play it back.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia ae u Sam Giancana retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | Within days of Monroe’s death, he writes, Frank Sinatra’s attorney Mickey Rudin, who also worked with Monroe, told him that the actress had been killed.
Conspiracy theorists consider Giancana along with Mafia leaders Santo Trafficante Jr. and Carlos Marcello associated with the | | | | | | | | | | | | | | i | i | | i | | | | | i | bed ; ; ; 1 | assassination of Kennedy.
In 1965, Giancana was convicted of contempt of court, serving one . | i | | | | | | | | i | | | i | | i | | | i | i | i | year in prison.
Bc onsressmand and Navy FLight Surgeon Larry McDonald retrieved from Wikipedia and copied 1%, or modified to here Larry McDonald APRIL 1, 1935 September 1, 1983) | Navy Flight Surgeon | Member of United States Congress | Us Citizen | Founder John Birch Society Political Organization and The New American Magazine Conceivably NASA DARPA may have had the technical capability to interfere with GPS or similar electronic navigation leading the plane into Russian airspace.
Conservapedia la child, he attended several private and arochial schools before attending a nondenominational high school.
In Iceland, McDonald asserted to his commanding officer that the United States Embassy in i Reykjavik was doing things advantageous to communists, but was told he did not understand the 1 big picture. i After his tour of service he practiced medicine at the McDonald Urology Clinic in Atlanta.
All three ' were openly homosexual. 1 | | i | | | i | | What links this story to Barack Obama is that, according to an acquaintance of Obama, Larry Sinclair, Obama is a closet bisexual with whom he had sexual and drug-related encounters in November 1999.
Z Kurt Donald Cobain retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | int Donald Cobain was an American singer, 1 songwriter, and musician.
In addition to 1 “Smells Like Teen Spirit”, Cobain wrote many other notable songs for Nirvana, including “Come as You Are”, “Lithium”, “In Bloom”, “Something in the Way”, “Heart-Shaped Box”, “All ; Apologies”, “About a Girl”, “Aneurysm” and “You Know You’re Right”. i | uring the last years of his life, Cobain struggled with heroin addiction and chronic health | problems such as depression.
Deaths of United States officers during corrupt elements of USA fighting dirty war of #NWO businesses who use foreign and private resources to kill United States officials.
An attempt to renew its support in a 1973 referendum on the monarchy and gradual democratisation was ended by another coup by hardliner Dimitrios Ioannidis.
They were known for being pro-communist and their hatred for anything they thought unfit for Greece including the United States military’s presence in their country.
In the GangStalk scheme recruits from mental health roles, family members of FBI agents, etc., act like civilians but are undercover actors faking or spinning _ events Ww y I am Edward Donegan dangerous drug addicted violent felons manufacture Child Porn in my vicinity, DARPA Backed The appear to have created the appearance of a fake ring that appears to include Tom Dunham and Edward Donegan who are giving into the blackmail or being detected by Dominatrices.
He slept well after releasing so much of is, Thin ASPT unit is the pla to go, The top FBI are blackmailed or involved.
To brass renewed his SC and his contract ,,., Ronald C Machen, the United States attorney for the District of Columbia, and Rod J Rosenstein, his counterpart in Maryland to take over direction of existing investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation In a program widely viewed as suspicious and unconstitutional the Obama Administration through Eric Holder appointed Machen Jr. and Rosensteind (of Maryaland Public Health Service and CIA) to keep the nations most secret sexrets secret I believe this is where subverting Targeted Individuals come from.
But Mr Holder instead assigned two prosecutors Ronald C Machen, the United States attorney for the District of Columbia, and Rod J Rosenstein, his counterpart in Maryland to take over direction of existing investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, elevating the stature of the cases but not giving them any special powers.
Earlier Friday, President Obama declared that the White House had not been behind the recent leaks and vowed to prosecute the people responsible for disclosing classified information if they could be identified.
NYT The geneology of Barrack Obama, both real and imagined, from around the world in world wide Sleeper Cells operations a On December 18, 2006, they murdered Stacey the premeditated, cold-blooded \ and cruel death of an innocent.
For i children with dyslexia, it has been shown to be an effective way of building up a word.
CONSPIRACY CON*SPIR*A*CY , PLURAL -CIES Middle English conspiracies, from Latin conspirare.
July 1989 | | 1 @salvationarmy Journalist; necromancer; spiritualist; pretend Christian; The Review of : Reviews editor and publisher; “Government by Journalism” concept creator; William Booth’s ; ghost writer-promoter for In Darkest England and the Way Out“ social gospel | campaign pic.twitter.com/c6OpZwrOPK | | Red KettleHistory.
Achievements Jim O Wilhite has been listed as a noteworthy gas company executive by Marquis Who’s Who.
Andi sent me this email shortly after our IM exchage ended: Andi: That’s why I can’t see every day; the level of such extreme torture and gross indifference to human life.
Commonalities with Others and My Story. e Thad first contacted [Veronica Hoffman after meeting her in person, all was well.
If “indirect” didn’t work, there was always “direct”, which might mean pulling the batteries out of your new car’s fancy built-in carphone while it was switched on, thus immediately destroying the charging circuitry and voiding your warranty.
James Bovard is a revaaler about lethal FBI Psychiatric Shock Troops and Lethal Engagements of Compounds system Death of Vicky Weaver * After the death of the United States marshal, the commander of the FBI’s Hostage Rescue Team was called in, and ordered federal agents to shoot any armed adult outside the Weaver cabin, regardless of whether that person was doing anything to threaten or menace federal agents.
New Questions In FBI Shooting retrieved from WBUR News by ri David Boeri and copied or modified to here Abdul-Baki Todashev holds a photo he claims is of his dead son, Ibragim, during a news conference in Moscow, Russia, on May 30, 2013.
The father, who says agents killed his son “execution style,” showed journalists 16 photographs of Ibragim in the morgue with what he said were six gunshot wounds to his torso and one to the [ . person has been shot directly into the brain as well as less visible torso shots What made Todashev’s shooting national news in May was what he reportedly told interrogators before he was shot.
But the FBI has not yet issued a report on whether the use of deadly force was y justified.
In the photo shown by his father a i i i I i i i i i | I i i | i | | i] | i i | | Ronald Harmon Brown AUGUST 1, 1941 Washington, D.C., United States Died APRIL 3, 1996, their Commerce Secretary who reportedly told Bill he would take him down with him if he was indicted for corruption.
Three days after the crash, a day he just happened to be off work, he was found with a bullet hole through his chest. | | ve Onvicted of terrorism in planting pressure cooker bombs at the Boston Marathon on April 15, 2013, along with his brother Tamerlan Tsarnaev.
Homicide The Colonel received a blow to the back of his head, which rendered a fatal injury.
United States Air Force 20th Fighter Group James Paul Donegan P-51 Pilot Glorian Gainey Bishopville resident with biological brother Harold and the Dew family adoptiong the Gaineys after Festus Gainey dies in NORTH Carolina with the Von Trapps in 1936 or so, and King Edward VIII abdicates that year. a 20th Fighter Group P-51D Mustangs parked at Shaw Field, November 1946.
The Murdaugh family is one of the most prominent families in South Carolina, with a long and storied history of influence and Leon Lott is a treasonous Sheriff in charge | power. of law enforcement for the unincorporated area’s of Richland County, South Carolina.
PatriotOrTraitor.com Only a year after the joint drills of the Richland County Sheriff’s Department and the United States military raised eyebrows, Sheriff Leon Lott of the RCSD has once again announced that the department will be conducting drills that involve the joint training of civilian law enforcement and the United States military.
On May 8, 2015 it was reported by WLTX that the Richland County Sheriff’s A member of the Murdaugh family had Department will be conducting drills in served as solicitor or district attorney in conjunction with the 3rd Special Forces Group out of Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
The exercises will take place at late-night and pre-dawn and will run from May 8 until WEN As Ro PA0 Boe Citizens have now been informed that Sheriff’s Department and Military vehicles will be traveling in the Lower Richland County community near Eastover and Hopkins as well as Elgin near Screaming Eagle Road.
The Sheriff’s Department has announced that residents in these areas may hear explosives being detonated and ordinance being set off as well as shots being fired. | the region for an uninterrupted 85 years, from 1920 to 2005.
Even now, the family’s wealth and power continues, with the family running a prolific law firm and owning several other businesses in Hampton, 5.
It is worth nothing that the drills will be taking place in the exact same location as last year’s drills.
May.,2021 at 9:32 AM CDT and copied or modified to here | i | 1 : In 2018, Sheriff Lott was the first sheriff to launch the PEACE Officer identity program, a new ' : framework for community policing, in collaboration with the not-for-profit Police2Peace.
Smith’s mother, Sandy Smith, told The Augusta Chronicle in 2015 that there were no broken glass or plastic shards from a mirror on the road where her son’s body was found. f ( A man on his way to work spotted Stephen Smith’s body on Sandy Run Road in the \involuntary .” early morning hours of JULY 8, 2015.
Cities with surf beaches include Huntington Beach, with its surfing museum, Newport Beach's boat-filled harbor sits opposite Balboa Peninsula.
Advocate General Manual investigations also reached the conclusion that Sabow ' committed suicide.
Marine Corps, which he had served loyally for three decades and had grown to love.
John David Sabow, Sabow’s brother and a South Dakota neurologist, had both the i Medical background and the tenacity to mount his own investigation.
Regarding the Waco incident, Wilcher alleged that: e Koresh and six others in his cult were CIA deep-cover operatives who had refused an order to activate against an unknown target. e The initial engagement plan was designed to result in the deaths of United States officers to justify a large-scale retaliation. e Nerve gas, not tear gas, was used in the final assault. e ACIA hit squad was dropped onto the roof by helicopter and killed Koresh and dozens of others with : e The CIA set the fire at the compound using timed white phosphorus incendiaries.
Reb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 Aug 4 July 4 April 1 a brain flies forward from sniper _ fire SS Paul Wilcher Paul Wilcher was the lawyer to whistle blowers Rodney Stich and Gunter Karl Russbacher.
Why the magic bullet and All of these and other connect to a PsyOps alleged ring of me in activities I am not tied to but appear to exist.
In feb 20 1961 My father and mother were Manchurian Candidate to Obama.
It also involved DNA asset seizure from me by the Whitehorse, Judge Roll, and United States redistributing, Scalia.
KidneyGate | Trump/USA | RU Black Market Criminals | Saudie Crowm Prince Comey Legality Jen Moore Vladimir Kashogi Family and career* Ralph Blasey Jr.
If there is any Unelected, Stable, Reliable “Deep State” criminal agenda going on today, Mr Blasey Jr is a Major link Lifelong connection between each New Administration to carry out and plan any longterm “Criminal Coup” of our nation.
Understand how someone 40+ years in the CIA from controlling Black Ops Secret Bank Budgets, to now Providing Personal Public Security to each of the “Deep State” criminals (Brennan, Comey, McCabe, Mueller, Rice, Lynch, etc) who have been fired, removed, and now facing criminal charges.
CIA’smain BLACK BUDGET OPERATIONS under the direct command of the feared CIA : Counterintelligence Chief James Jesus Angleton.
In other words, I’m not on anything that could kill me unexpectedly or suddenly. i I’ve never done illegal drugs either.
Not even once. i There’s no way anyone could get into my house, no robbers, no angry exes (which I don’t have btw), no fanatical people my house is like Fort Knox...unless it was someone super professional.
If something were to happen to me, it’s foul play and you know exactly who and why given ; my work and mission in this life.
We provide immediate support in areas experiencing disaster, war, and conflict. e are made up of highly-skilled military veterans, first responders, law enforcement, and civilian personnel specializing in Search & Rescue , Medical and Swift Water Rescue.
The second autopsies [which discounted the original autopsy report extremely stoned brothers stumbled into the trains path] were performed by Georgia medical examiner Dr.
Keith McCaskle, also implicated in the murder,[citation needed] was stabbed to death by an unknown attacker on NOVEMBER 10, 1988.
Obituary Calvin R Walraven of North Little Rock, AR, 1940 2017 Calvin R Walraven died on FEBRUARY 19, 2017.
She | was promoted to associate professor in 1971 and professor in 1976.
Elders received a D.Sc. ' degree from Bates College in 2002 Elders was born Minnie Lee Jones in Schaal, Arkansas, to a poor, farm sharecropping family, i and was the eldest of eight children, and valedictorian of her school class.
The family also i spent two years near a wartime shipyard in Richmond, California before returning to Schaal.
Biology from Philander Smith College in Little Rock, Arkansas, where she also pledged Delta ; Sigma Theta.
Elders drew fire, as well as censure from the Clinton administration, when she suggested that ; legalizing drugs might help reduce crime and that the idea should be studied.
Nuclear bomber capable aircraft retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Product Information story of the most sophisticated terrorist attack in history.
Based on a comprehensive ten-year study into the murders of his fellow pilots on 9/11, he explains how hijackers, novice pilots at the controls of massive guided missiles, were able to beat United States Air Force fighters to iconic targets with advanced maneuvering, daring speeds and a kamikaze finish.
Fasten your seatbeltthe sad truth is that all of the solid evidence points to a dark collaboration between members of the Bush Administration and a covert group of Saudi government officials. b b This is a game changer that will finally set the record straight on the most horrific crime in United States ' history.
States Senator Bob Graham’s Congressional Joint Inquiry in 2002 revealed that Saudi Arabian i Intelligence agents met the 9/11 hijackers in the Los Angeles in January of 2000, harbored them and led them to 18 months of flight training in Florida and Arizona.
James McDougal Clintons convicted Whitewater partner died of an apparent heart attack, while in solitary confinement.
Ed Willey died on the same day his wife Kathleen Willey claimed Bill Clinton groped her in the oval office in the White House.
He was found hanged and it is reported a non foul play suicide in part despondent over the death of his mother, a figure in British Counter Intelligence operations. a Hotel Le Bristol Innermost Paris, France.
Hotel Le Bristol opened in 1925 and is famous for its historic architecture and luxurious interior.
Victor Rothschild records in one of his books the step-by-step dismantling of a bomb masquerading as a crate of onions.
L Peter R de Vries retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here “Pe ter Rudolf de Vries was a Dutch investigative journalist and crime reporter.
In 2005, he founded his own political party which was disbanded soon after. yn 5 where he had appeared as a guest.
John F Kennedy assassination i conspiracy theories I | | Inthe first half of 2006, De Vries and Wim Dankbaar produced a two and a half hour | special about the 1963 assassination of United States president John F Kennedy.
Born JULY 10TH, 1956, he committed suicide on JUNE 5TH, 2019, at the age of 62.
It was Black’s contention that this was a lead up to the implementation of full-scale martial law and possible war.
The WMR site quoted ; intelligence sources saying that an FBI agent who discovered Emanuel connection with the | Israeli intelligence , was the assistant of the manager of the former investigation office, John | O’Neill, and another agent whose name was not uncovered, who is still employed by the | i i | investigation office.
Sydenham’s chorea For the mysterious historical phenomenon also known as “St.
There’s something about Harry Garudian UK Marilyn Diptych 1962 (Tate Galler Campbell’s Soup Cans by Andy Warhol, 1962.
Duffy told Bailey she was too posh for him, but Bailey was undeterred. -From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia St Bernard’s Catholic Grammar School Jean Shrimpton attended (formerly St Bernard’s Convent School) is an academically selective Roman Catholic grammar school on Langley Road, Slough, Langley, Berkshire.
Aldin House was bought (and renamed St Bernard’s) by the Bernardine nuns in 1897.
At the time of the foundation, the convent was right in the countryside, with nothing but fields separating it from Windsor Castle. -From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia The Manhattan Project began in late 1942, and along with it @ secrecy project of unprecedented scope.
The Kellogg Company was given more responsibility for Gaseous diffusion research, as well as more funding and resources.
It is 8:04, AUGUST 4 Edward Paul Donegan “Pop Icon Andy Warhol Dies After Routine Surgery” ran the headline in The Houston Chronicle.
By Blake Gopnik MYT Feb., 2017 Du Pont Empire Empire State Building retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ~~ The Empire State Building was financed primarily by Raskob and Pierre du Pont, while James 1 Farley’s General Builders Supply Corporation supplied the building materials. i | From the outset the building was in debt, losing $1 million per year by 1935.
Real estate | developer Seymour Durst recalled that the building was so underused in 1936 that there was no | elevator service above the 45th floor, as the building above the 41st floor was empty except for | the NBC offices and the Raskob/Du Pont offices on the 81st floor.
The site was previously owned by John Jacob Astor of the prominent Astor family, who had owned the site since the mid-1820s.
In 1893, John Jacob Astor Sr.‘s grandson William Waldorf Astor opened the Waldorf Hotel on the site; four years later, his cousin, John Jacob Astor IV, opened the 16-story Astoria Hotel on an adjacent site.
The two portions of the Waldorf-Astoria 1 hotel had 1,300 bedrooms, making it the largest hotel in the world at the time.
The Empire State Inc. consortium was announced to the public in August 1929.
Bono Goemptays Ger bictraghi, and Ge restauranis-gee no bint of Ted Gunderson did not believe that Sonny Bono died in a skiing accident.
New accusations emerge over Cher’s husband’s death assassination in January 1998. | i | | | i | Ted Gunderson said that Cher‘s former husband was targeted in a politically-motivated | | | | i | However, Bono‘s autopsy concluded that he died of injuries sustained after crashing into a tree while skiing at the Heavenly Ski Resort in Nevada.
Gunderson said hitmen hired by top United States officials moved in on him because Bono a member of the United States House Of Representatives was believed to be about to expose an international drug and weapons ring. eZ a Tabloid says ‘thugs’ killed Sonny Bono retrieved from Bradley Foster in the Daily Tahoe 1 Fe, Tribune and copied or modified to here High ranking official Sgt.
Salvatore Phillip “Sonny” Bono was an American singer-songwriter, producer, actor, and politician who came to fame in partnership with his second wife Cher as the popular singing duo Sonny & Cher.
Sonny Bono, the former singer and TV performer who was killed in a skiing accident Monday, revealed that he died of massive head injuries.
Douglas County, Nevada, Sheriff Ron Pierini said at a news conference Tuesday that Bono’s death force trauma” from hitting a tree.
S62(a ee eee ee eee eee eee eeeeeee a United States Senator Timothy Peter Johnson retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here 5---Johnson was treated for prostate cancer in 2004 and further tests showed that he was clear of the disease.
Brooks, served in the Army’s 101st Airborne Division, which would surely be mobilized to fight ' in Iraq. i Sightings #84.
Arrangements are by Schooler Funeral Home, 4100 S Georgia St, Amarillo, Texas 79110.
His body was discovered at 8:20 AM Saturday as movers reportedly found a note on the door of his residence a a sking them not to enter but to call for paramedics.
Webb’s August 1996 series Dark Alliance for the San Jose Mercury News pulled deep covers way from United States covert operations and American denial about connections between the CIA and drugs.
The non-nuclear explosives in two of the weapons detonated upon impact with the ground, resulting in the contamination o 1 which fell into the Mediterranean Sea, was recovered intact after a search lasting two and a half t months.
Z Murder of Cheri Jo Bate retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here f a 0.77-square-mile area with radioactive plutonium.
The fourth, | The murder of Cheri Jo Bates is an unsolved murder that occurred in Riverside, California, on October 30, 1966.
I would like to emphasize that there is a ; real possibility that he can become homicidal again.” Evaluation of the mindset of the murderer of Cheri Jo Bates, written by the Chief Psychologist of Patton State Hospital.
Bates was found sprawled face down on a gravel path between two unoccupied houses on 1 Terracina Drive, close to the library parking lot where she had parked her Beetle the previous i evening.
The ground surrounding her body was described in her official pee report as “looking like a freshly plowed field. .. the preschool site, acquired by Virginia McMartin in 1966, had been a horse stable and was inhabited by all sorts of farm animals.
Eliza Tibbets was among early American settlers and founders of Riverside, California; she gE was an activist in Washington, D.C., for progressive social causes, including freedmen’s rights and universal suffrage before going to the West Coast.
Bishop and Knight Checkmate can bring down an opposing king using the pieces of Bishops and Knights.
This differs from Bishop Bishop and other engames in the the Knight plays a key role on the capture of the opposing King.
A KBE is a decoration symbolising the second highest rank in The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire.
This medal is awarded to service personnel in recognition of outstanding public service.
On DECEMBER 18TH 2021, the Zodiac Speaking podcast will be releasing an interview with Jo Anne Goettsche, former roommate of Donna Lass at 4122 Balboa Street in San Francisco.
Interviewed by Mike Morford, she talks frankly about her recollections of Donna Lass and the relevant time period before and after September 6th 1970, having traveled to South Lake Tahoe the day of her disappearance to spend a couple of days sightseeing with Donna.
Unfortunately, that meeting never transpired, and Donna Lass was never seen again.
We will also discuss a private investigator’s report, provided to the family of Donna Lass by the investigator they hired.
So don’t forget to tune in on December 18th Santa Barbara JUNE 4Zodiac Killing Robert Domingos and his seventeen-year-old girlfriend Linda Edwards June 4th, 1963 was Senior Ditch Day at Lompoc High School.
It was a day which traditionally saw those in the senior year take a day off from classes and spend the day partying instead.
Eighteen-year-old Robert Domingos and his seventeen-year-old girlfriend Linda Edwards where just two of the many participating students.
Instead of attending one of the gatherings arranged, Robert Domingos and Linda Edwards decided they would rather spend the day together in a more intimate setting.
Originally they had planned to head to the beach with another young couple, however, when that couple had to cancel those plans Robert and Linda went on alone.
The young lovers drove down to Gaviota Beach near Santa Barbara in Robert’s 1957 Pontiac.
Sadly, the two teenagers would never make it home. he following morning both the teenagers were reported missing.
During the search, a friend remembered that Robert and Linda had previously mentioned spending time together at Gaviota Beach.
Upon arrival in the area, Robert Domingos dad George Domingos spotted his son’s 1957 Pontiac parked along Highway 101.
During a further search of the area, a Highway Patrolman named Paul Schultz came across a shack.
On entering Schultz discovered the bodies of Robert Domingos and Linda Edwards.
Vallejo 1969 Twenty-two-year-old Darlene Ferrin was a wife, mother and a popular waitress at a Vallejo restaurant.
On the night of JULY 4, she picked up friend Michael Mageau and stopped her Corvair in the parking lot of Blue Rock Springs Park.
Michael later told police that another vehicle pulled into the lot around midnight and then left only to return minutes later.
The driver got out of the car, shined a bright light and fired into the Corvair with a 9mm handgun.
The writer mocked police for failing to catch him and threatened to shoot children ona school bus.
The envelope contained a piece of the blood-stained shirt belonging to victim Paul Stine.
NOVEMBER 8, 1969 B43 8 SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE 7 PAGE LETTER: NOVEMBER 9, 1969 B43 9 LETTER ADDRESSED TO FAMOUS ATTORNEY MELVIN BELLI, POSTMARKED DECEMBER 20, 1969 in the Arizona House of Representatives from 2001 until 2003 and the Arizona Senate from 2003 until 2005 when she was elected to the United States House.
This book DARPA, Project Pegasus, DARPA and the Brain, and the #WETWORKS hashtag Me and Thomas “Neil Donegan are part of #ManhattanProject victims, born into it, destroyed by it, pawns of it.
Pegasus + | Pegasus Mythical creature Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to here +) Pegasus is a mythical winged divine horse, and one of the most recognized ; creatures in Greek mythology.
Wikipedia | slalats tetataee Bacrew D Basiago, DARPA Future Battle retrieved from link and copied or adified to here a) Introduction Tonight, in a major disclosure event, the United States time travel cover-up ends, as one of America’s early time-space explorers steps forward to reveal what he experienced and what he learned during the early years of time travel research and development by the United States government.
Wikipedia Andy is an emerging figure in the Truth Movement, who is leading a campaign to lobby the United States government to disclose such controversial truths as the fact that Mars harbors life and that the United States has achieved “quantum access” to past and future events.
Basiago says his father had previously worked for the Ralph M Parsons Engineering Corporation, where he helped develop the technology.
When Basiago was brought to participate in his first “jump,” he says his father had already been time traveling for years at the Curtiss-Wright corporation in New Jersey.
Unraveling the Soetoro-Obama Deception @ slideshare.net/exouniversity/manchurian-candidate-barack-hussein-obama stworking |] News tucc WETWORKS Pom MKULTRA ] Explore The Obama-Mars Connection: Unraveling the Soetoro-Obama Deception STATUS REPORT CIA Donald Barr William Barr 1971 A key nexus point in the Soetoro/Obama deception occurs in 1971, wher “Barack Hussein Obama” is pre-identified vi {DarPA) ime travel as 44"" U.S dent, sworn in on Jan., 2009.
Stanley Ann Dunham its directed by CIA handlers to arrange paternity agreement with Barack Obama Sr. in Honolulu, _ — Barry Soetoro and Stanley Ann Dunham participate in secret CIA jump roc training program with Andrew D Basiago and William Brett Stillings.
Soetoro/Obama meets Andrew D Basiago in Los Angeles and introduces self as “Barack Hussein Obama”, while friend identifies him as future United States president.
From * Wikipedia excerpted which has been sourced from link f the claims that Freemasonry exerts control over politics, perhaps the bestknown example is the New World Order theory, but there are others.
To Scalia’s credit, the science in Myriad is convoluted, especially for someone who hasn’t taken biology in decades.
Scalia commented that the harm of racial discrimination alone created an active controversy under the Court’s previous Equal Protection jurisprudence.
Justices Scalia, Alito, and Roberts asked many questions about the definition of a “critical mass”, which Grutter named as the central measure of diversity.
The expansion of the human brain during evolution, specifically of the neocortex, is linked to our cognitive abilities such as reasoning and language.
A ' Scientists Grow Bigger Monkey Brains Using Human Genes, r Replicating Evolution This may have replicated the moment in history i where humans and primates were set apart in evolution.
Administration as ; White House Staff ; Secretary from 1993 to 1995 and White House Deputy Chief of Staff for ; Operations from 1997 to 1998.
Additionally, he was a co-chairman of the Obama-Biden Transition Project.
Podesta spent most of his early years in Chicago, where he was born, growing ; up in the neighborhood of Jefferson Park on the city’s Northwest Side.
His ; mother, Mary , was Greek-American, and his father, John David * Podesta Sr., was Italian-American.
During the experiment, the equipment begins malfunctioning. i Observers simply see the ship disappear but sailors on board experience a bizarre i and disorienting phase shift.
They escape into the desert and after walking for miles, they eventually ind their way to a roadside diner the next day.
David and Allison then evade military police, ' who have arrived to take David into custody. f | | Jim was from nearby California, so David decides to try to find his family.
The two manage to elude them when the i pursuing vehicle crashes and burns.
Longstreet predicts that the vortex will continue to expand until the i entire world is consumed.
This book Mulholland Falls Analogy and MKULTRA COINTELRPO, MLKULTRA, tied to Ongoing Government Blunders with my DNA and DNA rights My belief is that there is an alleged genealogy backstory of Barrack Obama Jr., and perhaps the Kelly NASA Twins.
These lines cary a small gene, FOXP2 that VIenna and CIA and WIndsors were watching.
Aug 4 1962 was ovum from Glorian used with Malcom X for Barrack Obama jr.
Should a Legend be created by the FBI that he was a son of Marylin Monroe, the white mother, photos were created with RFK, others backing the event.
Marylin backed out and she was murdered at that time, the staged Aug 4 1962 Birthday of Barrack Obama Jr.
This occured during atomic testing my father and mother wre involved in during the Manhattan Project.
NOVEMBER 19 1961 the day after my and Barrack Obama Jr.s birth and day of Birth Certificate.
John Housing directing, Divinic birthday NOVEMBER 18 1962 Cheney and Bush of Zapata Oil likely join plan | AUGUST 4 1962 Marilyn dead, RFK in the area, likely staging possible timeline of birthday party with Obama Jr.
AUGUST 5 1962 Malcolm X invited to meet with black civil rights lawyer | and later RFK over assassination and moles.
The Bush Cheney Zapata Oil faction of Boston Cape Cod are at odds with JFK My guess is #MalcomX approached #MarilynMonroe as Barrack Obama Jr. parents.
Instead, Madelyn Lee Payne and Stanley Armour Dunham or more likely, Marylin Monroe met her nephew and was going to talk.
General Timms in command of the Atomic Proving Grounds of the Atomic Energy Commission is on horse.
Colonel Nathan Fitzgerald the colonel responsible for security will kill a call girl who saw the cancer victims.
Mulholland Falls It’s lonely in the Department of Defense Palms Springs Las Vegas desert area, but a call girl is present.
Later that same free spirited call girl will be freed from her pimps, also at the pool party by a cop from the Four Hats and they will fall in love and a story arc develops tying the anti mafia cops into the Atomic Proving grounds, and the murders covering up the cancer secrets.
In Donegan’s case it is illegal use of DNA never authorized by speech therapist CIA and FBI, DuPonts, Kellog X Kellex and others.
GENERAL THOMAS TIMMS GEneral Tims is Atomic Proving Grounds Atomic Energy Commission military ‘base general and played by John Malcovich.
While in a relationship with a general in charge of atomic tests in the desert, Allison stumbles upon secrets and sufferings being hidden as a result of those tests, something that leads someone to murder her by throwing her from a plane.
Investigating her murder is the L.A.P.D.‘s ‘Hat Squad’, a group of intrepid detectives who get much more leeway in their methods and their cases because they get results.
Determined to find her killer, he and his squad confront Federal and military roadblocks determined to keep them from getting to the truth.
In the end, Hoover discovers Allison was murdered to keep from blowing the whistle on human testing of radiation sickness, and avenges her by disposing of her killers.
How Kodak Exposed The Atomic Bomb on Youtube Veritasium 11.5M subscribers.
Kodack from paper in airplanes know photographic film and lit radium instruments of unlit cockpits fogged and contaminated photographic paper. but in Indiana they found Cerium-141 contamination at their papermills.
That began at much like my recon film my father used might have been affected by.
When Allison Pond was Xrayd an ankle was image was fogged and the coroner realized radioctive glass fragment COLONEL NATHAN FITZGERALD Treat Williams as Colonel Nathan Fitzgerald.
The blackmailer using Allison Pond call seductress secret sex tapes turns out to be Fitzgerald, who demands the film of Base General Timms with Allison be brought to him.
Hoover realizes that Fields’ film footage of Allison also includes images of “atomic soldiers”, American servicemen who were unwillingly used by Fitzgerald as guinea pigs for A-bomb tests before being transferred to a secure military hospital ward on his orders; the colonel intends to let them die so he can avoid being held accountable.
Hoover and Coolidge fly to the base, and secretly deliver the film to Timms, who is terminally ill with cancer himself, so he can expose Fitzgerald’s wrongdoing.
LIEUTENANT MAX HOOVER TEAM LEADER OF FOUR HATS Lieutenant Maxwell Hoover, and his partners Coolidge, Hall, and Relyea are brought in to investigate the suspicious death of a young woman whose body was found at a construction site.
An examination reveals that every bone in her body is broken and the coroner comments that she looks as though she “jumped off a cliff” even though there are no cliffs nearby.
The detectives receive a film of Allison having sex in a motel room, taken by a camera hidden behind a two-way mirror.
Allison’s friend, Jimmy Fields, admits that he and Allison made numerous such films, including one with Hoover in it.
Hoover is part of an LA group of anti-mob police unit that plays rough using dirty tricks to push the invading Chicago Mob back to Chicago.
Despite the name Hoover, or using the name Max Hoover, Hoover is at odds with the FBI Director who at the time was J Edgar Hoover who was covering for the Atomic Energy Commission and its problems with the dark secret of radiation victims.
Miami Vice Yerkovich has indicated he devised the concept after learning about asset forfeiture statutes allowing law enforcement agencies to confiscate the property of drug dealers for official use.
Two automobiles drew a lot of attention in Miami Vice, the Ferrari Daytona and Testarossa.
In an average episode, Crockett and Tubbs wore five to eight outfits, appearing in shades of pink, blue, green, peach, fuchsia, and the show’s other “approved” colors.
Designers such as Vittorio Ricci, Gianni Versace, and Hugo Boss were consulted in keeping the male leads looking trendy.
Jodi Tillen, the costume designer for the first season, along with Michael Mann, set the style.
The abundance of pastel colors on the show reflects Miami’s Art-deco architecture.
Hat-Wearing Foursome Was Legendary at LAPD Four young, impeccably dressed men—in dark, tailor-made, single-breasted suits, wide-brimmed hats, and polished shoes—piled out and approached a hot dog stand.
All were well over six feet tall and collectively they weighed more than half a ton.
Hoover then brutally assaults the FBI agent, after which another film is delivered to his wife Kate, showing her husband and Allison having sex in the motel.
The Colonel assigned to security he is using the tape of married LAPD Officer Hoover with Allison Pond while in fact Hoover wa married but Hoover had chosen to keep the sorrow of his affair as his own guilt and not make his wife carry extra pain from it.
GENERAL THOMAS TIMES He gives speeches about the need for a few to die so more might live.
J : Assasinations Witness resistance Cancer Edgar and a Hoover, Ware Psychological Atomic | Silencers >| Mafia/CIA | Radiation |"" Top ; Warfare Research Hits by J | Exosure i USA a military Area Edgar Victims ws Brass official secrets Hoover Movie | Allison | Defense Same in | Lt Max Cancer Colonel Pond Intelligence |movie, |Hoover and _ | patients in | Nathan military medical building being hidden Fitzgerald who reports to Timms but even more so sees his including from mission as a Air Force public duty higher in command than Tims is.
Life on the remote Greek fictional resort island of Karos is forever changed when atomic bombs are dropped there by a NATO plane rapidly losing power.
Life on the island is so bleak that the inhabitants stage a mass exodus on news that Denmark has opened Greenland to Greek emigration.
The pilots are unaware of the fact that American agents are also on the island searching for their cargo.
Fe le ee ee el ee ee ee ee een z Quote retrieved from National Association of Atomic Veterans and copied or ‘ modified to here National Association of Atomic Veterans, Inc.
Atomic Veteran Community to speak, with a single voice, to their inability to get a fair hearing related to their developing ( radiogenic ) health issues that may have been precipitated by their exposure to “jonizing” radiation while participating in a nuclear weapon test detonation, or a “posttest” event.
From the beginning, and to date, we continue to pursue our purpose to this dedicated cause.
Who is an Atomic Veteran Atomic Veterans were members of the United States Armed Forces who participated in atmospheric and underwater nuclear weapons tests from 16 July, 1945 to 30 October 1962.
They also include veterans who were assigned to post test duties, such as “sround zero” nuclear warfare maneuvers & exercises, removing radiation cloud samples from aircraft wing pods, working in close proximity to radiated test animals, de-contamination of aircraft and field test equipment, retrieval and transport of test instruments & devices, and a host of other duty assignments that provided an opportunity for a radiation exposure & contamination event.
Also included are military personnel who were a part of the Occupation Forces assigned to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan soon after the detonation of AtomicBombs over those respective cities, and those American prisoners of war who were housed in close proximity to those cities.
These Veterans fit the VA’s “official” description of an Atomic-Veteran.
There is a second group of veterans who may have been involved in radiation exposure events.
These include post test events related to nuclear weapon devices detonated underground or in shafts that may have provided a radiation exposure event, or those who’s duties involved regular use of radiation producing equipment or processes, such as power plant technicians aboard nuclear powered Aircraft Carriers and Submarines, X-ray technicians, and those veterans assigned to the Enewetak Atoll radiation clean-up projects.
These veterans fit the VA’s “official” description as Occupational radiation exposed veterans.
The United States has sponsored a total of 1,054 nuclear weapons tests, and detonated two of these weapons over enemy soil during an act of war.
Some of these nuclear and thermonuclear detonations failed to produce any noticeable explosion, either by design, or due to mechanical or electrical faults.
Several of these tests, by official definition, were actually multiple detonations, two or more at the same ' time, designed for gathering specific data & information or for instrument calibration , purposes.
I might die in this fight or end up in a homeless shelter a victim of unprovoked attacks because others are incited against me on manufactured “Legend” (false back-stories about me) predicates for assaults.
I might die in this fight or end up ina homeless shelter DARPA, The CIA, FBI, DOJ who misused DNA and Free Masons may die in this fight over their illegal and unethical conduct.
MKUTRA, Race Wars, and the Manhatan Project I am a Targeted Individual of Targeted Gangstalking of state backed criminal assailants attacking me with not only impunity but State backing and State pay for the criminal assailants of me My father and mother had their DNA misused during the Cold War and espionage agencies are now targeting me illegal with violent assaults Underneath all of this has been secret tapping of genome into Illuminati and SJW causes by excuse against me, or deceit of my father and mother.
I believe the IVF of me made him the Manchurian Candidate whose lab fertilization of me also was used to create Barack Obama from Donegan DNA, and other Illuminati projects use of that DNA as well.
Leprechaun is a 1993 American horror film written and directed by Mark Jones.
Obtuse gestures around me I am authorizing my DNA, using it for bills NOT true though That is one message of the Gangstalk in the public appearances being created before the public and with break-ins of my apartment Also the message is Ed is harrasing tots and avoid him, ostracize him, in other words the Slander Campaign against me is old school OSS Psychological Warfare painting me as an evil or fool before the public.
In this revolution, research has become central, it also becomes more formalized, complex, and costly.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Treat Williams as Colonel Fitzgerald Cleanup of Espionage by Espionage hits as needed to save the bosses In a United States Federal Prison with the Department of Defense United States Public Health Commissioned Corps medical staff I sat in a small prison cell and began to feel a pinging and burning. as my meal plate was delivered.
Essentially, her job as logistics coordinator involved managing the technical details of Treadstone missions and cleaning up collateral damage.
Afterburn is another one where the wife of a dead air force pilot had to fight the military industrial complex ren is a 1992 drama film In this fact-based film, Ted Harduvel , one of the finest pilots employed by the United States Air Force, is enlisted to perform test flights for a new model of the F-16 plane.
The film’s name is derived from the “Afterburner” bar where the central character , who works as a waitress, met her future husband, a setting that forms the focus of the first part of the film.
On NOVEMBER 15, 1982, Janet Harduvel is devastated by the news of the death of her husband Ted who flew as a United States Air Force pilot in one of the world’s most sophisticated fighter aircraft, the General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon.
She is stymied in finding out the truth behind his crash in Korea and takes on the United States military and General Dynamics, maker of the F-16.
Also notable is the music by Stewart Copeland, best-known to the public as the drummer for the British band The Police, but who also was a very successful composer with an extensive career in films and TV productions. subject matter retrieved from Find a grave memorial and copied or modified to here 7 > @) sapt Theodore Harduvel JR. 8th Tactical Fighter wing was killed November 16th en his F-16 Fighting Falcon crashed near Taejon, Korea during a low level training mission.
He was going ; to be promoted to Major several months ‘ after his Korea tour.
He is survived by ; his wife Janet L and daughter Christina If you consider me the son of an air force pilot abused in DNA studies as analogous to the air force wife, in my case the defense contractors of big . business are not only failing to come ia clean they are trying a hit on me from the offices they and their church groups hold.
Harduvels wife a Prophet? pose Goddess” Janet Sciales retrieved from Janet Sciales profiled in St.
Freak Show, has been Tampa Bay’s most prominent astrologer for at least as long as ; Tampa Bay Skeptics has been around.
Ironically, Sciales was among the inaugural TBS members upon our founding in , 1988.
When I mentioned the uncanny resemblance, Sciales acknowledged that she was | | oogle knowledge panel retrieved from Mike Nichols and copied or modified to here ile ley ic.
In 1966, Warner Brothers invited Nichols to direct his first film, Who’s Afraid of 1 Virginia Woolf?, starring Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton.
Nichols also was known for work on i television directing HBO’s Wit with Emma Thompson and Angels in America 1 starring Meryl Streep.
Studios complex in ; Burbank, California, and a subsidiary of AT&T’s WarmerMedia through its Studios & ' Networks division.
In 1905, Harry sold his bicycle shop and i joined his brothers in their fledgling film business.
A serious problem threatened the Wamers’ film company with the ; advent of Thomas Edison’s Motion Picture Patents Company (also known as the Edison Trust), which charged distributors exorbitant fees.
The Warner Brothers and the breakthrough of Talkies Vintage projector image from Torbosquid by Shuterstruk Sound-on-film is a class of sound film _ processes where the sound accompanying a wa picture is recorded on photographic film, usually, but not always, the same strip of film carrying the picture.
Lee de Forest (August 26, 1873 JUNE 30, 1961) was an American inventor and early pioneer in radio and in the development of sound-on-film recording used for motion pictures.
He was also involved in several major patent lawsuits, spent a substantial part of his income on legal bills, and was even tried (and acquitted) for mail fraud.
Although de Forest had only a limited understanding of how it worked, it was the foundation of the field of electronics, making possible radio broadcasting, long distance telephone lines, and talking motion pictures, among countless other applications.
Nationality American Alma mater Yale College Occupation Inventor Known for Three-electrode vacuum-tube , soundon-film recording A vacuum tube, electron tube, valve , or tube (North America), is a device that controls electric current flow in a high vacuum between electrodes to which an electric potential difference has been applied.
Christopher Schirner een BV60 tube bass amplifier Audio power amplifier using tubes, in operation.
They were crucial to the development of radio, television, radar, sound recording and reproduction, long-distance telephone networks, and analog and early digital computers.
CIRCUITS COPYRIGHT 2013 2021 © ELPROCUS Electrical devices are built with the help of the linear and nonlinear components.
Generally, the word linear means a straight line which looks like diagonal and it tells about linear characteristics in between voltage and current.e the current flow in the circuit is directly proportional to the voltage. the formula is I Amperage aka rr The phrase “The Turing Test” is most properly used to refer to a proposal made by Turing as a way of dealing with the question whether machines can think.
Wikipedia Bc Touring Test retrieved from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy and copied or modified to here The phrase “The Turing Test” is sometimes used more generally to refer to some kinds of behavioural tests for the presence of mind, or thought, or intelligence in i putatively minded entities.
Test is prefigured in Descartes’ Discourse on the Method. finds : an anticipation of the test in the 1668 writings of the Cartesian de Cordemoy.
After Sam’s death, Jack clashed with his surviving older brothers, Harry and Albert Warner.
Despite his controversial public image, Warner remained a force in the motion picture industry until his retirement in the early 1970s HARRY WARNER Harry Morris Warner (born Hirsz Mojzesz Wonsal; DECEMBER 12, 1881 July 25, 1958) was an American studio executive, one of the founders of Warner Bros., and a major contributor to the development of the film industry.
As in many Jewish immigrant families, some of the children gradually acquired anglicized versions of their Yiddish-sounding names.
ALBERT WARNER Abraham “Albert” Warner (born Aaron Wonsal, July 23, 1884 NOVEMBER 26, 1967) was an American film executive who was one of the founders of Warner Bros.
The three brothers then rented an office in the Bakewell building in downtown Pittsburgh with a loan from Max Fleischer.
SAM WARNER ie Samuel Louis Warner (born Szmuel Wonsal , August 10, 1887 October 5, 1927) was an American film producer who was the cofounder and chief executive officer of Warner Bros.
While Warner’s younger brother Jack did not object to Basquette’s Catholicism, the rest of the Warner family did.
He died of pneumonia caused by sinusitis, before the premiere of The Jazz Singer.
Bre FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, who tested Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013.
A view of the Corinthian Hall during a tour of the Grand Masonic Lodge of Massachusetts.
I am exactly under that Free Mason Gangstalk including during the writing of this book theft of my PC and destruction of my PC and writing materials (research DVDs, The Kings Speech) people actually standing not to my window in my home office nose touch the outside of my window making faces at me, banging on the dumpster of the gas station next door, theft of manuscript, death threat for writing it, shouting at me during the writing of it, all much like Tom Dunham experienced with his web site publicly exposing the same criminal elements I am writing about.
Showing I am receiving retardation coaching including among minors makes me seem developmentally retarded.
Read More Racketeering in the Continuing Criminal Enterprise Masonry State with money laundering and sub version based in genetics and long running Illuminati CIA DARPA operations Twitter @IchooseLove22 @FightingMonarch @Robby12692 At least in my case me being a far right winger New Age Claims call me a Nazi and lay the claims of alleged harmed victims at my feet, actually New Agers self victimize then subvert me on appearances cause I was in vicinity.
Many media orgs are not researching story carriers but rather Propaganda operations for the interests they co-ordinate with including blind spots, pol intimidation of dissent Much of out of New Agism fighting old school fare right wing whites with defamatory allegation with compensatory claims demands.
The basic form of the scam is that those who surround me to, in their own words, defeat white supremacism, will label me with their own acts by assaults upon me for their acts towards others and toward me.
My dialogue of I would like a personal pizza gets responded to by a covert operator turning that into some seedy WWII antique shop dialogue.
In extortion vendors assert that my normal purchases are code purchases and use my normal purchases as their foil.
Nueces County Social Services I refused to sign up for and never will, or the Nueces Texas District Attorney Matt Gonzales or United States Marshalls who conduct asset seizures.
My brother Tom Donegan, gay rights activist and who has fought me for years as to whether I was competent or not, I always said I had far more actual real work and training than him.
Getting themselves substituted for me, Anti White Supremacists isolate me and surround those who may have been influenced by my Dr Jekyll is proud of being white and defends the white race.
Black Marshalls | Mr Hyde | Related to neither, Ed Donega, Dr Jekyll The paradox of who is Mr Hyde and how does he fit into some other identity Dr JEKYLL CLIP é AND World's Greatest Authors MY | R Hyper Robert Louis Stevenson ‘ * No] 3.
What “set off” Mr Hyde to masterbate to peeping tom acts and photos, that the Law Enforcement who invented and deployed Mr Hyde as FBI contractor was the need for the Government and Religious Missions to claim rights to my DNA and make a sock puppet Ed Donegan who has harmed others.
Hyde, that puppet, is drawn from prison and homeless populations to “mind model” the allegations made behind my back which defame me and create liabilities in which property of mine is due to people victimized by Mr Hyde in my vicinity.
That others have an interest in use of my DNA they will not admit to me solves the paradox of why Mr Hyde is tied to illegal State persecution of me and why the State will not stop the acts against me.
Color Code AG The Aviator Glasses Wearers almost always are non-white, gay, or non-white gays.
Their placing of Shill female vicitms near or in front of me, ass flashing me, or their photographing of women near me create the Legend that I am threat to women and women are a threat to me and that my DNA is due to those who were exploited [by the racket] The black male and black nationalist above moved into apartment 40 of the floor I am on and another black male moved into apartment 47.
Because this scheme depends on inciting vigilantism against somebody scorned and that is done by planting evidence, physical assaults upon me, staging sympathetic figures as victims of a supposed scum bag, the total record is of manufacture of allegations against me to gain a fraudulent result.
This has been used to defeat my housing and seuxal reproductive rights, publishing rights, etc., This chart lays out the persecution of my by the protection racket and will be usefull for the classes of people witness will be listed by.
I have requested an expungment of my record so i can obtain a shotgun and clear my front door outdoor side or patio from harassing assailants, including roaring engines.
Repeatedly those assaulting me during work or acts of necessity such as food or gym have said they will have my children and I have insisted any child with genome from me will be incinerated if ever found.
Folsom Street Eviction I was living a a major scene area of FOlsom street very close to Tom Dunham and across the street from a bar he and I often hung out at.
Finally normal acts are escalated into peeping though not related to that so that evidence of peeping seems to exist while it is in fact not present.
The Sept., 1994 Tempe ; Tribune newspaper reported that the FBI suspected that a bomb had brought down the I . ; airplane.
On JULY 2, 1994, the flight encountered heavy thunderstorms and microburst-induced windshear while attempting to land, and crashed into heavy trees and a private residence near the . airport.The crash and ensuing fire caused 37 fatalities and seriously injured twenty i Others. | claim rights to my genome so it can be moved in such a way as to move the origins of the maternal side of the Obama family to sought locations and also at the same time prevent me, the half brother of Obama, from living normally and developing my own family tree.
Before I list the California main witness it will be necessary to understand the long con being run which until about 8/1/2019 I did not understand because the scheme was protected from my scrutiny, protected by the appearance of statements made to me which when I attempted to pin them down were withdrawn, protected by blind conservator ship misrepresentation of me, and media support for the protection racket operates by plant stories to create the “Legend” cover stories.
From 2007 to 2009 I was in a federal medical hospital trying to trace the theories of black nationalism which was the belief of assailants of my mother and I Someone said to have been FBI SIS or Marshalls undercover as a prisoner made death threats against me repeatedly that my throat would be slashed, my balls would be cut off, and Jessica SImpson would be fucked by blacks, Jessica Simpson a bikini blonde on his coffee mug.
This person also assaulted me about my mother’s heart stopping from Potassium congestive heart failure while I was in prison, a worry of me at the time, proving to me he was some sort of plant to assault me, he would not have otherwise in any possible way known the situation with my mother.
Defeating White Supremacism by Assets Smuggling and Humanism to the Needy 2 Humanism Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to here 7 Humanism is a philosophical stance that emphasizes the value and agency of human beings, individually and collectively.
Wikipedia I am asserting the Masons are continuing under oddly convoluted means to smuggle my genome and life work product to e Themselves, their careers, and children e To the entire world, where it all seems to have come from, rather than Windsors Kutscheras, but since I am the source, its genetic match to me also makes sense should that be identifiable.
Effectively an underground railroad spreading Soverign tied legacy genes into the world creating world equality and undermining racism, poverty, and war conditions.
What Douglas Pike , i 85) termed the NLF’s “violence program” included terrorism, guerrilla warfare, and (t3 ; conventional military operations.
It is also used to destroy the morale of enemies through tactics that aim to depress troops’ psychological states. not just limited to soldiers.
For those situations in which infiltration is too difficult, terrorists and insurgents may establish their own front groups that is, organizations that purport to be independent but are in fact created and controlled by others.
This too is a type of intelligence operation; like counterintelligence carried out by government intelligence services, it aims to disrupt the organization and operations of enemy forces.
Thatwe must work among the troops goes without saying” (Lenin, 1900).16 But the tactic is by nomeans confined to Marxist-Leninist groups.
Recent series of events including under of unique and separate tools and 1 | | | | | | | | | DOJ William Barr flash mobs invading and practices.
Each subversive ampaign is different because of he social, political, economic, ultural, and historical differences that each country has.
While the subversive actors may be i different, the soon to be subverted targets are the same.
Only when the government itself furnishes a nation with money, arms, supplies, or other help to dissidents can it be called external subversion. ee ee ee a a a a Tactics Insurgencies differ in their use of tactics and methods.
Force used in this manner is meant to reinforce other forms or persuasion in addition to cowering the people or leaders.
Harold, my mother’s adoptive brother always told me driving was not about the paint but knowning under the hood was O.K, the rest was busy work if there was time.
Cervantes and his manservant have been imprisoned by the Spanish Inquisition, and a manuscript by Cervantes is seized by his fellow inmates, who subject him to a mock trial in order to determine whether the manuscript should be returned.
Funding it the operation out of my trust fund left by my mother was a way to get funding clandestinely with shakedown law suits which then funded the operation acting under various disguises, such researching psychology, studying racism, or stopping exploitation of minors, created conflicts with me which are not naturally occurring.
According to whistleblower testimony I have now received, Joseph Rosati is, in fact, ; the man who hired two MS-13 agents to shake down Seth Rich that fateful night.
This book Dr Bradstreet ee ee eee eee ee eee re eee Here’s Why Authorities Searched The Offices Of Controversial Autism Doctor Bradstreet retrieved from Forbes Emily Willingham Former Contributor and copied or modified to here wee According to a federal government warrant, the offices of controversial autism doctor Jeff Bradstreet were the target in June of a search related to an experimental drug for autism.
GcMAF is thought in some circles to modulate the immune system in ways that make it a treatment for everything from autism (which some believe is immune related) to cancer.
A Bradstreet family member has set up a GoFundMe campaign site “to ; find the answers to the many questions leading up to the death of Dr , Bradstreet,” and I have reached out through the site to that family * member for comment.
James J effrey “Jeff” Bradstreet , was an » American doctor, alternative medicine practitioner, and a former ; preacher who ran the International Child Development Resource ; Center in Melbourne, Florida, a medical practice in Buford, » Georgia and in Arizona, where he practiced homeopathy.
He , also founded the Good News Doctor Foundation, which aimed to conibide Christian beliefs with his medical practice.
Bradstreet also published research regarding the use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy for autism, some of which concluded it was ineffective, as well as a paper arguing that autistic children have an increased vulnerability to oxidative stress.
Personal life and death Bradstreet was found dead from a gunshot wound to the chest in the Broad River in Rutherford County, North Carolina in June 2015, after his Buford, Georgia medical office was raided by the FDA in connection with an investigation into GCMAF treatments.
This book Bully Media Cartel Bandwidth stops theories of the OSS QETI Cartel THe Press as Cabal have failed to out and even built a Defensive Legend, a Defensive Ethic, for Government Corruption.
The Kaine Mutiny Keifer played by Fred McMurray), a slick office and writer full of theories of psychoanalysis decides to lead a mutiny against Queeg, a mine ship commander layed by Bogart.
In fact some mental fragility had seized the ship commander thus materially undermining his command.
In fact fraglie elements who are corruptable in this Hispanic poor imigrant community wree weaponized and temped by gains offered to them for fraud.
But if they are in a sort of similar vain with Maryk, I will blame the press corps for encouraging the insanity environment which fostered the events later adjudicated in the courts which should have been avoided by responsible conduct of those who surrounded the events and acted irresponsibly.
The Press Corps is who I specifically suggesting as the irresponsible actors. r~ At the height of a typhoon, Maryk urges the captain to reverse course into the wind i and take on ballast, but Queeg refuses.
Maryk, supported by Keith, relieves Queeg of 1 command under Article 184.
Wounded Naval Aviator, Lieutenant Barney ; Greenwald, an attorney before entering the Navy, becomes Maryk’s defense counsel.
At the court-martial, Keefer claims he never observed any mental illness in Queeg and was “flabbergasted” when he was relieved.
Under Greenwald’s relentless crossexamination, Queeg exhibits odd behavior on the stand, and Maryk is acquitted.
Following the acquittal, the officers of the Caine hold a party, where Keefer receives a 1 frosty reception from Maryk.
A drunken Greenwald arrives and berates all the officers . for not appreciating Queeg’s long service and failing to give him the support he asked i for.
Walt Disney, Ian Flemming, Clark Gable, John Wayne into Katherine Mulgrew, Kristen Stewart, most others Dyslexic Suicided Margaux Hemingway FEBRUARY 16, 1954 JULY 1, 1996 in 1991 on the set of the film Double Obsession in Boulder.
The society isolates FOXP2 in hopeless contexts of non access to normal life where people finaly decide with State encouragement to commit suicide.
Also manty things about me, Name, Information, Application of the information (CSS Rule Name, Styling data, spanning the style) as Semiotics with renaming and other elements are in the movie.
Clark Gable, Julie Andrews, and many others were part of the Legend the CIA creating bolstering Maria Augusta Kutchera but denouncing Glorian Donegan and Ed Donegan with a slander campaign.
CIA OSS “Metaphors” or fictionalized versions of stories behind the theatrical mask of metaphors are what Dorothy Kilgallen was outing by Mafia hitman Ron Pataky killer her for. my book has hundreds of examples of those who made movies about the story line such as Brittany Murphy (Slamming FOXP2 as a serious rather than minimal brain dysfunction to Heath Ledger and a knight found in the masses to Jeanie the Soup Girl and Any Warhol all who died odd deaths as the back story disappears to the movies which are still in print unexplained.
PolitiFact was created by the Tampa Bay Times, a Florida newspaper, in 2007.
In 2018, PolitiFact was acquired by the Poynter Institute, a nonprofit school for journalists.
While PolitiFact relies on administrative support from the Poynter Institute, it is otherwise financially self-sustaining.
PolitiFact also receives compensation for selling its content to media publishers and companies.
In 2017, PolitiFact launched a membership campaign called the Truth Squad to allow individual donations. rs In March 2018 Craiglist was under investigation for allowing child and other trafficking result in personals from being removed from the site.
Prior to founding craigslist, he worked as a computer programmer for companies such as IBM, Bank of America, and Charles Schwab.
Newmark served as chief executive officer of craigslist from its founding until 2000.
Newmark serves on the board of several non-profit organizations such as CUNY Graduate School of Journalism, Girls Who Code and Vets in Tech, among others.
In 2011, Newmark launched craigconnects, a non-profit initiative to support the efforts ' of other non-profits and public service organizations working in the areas of global i poverty, the Middle East, veterans affairs, and low-income neighborhoods.
September 2018, he gave $20 million to fund the creation The Markup, a non-profit : News organization.
That ; year, Newmark donated $1 million to Mother Jones to help the magazine combat fake ‘ news.
Newmark made a $20 ; million endowment to the CUNY Graduate School of Journalism, which was ' subsequently renamed the Craig Newmark Graduate School of Journalism.
Institute, and $350,000 to the Feminist Majority Foundation and Ms. magazine.
Newmark gave $5 million to the Poynter Institute, which used the funds to establish ; the Craig Newmark Center for Ethics and Leadership.
Newmark’s previous donation of ; $1 million to the Poynter established the Craig Newmark Journalism Ethics Chair.
The Chronicle of Philanthropy ranked Newmark 17th out of 50 in its 2020 ranking of | | individual donors, giving a total of $100 million.
AP versus United States Finally, the argument is made that to apply the Sherman Act to this association of publishers constitutes an abridgment of the freedom of the press guaranteed by the First Amendment.
The court was formed by agents of the Senior Executive Service (formed in 1978 by Jimmy Carter)-10,000 British Crown Agents that have infiltrated every agency of the Executive Branch.
C.I.A., NSA, FBI, DoD, DOS, SEC, Judiciary and multinational corporate intelligencers are American stooges controlled by the British Empire CIA NWO Shadow Gov assassinations, the war against Home Likely written to the NDAA passed in 1961 Mockingbird uses charactaer assasination via villification morality plays asserting an evil and later elsewher alleging others fit the characterization which peole now have a grasp of.
This was described in the grocery store as gliding rather than banging on the handle of shopping carts losing most energy in the bang to problems in acceleration to energy expended energy consumption rations.
During the course of trying to being the Momentum Engine to market the enormouse cash power of the oil industry was able to frurstrate all attempts incling supporting law suits required to bring the invention to market.
It was additionally introduced in the United States Subversion System supported by the powerful Cabal The Gangstalk method is you start Somewhere, you are roadblocked in Some stealthy bureaucratic way Such as apt lease turned down on credit score, a Doppler moves into your started identity/location fusion.
The Senate then passed the measure in a 1 conference report on December 8 by a tally of 92-7.
On 23 December 2016, President Obama signed the 2017 National Defense Authorization Act into law.
The story and facts I assert are threaten to the Cabal are defeated by Deep State 1 i : story threatens.
Davis quotes Brigadier General Ralph O Baker the Pentagon officer responsible for the Department of Defense’s Joint Force Development (i.e.
Information Operations are primarily used to target foreign audiences, but Davis cites numerous senior leaders who want to “protect a key friendly center of gravity, to wit United States national will” by repealing the a Smith-Mundt Act to allow the direct deployment of these tactics on the American i public.
ACUTE having or showing a perceptive understanding or insight; shrewd. “an acute awareness of changing fashions” narrow rather than wide open, specific in scope DEMURE reserved, modest, and shy To demur is to show reluctance or to hesitate, like not quite getting in the car when someone opens the door, but demure isalways an adjective describing a modest, reserved, or shy person, and sounds like the mew of a tiny kitten.
Study.com Obtuse acts such as blocking or marking off windows in my vicinity (Obtuse meanings space) rather than acute narrow asserts of facts “Ed is a peeper thus Ed we are blocking your use of the window” In short, to Demurer is to fall back and accept there is no grounds to continue, the defense may assert that as to a plaintiff actions, or a plaintif may demure upon a defendent asserting the plaintif has no case.
It alerts the judge the case is not worthy of continuance and therefore calls for dismissal of the lawsuit.
A consolidation of an opion that is nether science based nor subjected to hypothesis testing, aka debate. mz Z “Truth is treason in an empire of lies” post by Kevin Kervick, Nov 18, r 2013 ( Truth is treason in an empire of lies The title of this blog is a quote from former Congressman and presidential candidate, Ron Paul.
In Greek word my reading of the daimon does not 7 history of carry negative Paganism those feloyavetolectaceyacm MM who wish to create The Ancient anew Greek word understanding daip@v daimon denotes a spirit or divine power, much like the Latin genius or numen.
The Greek conception of a daimon notably appears in the works of Plato, where it describes the divine inspiration of Socrates. b) often “Demonize’ the old beliefs, making them a thing of fright.
With most agreeing that is a strop backward in our understanding we can move forward with a new understating of Illuminati mistakes and Illuminati profiteering.
This list has floated around the internet for many years, and is sometimes discussed : very late at night on AM radio stations, or perhaps on shortwave stations, but it is : rarely mentioned in the mainstream news media.
If you would like to dig into this topic on your ; Own, just use your favorite search engine and enter, for example, “Gandy Baugh” (with ' quotation marks) and you’ll be on your way to dozens if not hundreds of web sites ' with information about this list.
I Because these cases are so numerous, and so many have connections to Arkansas, 1 writers sometimes use the term “Sudden Arkansas Death Syndrome”, also known as 1 Arkancide.
Standorf’s car had been on a short-term parking lot at Metropolitan Washington National Airport since Jan., said David Hess, spokesman for the Metropolitan Washington Airport police. ark Standorf said his mother, Jeanette, would worry when Alan might casually mention that he was thinking of getting out of military work to become a policeman.
I | I | I | I | ; “Most of his years in the Army, he was stationed in Germany 1 with military intelligence,” Mark Standorf said.
That’s just human | I | t | I | I | i | I | 1 Please visit the web pages | I | * DISINFORMATION nature.
Most people seem to have found the I | I | I | I | i | I | | | I | of these idfiles.com source of political news that they prefer, and * WITHHELD INFORMATION | they agree with the views they hear or read, and there would be no harm in that if the e BIASED INFORMATION news media was always reliable, but it isn’t.
We’re just asking folks to be responsible enough to accept that journalism can be ; reckless or even self-serving and can cause great harm.
The Crimes of Mena, by Sally Denton and Roger Morris was scheduled to appear in 1 i the Washington Post.
Stunting and even intimidating public understanding of the NWO and its plans and its real reasons Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here STUNT To stunt is to slow or hinder.
Our problem in the West of Europe is not that the press of the West is ignorant, it is that they are so well instructed by Robber Barrons who control government corruption.
Hewlett-Packard built its V-16 engine andthe plane J was built by North American Aviation who later built the jet replace the F-86 Sabre flow in the Korean War § Both have Combat Camera versions my father flew.
Here a Russian autonomous unmaned drone will fly on point in combination with a manned SU-57 fighter plane gaining data further out about targets than the SU-57 can reach, thus extending the weapons and combat function to a wider and more foreward or perhaps rearward radius.
According to United States diplomats, the phrase “mafia state” was coined by Alexander Litvinenko “In navies and the maritime industry, damage control is the emergency control of situations that may cause the sinking of a watercraft.
THe #1a protects each component delusion with necessary cohesion and and efficiency.
S In Barrett Outlet Broadcasting Inc.,i s the children of a suicide victim brought a § 1983 action gainst a city and members of its police department, alleging that police employees ermitted a news crew to enter the victim’s home, film the scene of a suicide and roadcast those pictures on television. a Pp b I will later find out during researching my book on the topic, the topic of my life and my family of biological origins, that all three of the four member family or origin, my mother, father, and myself, underwent PsyOps Gangstalk.
Or to by repudiably irritating and frustrating a person (Happy Slapping normal hapy states) create frustration which appears to the examiner to by psychosis.
Assassination the White Supremacist and deplete his assets 8 ao ee Tom Dunham and I spent most or part of our lives talking to deaf ears whatever peeping rings exist we are NOT in them despite appearances we are. a who have been brought up in freedom, with the right of free speech, cannot in my ld age change and learn slavery instead.” Cato the Younger retrieved from link and copied or modified to here | | ' Few men have been desperate enough to attack openly, and barefaced, the liberties of ' a free people.
I have lost all my adult lifespan to horrific imprisonment conditions which exacerbate, inflame, and grind on, and continue in detention conditions the very sexual, physical, and psychiatric assaults (taunting by actions towards me, physical contact assaults, arguments insane in premise imposed on me, etc.,) which often had originally landed me in custody, myself in self defense against plain clothes State backed COINTELPRO assailants who denied any complicity and denied they were State planted Agent Provocateurs or Mercenaries from some type of COUNTER-IINTEL function being used on me.
I assert that a Criminal Harassment Under Color of Law as Subversion of the USA and my MKULTRA family genome is based in taking over charities, using charities as claimants against me thus manufacturing a popular and publicly accepted Conspiracy Against my Rights under color of Subversives in Power feigning loyalty to the Constitution.
A blend of witness tampering and conflicts of interests placed me under arrest for “harassing and annoying phone calls” which were in support of my FOIA requests and FOIA appeals which were not returning the documents I requested.
The NIH used its health care power and the PHS DOD element of it (see Prosecution for the Defense) to place me and my views under PsyOps and covert actions scrutiny and disruption ever since.
While I was held in custody undergoing involuntary interviews with NIH psychologists and psychiatrists, things I represented and spoke of while explaining and justifying my views to the National Institute of Health were being co-opted into the Obama Biden presidential campaign.
Gangstalk of Evidence Plants and Agencies Believing fake evidence create new unjust recomposition, sketch, of the gang stalk victim’s life Gangstalk System Targeting a Cape Cod Atomic Testing Veteran The State (Enrique Prado, La Cosa | The innocent murdered victim in custody Nostra, assets) DARPA | Their Espionage CIA Recruits Targeted by Gangstalk Victim, murdered, conspired against DEEP | Deep State for by CIA STATE | Recruitment > Mercenary at State Agency, Landlord, etc., acts on pretext created by Doppelganger Ed Donegan abused by State lives in Context of retaliation.
The people who want to plead me guilty to raping Tawana Brawley I can not only get rid of they state they will kill me as social justice and also claim to manage my DNA for me.
This nightmare of hate crime against me as I lay in a medical emergency in the gladiator pit was too interesting for the Illuminati to ever stand down from.
There is always the Doppelganger or identity theft at every moment of my being alive for thirty years and even at places like the Department of Motor Vehicles, court clerks office, gym, or other locations like detention, always the video is down or being serviced by some security company and it seems there is no record of who was realty at the window or booking desk or applying for the drivers license or in which unit of an apartment or hotel.
Mr Rothkopf considers Soveriengty and the Superclass of international elites Westphalian sovereignty Google Knowlege Panel * Westphalian sovereignty, or state sovereignty, is a principle in international law that each state has exclusive sovereignty over its territory.
Wikipedia Pp surerciass THE «GLOBAL POWER Federal News Service is a ELITE AND THE Washington, D.C.-based WORLD THEY ARE oe company providing MAKING” retrieved from a i as naling nae transcription services.
The produces on-demand verbatim ; Ruling Elite Finance, transcripts of newsworthy » Wealth, Power and events in DC for its clients.
THE GLOBAL POWER ELITE AND THE WORLD THEY ARE MAKING on esate by David Rothkopf “Oil is the most mind altering substance known to man.” .. | was thinking back on the fact that I had probably given 50 or 60 « speeches on the other book and whenever I gave a speech on “Running : the World,” somebody would stand up in the audience and say, that’s the trouble with you Americans; you think you’re running the world.
And I would look at them aghast because, apparently, my subtle irony was lost i in the title.
In fact, it t just came out of 51 years ago now, just about half a century ago.
And it looked at how political leadership and business leadership and military leadership interacted at just the moment of American post-war ascendancy, at just the moment when we were starting to have concerns I I | I I I ; that would lead a couple of years later to Dwight Eisenhower identifying I i the threat associated with the military-industrial complex.
You know, I mean, all of us have had our brushes with conspiracy i theory.
I grew up, Jewish boy in New Jersey, hearing about the world i Jewish conspiracy, and I thought, great.
And so, the i definition that we used was people who influence the lives of millions » across borders on a regular basis.
I think of the Fortune 500, there are 13 women right now ; who are CEOs.
But by far the most rapidly growing "" component of the group are people on the Asian side of the Pacific "" Ocean and that the center of gravity within the superclass is following « the center of economic gravity on the planet.
So understanding how this group influences things will help us understand what the implications of a change like that might be.
And we can go further and further. countries around the world and most of, you know, a fairly substantial portion of them, a third roughly, have gone to just one of 20 schools.
And time after time after time, when I talked to people sort of within the heart of this superclass, one of the first things they said is, small world.
That gives them commonality of interest and an enormous amount of influence, and when they act together it has an effect on how we regulate, how we look at markets, what we Say is tolerable and what we don’t say is tolerable in those regards, and I think that’s what it is.
He was born ; in Couvet in the Principality of Neuchatel (now a canton part of * Switzerland) in 1714 and died in 1767.
Proscribed rights, and do no harm to others or the property of others creates a utilitarian property rights motive for production The harm principle says people should be free to act however they wish unless their actions cause harm to somebody else.
This book Mercenary Media Inteligentsia Take Lab Notes and Profits on Street Fights COINTELPRO Experiments “Nobody helps nobody but himself.” Okmyx “Sir, you are employing a double negative.” Spock I have an unusual background.
Kirk, Spock and McCoy are concerned about what effects the Horizon’s crew may have had on the Jotian culture which was just beginning industrialization at the time and have a knack for imitation.
They are immediately greeted by two men dressed as gangsters who threaten them with Tommy guns.
Most » contemporary uses of the term refer to academia or the college and * university systems in many countries.
Then there was Drudge’s site, which started first in 1995 as an email newsletter.
This book What Can Publicity Do AP v United States Amendment rests on the assumption that diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public, that a free press is a condition of a free society.
Out PlIzzagate as violent Narco State Illuminati usage of my genome in their causes for minority benefit both through charity and charity organizations using criminals to offer my genome under “blackmail” conditions to adult entertainers, the criminal network pretending to be me while peeping at women and then being punished (for real Ed Donegan’s genome rights) as penalty.
Illustration from Harper’s Weekly December 20, 1913 by Walter J Enright ee Publicity is justly commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases.
That potent force must, , in the impending struggle, be utilized in many ways as a continuous remedial ; Measure.
It 1 was wealth which enabled the Morgan associates to buy, from the Equitable and the A Mutual Life Insurance Company the stocks in the several banking institutions, i which, merged in the Bankers’ Trust Company and the Guaranty Trust Company, r gave them control of $357,000,000 deposits.
Morgan to acquire his shares in the First National and National City banks, worth ; $21,000,000, through which he cemented the triple alliance with those institutions.
More recently, bankers’ syndicates have, , in many instances, received for floating preferred stocks of recapitalized industrial * concems, one-third of all common stock issued, besides a considerable sum in cash.
On bonds of high-class industrial concerns, bankers’ commissions (or ' profits) of from 5 to 10 points have been common.
Even railroad i securities, supposedly of high grade, have been subjected to like burdens.
They took the Portland ; Terminal Company bonds, guaranteed by the Maine Central Railroad a corporation ‘ of unquestionable credit at about 88, and these were marketed at 92.
Morgan &amp; Co. received a 3 per cent. commission, that is, $5,100,000, f practically for arranging that others should underwrite and sell the bonds.
I | The aggregate commissions or profits so taken by leading banking houses can only ; be conjectured, as the full amount of their transactions has not been disclosed, and ; the rate of commission or profit varies very widely.
Morgan &amp; Co. was we do not know; but we do know that every one per cent. ' on that sum yields $19,500,000.
If the bankers’ compensation is reasonable, considering the skill and risk involved, there can be no objection to making it known.
Where there is a large risk that the bonds or stock will not be promptly sold at the issue price, the underwriting commission (that is the insurance premium) should be correspondingly large.
To be effective, knowledge of the facts must be actually brought home to the investor, and this can best be done by requiring the facts to be stated in good, large type in every notice, circular, letter and advertisement inviting the investor to purchase.
The bankers took for their services $250,000 in cash, i besides one-third of the common stock, amounting to about $2,000,000.
We have today secured substantial control of the successful machinery business ‘ heretofore conducted by at -, Illinois, which has been incorporated under the name : of the Excelsior Manufacturing Company with a capital of $10,000,000, of which $5,000,000 is Preferred and $5,000,000 Common. ' | | | | i | | | As we have a large clientele of confiding customers, we were able to secure from the owners an agreement for marketing the Preferred stock we to fix a price which shall net the owners in cash $95 a share.
I was at on place at one point in time and later as me (at Element B using identity theft) get caught be a Legitimate sex workers with something illegal The punishment at Element “B” is fake Edward Paul Donegan will sign fertilization and genetics rights in the the United States Marshalls evidence locker when that is recommended by the adult entertainer.
Some will go to charity, most up the chain to the Illuminati families and the CIA history of this.
Or the service such as Social Security our Housing is lost and I live under a bridge and I have to seek out those very corrupt family services that are part of money launder my genetics rights to their “victims” of me.
This hides that my real money is being used and laundered elsewhere, likely Stay and Play though I was zerod out from there and my drivers licenses with that address rescinded by the CA DMV, likely then re-issued to the Doppelganger of me.
To repeat one of the points of this book When those who have the opportunity to act covertly, with Press complicity (or Duplicity,) checks and balances containing the power of government are lost.
TOOLS VIEW RuizRocket.docx Word a © PROTECTED VIEW Be carefultiles from the Internet can contain viruses.
The ) es complexifying elements are that < a * Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due me but held by others. | have no verbal, financial, or any another account of the financial accounts but others use identity theft to create the cover story | am aware of the money and | am spending out of it.
SCREENS 1-2 OF 47 © Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct.
PICTURED A bike other than my bike, but of similar discription, in an otherwise empty parking lot, is spying on women of the gym.
Golds Gym Corpus Christi.Rarely and non-exploitivly | do use a forward facing dash camera to tape scenic motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle, not the one a | x O type here to search Follow the Money to Corpus Christi Neuces, behavioral health, Salvation Army, Nueces Corpus Christi, auto sales, Golds Gym Corpus Christi, the new District Attorney in Corpus Christi, and Golds Gym and Omni TOOLS VIEW RuizRocket.docx Word © PROTECTED VIEW Be careful files from the Internet can contain viruses.
Capitola Police theft which (thinkis CIA and despicable and politically defaming conduct.
Ed Donegan 19025 Ki D | do use a forward facing dash camera to tape scenic aren Ur Salinas, CA 39307 motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle, not the one EdinArlington@gmail.com a complexifying elements are that Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due me but held by others. | have no verbal, financial, or any another account of the financial accounts but others use identity theft to create the cover story | am aware of the money and | am spending out of it.
SCREENS 1-2 OF 47 O pe here to search Exactly the genome racketeering, blackmail scheme by family courts corruption, that Jen Moore and I are reporting to deaf ears.
MKtUltra has been around for decades, it’s perfected a lot of Mind Games.
Also, it’s hard to imagine any aspect of public life where ignorance or delusion is . better than an awareness of the truth, even an unpleasant one.
The authors’ 1983 follow-up, Monimbo, envisioned Miami race rioters as the pawns of Nicaraguan and Cuban communists.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Larry King was born in Brooklyn, on NOVEMBER 19, 1933.
He was one of two children of JENNIE , a garment worker who was born in Minsk, Russian Empire, and Aaron Zeiger , a restaurant owner and defense-plant worker who was born in Pinsk, Russian Empire.
His parents were Orthodox Jews who immigrated to the United States from Belarus in the 1930s. 3 The KGB’s Bead on the Media (byline missing, WAPO pez) The KGB’s “dysinformatsya” department was elevated to a full directorate of the Soviet secret service in 1968.
Thus each fact as it emerge must be contested or spun in accepted ideologies in ways each ideology can accept, reject, or interpret the data.
B.S Se ee ee a ee ee eee eee ee Bpotransigent Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here is ee INTRANSIGENT impervious to pleas, persuasion, requests, or reason Intransigent means inflexible, stubborn, entrenched.
Liz Cheney’s ouster proved Republicans are a bigger threat than the 9/11 hijackers who killed thousands of Americans, according to a USA Today editorial.
The removal of Cheney from her leadership position suggests that the GOP has endorsed election fraud conspiracy theories, USA Today editor David Mastio wrote in a Thursday editorial.
Corpus Christi, Texas, United States500+ connections Currently, VP-GM with EW Scripps in Corpus Christi.
This occurred when the Blue Angels were outside my apartment area on the see wall, Ana Tamez was there, a females buttocks were facing my apartment, and the next day, 4/30/2021 a Hispanic veteran from unit 1001 N Water Street #36 directly below, below my 46 apartment stood in the hallway outside 46 groping himself looking to where she had been the previous day and talking about what a beautiful view it was.
Proving Actual Harm retrieved from AllLaw.com and copied or modified to here ~ A successful lawsuit for defamation of character might require a showing of real damage caused by the statement.
Defamation of character occurs when someone makes a false and harmful statement about you.
With either type, the statement must be published in some way (which just means some third party must have heard or read it), it must be false, and it must result in harm, usually to the subject’s reputation.
Other kinds of false allegations may also be presumed to be defamatory.
METHODS OF PROOF In many jurisdictions, if you can prove that someone made a false Statement about you knowingly or recklessly, and published it to other parties, you have established a claim of defamation, and it will be presumed that you have suffered harm.
If, however, your jurisdiction does not follow that rule, or if you are a public figure or someone who is in the public eye, you might have to prove you were in fact harmed by the defamatory statement.
You might also provide witnesses to testify about their observations about you in connection with the incident.
To understand the nuances of defamation law and how it applies to your situation, you may want to consult with an experienced personal injury lawyer.
Competition in Competing Process a Myself seeking community but rejected |Results |Me Diminuzed because of KOMPROMAT Stolen | and discredited Either way my property rights are not being defended but rather violated and that is being encouraged by the State.
Without that Standing and worth as a person, a potential husband, employee, activist, etc., I can not gain the foothold needed in life.
Seeking my knowledge of Recovery and my capabilities representing recovery through assaults rather than cooperation Hegel and the FOXP2 gene My honest and hard working literate lifestyle and morality has been the mental health system motive to coopt and attack me because I was doing in my non employed life what they were not doing while at work.
This was the same counselor I had to tell what a Dialectic was and also completely missed my having diabetes and was wrong about the diet plan, not accepting the one promoted by my Internal Medicine doctor and she did not understand my gym plan or routine either.
By studying me down to the Molecular level by assault and intrusion the Analog Molecule can be formed which will displace me.
DARPA Brain Program and Behavioral Health have the clout and even technology to do hit jobs on the reports they generate about me.
This includes inbound calls, SMS TXTs, or STOPS to my smartphone music such that I touch my phone for one purpose when it looks like I am using my phone for something else.
BTW John Pilger also believes it possible Obama is the Manchurian Candidate, which is what he has reported on and would explain to keep my genes out of what would be immediate relatives white women, and into blacks instead, all tied to the Vatican and the CIA including in Texas.
This great war has everything to do with our Lord Jesus Christ, His soon returm and reign on this Earth, versus the reign of Lucifer, Satan, the devil and his soon ending reign in this very dark world.
Linda Newkirk is correct that in this world blindness to reality the Illuminati have been able to operate near publicly without being noticed or being ignored. (ee eee eee Polis Ochs Adler retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to 1%, here re Z, Julius Ochs Adler was an ‘ American publisher, journalist, and highly decorated United States Army officer with the rank of major general.
He later served as Assistant Division Commander, 6th Infantry ‘ Division during New Guinea campaign, but reverted to the inactive r status in late 1944.
York Times as General manager and also resumed his work as the ; president and publisher of The Chattanooga Times.
Shortly following the » surrender of Nazi Germany in May 1945, Adler and several other » hewspapers executive, visited Concentration camps in Germany at the "" invitation of General Dwight D Eisenhower.
Senior Army Reserve Commanders Association, 1949-1951 and a « Reserve member of the Components Policy Board.
Loe 8 8 ee a Brian Williams retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to ‘ here ee ee Williams became anchor of NBC Nightly News on December 2, 2004, 1 replacing the retiring Tom Brokaw.
NBC Nightly News also "" earned the George Polk Award and the | ( Amst cee GONE MONALaeAwaNwelne for its Katrina coverage.
Even if there is no copyright, as long as it is proven that the content is made by someone else, you can be held legally responsible for using content without authorization or creating substantially similar content.
Helping Someone Who Is ParanoidGoogle knowledge panel retrieved from lwww.verywellmind.com and copied or modified to here e Don’t argue. ... e Use simple directions, if needed. ... e Give the person enough personal space so that he or she does not feel trapped or surrounded.
The patient is certain, and not persuaded by any arguments to the contrary. o “False” relates to the veracity of the patient’s belief. o “Idiosyncratic” means the belief is characteristic of the individual patient. e Beliefs about which the truth cannot be known with reasonable certainty, such as cultural or religious beliefs should not be classified as delusions without careful consideration. e Beliefs shared by a group of people, for example, a belief in UFOs, are not delusions.
JESCRIPTIVE PHENOMENOLOGICAL APPROACH ""| This approach to understanding delusions is a very influential one for psychiatrists.
In this way one alrives at an “actualization, representation or bringing to mind” of the , patient’s experience.
The empiricists emphasized incoming sensation exclusively; the rationalists (Descartes and Leibniz) emphasized the organizing concept exclusively.
If the underlying delusions are organic they may not yeild to corrective evidence made available to the mind.
If the errors of fact driving the mind to erroneous conclusions is not based in biology or nor in fixed brain disorder then rational analysis should be available as an intervention.
For manipulation Manipulators often play the victim role (“woe is me” by portraying themselves as victims of circumstances or someone else’s behavior in order to gain pity or sympathy or to evoke compassion and thereby get something from someone.
Rationalization From Wikipediaa, the free encyclopedia In psychology and logic, rationalization or rationalization (also known as making excuses) is a defense mechanism in which controversial behaviors or feelings are justified and explained in a seemingly rational or logical manner to avoid the true explanation, and are made consciously tolerable-or even admirable and superior-by plausible means.
If pagans are corrupted by the demon “god” Baal, then clearly they ee ee a a a a a a ee ee eee a a a a a a a » must be fought or at least oppressed.
To gain access to my genome a larceny front organizations system created phony fight against me as I have repelled aggressor racial and aggressor minor exploitation allegations which generate those questions in my life. g Wikipedia retrieved from Infiltration and establishing front groups and copied or modified to here r~In order for a group to be successful in subverting a government, the group itself and its ideas must be seen as 1 an acceptable alternative to the status quo.
However, groups that work toward subverting a government, in i many cases, follow ideas and promote goals that on their surface would not receive the support of the | population.
I Espionage Use of Placing Recidivist Offenders near me OR Planting Evidence of Others Crimes On or Near Me wrongly implicating both my character and my acts This occurs in primed paranoia about me in an Identity Theft system known as Road Blocking.
I am prevented from my path as others take over my path, for instance I am thrown out of Corpus Christi Bay Area Landry suddenly but then a Dopple takes over the clothes I was washing and moves them, and with them, my identity to a Long Con set where the Dopple of me becomes included in wrongdoing and confesses to wrongdoing.
The Corpus Christi PD do know this is fraud and have hot flight left scenes where I have detected the dopple in action.
Cutting out my leaving the gym alone with someone leaving the gym with an impersonator.
It was a dopple of me wearing England or 88 clothes who DID photo that beauty though.
Here Rx, me and Tx the photographer are in the same elevator we also will have nearby hotel rooms or similar hotel rooms.
The Sham as an Abuse of Process by placed Illuminati Puppets Red White and Blue the Subversion of the USA begins with moles then Abuse of Process via shams conducted and overseen by the Illuminati Moles.
The puppets can be in Media, Law, Law Enforcement, Religion, elsewhere, who have the Espionage plan and abuse their offices.
Get puppet to create false flags, etc., using Illuminati techniques, Masonry armies 4.
Referee street contests, street rough music into Illuminati as the victor of sreet fights 5.
Once Moles gain office they can Abuse Proccess, Abuse Power Illuminati Once in place, they are the Referees.
As the Gangstalk then moves ahead of its victim then the person is blocked from their destination as the destination location is closed to the person, the real flag, because the false flag crisis is alleged to the real flag.
He returned to office on » November 15, 2010, following completion of A Very Harold & Kumar 3D » Christmas.
From the character Lawrence Kutner on House M.D. into Principal Associate Director of the White House Office of Public Engagement In office January 20; 2009 August 20, 2011 Penn was a co-chair of Obama’s reelection campaign.
On November 18, 2013, Obama appointed Penn to serve on the f President’s Committee on the Arts and Humanities.
Donald Trump’s remarks on the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, : Virginia.
He later expressed support for Joe Biden after he became the ; Nominee.
His most famous role was as Jed Clampett in the CBS television sitcom The Beverly Hillbillies ; A middle child with four sisters and a Republican , Buddy Ebsen was bom as Christian Ludolf Ebsen Jr., on April 2, 1908, in ; Belleville, Illinois.
His father, Christian Ludolf Ebsen Sr., was a Danish ; choreographer, who once owned a dance studio and was also a physical ‘ fitness advocate, before operating a natatorium for the local * school district, and his mother, Frances , was a Baltic "" German painter.
Clair County, Illinois, coterminous with the now "" defunct Belleville Township.
It is also the seat of the Roman Catholic » Diocese of Belleville and the National Shrine of Our Lady of the Snows. i The population was 44,478 according to the Census Bureau’s 2010 data, making it the largest city in the state south of Springfield.
It comprises the southern * counties of the state of Illinois and the See city for the diocese is the City , of Belleville.
Stalin proceeded to set up Soviet military bases in Estonia and Latvia in late 1 1939.
Treaties were signed with Estonia and Latvia in 1939 and 1940 concerning the emigration of Baltic Germans and the liquidation of their educational, cultural, and religious institutions.
Lee Meriwether was born in Los Angeles, California, to Claudius Gregg * Meriwether and Ethel Eve Mulligan.
DiMaggio was born Giuseppe Paolo DiMaggio on NOVEMBER 25, 1914, in Martinez, California, the sixth of seven children born to Italian immigrants Giuseppe and Rosalia (née Mercurio; 1878-1951 ) DiMaggio, from Isola delle Femmine, Sicily.
Marylyn Monroes described Joe DiMaggio as under appreciated because eopple thought of him only as a basball player but she and those who new him saw so much more. y 'U » DiMaggio enlisted in the United States Army Air Forces on FEBRUARY "" 17, 1943, rising to the rank of sergeant.
Hitting streaks -nothing new , to Dimaggioback in 1933 while with San Francisco in the Pacific Coast * League he had a 61 game hitting streak.
A remastered 40th-anniversary edition of the album was released on 22 October 2021.
ZIP Codes 10003, 10009, 1001 1From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Rollings Stones and Led Zepplin use this building.
Physical Graffiti is the sixth studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin.
Harlem seems lett out from the iple mover owning two births, the harlem person has no people mover.
Divison vec range of Hollywood ephemera. cu eee “Caesar cipher retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here In cryptography, a Caesar cipher, also known as Caesar’s cipher, the shift cipher, Caesar’s code or Caesar shift, is one of the simplest and most widely known encryption techniques.
As with all single-alphabet substitution ciphers, the Caesar cipher is easily broken and in modem practice offers essentially no communications security.
The transformation can be represented by aligning two alphabets; the cipher alphabet is the plain alphabet rotated left or right by some number of positions.
For instance, here is a Caesar cipher using a left rotation of three places, equivalent to a right shift of 23 | Plain |ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Cipher |X YZABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVW one ns Kiefer Sutherland retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Sutherland was born 21 DECEMBER 1966, in St Mary’s Hospital, Paddington, London, to Donald Sutherland and Shirley Douglas, both 1 successful Canadian actors who had been living and working in England ; for some time.
Sutherland is named after American-born writer and director Warren Kiefer, who directed Donald Sutherland in his first feature film, Castle of ; the Living Dead.
Abrams retrieved from and copied or modified to here Jeffrey Jacob Abrams is an American film director, producer, screenwriter and composer.
She later began a writing career, authoring two books, Grandparents & Grandchildren and Teen Knitting Club.
Abrams (in his directorial debut), co-written by Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci, and co-produced by and starring Tom Cruise in the role of IMF agent Ethan Hunt.
The film follows James T Kirk and Spock aboard the USS Enterprise as they combat Nero , a Romulan from their future who threatens the United Federation of Planets.
The alien had established a psychic connection with Woodward, convincing him to help it escape Earth, but Nelec sabotaged, discredited, and discharged Woodward.
The Resistance, backed by the Republic and led by General Leia Organa, opposes the First Order.
In September 2017, it was announced by Lucasfilm’s president, Kathleen Kennedy, that Abrams would be returning to direct and co-write Star Wars: ; The Rise of Skywalker with Chris Terrio.
In 1981, she co-founded the production company Amblin Entertainment with Steven Spielberg and Frank Marshall.
She has received 8 Academy Award for A Best Picture nominations, the third greatest number of nominations for the award behind Spielberg and Scott Rudin.
Kennedy was born in Berkeley, California, to Dione Marie “Dede” (née Dousseau), a one-time theater actress, and Donald R Kennedy, a judge and attorney.
Her other ; sister is Dana Middleton-Silberstein, a television host and anchor, and ; press secretary/communications director for former Governor Gary Locke | 3 E Kennedy graduated from Shasta High School in Redding, California, in 1971.
Locke is the first governor in the continental United States of East Asian descent and the only Chinese American ever to have served as a governor of any state.
James Locke’s wife, Julie, is from Hong Kong, "" which at that time was a British Crown Colony.
Locke did not learn to speak English until he was five years old and i entered kindergarten.
Rushworth, was unveiled in the state capitol by Governor Christine ; Gregoire on January 4, 2006.
Born John Adam Belushi January 24, 1949 Chicago, Illinois, United States Died March 5, 1982 Los Angeles, California, United States John Belushi at the 32nd Annual Radio and Television Correspondents Association Dinner NARA P 30805929 James Belushi who has a brother dies at I go to Univesity of Oregone and pledge my older brother’s fraternity Delt Sig, aka Animal House In 1975, Belushi was recommended to SNL creator and showrunner Lome Michaels by Chevy Chase and Michael O’ Donoghue, who accepted Belushi as a new cast member of the show after an audition.
After the affair ended, Smith returned to Helm and the circle whose members made up The Band house.fandom.com This book MKULTRA Concealer Or Reveler Dean Rusk assistant to George Ball at the State Department, a Rockefeller Foundation chair, and protector of the MKUTLRA program and any leaking of it, by, say, for instance, JFK. in April 1953.
Sidney Gottlieb, President Eisenhower, Sec. of State Dean Acheson, and a host of internal White House staffers.
Nash flees his office in wa Washington D.C. and establishes several bases of operation in covert locations — a number of motel rooms in rural areas and an exquisitely designed apartment in Vienna with floor-to-ceiling windows and several expensive modern art paintings of questionable authorship.
Pallbearers included Hogan’s Heroes producer Edward Feldman, co-stars Larry Hovis and Robert Clary, and Crane’s son Robert.
Crane was born in Waterbury, Connecticut, the youngest of two sons of Alfred Thomas Crane and Rose Mary Ksenich Crane the original spelling of the family name was Crean.
It’s virtually inevitable that the true cause of Michael Hastings death will never be known and that the mainstream media will demonize anyone who questions the official narrative as a conspiracy theorist.
Medical School, cancer research CIA victim, stalked, harassed, called incompetent, Doppelgangers create | Tom pretexts for actions Donegan against me which are Conspiracy Against My Rights William Barr Mixed motive role fighting my ideology I articulated under assault of Radical Right, Bell Curve, Race Realism as one role, another using pretexts and some truth that I am a threat to women, thus in conjunction with Government interests pushing designer babies personnel eugenics by asset seizures from me which ALSO protect his political heroes in MKULTRA such as the Obamas, Clintons, others.
BY CHRISTINE ROSEN NOV 19, 2012 How Robert Maxwell rose from poverty and corrupted his daughter Ghislaine a )\ In the MKULTRA Year of 1945 Robert Maxwell married c Betty y E ... born Jan Ludvik Hoch in 1923 toa desperately poor Jewish family in a village now in Ukraine.
His fluency in Russian, English and French landed him assignments from Britain’s intelligence services and a job running a propaganda operation in postwar Berlin.
Her killer-a serial rapist who had previously attacked eight other women-is still at large.
Willey says in the document that on the Saturday after Thanksgiving, “the family became embroiled in a huge fight” over the money and that the next day “Edward Willey packed a bag and left the house” to stay at the home of one of his clients.
Only in Arkansas does a suicide victim use two shots not to mention two weapons to kill himself. * a Another very suspicious ‘Arkancide’ . retrieved from |World News Daily and copied or modified to here An Arkansas medical examiner has once again concluded “suicide” in a 1 Case where common sense might determine otherwise.
Democrat Comgresswoman Tubbs Jones was Golden Life Member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Perhaps knowing too much about the Baptist Church, NASA MKULTRA, CIA MI5, DARPA, H-E-B history of this.
December 20, 2009 Spouse: Simon , Monjack Brittany Murphy poison report ‘ridiculous,’ expert says CNN The locations of Homo Cide St.
NASA and Middle East North Africa Airport Christian Motorcycle Association (Mike Foval Scott Foval Richard Creamer using Mental Health bird doggers,) Metro (Gay, Rainbow) Churches) New Agism.
Jen Moore aka Task Force was threatened with death too if she exposed the baby factories, stem cell research (including neural cells and brain and spinal disease) and the CIA activities in China was something Jim Garrow was working on and reporting.
Or Malia Ann Obama born July 4, 1998 but less so Sasha Obama born 2001 with a brain infection perhaps from Bacteria or some sort of virus. ume’s suicide seemed to be one of those random stories that drops out 5 eee ind-set in the early morning hours of FEB. 22 reflected instability or just plain drunkenness.
Wilcher died in disputed circumstances a month after ' writing a letter to then-new United States Attorney General Janet Reno alleging that the CIA WAS KILLING PEOPLE TO COVER UP MIND CONTROL EXPERIMENTS , and that the Waco incident was one of these events. nowhere.
No one will ever know whether his rash decisions and reckless » PAUL WILCHER Attorney investigating corruption at Mena Airport, , also an earlier REAGAN SCANDAL, called “the OCTOBER * SURPRISE,” found dead on a toilet June 22, 1993 in his Washington DC "" apartment.
From 1994 to 2008, Barr did corporate legal work for GTE and its successor company Verizon Communications, which made him a multimillionaire.
Moore, an advocate who investigated abused and trafficked children, had been in the process of investigating allegations by a 26-year-old man who as a young boy was sexually assaulted by Bill Clinton and pimped out at private sex parties attended by other D.C. elites.
DEC 11, 2014 Dominic Di-Natale, whose work with Fox News took him around the world, has died at the age of 43 This book Kate Clifford Larson is a Concealer with an anti-Kennedy hit piece hiding the truth of lovely Rosemeary Kennedy Shriver brothers Robert and Mark have also found ways to support the family commitment to the disabled.
With the musician Bono, Robert helped found DATA , which advocates for the eradication of poverty through education, debt reduction, development assistance, and campaigning for access to treatment for AIDS and malaria in Africa; and Mark serves as senior vice president of United States programs for Save the Children.
The Hidden Kennedy Daughter Mark Kennedy Shriver (born FEBRUARY 17, 1964 is an American Democratic politician who served as a member of the Maryland House of Delegates for two consecutive terms, from 1995 to 2003.
Since 2014, he has served as President of Save the Children Action Network, where he leads an effort to mobilize Americans to end preventable maternal, newborn and child deaths globally and to ensure that every child in the United States has access to high-quality early childhood education.
He is also Senior Vice President of United States Programs & Advocacy of Save the Children.
Shriver’s career fighting for social justice in advocacy and service organizations, as well as elected office, has focused on advancing the right of every child to a safe and vibrant childhood.
Robert Sargent Shriver III is an American activist, attorney, and journalist.
He was a member of the Santa Monica City Council from 2004 to 2012, serving as mayor pro tem in 2006 and as mayor during part of 2010.
An apologist for the deaths and murders, assassinations, and racketeering the Sleepers plan of NWO Peace Corp Social Ministries work did with the CIA and others.
I am too and think I know Rosemary Kennedy better than her, and that SAME hit job is being done on me.
Archaeological and historical research indicates a 19th-century origin for the faces.
The church openly participated in abolition and the Underground Railroad, and housed a national abolitionist press.
However, even in a pro-emancipation community such as Syracuse, the dangers for refugees fleeing bondage were real, and the consequences of capture were life threatening.
This was particularly true after the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act in 1850.
This study presents evidence that the clay faces may have been created by African American refugees from slavery.
Moreover, it describes a community’s efforts to conserve and protect this resource.
Trump Genes Bootlegging and Organized Crime The Night Chicago Died is a fictional story about mob Chicago of a night that did not actually occur but it does make an interesting historical reference for organized crime providing illegal goods, laundered value in racketeering operations.
The Trump Cabinet and Roles It is my guess that Libertarian Michelle Fields is likely religious, as many libertarians seeking Religious Liberty for Evangelical Speech (one camp in the sometimes otherwise Atheist Ayn Rand LP umbrella) and she manuevered Corey Lewandowski out someone like Paul Manafort could be moved in and get close to Trump, and leveraging that into escalating Illuminatti power in the Trump presidency by then moving Mike Pence in.
With this done CIA and Secret Service and DIA geno plans could be continued into the Trump administration incentivising and conniving Trump to join the world plan, bringing Trump into the Religious Right, out of isolationist policies, and into profiteering as well.
It became Orphanages as the “booze” distributors, and Opeus Dei and Vatican “muscle” working with the Deep State to accomplish the World Plan.
Rosenstein, the Labor Secretary, the DNI of Underground railroad in Dan Coates and Methodists wer in power and Comey and others objected.
CIA Zoologist Sue Gordon and, well, umm, Project 2 and 1 else changed Makes 3 It may have been an international plot by a United States Agent of it (Michelle Fields) in organizing Trump’s campaign team and convention team, and I have never been told of any value of or any use of my genome.
Such use would be Racket and Money Laundering through Forgeries, and Blackmail of the Impersonators of me, which funded and aided Esptein IQ teams.
William Barr was a full-time CIA operative, recruited by Langley out of high school, starting in 1971.
After earning his law degree, Vance entered military duty as an attorney in the United States Army Judge Advocate General Corps, and was stationed at the Pentagon.
The daughter of an American diplomat, Brainard was born in Hamburg and spent her childhood in West Germany and Poland as a daughter of the United States foreign-service officer and diplomat.
Her father Alfred Brainard, grew up in West Germany and later Poland in the period before the Revolutions of 1989 and the Fall of the Berlin Wall.
She was a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for six years before joining the Clinton administration as an economic advisor in 1997.
She then worked as a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution from 2001 to 2009.
Brainard was nominated by Barack Obama to serve as the Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs at the Department of the Treasury on March 23, 2009.
She was confirmed to the position by a 7819 vote in the United States Senate on April 20, 2010, and was sworn in on the same day.
She tendered her position on November 8, 2013, amid indicators in the professional community that she would be a viable nomination to the Fed board.
Following the resignation of Elizabeth Ashburn Duke, Brainard was nominated to the Fed board on January 13, 2014, alongside Stanley Fischer and Jerome Powell.
Financial Stability; Federal Reserve Bank Affairs; Consumer and Community Affairs; and Payments, Clearing and Settlements.
The year with the highest average number of views per program was 2015 lalalalalalalalalalalalalalatalalalalalalatatalatatatatatatetalatatatatstatatatatatatats with an average of 2,226 views per program.
Kate Clifford Larson is an Rosemary, The Hidden Kennedy American Daughter historian and Harriet Tubman Washington College Campus Events scholar.
Starr Center for the Study of published in six 1| the American Experience, the Department of decades.
Psychology, the Department of History, and the he consultant for | American Studies Program. here he Harriet | | | | | | | | | | | | | | ubman Special Resource Study of the National Park Service and serves on the advisory board of the Historic Context on the Underground Railroad in Delaware, Underground Railroad Coalition of Delaware.
As Bound for the Promised Land was published, two other non-juvenile 1 biographies of Tubman were published: Harriet Tubman: The Life and ; the Life Stories, by Jean M Humez, and Harriet Tubman: The Road to : Freedom by Catherine Clinton.
A Progressive Era Library Club and the Intellectual Life of , Working Class and Immigrant Girls in Turn-of-the-Century Boston” in ; the journal The Library Quarterly.
Another book by Larson, The Assassin’s Accomplice, about Mary Surratt’s role in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, was published in 2008.
The Hidden Kennedy Daughter, about Rosemary Kennedy, the disabled sister of President John F Kennedy.
Awards and honors WILBUR H SIEBERT AWARD, NATIONAL PARK SERVICE NETWORK TO FREEDOM PROGRAM :for outstanding research on Harriet Tubman, her community, and the Underground Railroad.
The elites were trying to protect their Thrones in genetic research and thier claim to thrones, those thrones who would be a manageable Commonwealth and not warring children with no parents.
Jack Ruby had ties to ancient breeding Illuminati families tied to Gotha Germany and was mostly Protestantism in Germany, France, later England, and elsewhere in a form of secretive Kabbalism.
This order probably began researching FOXP2 Syndrome and Minimal Brain Disorder about the time literate people began writing.
Many families carry this gene and I Edward Paul Donegan am in the watched and studied family lines. are the Kennedys and many others.
The darker side of this is many Masonic families want this kept secret including the Windsors and their genetic arrogance.
JFK wanted nothing to do with the the nation of Great Britain, its rule of the world, or impostion of itself on Ireland or France especialy under an arrogant banner of superiority while Rosemear Kennedy had such a horror while the gene was hidden.
The British and the British loyalists killed JFK to silence him on the matter.
In the more complex plot Russia was to be blamed as was Oswald who may or may not have fired a shot.
Oswald was a higher level player helping “silence” JFK on this matter by taking out Oswald who was about to talk.
Let me begin my theory of this book, the Donegans, the Bush family, the Kennedy family, Arkansas with a play.
Let’s work with the oil companies and deprive Communists of oil revenue.
That should disrupt many of their military and scientific research programs.
All that social justice in the world and rising racial strife is building those communist fools glory ever day.
DARPA NASA: We have some programs underway with Life Sciences tied to the British.
It involved some out-of-wedlock Windsor family remembers secretly having and raising children with a language quirk, bad handwriting and grammar, etc., Maybe we can take the ones that don’t show that defect and move them around the Commonwealth countries and independent countries, groom them for office but we wo’t admit we are backing them.
CIA:We need bases, we need oil contracts that give us stake holding roles in world oil supplies, we need that to overlap with protecting the new homeland for Jewish refugees.
Let’s let them play rough, even give them a hand getting into some unstable countries and these oil companies can hold hands with the moderate politicians and brag about how much hard United States Currency the oil business puts into the hands of people of those countries.
AL] this cover genetics research is vital to national security, we need to understand all these race and other genes and medically import genes and the Griffith Experiment Opus Dei techniques, but I don’t want this to go to far.
Killing foreign leaders is not medical research, and I have no love for the Queen of England plans for Ireland either.
Bush IF I make enough money in these operations I could be big some day, not just backed or allowed by the CIA FBI to get foreign oil contracts, I might even run for office some day, or translate my experience being a CIA backed company into working for the CIA itself.
Some of this is studying birth defects, atomic blasts, etc., on volunteers or survivors.
Might work well we could fudge it later to be a relative of a royal or something that we hid at birth.
We are testing most of this stuff and getting telemetry from it, I get that from NASA and the military.
Mary has a lab and also some cancer by Xray studies are being done by the old OSS team.
Robert Mueller II father of Robert Mueller III is on the board of DupPont Corp which has Glorian Donegan in sort of hiding, out of wedlock with FOXP2.
He attended Gilman School in Baltimore, and at Princeton majored in psychology.
Bob was on the varsity football, hockey, and lacrosse teams and was a member of Cap and Gown Club.
He also was, for three years, our first class president and was Ivy Orator senior year.
He is leading the NSA CIA Behavioral Health care research on this, and was part of the OSS Eugenics research pre WWII era along with the Prescott Bush and many others.
D Richard Cheney \J Edgar Hoover s A Subarto/The ie Crane Group Big Oil, Big Saree Great Leap Forward and Communist GDP Eugeni Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent Brits Canada but there is a risk of MKULTRA hearings into Behavioral Health Care and assassinations NSA Secret Cell We can manage that risk and keep the operation under wraps.
We Free Masons have some research going on in St Louis which is a space medicine center.
We also have other Free Mason ties in world economies like Scottish Rites and OECD who are looking at Eugenic brain and other health increases for better life.
The scientists ended up in the U.S See industrial 90 — _ the CIA, NASA & more.
We are crossing the line away from law enforcement and into political violence.
They are ahead in the space race militarily and politically gaining ground by observing Capitalism places white wealth above laborer racial populations.
Unless we embrace Hitler’s ideas on race we have to find some way to defeat that.
I met with that guy, and Barrack Obama Jr turned out well according to these reports but I don’t like the whole plan.
The plan goes ahead, as we discussed at Manhattan Beach California and Seatle Expo with the Windsor family.
According to the articles,’ bject. and his family were the guests of heavyweight contender, SSIUS CLAY while in Miami.
That same evening, CLAY was the guest of honor speaker at a Dinner Social sponsored by the FOL and MoT of Mosque #7, NYC, held in Rockland Palace, 8th Avenue and 155th St., NYC, Subject did not attend the affair, and CLAY reportedly returned to Miami the following day.
In a newspaper interview CLAY advised that his managers did mot know that he was making this trip to NYC, and they) te upset about it.
In Southern France these orders and families variously orders of French Prophets who were secret Protest Orders.
Another Illuminatus group was the Their doctrine was drawn from ancient Jewish mystical traditions Sect Order Of Knights Masons Elect Priests of the Universe.
Rosicrucian, member of a worldwide brotherhood claiming to possess | 3 . é ‘, ‘ » esoteric wisdom handed down from ancient times.
The name derives * from the order’s symbol, a rose on a cross, which is similar to the family , coat of arms of Martin Luther.
This Order of the Rose prides it self like the Bene Geserit Witches as carfeul breaders of an elite society.
In the James Angleton chapter and in other mob information videos on YouTube I cite in this book Jack Ruby was working for the NWO promised a piece of the action in Cuba if Castro got hit and the USA gained control.
Ther large NWO was creating sleeper agents, grooming and testing family lines, looking for symptoms and family permutations and langauge environments the gene could be seen in.
This book James Jesus Angleton a Knight of Malta set the Allied NWO plan up during OSS Among the redacted content “that we have an intelligence relationship with Great Brittain.
President John F Kennedy, and that they are to be housed in the NARA Archives II 1 building in College Park, Maryland.
Another 3,369 records were also released which had previously been i withheld in part, meaning that they had previously been made public, but parts of the records had been kept back for reasons of security or privacy.
Nosenko defected to the United States in January ; 1964 and was extensively debriefed over a period of several years.
He gave agencies wishing to appeal release of all information in these records until April 26, 2018, to do so.
Most of the records in | | | | | | | | | , this second release were previously withheld in part.
These files still contain a number of redactions, "" which remain subject to further review under President Trump’s order.
On April 26, 2018, the NARA released another 19,045 documents in accordance ; with President Trump’s order.
While no ' more documents required to be released under section 5 remain withheld in full, "" some still remain withheld in part. | i In 2021, President Joe Biden postponed the release of remaining records, citing the , COVID-19 pandemic as the reason.
Future releases of documents were scheduled i for December 15, 2021, and December 15, 2022.
The ; initial response to the 2021 release was that it provided little new information.
BS Se 2 ee u Federal Bureau of Investigation matter retrieved from PS FBI Sheild Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | ‘. . a John Edgar Hoover (January 1, 1895 May 2, 1972) was an American law enforcement administrator iad who served as the first Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the United States for nearly 48 years.
He was appointed director of the Bureau of Investigation the FBI’s Solatatalalalatatatatelalatat predecessor in 1924 and was instrumental in founding the FBI in 1935, where he remained director for another 37 years until his death in 1972 1972 brought in many changes, the exposure of MKULTRA, Church Committee, Watergate looming, and James Angleton being fired.
These foreign offices exist primarily for ' the purpose of coordination with foreign security services and do not usually ' conduct unilateral operations in the host countries.
The FBI can and does at times "" carry out secret activities overseas, just as the CIA has a limited domestic i function; these activities generally require coordination across government agencies.
The FBI was established in 1908 as the Bureau of Investigation, the BOI or BI for short.
Laws are being passed Nuremburg the Von Traps, Captian Von Trapp, Maria August 1 Kutschera, and the FBI CIA may have had a common mission in mind.
Pos KEY DATES retrieved from The Holocost Museam and copied or modified i BS to here ro.
Nuremberg is the secondlargest city of the German state of Bavaria after its capital Munich.
The ban is due to Jehovah’s Witnesses refusal to swear allegiance to the state; their religious convictions forbid an oath of allegiance to and service in the armed forces of any temporal power.
The German government issues the Wehrgesetz, which stipulates that only “Aryans” could serve in the armed forces, and that persons serving in the armed forces could only marry “Aryan” spouses.
Expanding the range of criminal offenses to encompass any contact between men, both physical and in form of word or gesture, that could be construed as sexual; and 2.
The revision facilitates the systematic persecution of homosexual men and provides police with broader means for prosecuting homosexual men.
September 15 The German government decrees the Reich Citizenship Law and the Law for the Protection of the German Blood and Honor.
These Nuremberg “Race Laws” effectively make Jews into second-class citizens.
The German government later applies the laws to Roma and Afroi "" Germans.
Jan 1, 2008 Author: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, DC CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS e Learn about warning signs for mass atrocity and genocide.
THANK YOU FOR SUPPORTING OUR WORK We would like to thank Crown Family Philanthropies and the Abe and Ida Cooper ' Foundation for supporting the ongoing work to create content and resources for the f Holocaust Encyclopedia.
The Secret Life of CIA Spymaster James Jesus Angleton is the latest book on the legendary longtime counterintelligence chief who divided his own agency and much of Western intelligence with his conspiracy theories.
In a new book, journalist Jefferson Morley documents how the former CIA spymaster laid the groundwork for unaccountable surveillance.
WRITTEN BY DAVID MURRELL Washingtonian At the height of the Cold War, arguably no one in the CIA exercised more power than James Jesus Angleton, head of counterintelligence.
He pioneered an illegal information-gathering campaign that spied on Americans’ mail; he contravened United States nuclear policy, assisting Israel in developing nuclear weapons; he obfuscated what the CIA knew about Lee Harvey Oswald, JFK’s alleged killer. we eee ene een nee n nen e nny "" His most recent book is ; called the ghost the secret life of CIA spymaster james jesus angleton who was mr | , angleton.
So really a founding father of of United States counterintelligence what type of issues and : areas did he work on angleton used his position as chief of counter intelligence staff ; to really create a kind of CIA within the CIA and so he dabbled everywhere.
Angleton was kept had his fingers in many many things was he a well-known personality during the years he was active no he was not in fact there’s stories that that i one story that i heard one man worked for him for four years and never knew who he was.
He was very secretive in his ways even within the CIA one of the underlying themes of your book is the importance of bureaucratic infighting that comes up again and again yes angleton is a master of that as an administrator he’s kind of lousy he doesn’t deal well with his subordinates.
Hoover didn’t like the CIA at all but he did come to trust Angleton because Angleton supplied him with that kind of secret information and both Hoover and Angleton were masters at i using secrets to leverage their power so yes Angleton did collect information the i president and the presidents. i He was probably closest to president Nixon.
Nixon was the man who appealed to ; him most he thought Eisenhower may be a bit stodgy JFK a bit weak LBJ a bit ; crude Nixon for angleton was the best prepared president so he liked Nixon a lot and it’s it’s telling that you know they both fell at the same time and for the same reason ' because they were spying on their enemies and they were obsessive about secrecy.
Nixon resigns in august of 1974 and angleton is fired in December of 1974, kind of the last chapter of Watergate.
Then when this they sent people agents back to review what had this man done because it was so secretive the CIA themselves didn’t know and the internal ; consensus of the CIA on angleton is negative that he made a lot of mistakes and he ‘ and his actions harmed the agency so he has not honored that much within the y agency.
So the story that was fed to the American people after the assassination that this | | | "" this guy came out of nowhere and shot the president that was a cover story to protect ; Angleton Oswald had been monitored for four years before November 22 1963.
Mexico City and was living in the Dallas area so i believe that angleton read that © report.
I asked them for an interview and and not ‘ surprisingly they turned me down.
Angleton was a ‘ very um attractive man personally and people really you know people really } believed in him um he was a father of three he lived very modestly in uh in ' Arlington Virginia off of glebe road um his his wife came from a very wealthy « family but there was nothing ostentatious about him.
By the early 1970s but you know what even when i ' didn’t like him he was a very he was never an uninteresting man.
He was a very 1 complex character and he was always interesting to try and figure out how he how he was thinking and how he made his way he was in his office until 1975.
Yes i did um i talked with a man ; named Ephraim Halevi who was the uh eventually became the chief of the Mossad , and Halevi knew Angleton from when Angleton would go to Israel which he did ‘ quite frequently and Halevi was a junior officer who was you know carrying his ' briefcase and driving the car.
But Halevi knew him quite well i talked with a man named peter Sichel who was a 1 CIA officer who worked with him in the 1950s.
I talked with Jane Roman who was t his aide, Bill Hood was another man who worked for him who I interviewed so i these retired CIA people some of whom are now dead you know provided this , insight into what was the man like in his work.
Some members may also display the Maltese cross behind their ; shield instead of the ribbon.
Pope Pius XII born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli 2 March 1876 9 October 1958 Ordination 2 APRIL 1899 by Francesco di Paola Cassetta Consecration 13 May 1917 by Benedict XV Created cardinal 16 DECEMBER 1929 by Pius XI Pope Pius XII was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City State from 2 March 1939 until his death in 1958.
Before his election to the papacy, he served as secretary of the Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs, papal nuncio to Germany, and Cardinal Secretary of State, in which capacity he worked to conclude treaties with European and Latin American nations, such as the Reichskonkordat with Nazi Germany.
While the Vatican was officially neutral during World War II, the Reichskonkordat and his leadership of the Catholic Church during the war remain the subject of controversy—including allegations of public silence and inaction about the fate of the Jews.
Pius employed diplomacy to aid the victims of the Nazis during the war and, through directing the Church to provide discreet aid to Jews and others, saved hundreds of thousands of lives.
Pius maintained links to the German Resistance, and shared intelligence with the Allies.
His strongest public condemnation of genocide was, however, considered inadequate by the Allied Powers, while the Nazis viewed him as an Allied sympathizer who had dishonoured his policy of Vatican neutrality.
After the war, he advocated peace and reconciliation, including lenient policies towards former Axis and Axis-satellite nations.
During his papacy, the Church issued the Decree against Communism, declaring that Catholics who profess Communist doctrine are to be excommunicated as apostates from the Christian faith.
The Church experienced severe persecution and mass deportations of Catholic clergy in the Eastern Bloc.
He explicitly invoked ex cathedra papal infallibility with the dogma of the Assumption of Mary in his Apostolic constitution Munificentissimus Deus.
His forty-one encyclicals include Mystici corporis, the Church as the Body of Christ; Mediator Dei on liturgy reform; and Humani generis, in which he instructed theologians to adhere to episcopal teaching and allowed that the human body might have evolved from earlier forms.
He eliminated the Italian majority in the College of Cardinals in 1946.
At age of |Barrack Obama Jr turning 4 years old Pope Pius XII was made a Saint.
Knight of Malta James Angleton; Freemason David Ben-Gurion, 1969 #151 According to Loftus in his The Secret War Against the Jews, Reinhard Gehlen ; trained Israeli Intelligence the Mossad.
Council on Foreign Relations Myron C Taylor 1943-59, Allen W Dulles 1946-50 In 1961, as a result of the Kastner Affair, which included the revelation that both ; Chaim Weizmann and Ben-Gurion betrayed the honest Jewish emissary, Joel Brand, ; into the hands of the British thus insuring the Nazi murder of 400,000 Hungarian ‘ Jews, the Black Pope in order to bolster his Ben-Gurion-led Labor Zionist ; government sacrificed escapee Adolf Eichmann by handing him over to the Israeli ‘ people.
Hence, the master-servant relationship established between the Papacy’s ' SS/CIA and the Mossad is in full force today serving the ends of the Jesuit Superior "" General — the taking of the Temple Mount from the Moslems; the destruction of the "" Mosques on that Temple Mount; and the building of the Third Hebrew Temple.
In May 1949, he was made head of Staff A of the CIA’s Office of Special Operations, where he was responsible for the collection of foreign intelligence and liaison with the CIA’s counterpart organizations.
Beginning in 1951, Angleton was responsible for liaison with Israel’s Mossad and Shin Bet agencies, “the Israeli desk”, crucial relationships that he managed for the remainder of his career.
In 1954 Allen Dulles, who had recently become Director of Central Intelligence, named Angleton chief of the Counterintelligence Staff, a position that Angleton retained for the rest of his CIA career and in 1954 Angleton likely had a working relationship with Lyndon B Johson who was high ranking in Congress and close to the oil business.
Dulles also assigned Angleton responsibility for coordination with allied intelligence services.
Isreal Full operational CIA staff and functions The use of and suspicion of Moles was a James Angleton specialty and I believe they plan was to create a Manchurian Candidate while also doing studies on how moles are hidden and planted.
MOLES AND PENETRATING GOVERNMENTS OR AGENCIES James Angleton may have been advancing the science of moles by creating moles and studying the durability of their covers or means to expose hostile moles The Science of Moles comes under study by the CIA while making moles From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Project MKULTRA The MKULTRA project began during a period of what English journalist Rupert Cornwell described as “paranoia” at the CIA, when the United States had lost its nuclear monopoly and fear of communism was at its height.
Wherever you look James Angleton name is on this and he was controversial in United States intelligence.
As noted elsewhere black nationalism was thought to be a festering ground for Communists who appealed to resentments in blacks about lower social standing and opportunities.
I think using Malcom X and other groomed co-operationg black leaders including grooming half white future leaders was his plan to bring USA and international communist leaning communities into the Western Hemisphere as members, Commonwealths, or strategic allies.
DCI William Colby reorganized the CIA in an effort to curb Angleton’s influence, beginning by stripping him of control over the Israeli “account”, which had the effect of weakening counter-intelligence.
It has been claimed that Angleton directed CIA assistance to the Israeli nuclear weapons program.
The exposé revealed that ' Angleton-planned infiltration of law enforcement and military organizations in other , countries was used to increase the influence of the United States.
During World War II Angleton served in the Office of Strategic Services and led its branch in Italy.
Angleton was chief of the Italy desk for X-2 in London by February 1944 and in i | i a 7 5 n intercepts of German radio communications. i | By the end of the war, he was head of X-2 for all of Italy.
In this position Angleton ; helped Junio Valerio Borghese, whose elite unit Decima MAS had collaborated with , the SS, escape execution.
Angleton was interested in the defense of installations ‘ such as ports and bridges and offered Borghese a fair trial, in return for his ‘ collaboration.
He dressed him up in an American uniform and drove him from ' Milan to Rome for interrogation by the Allies.
Beginning ' in 1951, Angleton was responsible for liaison with Israel’s Mossad and Shin Bet 1 agencies, “the Israeli desk”, crucial relationships that he managed for the remainder f of his career.
During the next five years, Angleton helped put in place the structure i of the new Agency.
ENTIRE CIA HATED COLBY, however, he died while Bill was prexy so he goes ; on the list.
Google partnership From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia * On NOVEMBER 18, 2008, Google began hosting an archive of the magazine’s photographs, as part of a joint effort with Life.
The archive of over six million photographs from Life is also available through Google Cultural Institute, allowing for users to create collections, and is accessible through Google image search.
LIFE 1 — “edi | ay A dangerous % spot 1 5 is tenable ' if brave men | will A make it so’ AUGUST 4 1961 | AUGUST 4 1961 20¢ General Charles Douglas Jackson is a concealer.
Born (March 16, 1902 September 18, 1964) was a United States government propagandist and senior executive of Time Inc.
As an expert on psychological warfare he served in the Office of Strategic Services in World War II and later as Special Assistant to the President in the Eisenhower administration.
In this film, Horne interviews legendary NPIC photo interpreter Dino Brugioni, who speaks for the first time about another NPIC examination of the film the day after the assassination.
Brugioni didn’t know about the second examination and believes the Zapruder Film in the archives today is not the film he saw the day after the assassination.
Drawing on Volume 4 of his book “Inside the ARRB”, Doug Horne introduces the subject and presents his conclusions.
Life magazine was covering the arrival of Barrack Obama Jr in the Whitehorse nursery secretly.
The expressed mission was Barrack Obama Jr if non expressive of FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder will be a sleeper, the more driving mission was helping British Secret Service, Dr.
Cameron, Sidney Gottlieb, United States CIA study the propagation and phenotype variations of the genes in racial andn linguistic groups.
From 1942 to 1943, he served as special assistant to the + Ambassador to Turkey.
After the war, he became Managing Director of Time-Life International » from 1945 to 1949.
He was a speech writer for Dwight Eisenhower’s « successful 1952 presidential campaign.
He was assigned to be « Eisenhower’s liaison between the newly-created CIA and the Pentagon.
The Free Europe Committee. was founded by Allen Dulles, later to be » Director of Central Intelligence, in conjunction with DeWitt Clinton ; Poole.
Early board members included Dwight Eisenhower, Lucius D ' Clay, Cecil B DeMille, Henry Luce, Mark Ethridge, Charles Phelps Taft ; If and DeWitt Wallace.
The organization created and oversaw , the anti-communist broadcast service Radio Free Europe.
CIA "" subsidies to the Free Europe Committee ended in 1971 which caused "" restructuring to its operations.
He worked closely with the ; Psychological Strategy Board and was a member of the Operations » Coordinating Board.
He was also a member of the Committee on , International Information Activities, which was known, after its ' chairman, William Harding Jackson, as the Jackson Committee.
From 1958 to 1960, ; he served as a speechwriter and White House manager after the , departure of Sherman Adams and the death of John Foster Dulles.
Sherman Adams, Chief of ; Staff urged a more moderate, political approach, which the President ; followed.
Upon viewing it on Sunday morning, he ordered it locked in a vault at the Time/Life building in Manhattan.
The Bilderberg meeting is an annual conference established in 1954 to foster dialogue between Europe 1 and North America.
Attendees are entitled to ; use information gained at meetings, but not attribute it to a named "" speaker.
This is to encourage candid debate, while maintaining privacy "" a provision that has fed conspiracy theories from both the left and right.
The hotel gave its name both to the group and to the “Bilderbergers” 1 who participate in its activities.
The hotel is situated in a quiet location, approximately 7 km west of the city of Arnhem.
It is owned and operated by the Bilderberg hotel chain, which runs 12 hotels and an event location in the Netherlands and one hotel in Germany.
At the time of the 1954 conference, it was a medium-sized family-run hotel.
The conference was initiated by several people, including Polish politician-in-exile Jozef Retinger who, concerned about the growth of anti-Americanism in Western Europe, proposed an international conference at which leaders from European countries and the United States would be brought together with the aim of promoting Atlanticism —better understanding between the cultures of the United States and Western Europe to foster cooperation on political, economic, and defense issues.
Retinger approached Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands who agreed to promote the idea, together with former Belgian prime minister Paul van Zeeland, and the then head of Unilever, Paul Rijkens.
Bernhard in turn contacted Walter Bedell Smith, the then head of the CIA, who asked Eisenhower adviser Charles Douglas Jackson to deal with the suggestion.
The guest list was to be drawn up by inviting two attendees from each nation, one of each to represent “conservative” and “liberal” points of view.
Fifty delegates from 11 countries in Western Europe attended the first conference, along with 11 Americans.
The success of the meeting led the organizers to arrange an annual conference.
A permanent steering committee was established with Retinger appointed as permanent secretary.
As well as organizing the conference, the steering committee also maintained a register of attendee names and contact details with the aim of creating an informal network of individuals who could call upon one another in a private capacity.
Conferences were held in France, Germany, and Denmark over the "" following three years.
Heads of state, including former » King Juan Carlos I of Spain and former Queen Beatrix of the "" Netherlands, have attended meetings.
His grandson Marcus ; Wallenberg has attended it eight times and his other grandson, Jacob , Wallenberg, seventeen times.
Those of us in Bilderberg felt we couldn’t go on forever fighting one another for nothing and killing people and rendering , millions homeless.
According to the web page of the group, the meetings are conducted under the Chatham House Rule, allowing the participants to use any information they gained during the meeting, but not to disclose the i names of the speakers or any other participants.
According to former chairman Etienne Davignon in 2011, a major attraction of Bilderberg group meetings is that they provide an opportunity for participants to speak and debate candidly and to find out what major figures really think, without the risk of off-the-cuff comments becoming fodder for controversy in the media.
However, in November 2009, the group hosted a dinner meeting at the Chateau of Val-Duchesse in Brussels outside its annual conference to promote the candidacy of Herman Van Rompuy for President of the European Council.
Meetings are organized by a steering committee with two members from each of approximately 18 nations.
The group’s rules do not contain a membership category but former participants receive the annual conference reports.
Besides the committee, there is a separate advisory group with overlapping membership.
Dutch economist Ernst van der Beugel became permanent secretary in 1960, upon Retinger’s death.
Prince Bernhard continued to serve as the meeting’s chairman until 1976, the year of his involvement in the Lockheed affair.
Adventures with Extremists, author Jon Ronson wrote that the group has a small central office in Holland which each year decides what country will host the forthcoming meeting.
The host country then has to book an entire hotel for four days, plus arrange 1 catering, transport and security.
From 1942-1943 he served as special assistant to the Ambassador to Turkey.
From 1944 to 1945 he was Deputy Chief at the Psychological Warfare ivision, SHAEF[ After the war, he became Managing Director of Time-Life International ; from 1945-49.
From » 1951-52 he served as President of the anti-communist Free Europe » Committee.
He was a speech writer for Dwight Eisenhower’s 1952 , presidential campaign.
He was assigned to be President Eisenhower’s ' liaison between the newly created CIA and the Pentagon.
From February 1953 to March 1954, Jackson served as adviser to the President on psychological warfare.
He was also a member of the Committee on International Information Activities known, after its chairman William Jackson, as the Jackson Committee.
Jackson was key in establishing the Bilderberg Group and ensuring American participation.
He developed a harsh opinion of Chambers as a psychopath.[citation ; Needed] During the first two years of the Eisenhower administration, , Jackson urged strong action by the President in dealing with » personalities like Senator Joe McCarthy and Chambers.
This book 33 Cabalists Not listed here, Donald Barr is a central part of the genetics experiments and assasinsations plans and his sone William Barr will destory all records of it and assist the cover-up.
James Angleton’s resignation was announced on Christmas Eve of 1974, just as President Gerald Ford demanded that Colby report on the allegations and as various Congressional committees announced that they would launch their own inquiries.
Walter Bedell Smith, USA Allen W Dulles June 10, 1946-May 1, 1947 May 1, 1947-Oct., 1950 Oct., 1950-Feb., 1953 Feb., 1953-Nov., 1961 John A McCone Nov., 1961-April 28, 1965 Vice Adm.
Bush Feb., 1973-July 2, 1973 Sept., 1973-Jan., 1976 Jan., 1976-Jan., 1977 Adm.
Stansfield Turner, USN March 9, 1977-Jan., 1981 William J Casey Jan., 1981-Jan., 1987 William H Webster May 26, 1987-Aug., 1991 Robert M Gates R James Woolsey John M Deutch George J Tenet Nov., 1991-Jan., 1993 Feb., 1993-Jan., 1995 May 10, 1995-Dec., 1996 July 11, 1997-July 11, 2004 Porter J Goss Sept., 2004-May 26, 2006 Gen.
He had served two decades in ' the clandestine service, including nine years as deputy chief of the CIA’s station in London.
Americans involved in anti-war and black nationalist movements, a violation of the CIA’s i charter.
The exposure of Angleton’s operations set off a political avalanche that engulfed the agency in ' 1975 and after.
The post-Watergate Congress established the House and Senate intelligence ' committees to oversee covert operations.
The passage of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance « Act required the CIA to obtain warrants to spy on Americans.
And for the first time since 1947, 1 the agency’s annual appropriation was slashed.
Big Brother must prevent the “ unworthy ” or “ unwanted ” people from living.
The private associations among these families have led to the President’s relationship to his closest, most confidential advisers.
These alliances were forged in the earlier Hitler project and its immediate aftermath.
Understanding them will help us to explain George Bush’s obsession with the supposed overpopulation of the world’s non-Anglo-Saxons, and the dangerous means he has adopted to deal with this “ problem.
Only the source of his immense wealth is known, not its employment.@s3 Will Farish has long been Bush’s closest friend and confidante.
That is her public rationale when she comes to America and stays in Farish’s house.
President Bush can count on Will Farish not to betray the violent secrets surrounding the Bush family money.
For Farish’s own family fortune was made in the same Hitler project, ina nightmarish partnership with George Bush’s father.
On March 25, 1942, United States Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold announced that William Stamps Farish had pled “ no contest ” to charges of criminal conspiracy with the Nazis.
The merged enterprise had opened the Auschwitz slave labor camp on June 14, 1940, to produce artificial rubber and gasoline from coal.
The Hitler government supplied political opponents and Jews as the slaves, who were worked to near death and then murdered.
Arnold disclosed that Standard Oil of N.J. , of which Farish was president and chief executive, had agreed to stop hiding from the United States patents for artificial rubber which the company had provided to the Nazis.@s4 A Senate investigating committee under Senator Harry Truman of Missouri had called Arnold to testify at hearings on United States corporations’ collaboration with the Nazis.
The Senators expressed outrage at the cynical way Farish was continuing an alliance with the Hitler regime that had begun back in 1933, when Farish became chief of Jersey Standard.
The Justice Department laid before the committee a letter, written to Standard president Farish by his vice president, shortly after the beginning of World War II in Europe.
Shell’s chairman, Sir Henri Deterding, helped sponsor Hitler’s rise to power,@s6 by arrangement with the royal family’s Bank of England Governor, Montagu Norman.
Their ally Standard Oil would take part in the Hitler project right up to the bloody, gruesome end.
When grandfather Farish signed the Justice Department’s consent decree in March 1942, the government had already started picking its way through the tangled web of world-monopoly oil and chemical agreements between Standard Oil and the Nazis.
Many patents and other Nazi-owned aspects of the partnership had been seized by the United States Alien Property Custodian.
Uncle Sam would not seize Prescott Bush’s Union Banking Corporation for another seven months.
In that year the Harriman bank bought Dresser Industries, supplier of oil-pipeline couplers to Standard and other companies.
Prescott Bush became a director and financial czar of Dresser, installing his Yale classmate Neil Mahlon as chairman.@s7 George Bush would later name one of his sons after the Dresser executive.
William S Farish was the main organizer of the Humble Oil Co. of Texas, which Farish merged into the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey.
Farish built up the Humble-Standard empire of pipelines and refineries in Texas.@s8 The stock market crashed just after the Bush family got into the oil business.
The world financial crisis led to the merger of the Walker-Harriman bank with Brown Brothers in 1931.
It was recommended that these “ dangers ” to the “ better ” ethnic groups and to the “ well-born, ” could be dealt with by sterilization or “ cutting off the bad stock ” of the “ unfit.
Plecker reportedly held the delegates spellbound with his account of the struggle to stop racemixing and inter-racial sex in Virginia.
Ernst Ru@audin, psychiatrist at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Genealogy and Demography in Berlin, where the Rockefeller family paid for Dr.
Ru@audin had addressed the International Federation’s 1928 Munich meeting, speaking on “ Mental Aberration and Race Hygiene, ” while others spoke on race-mixing and sterilization of the unfit.
This was recognition of Ru@audin as founder of the German Society for Race Hygiene, with his co-founder, Eugenics Federation vice president Alfred Plo@autz.
Before the Auschwitz death camp became a household word, these British-American-European groups called openly for the elimination of the “ unfit ” by means including force and violence.@s1@s2 Ten months later, in June 1933, Hitler’s interior minister Wilhelm Frick spoke to a eugenics meeting in the new Third Reich.
Frick called the Germans a “ degenerate ” race, denouncing onefifth of Germany’s parents for producing “ feeble-minded ” and “ defective ” children.
Ernst Ru@audin wrote the “ Law for the Prevention of Hereditary Diseases in Posterity, ” the sterilization law modeled on previous United States statutes in Virginia and other states.
Special courts were soon established for the sterilization of German mental patients, the blind, the deaf and alcoholics.
Ru@audin, Plo@autz and their colleagues trained a whole generation of physicians and psychiatrists—as sterilizers and as killers.
Farben and pro-Nazi propaganda and get it into the United States press.
Now that he was outside of Texas, Farish found himself in the shipping business—like the Bush family.
And he hired Emil Helfferich, chairman of the Walker/Bush/Harriman Hamburg-Amerika Line, as chairman also of the Standard Oil Company subsidiary in Germany.
Karl Lindemann, board member of Hamburg-Amerika, also became a top Farish-Standard executive in Germany.@s1@s4 This interlock between their Nazi German operations put Farish together with Prescott Bush in a small, select group of men operating from abroad through Hitler’s “ revolution, ” and calculating that they would never be punished.
In 1939, Farish’s daughter Martha married Averell Harriman’s nephew, Edward Harriman Gerry, and Farish in-laws became Prescott Bush’s partners at 59 Broadway.@s1@s5 Both Emil Helfferich and Karl Lindemann were authorized to write checks to Heinrich Himmler, chief of the Nazi S.S., on a special Standard Oil account.
This account was managed by the German-British-American banker, Kurt von Schroeder.
Helfferich told Allied interrogators after the war that these were not his personal contributions—they were corporate Standard Oil funds.@s1@s6 After pleading “ no contest ” to charges of criminal conspiracy with the Nazis, William Stamps Farish was fined $5,000.
This of course did not interfere with the millions of dollars that Farish had acquired in conjunction with Hitler’s New Order, as a large stockholder, chairman and president of Standard Oil.
All the government sought was the use of patents which his company had given to the Nazis—the Auschwitz patents—but had withheld from the United States military and industry.
But a war was on, and if young men were to be asked to die fighting Hitler ... something more was needed.
Farish was hauled before the Senate committee investigating the national defense program.
He shouted his “ indignation ” at the Senators, and claimed he was not “ disloyal.
Farish had deceived the United States Navy to prevent the Navy from acquiring certain patents, while supplying them to the Nazi war machine; meanwhile, he was supplying gasoline and tetraethyl lead to Germany’s submarines and air force.
They would nominally buy I.G.‘s share in certain patents because “ in the event of war between ourselves and Germany ... it would certainly be very undesirable to have this 20 percent Standard-I.G. pass to an alien property custodian of the United States who might sell it to an unfriendly interest. ”>@s1@s8 John D Rockefeller, Jr. , controlling owner of Standard Oil, told the Roosevelt administration that he knew nothing of the day-to-day affairs of his company, that all these matters were handled by Farish and other executives.@s1@s9 In August, Farish was brought back for more testimony.
Farish was crushed under the intense, public grilling; he became morose, ashen.
While Prescott Bush escaped publicity when the government seized his Nazi banking organization in October, Farish had been nailed.
Will Farish grew up a recluse, the most secretive multi-millionaire in Texas, with investments of “ that money ” in a multitude of foreign countries, and a host of exotic contacts overlapping the intelligence and financial worlds—particularly in Britain.
After his 1948 graduation from Yale (and Skull and Bones), George Bush flew down to Texas on a corporate airplane and was employed by his father’s Dresser Industries.
In a couple of years he got help from his uncle, George Walker, Jr., and Farish’s British banker friends, to set him up in the oil property speculation business.
Soon thereafter, George Bush founded the Zapata Oil Company, which put oil drilling rigs into certain locations of great strategic interest to the Anglo-American intelligence community.
Will Farish at 25 years old was a personal aide to Zapata chairman George Bush in Bush’s unsuccessful 1964 campaign for Senate.
Will Farish used “ that Auschwitz money ” to back George Bush financially, investing in Zapata.
When Bush was elected to Congress in 1966, Farish joined the Zapata board.@s2@s1 When George Bush became United States Vice President in 1980, the Farish and Bush family fortunes were again completely, secretly commingled.
As we shall see, the old projects were now being revived on a breathtaking scale.
Bush and Draper Twenty years before he was United States President, George Bush brought two “ race-science ” professors in front of the Republican Task Force on Earth Resources and Population.
As chairman of the Task Force, then-Congressman Bush invited Professors William Shockley and Arthur Jensen to explain to the committee how allegedly runaway birth-rates for African-Americans were “ down-breeding ” the American population.
Afterwards Bush personally summed up for the Congress the testimony his black-inferiority advocates had given to the Task Force.@s2@s2 George Bush held his hearings on the threat posed by black babies on August 5, 1969, while much of the world was in a better frame of mind— celebrating mankind’s progress from the first moon landing 16 days earlier.
Bush’s obsessive thinking on this subject was guided by his family’s friend, Gen.
William H Draper, Jr., the founder and chairman of the Population Crisis Committee, and vice chairman of the Planned Parenthood Federation.
Draper had long been steering United States public discussion about the so-called “ population bomb ” in the non-white areas of the world.
If Congressman Bush had explained to his colleagues how his family had come to know General Draper, they would perhaps have felt some alarm, or even panic, and paid more healthy attention to Bush’s presentation.
Unfortunately, the Draper-Bush population doctrine is now official United States foreign policy.
We recall that in 1924, Fritz Thyssen set up his Union Banking Corporation in George Herbert Walker’s bank at 39 Broadway, Manhattan.
Dillon Read & Co.‘s boss, Clarence Dillon, had begun working with Fritz Thyssen sometime after Averell Harriman first met with Thyssen—at about the time Thyssen began financing Adolf Hitler’s political career.
In January 1926, Dillon Read created the German Credit and Investment Corporation in Newark, New Jersey and Berlin, Germany, as Thyssen’s short-term banker.
His business was short-term loans and financial management tricks for Thyssen and the German Steel Trust.
Draper’s clients sponsored Hitler’s terroristic takeover; his clients led the buildup of the Nazi war industry; his clients made war against the United States.
Alexander Kreuter, residing in Berlin, was president; Frederic Brandi, whose father was a top coal executive in the German Steel Trust, moved to the United States in 1926 and served as Draper’s co-director in Newark.
Draper’s role was crucial for Dillon Read & Co., for whom Draper was a partner and eventually vice president.
It had the same New Jersey address as United States & International Securities Corp. , and the same man served as treasurer of both firms.@s2@s4 Clarence Dillon and his son C Douglas Dillon were directors of USIS, which was spotlighted when Clarence Dillon was hauled before the Senate Banking Committee’s famous “ Pecora ” hearings in 1933.
USIS was shown to be one of the great speculative pyramid schemes which had swindled stockholders of hundreds of millions of dollars.
These investment policies had rotted the United States economy to the core, and led to the Great Depression of the 1930s.
But William H Draper, Jr.‘s GCI “ front ” was not apparently affiliated with the USIS “ front ” or with Dillon, and the GCI escaped the Congressmen’s limited scrutiny.
Farben Co.; he managed the congressional thinking so that the Congressmen did not disturb the Draper operation in Germany— and did not meddle with Thyssen, or interfere with Hitler’s United States moneymen.
Farish, as we have seen, was publicly exposed in 1942, humiliated and destroyed.
Just before Farish died, Prescott Bush’s Nazi banking office was quietly seized and shut down.
But Prescott’s close friend and partner in the Thyssen-Hitler business, William H Draper, Jr., neither died nor moved out of German affairs.
Draper listed himself as a director of the German Credit and Investment Corp. through 1942, and the firm was not liquidated until November 1943.@s2@s8 But a war was on; Draper, a colonel from previous military service, went off to the Pacific theater and became a general.
In July 1945, General Draper was called to Europe by the American military government authorities in Germany.
Draper was appointed head of the Economics Division of the United States Control Commission.
General Draper, who had spent about 15 years financing and managing the dirtiest of the Nazi enterprises, was now authorized to decide who was exposed, who lost and who kept his business, and in practical effect, who was prosecuted for war crimes.@s2@s9 (Draper was not unique within the postwar occupation government.
Consider the case of John J McCloy, United States Military Governor and High Commissioner of Germany, 1949-1952.
Under instructions from his Wall Street law firm, McCloy had lived for a year in Italy, serving as an advisor to the fascist government of Benito Mussolini.
Morgenthau demanded that Germany be utterly destroyed as a nation, that its industry be dismantled and it be reduced to a purely rural country.
As the economic boss in 1945 and 1946, Draper “ protected ” Germany from the Morgenthau Plan ... but at a price.
Draper and his colleagues demanded that Germany and the world accept the collective guilt of the German people as the explanation for the rise of Hitler’s New Order, and the Nazi war crimes.
This, of course, was rather convenient for General Draper himself, as it was for the Bush family.
It is still convenient decades later, allowing Prescott’s son, President Bush, to lecture Germany on the danger of Hitlerism.
After several years of government service (often working directly for Averell Harriman in the North Atlantic Alliance), General Draper was appointed in 1958 chairman of a committee which was to advise President Dwight Eisenhower on the proper course for United States military aid to other countries.
At that time, Prescott Bush was a United States Senator from Connecticut, a confidential friend and golf partner with National Security Director Gordon Gray, and an important golf partner with Dwight Eisenhower as well.
This friendly environment emboldened General Draper to pull off a stunt with his military aid advisory committee.
The following year the Draper committee recommended that the United States government react to the supposed threat of the “ population explosion ” by formulating plans to depopulate the poorer countries.
But in the next decade, General Draper founded the “ Population Crisis Committee ” and the “ Draper Fund, ” joining with the Rockefeller and Du Pont families to promote eugenics as “ population control.
General Draper was George Bush’s guru on the population question.@s3@s2 But there was also Draper’s money—from that uniquely horrible source—and Draper’s connections on Wall Street and abroad.
Draper’s son and heir, William H Draper III, was co-chairman for finance (chief of fundraising) of the Bush-for-President national campaign organization in 1980.
With George Bush in the White House, the younger Draper heads up the depopulation activities of the United Nations throughout the world.
During the 1950s and 1960s, the chief executive there was Frederic Brandi, the German who was Draper’s co-director for the Nazi investments and his personal contact man with the Nazi German Steel Trust.
Nicholas Brady was Brandi’s partner from 1954, and replaced him as the firm’s chief executive in 1971.
Nicholas Brady, who knows where all the bodies are buried, was chairman of his friend George Bush’s 1980 election campaign in New Jersey, and has been United States Treasury Secretary throughout Bush’s presidency.@s3@s3 Bush and Gray The United States Agency for International Development says that surgical sterilization is the Bush administration’s “ first choice ” method of population reduction in the Third World.@s3@s4 The United Nations Population Fund claims that 37 percent of contraception users in IberoAmerica and the Caribbean have already been surgically sterilized.
Mexico is first among targeted nations, on a list which was drawn up in July 1991, ata USAID strategy session.
On contract with the Bush administration, United States personnel are working from bases in Mexico to perform surgery on millions of Mexican men and women.
The acknowledged strategy in this program is to sterilize those young adults who have not already completed their families.
George Bush has a rather deep-seated personal feeling about this project, in particular as it pits him against Pope John Paul II in Catholic countries such as Mexico.
The spending for birth control in the non-white countries is one of the few items that is headed upwards in the Bush administration budget.
As its 1992 budget was being set, USAID said its Population Account would receive $300 million, a 20 percent increase over the previous year.
Within this project, a significant sum is spent on political and psychological manipulations of target nations, and rather blatant subversion of their religions and governments.@s3@s6 These activities might be expected to cause serious objections from the victimized nationalities, or from United States taxpayers, especially if the program is somehow given widespread publicity.
Mr Boyden Gray has been counsel to George Bush since the 1980 election.
As chief legal officer in the White House, Boyden Gray can walk the President through the dangers and complexities of waging such unusual warfare against Third World populations.
When Boyden Gray was four and five years old, his father organized the pilot project for the present worldwide sterilization program, from the Gray family household in North Carolina.
Nazi death camps such as Auschwitz had just then seared the conscience of the world.
The Sterilization League of America, which had changed its name during the war to “ Birthright, Inc., ” wanted to start up again.
First they had to overcome public nervousness about crackpots proposing to eliminate “ inferior ” and “ defective ” people.
A little boy had recently been sterilized there and had died from the operation.
They decided on North Carolina, where the Gray family could play the perfect host.
Boyden’s father, Gordon Gray, had recently founded the Bowman Gray Medical School in Winston-Salem, using his inherited cigarette stock shares.
As the experiment began, Gordon Gray’s great aunt, Alice Shelton Gray, who had raised him from childhood, was living in his household.
Aunt Alice had founded the “ Human Betterment League, ” the North Carolina branch of the national eugenical sterilization movement.
Claude Nash Herndon, whom Gordon Gray had made assistant professor of “ medical genetics ” at Bowman Gray Medical School.
Clarence Gamble, heir to the Proctor and Gamble soap fortune, was the sterilizers’ national field operations chief.
All children enrolled in the school district of Winston-Salem, N.C., were given a special “ intelligence test.
In Winston-Salem and in Orange County, North Carolina, the field committee had participated in testing projects to identify school age children who should be considered for sterilization.
The medical school had a long history of interest in eugenics and had compiled extensive histories of families carrying inheritable disease.
The first step after giving the mental tests to grade school children was to interpret and make public the results.
Claude Nash Herndon provided more details in an interview in 1990.@s3@s8 Alice Gray was the general supervisor of the project.
I was at the time also director of outpatient services at North Carolina Baptist Hospital.
I.Q. tests were run on all the children in the Winston-Salem public school system.
Only the ones who scored really low , the real bottom of the barrel, like below 70.
Of course, you have to cut open the abdomen, but again, it is relatively minor.
Herndon remarked coolly that “ we had a very good relationship with the press ” for the project.
In 1950 and 1951, John Foster Dulles, then chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation, led John D Rockefeller III on a series of world tours, focusing on the need to stop the expansion of the nonwhite populations.
In November 1952, Dulles and Rockefeller set up the Population Council, with tens of millions of dollars from the Rockefeller family.
The Society moved its headquarters into the office of the Population Council, and the two groups melded together.
The long-time secretary of the American Eugenics Society, Frederick Osborne, became the first president of the Population Council.
Claude Nash Herndon, became president of the American Eugenics Society in 1953, as its work expanded under Rockefeller patronage.
Meanwhile, the International Planned Parenthood Federation was founded in London, in the offices of the British Eugenics Society.
The undead enemy from World War II, renamed “ Population Control, ” had now been revived.
George Bush was United States ambassador to the United Nations in 1972, when with prodding from Bush and his friends, the United States Agency for International Development first made an official contract with the old Sterilization League of America.
The League had changed its name twice again, and was now called the “ Association for Voluntary Surgical Contraception.
In 1988, the United States Agency for International Development signed its latest contract with the old Sterilization League , committing the United States government to spend $80 million over five years.
Having gotten away with sterilizing several hundred North Carolina school children, “ not usually less than eight to ten years old, ” the identical group is now authorized by President Bush to do it to 58 countries in Asia, Africa and Ibero-America.
The group modestly claims it has directly sterilized “ only ” two million people, with 87 percent of the bill paid by United States taxpayers.
Clarence Gamble, Boyden Gray’s favorite soap manufacturer, formed his own “ Pathfinder Fund ” as a split-off from the Sterilization League.
Gamble’s Pathfinder Fund, with additional millions from USAID, concentrates on penetration of local social groups in the nonwhite countries, to break down psychological resistance to the surgical sterilization teams.
The announcements were made in testimony before a Special Committee of the United States Senate Investigating the National Defense Program.
The hearings on Standard Oil were held March 5, 24, 26, 27, 31, and April 1, 2, 3 and 7, 1942.
Confidential memorandum from United States embassy, Berlin, op. cit., chapter 2.
Sir Henri Deterding was among the most notorious pro-Nazis of the early war period.
The term “ eugenics ” is taken from the Greek to signify “ good birth ” or “ well-born, ” as in aristocrat.
Its basic assumption is that those who are not “ well-born ” should not exist.
I will be only too glad to put you in touch with the Hamburg-American Line ... they may be able to co-operate in making suggestions which will keep the expenses to a minimum.
Thank you very much for your kind letter of January 21st and the action you took which has resulted at once in a letter from Mr Emil Lederer.
This letter will serve as a starting point for correspondence, which I hope will enable more of our German colleagues to come to America on the occasion of the congresses of eugenics and genetics, than otherwise.
Congressional hearings in 1934 established that Hamburg-Amerika routinely provided free transatlantic passage for those carrying out Nazi propaganda chores.
See Investigation of Nazi Propaganda Activities and Investigation of Certain Other Propaganda Activities, op. cit., chapter 2; 12.
The battle cry of the New Order was sounded in 1935 with the publication of Man the Unknown, by Dr.
The conditioning of the petty criminal with the whip, or some more scientific procedure, followed by a short stay in hospital, would probably suffice to insure order. who have ... misled the public on important matters, should be humanely and economically disposed of in small euthanasic institutions supplied with proper gases.
A similar treatment could be advantageously applied to the insane, guilty of criminal acts.
Bush inserted in the record the testimony given before his Task Force on Aug., 1969.
See also Boyle, op. cit., chapter 1, concerning the Morgan-led Dawes Committee of Germany’s foreign creditors.
Like Harriman, Dillon used the Schroeder and Warburg banks to strike his German bargains.
Morgan & Co. partner Thomas Lamont, and were authorized by Bank of England Governor Montagu Norman.
Ivy Lee had been hired to improve the Rockefeller family image, particularly difficult after their 1914 massacre of striking miners and pregnant women in Ludlow, Colorado.
Lee got old John D Rockefeller to pass out dimes to poor people lined up at his porch.
Third International Eugenics Congress papers op. cit., footnote 7, 512, “ Supporting Members.
Eugenics Congress papers, 526, lists the officers of the International Federation as of publication date in September, 1934.
Ru@audin is listed as president—a year after he has written the sterilization law for Hitler.
Draper continues to lead through his tireless work for the United Nations Population Fund.
Interview July 16, 1991, with Joanne Grossi, an official with the USAID’s Population Office.
See User’s Guide to the Office of Population, 1991, Office of Population, Bureau for Science and Technology, United States Agency for International Development.
This is the official history, written with full cooperation of the Sterilization League.
GS Bs BB BB TB BB TT eee Cy a William Stamps Farish III retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom In office July 12, 2001 July 10, 2004 President Cea W Bush He was an only child, his father, ' Army Lt.
His grandfather is William Stamps | Farish II, the founder of Humble Oil ; and Refining Company, which struck | oil in the Houston suburb Humble, part | of what was later to become the Exxon ' behemoth.
His other grandfather was Robert E Wood, who was the chief executive , officer of the Sears, Roebuck & Co.
Bush (later 41st President of the United | States) and Barbara Bush Bush were very close friends.
When Bush moved to Texas in 1948, it | was the Farish connection that gave him his start in his career in the oil industry.
In that year the Wall Street investment bank of W i Averell Harriman bought Dresser Industries , a supplier of oil-pipeline to { Standard Oil and other oil companies.
Bush’s father was a ; Harriman and Company executive who became a director and financier of Dresser and he served ; on the board of directors for twenty-two years.
This book The Windsors Cabal Are Concealers and Pretenders even most more than any others to any throne Great Britain’s Dr.
Cameron and the USA’s Dr Sidney Gotlieb are (or were as archetypes) the architects of the system of Deep State Ted Gunderson described which ins integrated with violent gang mafia for illegal programs and illegal ends, all of which are denied and part of psychiatric research, experimentation, and abuse of subjects involuntarily attacked including lethally.
Study minimal brain disorder, FOXP2 involves illegal use of DNA, illegal tracking of families, and hits on subjects who do not consent to program activities, would not have, or never did, or who had knowledge of the research and attempted to cancel it as the Kennedys did and the Donegans did.
The premise is those who are connected to “sovereign” or high performing “blue blood” lines are embraced as Windsor lost relatives those who show the grammar or other defects are harmed in life outcomes, distanced from the not-swithed-ons and led to dead end lack of good outcomes in their lives.
A State Secrets goal is to insure normally people with minor disabilities (Minimal Brain Disorder LONDON KE FAMILY are subject to extreme slander and subversion less they look like the celebrities they are related to.
The operation in public operates by payoffs and incentives to the paid actors who work for the Stat but deny their actions which are highly illegal.
The Confidential Assailants that are people like Ron Pataki are various Mafia the FBI, NSA, and CENTCOM have long term relationships with and are used for assassinations of foreign leaders, research victims in the USA, Britain or elsewhere, or staging pretexts for arrests such as the sexual assault warrant against Assange, or for other Special Activities and Special Access Programs.
Mary later ; Married his younger brother, who became King George V in 1910 The Great Treason was when the British Crown created a Fifth Column of sleepers in the USA who would operate under the theory that Britain and the USA together could and should oppose Russia and Iran and North Korea the same way the Britain and the USA opposed Nazi Germany.
This Special Relationship is bolstered by big business and maintained by assassination of those opposed to it.
It plans British Crown expansion into new Commonwealths getting Ireland back, India back, Pakistan, and other countries while many Roman, French, Italian, and Boston Massachusetts Catholics have opposed the plan.
On 17 July 1917 King George V issued a proclamation declaring “The Name of Windsor is to be borne by His Royal House and Family and Relinquishing the Use of All German Titles and Dignities.
King Edward the VIII Prince of York and his brother King George VI who took over his rule were close with and from Central Europe including Viennese psychiatry emerging from Carl Yung, Sigmuend Frued, and others.
From about 1901 to 1936 there was a significant period of hidden activities from the Windsor family.
The worked with the genetic scientists from Nazi Germany including Mengle and others and had out of wedlock children as the gene which about half of offspring have were studied in children resultant from affairs.
Not too bad on the surface but it presented several serious PR problems.
With Germany a National Socialist country rejecting international communiism and international royal families and at war with England the Windors used the Windsor location of England to draw their name royal identity from becoming the Windsor Royal Family from Windsor Castle in London.
While the public was told Maria Von Trapp married Captain Von Trapp, Austrian war hero u-boat submarine captain who used his Whitehead torpedoes and those people left Austria in 1926 AFTER being used by Uncle Kutscher as Hitler Youth on stage, they made great war time allies with the British as a success story of refugees coming to the USA via Engalnd adn supporting the Allies now when they were free from Nazis.
The Windsors did know their darkest of secrets were in the Maria Augusta Von Trapp story and this was a threat to the Brittian.
From 1926 on increasing levels of propoganda whiteshased the story for decades that the uncle was Franz Kutschera.
THe worsening of the proble was that a group of WASPS tied to England were working on British and Standard Oil and British Petroleum needs for Middle East NOrth Africa and the overthrow of Cuba and Indonesia and Hawaii and ohter nations and sleeper agents if groomed from those windsors including “half breeds” from around the world could build the Windsor family of connected world rule.
My family comes from the three children King Edward Prince Edward or King Edward VIII Prince Edward and King George VI Prince Albert had with Maria Kutscherea and others.
Julie Andrews seems another one who found out she (like Marlying Monroe who made a 1957 movie about Prince and Singer) all did half truth half altered names for the story.
These out of wedlock childre are tied to CIA British regime change plans the Kennedy family rejected and many Catholics opposed since William of Orange days.
King George V and Queen Mary Tuk were catapulted into the center of ; their first national emergency on the 4TH OF AUGUST 1914 when ; britain declared war on Germany and it seems incredible that it should ; have started with such a relatively unimportant event as the assassination » of the archduke Leopold of Austria.
Upon his death Mary of Tek married Price of York who then succeeded King Edward VII Prince of Wales to become George V By many accounts including Fighting Monarch King George V wife fo Mary Tek and fathe of King George VI was emotional and a though child to control in ways but finally gew up well as was liked.
His brother is King Geroge V both mary TEK THE TRUE STORY OF THE KING’S SPEECH December 20, 2019 fightingmonarch In 1895, Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V The German boy who would become George VI was a sickly and fearful child prone to tears.
Crimes at Colorado Springs The Air Force is Full of Satanists, Rapists, & Child Molesters King Geroge V passed his gene onto Edward Prince of Wales, Albert Prince of York, and Princess mary at leat one copy of the gene.
It was thought Mary of Teck was supposed to eliminate the inbreeding problem the Windsors had and they were trying to widen their genetic lineage to cover what they thought was an inbreeding problem but was more a common Central European Minimal Brain Dysfunction gene they did not want to admit they had and studeid the gene propagation in out of wedlock children., those children attributed to affairs of the spouses of Windsors, not the Windsors themselves.
Thgis was the real plan to save the Thrown of England from the stygma of a genetic brain quirk a time royals were losing their thrones.
This book suggests Harold and Glorian Gainey were out of wedlock Prince Edward VII early Prince Edward of Wales and Maria August Kutschera children.
There were three of those children I think Marlin Monroe was the other.
This book Love of the USA and Sovereign Republicanism Story The policy difference.
The comment quickly caught the attention of Rush Limbaugh, who saw nothing short of a threat to the republic.
A year ago, the term “deep state” was the province of Edward Snowden acolytes and fans of paperback espionage thrillers.
Today, Limbaugh takes it for granted that his millions of listeners know what it meant.
The deep state entered America’s national discourse in 2017 with the ' feeling of an already familiar character, ready to assume a Starring role as hero or villain-depending on how you feel about Trump.
There really : is a kind of cabal that operates independently of elected officials in ; Washington-even if it’s not quite what Trump or his conservative allies » think it is.
I suggest in this book a long line of Catholic straight-laced no corruption types are rejecting the Allies of WWII cartel of Defense Contractors as QEII backed Masonic strategic interests businesses that play dirty to win in other countries and thus become a glue to other countries creatign a weave together.
I belive Joseph Kennedy Sr though an Irish Catholic by ties to Great Brittain was connected to this web however JFK and RFK were attempting to stand on their own two feet and had the experience of being President and Attorney General in a weighty time and combines with their Boston anti Catholic expweriences and the situation between Ireland and the Republic of Ireland JFK and RFK rejected the old boys network of their father in Boston and attempted to go up against the CIA DOD QEII backed network.
That story is actually told in Love Story 1970 as JFK meets smart Jacki.
Brennan’s 25 years with the CIA included work as a Near East and * South Asia analyst, as station chief in Saudi Arabia, and as director of ; the National Counterterrorism Center.
Brennan served in the White House as Assistant to the President for : Homeland Security between 2009 and 2013.
Obama nominated Brennan » as his next director of the CIA on January 7, 2013.
The ACLU called for , the Senate not to proceed with the appointment until they confirmed that ; “all of his conduct was within the law” at the CIA and White House.
On August 15, 2018, President Donald Trump announced that he had I revoked Brennan’s security clearance, although the White House reportedly did not follow through with the revocation process.
He continued to lead TAC after its acquisition by Global Strategies Group in 2007 and its growth as the Global Intelligence Solutions division of Global’s North American technology business GTEC, before returning to government service with the Obama administration as Homeland Security Advisor on January 20, 2009.
On January 7, 2013, President Obama nominated Brennan to be director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
On January 20, 2017, Brennan’s CIA appointment ended, and he was replaced by President Trump’s nominee Mike Pompeo on January 23, 2017.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia PsychWard Edinburgh Military Tattoo A salute to Australia 2005 1080p HD * wa Very impressive Commonwealth Tatoo of Massing of Pipes and Drums of Beefeater types of Comonwealth countries.
The patriotism and pomp and circumstance within the Commonwealth may give them shivers of patriotism.
First Contact the season close and open in Next Generation is just about that.
It is not how you understand yourselves in presenting yourself to others but how others will perceive you.
Understanding throwing a shoe at a person from another country may not be the same thing as a groupie throwing her panties on stage to a rock band.
In August 1943, as the sailors were sleeping without posting a watch , a Japanese destroyer rammed his boat, PT 109.
Towing a badly burned crewmate by a life-jacket strap clenched in his teeth, Kennedy led the crew’s ten survivors on a three-mile swim to refuge on a tiny island.
Massachusetts family with a long political history, Henry Cabot Lodge ; Jr.
Addison’s disease overlay with ADHD/Minimal Brain Dysfunction The adrenal medulla, the inner part of an adrenal gland, controls hormones that initiate the flight or fight response and sex drive via Androse.
Adrenal glands 5 Cortisol deficit/hyperactivity disorder is a heterogeneous disease that affects children, adolescents, and adults.
Underpinning these abnormalities are disturbances of catecholamine neurotransmission.
The efficacy of stimulant agents confirms that the neurotransmitter oe seen in ADHD are primarily catecholaminergic ‘| origin.
ADHD AND MINIMAL BRAIN DYSFUNCTION Poor muscle control in handwriting Low attention to or motivation for concnetrating Brooding and often strong emotions Passion is included in strong emotions and includes light hearted easy communications with others.
Can be associated with Mitochondrial Disorder and dysfunction in digestive enzimes such as with Justina Pellatier.
Jen Moore knew of what I call MKULTRA Birther, that we have groomed sleeper agents for leaders and they and their Nazi rescue Free Mason ties don’t want to be exposed as Infiltrators.
While Lloyd Austin has promised the Saudi Royal Family he will suppress these United States Patriot Groups and people like Jen Moore or Obama Dead Pool sites, this information is vital to the USA and must not be suppressed.
Shaken by concerns of possible right-wing extremism among the troops, Austin on February 5 announced that every unit of the United States military; Active, Reserve, and Guard would be required to stand down within the next 60 days in order to conduct “sensitivity” training.
The training would last at least one day and was focused around discussions including the importance of the oath of office; a description of impermissible behaviors; and procedures for reporting suspected, or actual, extremist behaviors.
Austin expressed support for Saudi Arabia in the Iran-Saudi Arabia proxy conflict.
WestExec Advisors LLC is a consulting firm founded in 2017 by Antony Blinken, Michele Flournoy, Sergio Aguirre, and Nitin Chadda, all former Obama administration officials.
Lisa Monaco, Robert O Work, Avril Haines, David S Cohen, and Jen Psaki have also been WestExec employees.
The firm and its partners avoid becoming registered lobbyists or foreign agents so that they can enter government service without delays It does not disclose its clients, whose names are restricted from disclosure by non-disclosure agreements.
The firm is named after West Executive Avenue, a street near the West Wing.
Donald Blinken, investment and [April 16, 1962) is an United States ambassador to Hungary American government official and diplomat serving as the 71st United States ¢ MOTHER: Judith Pisar, secretary of state since UNESCO Special Envoy for Cultural January 26, 2021.
Evan Ryan and by her two 0M 2013 to 2015 and | from 2015 to 2017 under ‘ President Barack Obama. e ETHNIC LENS: Jewish, his stepfather, ' | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Samuel Pisar, was a famed lawyer and Holocaust survivor.
Blinken’s uncle, Alan Blinken, served as the American ambassador to Belgium.
His paternal grandfather, Maurice Henry Blinken, was an early backer of Israel who studied its economic viability, and his greatgrandfather was Meir Blinken, a Yiddish writer.
Blinken and his brothers Alan and Robert were born to a father originally from Kyiv and a mother also of Jewish heritage.
Blinken graduated magna cum laude in Economics from Harvard in 1948, after serving in the United States Army Air Corps during World War II in 1944.
In 2015, the Open Society Archives in Hungary was renamed Vera and Donald Blinken Open Society Archives after receiving a major donation from the couple.
POSSIBLE CLONES EXAMOLES Roy Marcus Cohn was an American lawyer who came to prominence for his role as Senator Joseph McCarthy’s chief counsel during the Army McCarthy hearings in 1954, when he assisted McCarthy’s investigations of suspected communists.
He then moved to Paris with his mother Judith and Samuel Pisar, whom she married following her divorce from Donald.
Pisar, a Holocaust survivor, lawyer, and presidential adviser who was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, has received posthumous scrutiny on social media for representing British publisher Robert Maxwell.
Blinken ; worked as an intern for The New Republic for around a year after graduating from ' Harvard.
He entered Columbia Law School in 1985 and earned his J.D. degree in , 1988.
America, Europe, and the Siberian Pipeline Crisis 1 , Blinken argued that exerting diplomatic pressure on the Soviet Union during i the Siberian pipeline crisis was less significant for American interests than maintaining 1 strong relations between the United States and Europe.
He was a senior ; fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies from 2001 to 2002.
He ' advocated for the 2003 invasion of Iraq while serving as the Democratic staff director ' of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee from 2002 to 2008.
From 2009 to 2013, Blinken served as deputy assistant to the president and national : security advisor to the vice president.
Leaks credibly and reinforcing without conflicts and interval United States information indicates the Saudis funded sleeper agents of the “correct” skin color to become heroes in liberalized USA or colonies of imperialism who would be welcomed and supported by United States Media also aligned with MKULTRA goals.
Patriots including myself claim to either be victims of WETDIVISION mafia in the USA operating under abused State powers or believe USA officials have been assassinated and journalists murders so the oil based cartel lacking political philosophy but charted as a criminal achievement modus can thrive ins Shadow World Gov Cartel.
Think Middle East North Africa CIA Airport MENA airport 1961 General Austin, Barrack Obama, Colin Powell, Kamala Harris, and to some lesser degree Joseph Biden, the Kelly Brothers, and others like Ted Cruz fit the Cartel Syndicate profile.
Since its inception the FBI DOJ have been loyal to this shadow government agenda and nothing else always willing to conduct illegal operations which support Free Mason world grooming plans including fighting socialism or communism rather than free society.
While Lloyd Austin has promised the Saudi Royal Family he will supress these United States Patriot Groups and people like Jen Moore or Obama Dead Pool sites, this information is vital to tthe USA and must not be suppressed.
Leaks credibly and reinforcing without conflicts and interal United States information indicates the Saudies funded sleeper agents of the “correct” skin color to become heroes in liberalized USA or colonies of emprialism who would be welcomed and supported by United States Media also aligned with MKULTRA goals.
Patriots including myself claim to eiter be victims of WETDIVISION mafia in the USA operaing under abused State powers or beliege USA officials have been assasinated and journlists murders so the oil based cartel lacking politcal philosphy but charted as a criminal achievement modus can thrive ins Shadow World Gov Cartel.
General Austin, Barrack Obama, Colin Powell, Kamala Harris, and to some lesser degree Joseph Biden, the Kelly Brothers, and others like Ted Cruz fit the Cartel Synidiate profile.
Those who begin coercive elimination of dissent soon find themselves exterminating dissenters.
Oddly enough, or predicably, there have been many murders of United States Intel officials, Navy Seals, CIA operatives in Ethiopia and elsewhere, journalists murdered, congress people murders, all of whom who were hostile to the nature of this cartel, often Catholics with Irish or Roman Catholic leanings.
On December 7, 2020, he was nominated for ' defense secretary by then-President-elect Joe Biden.
He was confirmed by the United | | i States Senate on January 22, 2021, by a vote of 93-2.
Tenet Health Care was under 1 investigation by the fired United States attorneys Austin was born on August 8, 1953, in Mobile, Alabama; he was raised in Thomasville, Georgia.
On February 25, 2021, under Biden’s direction, Austin coordinated military defensive airstrikes against an Iranian-backed militia in Syria.
NOTICE THIS ALSO FIGURES INTO JET PILOT AND THE HISTORY OF CLIFFS OF DOVER ETC., Further Reading and also Further Reading which has ties to the Waltham Murders and Boston Bombing.
Further Reading Gym Roughians and the Waltham Murders A triple homicide was committed in Waltham, Massachusetts, in the United States, on the evening of September 11, 2011.
The local district attorney said that it appeared that the killer and the victims knew each other, and that the murders were not random. -From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia ; I | i | I ‘| Waltham is a city in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States, and was an ‘| early center for the labor movement as well as a major contributor to the American ‘| Industrial Revolution.
Further Reading ' I | | The FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, who arrested Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013.
Officially, bad « weather was reported to be the cause of their deaths.
In a court filing in —_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_——_—_erevvveoov Oe eee Boston in October, federal prosecutors stated that Todashev had implicated Tsarnaev in previous crimes specifically the gruesome, unsolved murders of three men in Waltham nearly two years before the marathon bombing.
If what Todashev was saying was true, that made him a witness to the slayings apparently the only witness. y Very highly skilled military contractor of the capability level of Mossad or United States or British were invovlved The Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting occurred on December 14, 2012, in Newtown, Connecticut, United States, when 20-year-old Adam Lanza shot and killed 26 people, including 20 children between six and seven years old, and six adult staff members.
High School, during which he suffered a serious accident while canoeing.
In 1967, through connections on Broadway, Segal was given the opportunity to ; collaborate on the screenplay for the Beatles’ 1968 motion picture Yellow ; Submarine, based on a story by Lee Minoff.
He acknowledged that its success ' unleashed “egotism bordering on megalomania” and he was denied tenure at Yale.
He would go on to write more novels and screenplays, including the 1977 sequel to Love Story, titled Oliver’s Story.
Married with Flowers of Romance, some Central European (blue Windsor from Saxe Gotha) blue blood though from Roman Catholic family.
Conflicted with animosty towards Windsors Anglicanism, Imperialism, and ties to Irish heratige and Roman Catholicism in France, Ireland, elswhere White, two red flowers, and one blue one @RobertKennedyJr Hyaline Membrane Disease diagnosed in your uncle #JFK possible #HOXP2 Syndrome which affects Raspatory and GI Tracts such as numeral regulation of moisture, fine motor control.
Consider the term Narco State by Alexander Litvinenko Further Reading Consider Mr John Pilger’s assertions Barrack Obama Jr was born of this MKULTRA system of Business International Corporation and business groups mafia which operated in Australia.
Further Reading Consider Dirigisme which is a French concept the State should select Computer Chips over Potato Chips or similar prioritizations and become proponents and interventionists promoting those businesses in the State interest.
Profies in Courage is a book he produced having a ghost writer write it on spec which told the story of courageous pols who stood against their own conntries misdeeds including British pols who rose against East Indat Tea Company in England.
He produced the book while the United States Senator from Massachussetes trying (along with his brother Senate Counsel MclLllen hearings) the long term Mafia infiltration into business through the Teamsters who used “muscle” and other mafia activity. ie Snttact ; Lafayette in uniform of an American major general wa After forming the National Constituent Assembly, he helped to write the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen with Thomas Jefferson’s assistance.
This document was inspired by the United States Declaration of Independence and invoked Natural Law to establish basic principles of the democratic nation-state.
He also advocated the end of slavery, in keeping with the philosophy of natural rights.
This would make up the Francophile Bostonian profile in the USA which is similar to Mel Gibson disliking the British in Australia or the USA. were both contributing authors to the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Declaration of Independence of the USA from Great Brittan.
I grew up on Moraga California in my mid youth which was part of the Lafayette Orinda Moraga foothills nest of a group of small tows.
Among the illegal British plan run by Donald Barr and cover up by William Barr was the CIA plan to groom sleeper agents for oil in the Middle Eastern North Africa nations, the Pacific, and other locations including France.
IT came out of CIA Behavioral research as the FOXP2 Syndrome was under study, quirk in Central Eupean DNA which the Windsors have.
Deconstructing the purported statement on the CIA I will splinter the CIA into a thousand pieces and scatter it into the winds.
Propaganda through the Arts both on the talents of the artists and the messaging in the arts is what much of the Information Warfare OSS MI5 component of WWII was including the Berlin Olympics in 1936, driving Jewish classical musicians from Germany, stagecraft of public events and singing performances from Irving Berlin, Franz Kutschera, or Singing Von Traps first as children for the Nazis then defecting to the Allies and singing anti nazi songs in the 30s and 40s.
But as i far as verifying a quote is concerned, this one from JFK isn’t rock solid.
Buchan to replace the Earl of Bessborough as Governor General of Canada, for : which purpose Buchan was raised to the peerage.
It was in 1936 into 1938 the Von Trapp Singers were utilized to counter the Austrian Anschluss and this history was made clear to JFK and what resulted from that history. i | | | | ‘| | | i | . . 5 é i Buchan was enthusiastic about literacy and the development of Canadian culture, ; and he received a state funeral in Canada before his ashes were returned to the ; United Kingdom.
Jack Ruby retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | | | ~~ He likely knew what I think to be true, in Chicago speech and personality research is underway and I think Obama Jr being moved to Chicago is part of that.
Jack Leon Ruby (born Jacob Leon Rubenstein; MARCH 25, 1911 January 3, , 1967) was an American nightclub owner.
Jack Ruby was born Jacob Leon Rubenstein on March 25, 1911, in the Maxwell Street area of Chicago, the son of Joseph Rubenstein and Fannie Turek Rutkowski , both Polish-born Orthodox Jews from Sokotéw.
His troubled childhood and 0 adolescence were marked by juvenile delinquency with time being spent in foster homes.
From his early childhood, Ruby was nicknamed “Sparky” by those who knew ‘ him.
Other accounts say that the name was given because of his H quick temper.
JULY 3, 1913, Chicago, IL Arguably the most well known United States President, John F Kennedy also has the strongest Irish lineage, with all four of his grandparents hailing from the Emerald Isle.
Credit for the success of the negotiation of the Entente Cordiale belongs chiefly to Paul Cambon (France’s ambassador in London from 1898 to 1920) and to the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Lansdowne.
Wednesday, July ° 31, 1918 at 12:00:00 midnight To: Sunday, AUGUST 4, 1918 at 12:00:00 midnight a Result: 4 days, 0 hours, 0 minutes and 0 seconds Henry Jones Jr.
Marilyn Monroe (/‘merdlin mAn'rov/; born Norma Jeane Mortenson; JUNE 1, 1926 AUGUST 4, 1962) The 1704 August 02 Grand Island of Britain entered Grand Alliance preserves itself QEII’s USA twins following 1925 Wembley Stadium Imperialism disaster The Three Tramps connected to the JFK assassination and a happy birthday boy Mr President may have been some secretive reference to the reason three males were in the area, probably CIA, and the secretive reference were to Norma Jean, Evelyn Eugene Turner, and Glorian Donegan, born 1926-1928.
The Grand Alliance was the anti-French coalition formed on 20 December 1689 between England, the Dutch Republic and the Holy Roman Empire.
William III, King of England and Stadtholder of the Dutch Republic, and Emperor Leopold, on behalf of the Archduchy of Austria.
Wired.com My father flew in the first, second and would have been potentially third atomic bombing runs against.
This book Dorothy Kilgallen the Reporter Who Knew Too Much The FBI could not get Dorothy to talk in regards to who leaked to her Warren Commission files before their public relase.
I Ed Donegan suspect the reason Killgallen would not talk to the fbi is it was about RFK an RFK views she wanted to relate those peoples pieces she had access to while also leaving J Edgar Hoover out of the loop because Kilgallen did not trust J Edgar Hoover.
Of unprecedented fame nearly, few today or me 6 months ago knew her name.
The Shadow Government including its Gang Stalk hit teams keep the powerful in power and the victims silenced.
In the past, the Catholic Church » would not conduct funeral services for persons who killed themselves, » and they could not be buried in a Catholic cemetery.
However, the , Church lifted the prohibition on funerals for suicide victims in the 1980s.
Grave psychological disturbances, anguish, or grave fear of hardship, suffering, or torture can diminish the responsibility of the one committing suicide.
We should not despair of the eternal salvation of persons who have taken their own lives.
By ways known to him alone, God can provide the opportunity for salutary repentance.
I Ed Donegan suspect it was RFK an RFK wanted to synergize the pieces he had with others while also leaving J Edgar Hoover out of the loop because RFK did not trust J Edgar Hoover.
Contract killing is a form of murder or assassination in which one party : hires another party to kill a targeted person or persons.
For example, in the United States, the gang ritish History American History wv ww2 Russia Women's History Black History nous Crimes > Journalists > Dorothy Kilgallen yrothy Kilgallen ¥ Primary Sources ¥ newspaper owned by Villian Randolph Hearst, Kilgallen became a crime reporter and covered several important cases for her newspaper.
Around The World, She John F Kennedy also appeared in the film, Sinner Take AU, in 1936.
Monday to Saturday and Sunday Murder, Inc. committed hundreds of murders on behalf of the National Crime Syndicate during the 1930s and 1940s.
Contract killing provides the hiring party with the advantage of not having to carry out the actual killing, making it more difficult for law enforcement to connect them with the murder.
She came to Augusta 65 years ago because everyone was coming to Augusta.
We were a boom town with construction at Fort Gordon and the South Carolina “bomb plant” bringing in people and jobs.
Savannah River Site (DuPonts on South Carolina) From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia * In 1950, the federal government requested that DuPont build and operate a nuclear facility near the Savannah River in South Carolina.
The Savannah River Site is a United States Department of Energy reservation in the United States in the state of South Carolina, located on land in Aiken, Allendale, and Barnwell counties adjacent to the Savannah River, 25 miles southeast of Augusta, Georgia.
The site was built during the 1950s to refine nuclear materials for deployment in nuclear weapons.
Production of heavy water for site reactors started in the Heavy Water Rework Facility in 1952, and the first production reactor, R Reactor, went critical in 1953.
P, L, and K Reactors followed in 1954, and the first irradiated fuel was discharged.
F Canyon, the world’s first operational full-scale PUREX separation plant, began radioactive operations on 4 November.
PUREX extracted plutonium and uranium products from materials irradiated in the reactors.
Kilgallen was assigned to write an article on such boom towns for Good Housekeeping magazine.
As for Kilgallen, she dashed off to England to cover the June 2 crowning of Queen Elizabeth.
J Edgar Hoover and the FBI began to secretly investigate her with much more vigor than Augusta ever threw at its gamblers.
But it was the last years of Kilgallen’s life that grew very, very interesting.
A Hollywood insider, she knew President John F Kennedy and his girlfriends and hinted at liaisons with movie star Marilyn Monroe.
After Kennedy’s death in Dallas, Kilgallen went to Texas to cover the case.
Jack Ruby, the bar owner who shot assassin Lee Harvey Oswald on national TV, gave her private interviews.
July 3, 1913, Chicago, IL Died: November A Hollywood : 8, 1965 Reporter’s 1 Mysterious Death ' retrieved from | | | | | | | Kirbys Augusta 2.52K YouTube subscribers and copied or modified to here it happens all the time a celebrity journalist comes to town and everyone does what they can to impress they wine and dine and put on a : good show but you know what happens a few weeks later the story 1 Comes out and the town gets trashed.
Dorothy Kilgallen continued to maintain a high media profile and was known for having excellent sources within the Washington spy community frequently offering scoops on Castro and the CIA but it was the last years of her life that grew very very interesting.
Frequent sponsors in the 1960s were Kellogg’s cereals, Allstate Insurance, and Geritol.
Kellogg Cereal is a company who had a subsidiary Kellex aka Kellogg X which with DuPont corp built the atomic bomb.
At that time there were some latex head wax museum topographical molds of Julie Andres above the shoulders.
Jamiel Chagra, known as Jimmy, was born in El Paso, Texas on : December 7, 1944.
He was scheduled to appear before United States * District Judge John Wood, a judge nicknamed “Maximum John” who "" had a reputation for giving out the maximum sentence allowed for drug"" related crimes.
Facing life for smuggling, Jimmy Chagra i allegedly decided to have the judge killed.
Chagra was accused of (and was acquitted of, although he later confessed to conspiracy in a deal to help his wife) hiring hitman Charles Harrelson to kill Wood for $250,000; on May 29, 1979, Judge Wood was murdered outside his home by a shot in the back.
The Trapp Family Children (from the roadway Musical) retrieved from Imdb and copied or modified to here Arlene Francis, guest panelists e Tony Randall e Dorothy Kilgallen born in Chicago, Illinois, on 3RD JULY, 1913.
Miss Francis thanks the studio and viewing audiences for their support for her during her recent tragedy.
On a lighter note, host and moderator, John Daly, wishes Miss Kilgallen a very happy birthday.
Rowe and Miss La Vona Rowe, twin sisters from Iowa City, Iowa, who ; are news photographers.
Miss Francis would like for them to sing, “Do-Re-Mi,” but, Mr Daly says that’s not allowed, but says he took his family to see the show and was utterly delighted.
Time is ; short, but Tony Randall correctly identifies the gentlemen’s’ profession.
Quench the Stench of a Rat Fink rat fink retrieved from MerriamWebster and copied or modified to here Parker.
THE SOUND OF MUSIC The Sound of Music is a 1965 American musical drama film produced and directed by Robert Wise, and starring Julie Andrews and Christopher Plummer, with Richard Haydn, Peggy Wood, Charmian Carr, and Eleanor Parker.
Dame Julie Andrews DBE (born Julia Elizabeth Wells; 1 October 1935) is an English actress, singer, and author.
Robert Adolph Wilton Morley, CBE (26 May 1908 3 JUNE 1992) was an English actor who enjoyed a lengthy career in both Britain and the United States.
This film deals with the conflicts of Michelangelo and Pope Julius IT during the 1508-1512 painting of the Sistine Chapel ceiling.
In her book, Kilgallen , Lee Israel gives Pataky the name of “Out-ofTowner” Spartacus-Ediucational Poovoiny Kilgallen retrieved from Spartacus-Eductional and copied or ‘ modified to here Bey | Dorothy Kilgallen took an interest in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Pataky admits a close friendship with Vodka Roulette Seen Kilgallen but flatly denies an Ags Relief Pogsibilit affair, his presence at the Regency that night, or any involvement in her death.
That evening Senator arranged for Jim Koethe (a reporter for the Dallas Times Herald). , Hunter and Howard to search Ruby’s apartmen In Memoriam; 53rd Year Remembrance In loving memory of the life, death and legacy of Dorothy Kilgallen Dorothy Kilgallen JULY 3, 1913 November 8, 1965 Dorothy was a beloved mother and talented writer who died too soon.
There are still many fans and friends who miss her and still wonder about her death.
On November 9, 2014 an independent investigation started out of the San Diego area in an attempt to find out the truth on how she died.
RON PATARY, to SUBMIT DNA SAMPLE TO THE COURT It is not known hat the journalists found but on 23rd pril 1964, Bill unter was shot dead by Creighton iggins, a oliceman in the ressroom of a ong Beach police station.
Wiggins Gtombryan@yahoo.com Published on November 8, initially claimed that 2018 is gun fired when Obituary Salem e dropped it and Massachusetts News * ried to pick it up.
Tippit was born in Clarksville, Red River County, Texas, on September 18, 1924.
Tippit was one of the few officers in the Dallas Police Force not to be called to Dealey Plaza to help investigate the assassination.
Later, Markham identified Oswald in a police lineup, but this was after she had seen his photograph on television.
Warren Reynolds did not see the shooting but saw the gunman running from the scene of the crime.
After he survived an attempt to kill him, he changed his mind and identified Oswald as the man he had seen.
Tippit was buried in the memorial plot at Laurel Land Memorial Park, Dallas.
Coie Kilgallen Dorothy Mae Kilgallen (JULY 3, 1913NOVEMBER ™ 8, 1965) She interview Jack Ruby.
JEK MURDER GOVERNMENT MURDERED DOROTHY KILLGALLEN College drop becomes cub reporter, crime reporter, holllywood reporter, back stage gossib to world coronations. gged investigation of the JFK assassination.
Melvin Belli: King of the Courtroom, The Poison Patriarch: How the Betrayals of Joseph P Kennedy Caused the Assassination of JFK, and : his latest, The Reporter Who Knew Too Much.
Mark Shaw has written for USA Today, Huffington Post, and the Aspen f Daily News, which he co-founded.
Mark formally was a host or correspondent for ABC’s Good Morning America, and CBS’s People 1 and has appeared on the REEZL Channel’s program, The Kennedy’s.
The 6th Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza and Distortions of History Affecting Students of All Ages Dear Mr Morath, While I’m certain that most of your attention right now is focused on school re-openings so students and teachers are safe, I feel an obligation to forward along great concerns I have about these same students and teachers being subjected to continuing distortions of history during any I visits to the 6th Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza in Dallas so as to study ; the JEK assassination.
I *| On December 22, 1960, Daly married Virginia eur lnttle<oF sohat ;| Warren, daughter of then-chief justice Earl he people were Warren in San Francisco.
America with Kilgallen loyal readers glued to every word. : Kilgallen crowning achievement was her dogged investigation of , the JFK assassination.
She ultimately came in second tin the race, completing her around the world journey in 24 days.
Asylum exposé Ten Days in a Mad-House is a book by American journalist Nellie Bly.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia | This book Centering On RFK On JUNE 5, 1968, presidential candidate Robert F Kennedy was mortally wounded shortly after midnight at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles.
Assassination of Robert F Kennedy From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Robert F Kennedy lies mortally wounded on the floor immediately after the shooting.
Kneeling beside him is 17-year-old busboy Juan Romero, who was shaking Kennedy’s hand when Sirhan Sirhan fired the shots.
With generations of history in the Valley, the Cilker family donated some of the original land dedicated to the new hospital, including the plot containing the oak tree, and made other acreage available for development.
Dedicated volunteers and the earliest members of the Auxiliary of Good Samaritan Hospital raised funds for construction, equipment, and a hospital chaplaincy.
Growth and Expansion Additional fund-raising and strategic planning between 1968 and 1974 allowed the hospital to double in size.
Batista made a deal with the United States Mafia to create La Nacional United States Mob run Casino resort.
For ANTI mob RFK and JFK who was made by the mob but was being warned off the mob by RFK this sounde like bad business.
While the Mob and the CIA had it in for Castro an even deeper problem was these were Free Masons like Dupont and others Zapata Oil, the Rockefellers, and diry world busineses of Oil Barrel polics.
What was the Lawford Shriver plamn of Februrary 20 1961 and groomed sleeper agents.
United States Senate Counsel Robert F Kennedy and John L McClellan at Teamster hearings.
Ed Clark * THe FBI was in leuge with and not fighting organized crime in this time frame under J Edgar Hoover.
United States Senator from Massachusetts In office January 3, 1953 December 22, 1960 Tip O’neal: Member of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts In office January 3, 1953 January 3, 1987 Preceded by John F Kennedy Succeeded by Joseph P Kennedy II RFK gained national attention as the chief counsel of the Senate Labor Rackets Committee from 1957 to 1959, where he publicly challenged Teamsters President Jimmy Hoffa over the union’s corrupt practices.
From 1973 to 1977 William Barr was employed by the Central Intelligence Agency.
Sam Giancana was murdered on June 19, 1975, in Oak Park, Illinois, shortly before he was scheduled to appear before the Church Committee.
Plan “33” from Great Britain Further Reading RFK’s tenure is known for advocating for the civil rights movement, the fight against organized crime and the Mafia, and involvement in United States foreign policy related to Cuba.
The Mafia had a real opportunity in Labor Rackets because as my father Jim Donegan pointed out being a Bureaucrat of some type allowed power to stop a project or activity.
Once that power is available the bureaucrat must be appeased and may actually be in position to blackmail.
With single provider labor agreements if the mob can intimidate either party they are in kingpin position to alter off center deals or siphon from them.
Giocana ran Policies, a lottery illegal but profitlable in Chicago Illinois.
Giecani moved to Palm Springs and Las Vegas running resorts and rackets in mob controlled operations.
Meyer Lansky representing the mob from Miami Florida was the Gambling Commmisioner of Las Vegas and was given the contract via United States puppet Batista in Cuba to run the casinos as an annex of United States operations.
Jack Ruby was the go between and the FBI CIA was using these mob groups to support Batista including to supres Cuban communist MAFIA MOVIES RFK was opposing this in the Congress before JFK ran for president.
From 1957 to 1959, he made a name for himself while serving as the chief counsel to the Senate’s McClellan Committee under chairman John L McClellan.
Kennedy was given authority over testimony scheduling, areas of investigation, and witness questioning by McClellan, a move that was made by the chairman to limit attention to himself and allow outrage by organized labor to be directed toward Kennedy.
YouTube Robert F Kennedy was Attorney General of the Department of Justice from January 21, 1961 September 3, 1964.
He was named chairman of the failing |BY-V8l qoy en @hucleltmr-Ve in 1991.
In 1980, Katzenbach testified in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for the defense of W Mark Felt, later revealed to be the “Deep Throat” of the Watergate scandal and later Deputy Director of the FBI; accused and later found guilty of ordering illegal wiretaps on American citizens.
THIS SHOCKING VIDEO EXPOSES HER WORK IN NEW ORLEANS ALONG WITH JUDITH BAKER,OSWALD,JACK RUBY, CLAY SHOW AND DAVID FERRIE with David Ferrie Further Reading and Lee Harvey Oswald, secret project for Cuba * sleezy mafia poet Kilgallen crowning achievement was her dogged investigation of the JFK assassination.
NOVEMBER 20, 1925, Brookline, MA Assassinated: JUNE 6, 1968, PIH Health Good Samaritan Hospital, Los Angeles, CA The Zodiac murdered five known victims in the San Francisco Bay Area between December 1968 and October 1969.
I suggest he was CIA NSA contract killer wiping out family lines and Innocent Postcards “you will never catch me have a good time while trying” messaging actually contained 12/13 and 7/4 calender dates usage signaling to FBI CIA NSA and Mafica he is the real Zodiac Killer and is still at large.
Possible sleazy contract killer like Ron Pataky who will Doroth Killgalen Dorothy Mae Kilgallen murdered by Clay LaVergne Shaw New Orleans Democrat District Attorney Jim Garrison prosecuted Clay Shaw on the charge that Shaw and a group of activists, including David Ferrie and Guy Banister, were involved in a conspiracy with elements of the Central Intelligence Agency in the John F Kennedy assassination.
At the party, Russo said that Lee Harvey Oswald , Ferrie, and “Clay Bertrand” had discussed assassinating Kennedy.
November 7, 1928, Colorado Springs, CO Died by poising: July 31, 2011 The Troubles were an ethno-nationalist conflict in Northern Ireland that lasted about 30 years from the 1968 to 1998.
Joseph Connolly was an ardent nationalist and became a member of the Gaelic League and the Gaelic Athletic Association The Irish Volunteers , sometimes called the Irish Volunteer Force or Irish Volunteer Army, was a military organisation established in 1913 by Irish nationalists.
CIA Donald Barr CIA Free Mason with an experimental monkey having a birthday at the White House November 23 1961 Mary Stults, the daughter of a voice teacher, was born in Evanston, Illinois in 1913.
During this period Sherman did ground-breaking research into botanical viruses which lived in soil.
Bs Robert F Kennedy in 1964 Born Robert Francis Kennedy born NOVEMBER 20, 1925 Cape Cod Massachusetts Died JUNE 6, 1968 Early life and education Robert Francis Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts, on NOVEMBER 20, 1925.
Kennedy Berlin As one of the president’s closest White House advisers, Kennedy played a crucial role in the events surrounding the Berlin Crisis of 1961.
Roddenberry flew 89 combat missions in the Army Air Forces during World War II, and worked as a commercial pilot after the war.
The proposals called for the CIA operatives to both stage and actually commit acts of terrorism against American military and Star Trek Original civilian targets, blaming Season 2, Ep.
Assignment Earth them on the Cuban government, and using Show the exact value of ‘ * ‘ cosine of 144° using the law it to justify a War of cosines.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia In addition to Operation Northwoods, under the Operation Mongoose program the United States Department of Defense had a number of similar proposals for actions to be taken against the Cuban regime of Fidel Castro.
In 1969, she died in a car accident on Chappaquiddick Island, while being driven by United States Senator Ted Kennedy. ez United States Senator Edward M Kennedy, age 37, and his cousin, Joseph Gargan, 39, planned to race Kennedy’s sailboat, Victura, in the 1969 Edgartown Yacht Club Regatta on Friday and Saturday, July 18 and 19, 1969, after having forgone the previous year’s Regatta because of the assassination of Kennedy’s brother, Robert, that June.
Mr Anderson’s involvement in the Middle East began 1n 1969 when he began studies at the United States Foreign Service Institute’s Arab Language and Middle East Area Studies School in Beirut, Lebanon.
Earth’ retrieved from 1 INQUISITR and copied or modified to here By the end of Star Trek’s second eason, it looked as though the how would be canceled.
Word pread among cast and crew in he summer of 1967, as episodes ontinued to be filmed.
Low atings and network disputes with how creator Gene Roddenberry ver how the program should be run had given NBC reason to pull As the final letter in the Greek alphabet, omega is often used to denote the last, the end, or the ultimate limit of a set, in contrast to alpha, the first letter of the Greek alphabet; see Alpha and Omega.
I | I | I | I | | i | I | | Consider Russia as Omegans of Europe during the :| Cold War.
It had many sci-fi elements, but "" was totally unconnected to Star Trek.
Earth” focused on Gary Seven, a super-skilled Doctor Who-esque i traveler of sorts, who went into Earth’s present day to ensure history followed its proper i course.
He is joined by Roberta, a secretary, who learns about his mission and follows ; him along on his adventures.
Seven is also accompanied by a shape-shifting cat (a ‘ humorous foil to his serious-toned character), along with Beta 5, a super-advanced ; computer who acts as a kind of advisor.
Ten years before the series is set, Earth barely escaped destruction by the technologically superior Minbari, who sought revenge after an Earth starship unwittingly killed their leader during first contact, only for them to unexpectedly surrender on the brink of victory.
Teri Garr DECEMBER 11, 1944 Lakewood, OH as Roberta A Lincoln 1959 July Wikipedia JULY 1 A new standard for the yard and for the inch was adopted by the United States and Britain.
Heinrich Litibke was elected the second President of West Germany, succeeding Theodor Heuss.
Albert succeeded his brother Baudouin of Belgium as King of Belgium in 1993.
A fire at the Pentagon destroyed $30 million worth of computers in the Air Force Statistical Center and forced the evacuation of 30,000 employees. firemen required medical treatment.
JULY 3, 1959 For the first time, a Wimbledon champion came from South America, as Alex Olmedo of United States won the men’s singles title, beating Australia’s Rod Laver 61, 63 and 64.
The next day, Maria Bueno of Brazil completed the South American sweep and ended a 21-year streak of United States titles, defeating American Darlene Hard, 64, 63, to win the women’s singles.
THE CUMBERLAND GAP NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK WAS DEDICATED, The 49th star was added to the American flag on the first Fourth of July following Alaska’s admission to the Union.
JULY 5, 1959 President Sukarno of Indonesia dissolved the Konstituante parliament and introduced a totalitarian system, which he called “Guided Democracy” , with the assistance of General Abdul Haris Nasution.
JULY 6, 1959 A C-124 Globemaster cargo plane, carrying nuclear weapons, crashed on takeoff from Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana.
Richard Vandegeer, one of 18 Americans killed on May 15, 1975, in the Mayaguez incident, is the last.
In Kirkuk, Iraq, a rally to celebrate the first anniversary of the 1958 revolution degenerated into a three-day-long massacre of ethnic Turks by the Kurds.
JULY 16, 1959 Seconds after liftoff, a Juno I rocket, and the satellite it was carrying, were destroyed by ground control when the rocket veered off course toward central Florida.
Zinjanthropus is not considered a direct human ancestor, but another Olduvai discovery from 1960, the mandible with teeth of “OH 5” , the toolmaking Homo habilis, some 1.75 million years old, is believed to be.
JULY 24, 1959 The Kitchen Debate took place between Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and American Vice-President Richard Nixon, at Moscow’s Sokolniki Park, where the American National Exhibition was being held.
On April 25, 1961, he would receive United States Patent 2,981,877 and, along with Jack Kilby who had applied for a patent for the original IC five months earlier, would receive the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2000.
His was not an unresponsive and staid faith, but the faith of a Catholic Radical, perhaps the first successful Catholic Radical in American political history.
She was at the compound, where her grandmother, ... i | ; Out of the loop one and two.
Much of what was happening was highly illegal, run by ; British psychiatry or Rockefeller Psychiatry, tied to keeping British Commonwealth i ; royal secrets.
Rosicrucianism Cabal,The Rosicrucian manifestos heralded a “universal reformation . of mankind”, through a science allegedly kept secret for decades until the intellectual . climate might receive it.
Allegedly, the i meeting was held to discuss various topics including loansharking, narcotics trafficking, . and gambling, along with dividing the illegal operations controlled by the recently murdered Albert Anastasia.
A Space Odyssey and the secret mission creates is a worm in HAL Only about a month into their voyage, there were problems on board.
The HAL 9000 Analaogy FBI J Edgar Hoover used Mafia to create Political | assaasins and easily subject to blackmail by Appointee | mob Louis Patrick Gray II (July 18, 1916 JULY 6, 2005) was Acting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from May 2, 1972 to April 27, 1973.
During this time, the FBI was in charge of the initial investigation into the burglaries that sparked the Watergate scandal, which eventually led to the resignation of President Nixon.
He resigned as Acting FBI director on April 27, 1973, after he admitted to Continuing Deep State mafia destroying documents that had come from convicted Watergate conspirator E Howard Hunt’s safedocuments received on June 28, 1972, 11 days after the Watergate burglary, and given to Gray by White House counsel John Dean.
Bush Clinton May 3, 1972 Obama Year 1961 1963 1968 1972 April 27, 1973 | lines run the presiency Nov 22 RFK on 1963 FJK |vergeof |Ongoing purges of documents Assasinated, | presidency | data, wet division hits Obama Jr 2 | assasinated Manufacture of Barrack Obama Jr In December 1951 Gunderson joined the Federal Bureau of Investigation under J Edgar Hoover.
Bush Business Plot ; lunatics were doing in CIA Mafia NGOs including the Chicago Boys and LBJ backed "" activities, and he and Marylin Monroe were silenced just as RFK was headed to ' Chicago.
Simply put, the Operation 40 Oil Business Mafia and MKULTRA under ranked but out-killed the constrained assassination program RFK oversaw and ran in Florida.
Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend is an American attorney who was the sixth Lieutenant Governor of Maryland from 1995 to 2003.
She ran unsuccessfully for Governor of Maryland in 2002. wa In 2010 Townsend became the chair of the non-profit American Bridge, an organization whose focus is to raise funds for Democratic candidates and causes.
JOSEPH P KENNEDY II Py Joseph Patrick Kennedy II (born September 24, 1952) is an American businessman, Democratic politician, and a member of the Kennedy family.
DAVID A KENNEDY David Anthony Kennedy was the fourth of eleven children of Robert F Kennedy and Ethel Skakel.
As a child, David was shy, introverted and sensitive, and shared a particularly strong bond with his father.
His father dived under the water and rescued him, scraping and bruising his own forehead in the process. wa A 1973 Jeep accident left Kennedy’s then girlfriend, Pamela Kelley, paralyzed.
His oldest brother, Joseph Kennedy II, had been driving the Jeep and was charged with reckless driving.
Kennedy also served as the head of the non-profit organization Citizens Energy.
Kennedy died on December 31, 1997, in a skiing accident in Aspen Mountain, Colorado.
KERRY KENNEDY lpn Mary Kerry Kennedy (born September 8, 1959) is an American lawyer, author and human rights activist.
She is the seventh child and third daughter of Robert F Kennedy and Ethel Skakel.
She is the president of Robert F Kennedy Human Rights, a non-profit human rights advocacy organization.
CHRISTOPHER G KENNEDY Christopher George Kennedy is an American businessman, politician, and Chair of Joseph P Kennedy Enterprises, Inc.
DOUGLAS HARRIMAN KENNEDY Douglas Harriman Kennedy (born March 24, 1967) is an American journalist.
Kennedy attempted to take his infant off the maternity ward for some fresh air, which two nurses said was against hospital policy, and who claimed that he physically assaulted them when they tried to stop him from doing so.
RORY KENNEDY Py Rory Elizabeth Katherine Kennedy (born DECEMBER 12, 1968) is an American documentary filmmaker and youngest child of United States Senator Robert F Kennedy and Ethel Skakel.
I On AUGUST 2, 1999, Kennedy married Mark Bailey in Greece at the ‘mansion of shipping tycoon Vardis Vardinoyiannis.
I John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. , often 1 referred to as John-John or JFK Jr., was an American lawyer, journalist, and ‘magazine publisher.
SR eee A Hispanic American assassin loyal to the USA lost many friends to Fidel Castro communists in the eS of Pigs According to his friend, Ruben Carbajal, in the spring » Of 1973, Morales talked about his involvement with the ; Bay of Pigs operation.
When it was founded, the Foreign Legion was not unique; other foreign formations existed at the time in France.
The Foreign Legion fought alongside United States paratroops in Iraq, securing the west flank of the allied offensive.
The visit proved to be much more controversial than expected. "" | i I i i i I I i I I I i I i I i I i i I i I i I i I i i i I i i i I I I i I i i I i I i I i I i I i t I i I q Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forget falls drop by drop upon the heart, until, in our own despair, against our will, comes wisdom through the awful grace of God.
Goodman, and Schwerner : ( Eocated AUGUST 4, 1964 | | | | | : Pulitzer Prize-winning composer 1 Steven Stucky’s evening-long 1 concert drama, August 4, 1964, was i based on the events of that date: the 1 discovery of the bodies of the three : civil rights workers and the reported ; attack on two American warships in : the Gulf of Tonkin.
Commissioned ; to commemorate the centennial of | the birth of Lyndon B Johnson, it ' premiered to excellent reviews. i The bodies of the CORE activists were found only after an informant (discussed in ' FBI reports only as “Mr X”) passed along a tip to federal authorities.
Chaney, a black man, had been severely beaten, castrated and shot three times.
Two local Native I ; Americans found the smoldering car that evening; by the next morning, that ; information had been communicated to Proctor.
August 3, 2012 and copied or modified to here ee eee On Saturday, AUG. 4, former President Bill Clinton joined Humphrey’s sons Skip, : Bob and Doug in unveiling a memorial statue of Humphrey before an audience of 1,000 on the Minnesota Capitol grounds.
Humphrey died in 1978, 14 years after engineering the victory of the landmark a shsle Gini safeinissyavem which ended segregation and racial ; | | | | i | | | ‘ discrimination in public education and federally assisted programs.
If the meeting with Thorkill Kristesnen predating the Nov 18 1963 meeting tied to the : upcoming NOV 18 2nd Birthday of CIA created Barack Obama developmental : psychology report, its analysis, and implications, Illuminati / Stone Masons may have ; disagreed about global plans.
After the company won its first airplane contract for 2 NA-16 trainers in 1935, Kindelberger began moving North American’s anufacturing operations west.
In 1939, North American had begun developing a twin-engine bomber that eventually evolved into the B-25 Mitchell bomber.
A prototype of the proposed new design was rushed into production and i first flew on Oct., 1940.
Employees enter the North American Aviation manufacturing plant in El Segundo in , this undated photo, circa 1942.
It formed a separate company, Rocketdyne, in Canoga Park, to produce rocket ; engines.
After work on the B-1 Bomber program, another huge defense contract won by i Rockwell, slowed in the late 1980s, the company began reducing its operations at its El , Segundo facilities.
In December 1996, Rockwell International Corporation’s aerospace and defense ' and Rocketdyne, merged with the Boeing Company and were renamed singly as Boeing ' North American Inc.
The buildings on the North American site in El] Segundo were demolished after i Rockwell left the South Bay so that the land could be sold.
The manifestos do ; Not elaborate extensively on the matter, but clearly combine references to Kabbalah, ' Hermeticism, alchemy, and Christian mysticism. a Google knowledge panel quoted here | ' divisions, including Rockwell’s space systems unit, guidance systems firm Autonetics Sirhan never became an American citizen, retaining instead his Jordanian citizenship.
Ancient Mystical Order of the Rose Cross, commonly known as the Rosicrucians.
In 1971, Sirhan was housed in the Adjustment Center at San Quentin State Prison. ... i On AUGUST 30, 2019, SIRHAN WAS STABBED MULTIPLE TIMES by another prisoner.
Bobby Kennedy killed blonde bombshell Marilyn was hidden in the Los Angeles Police ; Department archives for six decades.
The Night Bobby Kennedy Killed Marilyn Monroe’ to be published on Thursday, JULY 8.
Kennedy then plied her with a drugged drink and she was dead by the time he left the house. e Officers from LAPD’s Intelligence division DID cover up the crime, making Marilyn’s murder look like suicide. e LA cops stole her diary, photo-copied its dynamite contents detailing her affairs with both Kennedys.
OCID also kept secret files on Marilyn’s friend and neighbour, British-born actor Peter Lawford, star of the original Oceans Eleven, who was the Kennedys’ brother-in-law. a KBE Order ra The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire is a British order of chivalry, rewarding contributions to the arts and sciences, work with charitable and welfare organisations, and public service outside the civil service.
Mass.) for 10 years and worked in three Kennedy family presidential campaigns, died ; of cancer yesterday at his home in Washington.
After three years as a consultant in public affairs and telecommunications policy, Mr i Drayne rejoined Sen.
Stationed in Korea, he worked on the Armed Forces Korean i television network.
Ferrier wanted also to test Jackson’s idea that epilepsy had a cortical origin, as it r was suggested by his clinical observations.
This book Leo Ryan was a Revealer Leo Ryan investigated CIA activities at Jonestown and Folsom Prison tied to Jim Jones and Peoples Temple in San Francisco.
Next to the synagogue was the Scottish Rites Temple ' ‘Building, known as the Alfred Pike Memorial Temple, at 1859 ea which ee back to the o century: Lees Ceo a hg Cian of the City of San Francisco Two buildings with fascinating history were both destroyed in 1989.
The CIA was the front agency for Scotish Rites DARPA Brain Research conducted in Jonestown in a Family ooperated by Lyndom B Johsson’s Desciples of Christ minister the Reverand Jim Jones.
The creation of the Church Committee was approved on J anuary 27, ; 1975, by a vote of 82 to 4 in the Senate.
Project MINARET ; involved the accumulation of all telegraphic data that entered or exited i the United States.
Intercepted messages were disseminated to the FBI, CIA, Secret I Service, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs , and the Department of Defense.
USSID 18 was the general guideline for handling signal intelligence inadvertently collected on United States citizens, without a warrant, prior to wr George W Bush the George W Bush Administration.
Ba’ ath regime in Baghdad” but that in their view there were distortions : of “important details” and criticism of Henry Kissinger.
The Tri State New England area and navigable waters and docks loading proximity ‘ to Toronto and Nova Scotia Canada made Detroit, Boston, and other locations ; Bootlegging areas and was part of Old Milwaukee Wisconson Jazz speakeasy.
In Love Story I believe Jacki Kennedy approaches JFK over being Catholic and that identity.
Jackkie asks him to embrace it, as a Catholic and lead equal to the WAPS but as a Catholic.
She even implies she might even become a Catholic Queem of France someday I think not really wanting it but suggesting France was a Catholic Franco Pride a rival of England.
Certainly a Barrack Obama Jr. or others could find a home somewhere on either side of their heritage.
SONNY Bono, former husband and singing partner of superstar Cher, was clubbed to death by hitmen on the orders of drug and weapons dealers who feared he was going to expose them, a former FBI agent claims.
One possibility the public discussion of forensic evidence would be consistent with is that Bono was bit in the head, died, and face down loaded into a sled which took him to the tree his body was recovered from and during that his own skip parker was blood stained from his being changed from face down to face up in the sled.
Michael LeMoyne Kennedy was an American lawyer, businessman, and activist in Massachusetts.
Mary Bono as a 22 year old student married Sonny Bono after the divorce wish Cher and Mary Bono filled his seat in the House to be elected to numorous full terms.
Further Reading In this time frame, 1998 Tom Donegan offered Ed Donegan a chance to interview at AOL Time Warner for a job.
Events were surreal and out of control with dopples in both payroll and walking around me and as I called out the odd constant abnormalities they said I was experiencing emotional problems and fired.
I used leather folios all my life and a coworker Toni used the exact same one and began acting as me in all sorts of ways.
A different Ed Donegan working for the AOL movie company Sun Productions had a similar salary which was deposited into my checking account my salary was also deposited into.
It is now news in Australia that new evidence has turned up that suggests that California congressman Sonny Bono was murdered and did not die in a skiing accident as we have been told repeatedly.
Although he was an American whose job was to represent Americans, as far as the mainstream United States press is concerned this news is unworthy of the attention of the people of the United States.
This is the same American press, of course, that never breathed the slightest hint of suspicion that there might have been foul play involved when the experienced skier Bono was reported to have slammed into a tree at the Heavenly Ski resort in Nevada on January 5, 1998.
There were no witnesses, the autopsy report was not released to the public, and Bono had shown himself to be something of a thorn in the side of official Washington, which is probably all the more reason for the lapdogs who call themselves journalists to have dummied up.
His father was a Methodist, later United Methodist, minister, and John traveled wherever his father was named by the denominational conference to pastor a church.
His research was presented in his thesis, The Conservative Worker in Britain.
During his time in Wichita Falls, Tower established his core political relationships, including Pierce Langford III, a key figure in the financing of the British offshore pirate radio stations created between 1964 and 1967 by Don Pierson of Eastland, Texas.
While at the London School of Economics, Tower put in an appearance at the offices of Swinging Radio England on Curzon Street.
Lyndon B Johnson, the incumbent Texas senator and famous nationwide as the Senate Majority Leader, won the election against Tower.
As John F Kennedy’s running mate, Johnson was also seeking the vice presidency in the same election.
Israel’s Superspy by Gordon Thomas and Martin Dillon, Tower became the liaison for Robert Maxwell, a British publishing mogul and super-agent for Mossad, to the White House and to United States government operations.
The relationship began in 1984, and the soon-to-be retired Tower “told Maxwell that his fee as Maxwell’s personal consultant would be $200,000.
Tower took Maxwell’s request for American help in arming Iran, and relayed it to President Reagan as a means to trade for American hostages held in Lebanon.
Tower retired from the Senate after nearly twenty-four years in office.
Two weeks after his leaving office, Tower was named chief United States negotiator at the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks in Geneva, Switzerland.
He became a consultant with Tower, Eggers, and Greene Consulting from 1987 until his death in 1991 In November 1986, President Reagan asked Tower to chair the President’s Special Review Board to study the action of the National Security Council and its staff during the Iran-Contra Affair.
The board, which became known as the Tower Commission, issued its report on February 26, 1987.
The report was highly critical of the Reagan administration and of the National Security Council’s dealings with both Iran and the Nicaraguan Contras.
In a stunning move, particularly since Tower was himself a former Senate colleague, the Senate rejected his nomination.
The largest factors were concern about possible conflicts of interest and Tower’s personal life, in particular allegations of alcohol abuse and womanizing.
After Tower’s defeat, he was named chairman of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
Dick Cheney, then a Representative from Wyoming and the House Minority Whip, was later confirmed as Secretary of Defense whose nomination was successful.
On April 5, 1991, Tower was aboard Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 2311 when it crashed while on approach for landing at Brunswick, Georgia.
The crash instantly killed everyone on board, including Tower and his middle daughter, Marian, the astronaut Sonny Carter, and twenty others.
An investigation determined that the crash resulted from failure of the plane’s propeller control unit.
Manley Lanier “Sonny” Carter Jr., M.D. , , was an American chemist, physician (Flight Surgeon), professional soccer player, naval officer and aviator, test pilot, and NASA astronaut who flew on STS-33.
During his time at Emory, Carter was a brother in the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 2311 was a regularly scheduled commuter flight from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport to Glynco Jetport in Brunswick, Georgia on April 5, 1991.
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that, the probable cause of this accident was the loss of control in flight as a result of a malfunction of the left engine propeller control unit, which allowed the propeller blade angles to go below the flight idle position.
Contributing to the accident was the deficient design of the propeller control unit by Hamilton Standard and the approval of the design by the Federal Aviation Administration.
The design did not correctly evaluate the failure mode that occurred during this flight, which resulted in an uncommanded and uncorrectable movement of the blades of the airplane’s left propeller below the flight idle position.
According to most of the interviewed witnesses, the airplane suddenly rolled to the left until the wings were perpendicular to the ground.:2 The aircraft then descended in a nose-down attitude and disappeared from sight behind trees near the airport.
SENATOR PAUL WELLSTONE Paul Wellstone, former member of the United States Senate from Minnesota Paul David Wellstone was an American academic, author, and politician who represented Minnesota in the United States Senate from 1991 until he was killed in a plane crash in Eveleth, Minnesota, in 2002.
In 1999, Wellstone formed an exploratory committee to run for President of the United States in 2000.
After campaigning in the early primary states, he announced he would not seek the presidency because of chronic physical limitations from a college wrestling injury.
As senator, Wellstone authored the Wellstone Amendment for the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002.
His efforts toward campaign finance reform were overturned in 2010 by the United States Supreme Court in Citizens United Federal Election Commission.
Eleven days before the 2002 United States Senate election, Wellstone died in a plane crash in Eveleth, Minnesota.
Wellstone’s sons, David and Mark, were not on the flight, and until 2018 co-chaired the Wellstone Action nonprofit organization in honor of their parents.
On October 25, 2002, Wellstone, along with seven others, died in an airplane crash in eastern Minnesota, at 10:22m.
The other victims were his wife, Sheila; one of his three children, Marcia; the two pilots; and campaign staffers Mary McEvoy, Tom Lapic and Will McLaughlin.
The airplane was en route to Eveleth, where Wellstone was to attend the funeral of Martin Rukavina, a steelworker whose son Tom Rukavina served in the Minnesota House of Representatives.
Wellstone decided to go to the funeral instead of a Minneapolis rally and fundraiser attended by Mondale and fellow Senator Ted Kennedy Martin “Benny”’ Rukavina, 85, of Virginia died Monday, Oct., 2002, at the Virginia Convalescent Center.
He graduated from Virginia Roosevelt High School and attended Virginia and Mesabi Community College.
Guest: Bob Fletcher In the first half, Bob Fletcher, a retired investigative researcher who conducted a probe into the CIA’s involvement in United States drug trade, spoke about the return of Planet X , how money has been secretly siphoned out of budgets to prepare for it, and the coming global cataclysm.
According to his information, Planet X was first discovered in 1983 by infrared telescopes and appeared to be on an inbound trajectory.
Since then, the United States has built numerous underground facilities , which will be offered as a survival option to only an elite few, he stated.
China has reportedly also completed the construction of underground facilities.
Operation Jade Helm 15, a military-law enforcement exercise coming later this year, is a dry run for “martial law,” and is being conducted as a test for how to deal with the public when they learn about Nibiru’s impending arrival, Fletcher contended.
For Americans, the new revelations can be found buried away-and ignored by “respectable people”-in the United States supermarket tabloid, Globe, of April 14, which hit the news racks on April 4.
He also feels partially responsible for what happened to the California congressman.
Before Bono’s death, Fletcher had been probing the activities of high ranking United States military and government officials he claims were raking in millions from arms and drug deals in Central America and Southeast Asia.
He says he sent his shocking findings of corruption, including videotaped evidence, to Bono.
The new evidence is the long-suppressed autopsy report, itself, which Fletcher obtained and furnished to Globe.
It’s nonsense for anyone to now try to suggest that Bono died after crashing into a tree.
There’s zero evidence in this autopsy report or any of these official documents to show such an accident happened.
Ted Gunderson, now a private investigator, has told the United States Globe tabloid that Bono, who served as mayor of Palm Springs for four years, did not die after hitting a tree on a Nevada ski slope in January 1998 as everyone believed.
So identical, are they, in fact, that all three of them have the first sentence in bold.
Bono, an experienced skier, was ambushed on the slopes by hired hitmen, who beat him to death and then staged a tree collision, Mr Gunderson said.
He called for authorities to dig up Bono’s remains and open a homicide investigation.
His claims have reportedly been backed by top forensics experts who fear Nevada authorities were too quick to call the death a skiing accident.
There’s no doubt in my mind Sonny was murdered by someone who needed him silenced,” Mr Fletcher told the paper.
It would appear that Yahoo is as compliant toward corrupt American authorities as it is toward their counterparts in China.
Other injuries detailed in the document included a black eye, swollen lips, bloody nose, bruised jaw, and two upper teeth knocked out, all on the right side of the head.
Fletcher consulted a panel of experts and performed a re-creation to determine how these wounds were caused.
Fletcher thinks the murder weapon was a pistol, but other experts tell GLOBE that a gun barrel would have left distinguishable marks.
Fletcher insists the lack of damage to the back of Bono’s brain, known as “contra-coup” injuries, is proof that he was beaten to death.
He says people who hit objects face-first normally have brain injuries caused when the organ rebounds off the back of their skull.
And other physical evidence doesn’t add up, either, he says. f tip) An entire brain moving to a frontal impact collapses into the impact then rebounds back.
A blow into the front a brain not in motion damges the brain only at point of impact.
Strangely for what was called a ski accident, Bono had no smashed ribs, broken knees, neck trauma—or hand injuries that would have come from trying to ward off a collision with a tree, Fletcher says.
And signs that he actually hit the tree—including bark impressions on his face and plant debris on his clothes—are also missing, the investigator says.
And his ski goggles weren’t smashed as they likely would have been in a collision, according to the expert.
Fletcher also notes the back of Bono’s clothes were soaked with blood—but he had no back wounds.
The autopsy also mentions a small L-shaped tear on the back of Bono’s black and purple Fila ski jacket.
And Gunderson believes the new evidence gathered by Fletcher raises the specter of murder and warrants a new investigation.
Fletcher believes that Bono’s wife when they became famous together, Cher, will call for a new investigation when she learns of these new revelations.
Little hope is held out, apparently, that she will be joined by Mary Bono, Sonny’s wife at the time of his death.
Mary, who succeeded Sonny in the Congress and has remarried, has suggested publicly that his errant skiing was caused by Sonny having taken too many prescription painkillers.
But that suggestion had already been contradicted by a previously-released toxicology report, said Globe.
Their marriage, which was Sonny’s fourth, was said to have been troubled at the time of his death.
Sonny’s mother, Jean, on the other hand, believed all along that he was murdered.
She died in 2005, but not before demanding “a much more thorough investigation” into his death, according to Globe.
Gunderson agrees with Fletcher that the 62-year-old Bono was likely to have been killed because of what he might uncover, or had already uncovered, about illegal drug and arms dealing by high-level government officials.
Reno had not conducted a more exhaustive study of CS before making a decision.
He challenged her claim that she had done all she could to investigate the attributes and hazards of the substance, noting that the United States Army Chemical Research and Development Center had confirmed that it knew of no laboratory studies of CS in which the subjects were children.
According to an ear, nose, and throat surgeon that I talked to, pulmonary edema is caused when the mucous membrane is irritated, it secretes mucous which in children and infants plugs up the bronchi.
What we see here on display is an independence of mind that is both refreshing and dangerous for an American member of Congress.
Perhaps Bono looked even further into the Waco outrage and found the Waco Holocaust Electronic Museum, which concludes that the whole episode was even more vicious and barbaric than almost anyone suspects.
Attorney General, I feel the death of Paul Wilcher offers too many questions and inconsistencies to be ignored.
Both were investigating possible government involvement in illegal activities.
Each was acting on his own, with dogged persistence, over a long time period.
Both Casolaro and Wilcher expressed fears, shortly before their deaths, that their lives were in danger because their investigations had led into sensitive territory.
As stated, Wilcher told at least one other person at the end of May that he feared he’d become a “danger signal” because his information on government malfeasance had gone beyond Casolaro’s.
In both cases, rapid alterations were made to the corpse making further forensic study difficult or impossible.
Casolaro was embalmed shortly after death without family consent; Wilcher was cremated, as remarked above, without fingerprint or other evidential identification of the body, and without complete forensic examination to determine cause of death.
The apartment was sealed off for the rest of ' the day, except for official personnel.
He joined the FBI agents in the Wilcher apartment during c t the 4:30 to 7:30 time period.
More people could have entered during this time Lidell 1 » says he returned to his own apartment and didn’t keep track. r | I ‘ r 1 Lidell says that an NBC camera crew was prevented from entering the apartment.
Aside from firemen, medical personnel to remove the body and the above ° ; Government agents, no one was allowed in the apartment for the entire day no ; ; reporters, friends, media crews, etc.
Sonny Bono and Peter Lawford in Sounds of Silence Cyrano de Bricker Murder on the High Seas The Tabloid Cover-up Operation Sounds of Silence / Cyrano de Bricker / Mt Seas |main| Suest Cast Suest Crew Cast Appearances crew Appearances A singer tries to persuade his manager to let him abandon the shock tactics that made him famous and let his music speak for itself.
He becomes even more determined to establish some credibility after he falls for a deaf friend of Julie's.
Everyone initially believes that he is just too caught up in the murder mystery that he has been reading, but the captain and Gopher soon begin to a PZ rm share his suspicions.
John Charlie Callas as Lillian Smith as Vinnie De Risi as Mitzi De Risi Sonny Bono Arte Johnson as Phil Backstrom / as Teddy Smith Deacon Dark as Marty Austin James Dobson Shes as Anderson, the Steward > as Sara One can hardly argue that the American press has really done the proper job of a free press in a free society because these new revelations have, at least, been published by Globe.
There is hardly any better way to discredit a serious story than to have it published in a tabloid, and only in a tabloid.
This Globe story is quite similar to the National Enquirer story about the dubious “suicide” of Enron executive, Cliff Baxter, or the Star story about the George W Bush-led fraternity at Yale branding pledges with hot coat hangers.
One can bet that Bob Fletcher made a serious effort to get the story covered by “more respectable” news outlets, but was rebuffed.
The same “respectable” news organs are now continuing to cover up for the controlling criminal elite by blacking out what Globe has published.
What is really impressive is how thoroughgoing and monolithic the whole operation is.
The country is full of reporters who buy groceries in supermarkets just as I do.
One would think that one of them, in one corner or other of this vast country, would spot the Sonny Bono article, would recognize the importance of the story, and would be able to prevail upon his or her editor to follow up on it.
For now it’s much bigger news in Australia than it is here, and the odds are very long that not one peep about these Sonny Bono autopsy revelations will be heard anywhere from the American mainstream press.
The same sort of blackout occurred when the former lead investigator for Kenneth Starr, Miquel Rodriguez, spilled the beans about the cover-up of Deputy White House Counsel Vincent Foster’s murder, and it happened when the official investigation of the “suicide” of America’s first defense secretary, James Forrestal, was made public, and it will occur again.
The writer of the Globe article is Bob Burns, email bobburns@Globefl.com Cher, Farah, and Vegas Throat CZ 7 Cher On Her Own Health & What Saved Farrah Fawcett retrieved from a Accessonline and copied or modified to here Cher and Farrah discuss Vegas Thoat.
Though the rumor mill went into overdrive with reports suggesting the legend was actually suffering with everything from severe abdominal problems to cancer, a healthy looking and spirited Cher said she is just fine during her recent visit to Access Hollywood.
If I had cancer, everyone would know it,” Cher told 1 Access’ Billy Bush.
Bush and cousin of President George W Bush and Florida governor Jeb Bush.
But you know there’s a wind thing that blows there sometimes ; in different months, and I have an allergy to it,” Cher said.
And Cher’s good friend arrah Fawcett knows exactly Each sphincter is associated with the lumen ow that feels. it is surrounding.
Relaxation of the trongest woman I have ever muscle causes it to lengthen, opening the lumen and known,” Cher told Billy.
The rectum connects the colon to the anus, which is the opening where stool exits the body.
The internal and external anal sphincters are rings of muscle at the opening of the anus.
The former “Charlie’s ngels” star took the singing uperstar’s advice and has een traveling to and from ermany for cancer treatment or Over a year.
For example, the lower oesophageal sphincter , which resides at the top of the stomach, is closed most of the time, keeping acids and other stomach contents from pushing up and into the oesophagus, but opens | “Are we to understand that to let swallowed food pass into the stomach.
Billy asked esophageal sphincter has also been referred (Cher of Farrah. to as the inferior pharyngeal sphincter because it is located at the lower end of pharynx and guards the entrance into the esophagus.
This is what cancer is’,” a tearful Stewart recounts in the harrowing film, Farrah’s Story, which aired in the early hours of yesterday morning.
There are hopeful moments in the film and Fawcett shows incredible resilience, but even as she vows to fight on the tale becomes progressively bleaker.
The 62-yearold is shown most recently in bed at home, barely conscious under a heap of bedclothes, after O’Neal said she had “pretty much” stopped receiving treatment.
After many treatments had caused her agony but spared what her Los Angeles doctor Lawrence Piro called “the most famous hair in the world”, Fawcett is seen late in the film with her hair falling out in clumps.
She shaves most of it off, then shows her head to the camera, bald but for a remaining blond fringe.
John Marley as Phil Cavilleri Italian Catholic father of Jennifer “Jenny” Caviller becomes Oliver Barrett IV’s Cahtolic Mafia Oliver rejects his too WASPY English Royalty connected father, who, btw was close with the Queen of England and presented Rosemay Kennedy to her while Ambasador to Great Brittian Profiles in Courage is a 1956 volume of short biographies B describing acts of bravery and integrity by eight United States Senators.
The book profiles senators who defied the opinions of their party and constituents to do what they felt was right and suffered severe criticism and losses in popularity because of their actions.
It begins with a quote from Edmund Burke on the courage of the English statesman Charles James Fox, in his 1783 attack upon the tyranny of the East India Company in the House of Commons.
Theodore Chaikin Sorensen was an American lawyer, writer, and presidential adviser.
He was a speechwriter for President John F Kennedy, as well as one of his closest advisers.
Most notably, he was generally regarded as the author of Profiles in Courage, a claim he addresses in his 2008 memoir.
Sorensen helped draft the Kennedy’s inaugural address and was also the primary author of Kennedy’s 1962 “We choose to go to the Moon” speech.
Jacqueline started her first job in the fall of 1951 as the “Inquiring Camera Girl” for the Washington Times-Herald newspaper.
Roving around the city, she took pictures of people she encountered, asked them questions on the issues of the day, and wove their answers into her newspaper column.
During this time, Jacqueline met John F Kennedy, who was a congressman and soon to be elected senator from Massachusetts.
Four months after the coronatio of QEII on September 12, 1953, FJK and Jackie married at St.
Mary’s Church in Newport, Rhode Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Lee “Jackie” Bouvier , when he was a congressman.
Charles L Bartlett, a journalist, introduced the pair at a dinner party.
They were married a year after he was elected senator, on September 12, 1953.
After suffering a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956 (their daughter Arabella), their daughter Caroline was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK’s immediate family.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr., nicknamed “JohnJohn” by the press as a child, was born in late November 1960, 17 days after his father was elected.
In 1963, months before JFK’s assassination, Jackie gave birth to a son, Patrick.
Delta Delta Delta sorority. 1985 was a heavy time of turmoil in the Belfast Troubles.
Farrah Fawcett was born in Texas and Roman Catholic and would have been 38 years old at that time.
A close friend has ' described her being “fearless” at the moment thanks to her faith.
The Catholic priest ' reportly administered her the Last Rites in a Los Angeles Hospital.
BREAKING NEWS A Youtube version of Love Story theme with their pictures here added to the link This book Christopher Pyle is a Revealer What has been done to the watched families was illegal and involuntary, their DNA used without permission including Glorian and Jim Donegan DNA and probably Malcom X DNA beyond what he approved.
Irregular Warfare Plant of ""33""5 Sleeper Agents Kennedys Pelletiers Spears Donegans many others Discovers and revealers of Free Mason Deep State.
Christopher H Pyle (born 1939) is a journalist and America needs a 21st century Church Professor of Politics at Mount Committee olyoke College in South adley, Massachusetts.
He 15 members and staffers from 1975 investigation __ {testified to Congress about the argue that NSA revelations demand congressional se of military intelligence action March 18, 2014 by Multiple authors @ajam against civilians, worked for the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee co Frank Church in 1976.
He is ) he author of several books and In 1975 the public learned that the National Security Agency had been collecting and analyzing international telegrams of United States citizens since the 1940s under secret agreements with all the major telegram companies.
Such congressional action is urgently needed to restore the faith of citizens in the intelligence community and in our federal government.
The actions uncovered by the Church Committee in the 1970s bear striking similarities to the actions Congressional reports on ilitary intelligence and constitutional rights, and has estified numerous times before he United States Congress on issues of deportation and extradition.
In the 1960s while an Army captain in intelligence, Pyle eamed that “Army intelligence ad 1,500 plainclothes agents atching every demonstration of 20 people or more throughout he United States,” (as later Pyle ecounted on December 19, 2005, on Democracy Now and again on ABC News on anuary 6, 2006,) as part of a road-based program of domestic spying.
In January and uly 1970, Pyle disclosed the rmy’s spying in articles that appeared in a new publication, ashington Monthly.
Ervin continued to investigate government activities; together ith the Church Committee inquiries, these Congressional studies led to the drafting of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.
Hillman Prize for nondenominational, residential, research liberal arts investigative journalism college for women that is gender diverse and welcomes applications from female, transgender e | 1971: Polk Award for and non-binary students.
The oldest of the Seven Sister itle,” Choice, for Extradition, colleges, we are a noted leader in liberal arts Politics and Human Rights education with a mission grounded in the conviction that women can and should make a difference in the world.
Luther Knight Mcnair Award from ACLU Massachusetts for contributions as “teacher, scholar, and model citizen activist e 2007: Distinguished teaching award from Mt.
He never doubted these were mafia international black opps assassinations.
HIS OWN MURDER a He asserted he was being poisoned and I believe on many basis.
GOVERNMENT, SAYS EX-FBI OFFICIAL * Preparations to Be Together for an Unknown Period of Time (Hungarian is in the CIA Masonic Familes watch certain family lines over time, but keep that activity secret.
That is also though secret beacuse of the Sounds of Silence / Cyrano de Bricker / Mt Seas wel GuestCast GuestCrew CastAppearances CrewAppearances Gallery Asinger tries to persuade his manager to let him abandon the shock tactics that made him famous and let his music speak for itself.
Everyone initially believes that he is just too caught up in the murder mystery that he has been reading, but the captain and Gopher soon begin to share his suspicions. e* © 98 Share this on Guest Cast Dana Wynter Charlie Callas Jill St.
CIA TSS Overthrow Including Irregular Warfare Plant o naan Sleeper Agents 33 Hnald Barr Jen Moore ed Gunderson United States Gov authorized )_,Regime Changes not Op 40 or Business Plot La Cosa Nostra Chicago + Mexican Mafia George H.W.Bush Famililes Watch research by CIA, others, of FOXP2 The successfull placement of Sleeper Agents around the world means one thing in particular.
In highly visible Sovereign heads of state the FOXP2 must not be recognized else the family lines will be recognized and the sleepers exposed The Lawford Shriver Peace Corps plan , amongst others, F Lee Bailey, Esq., The California Narcotics Authority by appointment of Governor , Jerry Brown, The 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Committee, and The 1979 Pan American Games in San ; Juan, Puerto Rico by appointment of then United States Attorney Genera) Griffin Bell. 1960 to 1964 and the Mob RFK Attorny General January 21, 1961 September 3, 1964 JFK assasinated November 22 1963 2.
Previous to my work as a private investigator I spent nearly three decades in the F.B.L Between 1951 and 1960 I was an F'B.L Special Agent.
Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to here r Colin Luther Powell is an American politician, diplomat and retired four-star general who served as the 1 65th United States Secretary of State from 2001 to 2005.
As aresult, I checked the fe SSNVS for the SSN Obama BolT 2 SEES TONN newer fovouny used for registering with "" Selective Service.
SF an ee pai Let me be direct i have not agreed with many of your tactics in this endeavor.
However, I have continued to follow your efforts to see where there may be synergy and this is one.
Sincerely Greg Hollister Gregory S Hollister, Colonel, USAF, Retired, President, Hollister Enterprises, LLC2 A Colorado Springs “birther,” retired Air Force Col.
Gunderson said his father worked on high-profile cases such as the death of Marilyn Monroe, the assassination of President John Kennedy, and He would also as an FBI and also as a private attorney upon retirement work on numerous cases including the JFK assassination, Mc Martin child abuse case of Manhattan Beach, California, with odd CIA activities testing children in odd secret ways in carefully hidden testing areas.
Kathy Monical USNORTHCOW’s specific mission: United States Northern Command Defends Our Homeland Deters, detects, and defeats threats to the United States, conducts security cooperation activities with allies and partners, and supports civil authorities.
North American Aerospace Defense Command F-22 fighter aircraft, supported by KC-135 air refuelers, intercepted three groups of two Tu-142 Russian maritime patrol aircraft that entered the Alaskan Air Defense Identification Zone late last night.
Miller said he began to see reports of these mysterious symptoms as a higher priority in December, after interviewing an alleged victim with extensive combat experience. but more military-style that I could understand, I was like this is actually for real,” Miller said.
William Burns, who vowed during his confirmation hearings to review the evidence on the alleged | attacks on CIA personnel overseas [possibly in conjuction with United States ; Dept of State security actors], which have long been publicly reported.
Queen of England on October 29, 1956 P while attending the Royal Command | Performance of the film Battle of the : River Plate : i | | i i | | | | | | i Glorian Donegan also born in 1926.
Google knowledge panel retrieved from ® Bornin 1926 Bornin 1926 Marilyn Monroe American actress and -~ copied or modified to here revolution.
But on March 27, 1977, senior the pilot who had logged more than 11,000 hours in the cockpit Evelyn EUGENE Tumer December 13, 1928 March 27, 1977) was an American pinup model, motion picture actress, and film producer.
The Netherlands KLM Netherlands Member of the OECD Development Assistance Committee since 1961 killed in the Tenerife airport disaster in 1977.
Mitechond wiped by xray tube Julian Assange Many Julius Julian Julius or Born July 3 turned his July names 1971 hair white.
NSA GCHQ faked case prisoner Born in 1926, perhaps Three pene Born 1926, Norma Jean Normal Genes cot aaah died August Victoria Windsor, or Dick Windsor, or others.
Kristen Jean MacDonald Like Norma Jean, killed by Clone of Feb 17 CIA, motichondria stolen from | Windsor Chicago and investigation.
The accident occurred when Bono left his family to ski alone on the afternoon of January 5 1998.
He was reported missing several hours later, and his body was found that evening.
Police said Bono had skied into a wooded area and hit a tree; the cause of death was massive head injuries.
Bono attended Inglewood High School, but did not graduate, opting to drop out so he could begin to pursue a Bono was married four times.
Brittany Murphy Brittany aa December suspicious 20. 2009 death maybe > , poisoned Bom Nov 10 1977 Atlanta Georgia, Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 1926 Secret Identity my Princess like femal ely Glorian Donegan Ann Anne promised to keep for me, Edward Donegan’s safety in retum Brit Hume American journalist Brit graduated Sotts Heritage, | Sandy Hume St.
February 20 might have oe decided he could be used as an asset inside the system for a long term goal Barrack Obama Jr Named changed from BHO for | Wears I think Feb some possible reason Aristocrats 20 Nov 18 clothing on Dec 13, claim November 19 |is Aug 4 portrait birth, Life possible Magazine connected by | 1961 Aug, 3 painter to mos shift from Feb Bone Marrow and medicine 2 marriage conception in future crimes.
Madelyn Lee Payne Dunham Blinken was Antony Blinken born on April 16, 1962, in Is son of Jewish Poles.
Plot for move The Switch is when semen used wrongly, the personality of the born reveals true genetic origins by personality characteristics, behavioral observations Neilia Hunter Biden (July 28, 1942 December 18, 1972) was an American teacher and the first wife of Joe Biden, the 46th and current president of the United States.
Colette is best remembered for her 1944 novella Gigi, which was the basis for the 1958 film and the 1973 stage production of the same name.
Proving associated Grounds, date The “Gadget” was the implosion plutonium device detonated in the Trinity Test in July 1945.
Wilbur Crane Eveland was an Aug 4 Creates intelligence agent known for his work Crane, July 4, CIA Overthrows, Obama for with the Central Intelligence Agency Tadonesis.
He was born , , to overthrow on July 1, 1918, in Spokane, Washington indonesia In 1940, Eveland joined the United States Army, where in January 1941 he was recruited as an agent for the Corps of Intelligence Police, later known as the Counter Intelligence Corps.
From 1959 to 1961 , Eveland was on CIA assignment to Rome, Italy, under cover as a Vinnell Corporation engineering company executive in charge of petroleum related construction, maintenance, and training projects in the Middle East and Africa.
Britney Spears, singer. i i | Britney’s father Jamie filed court documents on Tuesday, June 29, asking Judge Brenda Penny to open | an investigation into the “serious allegations” raised by his daughter in court.
Spears said she felt like she had her personal liberty taken away i and wanted her IUD removed so that she could have more children, but was not permitted to do so.
Wednesday, claiming that she has been receiving threats of violence and death since Britney’s explosive ' court statement in June.
In the docs, Jodi asked for 24/7 security to be paid for by the estate, and claimed Per the most recent docs, though, while Jamie “is very concerned” about the “dangerous rhetoric” and “increasing number of threatening communications and social media posts” directed at people involved in Britney’s case, he “objects to Ms.
Montgomery’s request for 24/7 live security services for herself at a cost of over $50,000 per month to the Conservatorship Estate for an indefinite period of time.” justify such an expense,” additionally claiming that she “improperly and inexplicably seeks to shift the burden of ensuring her safety” to Jamie.
Also my bith Edward Paul Donegan to James and Glorian Donegan and | think Barrack Obama Jr. too, the exprimental money Donald Barr is holding in a white house photo three days later.
Poevenert 2000 Fiizgered Kaneecy President John # Fitzgerald Kennedy notre Happy Birthday Mr President The performance at JFK’s 45 birthday was one of Marilyn Monroe’s last major public appearances before her death less than three months later on AUGUST 4, 1962.
Whitehouse 1 1 1 Another thing JFK may have disliked about the CIA FBI is their killing of Marylin Monroe because she knew about this little scene above in Santa Monica JFK also knew about.
Kennedy chose to confide immediately after the Chappaquiddick automobile accident which killed Mary Jo Kopechne.
The pastor there had i roomed with Ron at Highland Academy as a teenager, and had arranged for Ron to speak Friday night, | then for church, and in the afternoon for a question and answer period (you can hear this session under ; our Watch Videos page). | i t | Your web host, Kevin Fisher, with Ron Wyatt in 1997, Nashville, Tennessee.
Miracles after miracles were found in Ron’s life, all evidence of the Lord working with him. | it was only the High Priest that went into the Most Holy Place once each year to sprinkle blood on the | Ark of the Covenant.
So in our day it was only Ron Wyatt who entered the Most Holy Place, that cave, to ' take a sample of the blood of the Messiah and have it analyzed for the world to see the lab report when ' the Ten Commandments come out of the cave, along with the video of him removing the ' Commandments from the ark.
The people believed the man that was proven to be a man of the Lord. i i i i i i i i i i] i | i i i | i i] i | i | i | i I i I i i Ron was on the level of a High Priest in my opinion.
He was not a prophet, but a Holy man who ; i i i i i] i i i i i | i i] i | i i i i i] I i i i i My name is and I am from Germany.
This book Louis J Freeh, FBI Director September 1, 1993 June 25, 2001 is a Revealer Black Budgetes, CIA Slush Funds from illegal operations in defiance of United States and other laws fund the Shadow Government with up to 3 Trillion dollars.
This #operation40O escapes participant liabilities by cover terror and espionage for selfish motives, threatens global peace.
Thomas Crane Wales and Loius J Freeh will both after lay advice to populations including the poor not to fall to temptations they will be subjected to.
As youngsters in Park Ridge, Ill., he and Tony Rodham were jocks, while Hillary Rodham was a bookworm.
There was heavy security on the island, where the secret criminal order took root centuries ago and has claimed many lives.
In early 1980, Falcone joined the ‘Office of Instruction’ (Ufficio istruzione), the investigative branch of the Prosecution Office of Palermo.
Costa signed the indictments after virtually all of the other prosecutors in his office had declined to do so a fact that leaked out of the office and eventually cost him his life.
Following the investigation, Director Freeh served as the federal government’s principal courtroom attormey in the 14-month trial and won the conviction of 16 of 17 co-defendants.
After extensive investigation, a suspect was apprehended, prosecuted, and convicted. ee ee eee ee ee ee eee ee eee eee ee eee ee BPX esweek| WASHINGTON’ QUIET CLUB April 1, 2018 retrieved modified to here by Evan Thomas i | i | r.
In the case of Robert Hanssen, , the FBI agent accused of spying for the Russians, Opus Dei apparently ' failed spectacularly.
Bringing Down the Mafia, Investigating Bill Clinton, and Fighting the War on Terror Hardcover October 11, 2005 Louis Freeh led the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 1993 to 2001, through some of the most tumultuous times in its long history.
This is the definitive account of American law enforcement in the run-up to September 11.
Freeh is clear-eyed, frank, the ultimate realist, and he offers resolute vision for the struggles ahead.
While serving in this _ {for the Fifth Circuit position he was nominated to be the Director of the [being vacated by FBI by Bubba on July 20, 1993.
He was confirmed Judge Walter Pettus by the Senate on August 6, 1993 and was swom in |Gewin.
Vance was as Director on September 1, 1993. confirmed by the nited States ' Senate on » December 15, 1977, and received his commission the same day.
The ; jurisdiction of the Fifth Circuit at that time included six Southern states, ; including Alabama.
Chelsea Victoria Clinton is an American writer and global health advocate.
Friary Clinton cattle futures controversy retrieved from Wikipedia and | 1. copied or modified to here » An Arknasas lawyer rises, and she also has a Chicago Mob Chicao : Boys connected brother Tony Rodham.
I | I In 1978 and 1979, lawyer and First Lady of Arkansas Hillary Rodham , Clinton engaged in a series of trades of cattle futures contracts.
Her ; initial $1,000 investment had generated nearly $100,000 (equivalent to "" $356,579.55 in 2020), when she stopped trading after ten months.
Wellesley College retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to 1%, here re Wellesley College years Hillary Rodham campaigning for Wellesley College Government President in 1968, an election which she later won In 1965, Rodham enrolled at Wellesley College, where she majored in political science.
The report listed four action items completed by the Pentagon since April and an additional three recommendations moving forward.
It includes a broadened definition of extremist activities, which now accounts for social media and other online behavior, as well as better training for service members leaving the military who may be recruited by supremacist organizations.
The forms will notify recruits that any involvement in criminal gangs or extremist organizations is forbidden.
Recruiters and the Military Criminal Investigative Organizations also now have access to an FBI portal with “information on local gangs, white-supremacy and nationalist groups, gang signs, and extremist symbols and tattoos,” the report states.
If a recruit either attests to being a member of an extremist organization or has a tattoo that’s been flagged by the FBI, senior leadership will have to issue what’s known as a “Morals Eligibility Determination” that allows them to move forward in the application process, the defense department said. msm.com Espionage destroying the lives of witness to the Kennedy Assassination Illegal Espionage activities by powerful elites can study, steal, co-opt, ambush and plan for what would be called ""Executive Privilege"" ""Secrecy and Dispatch"" operations of political rivals.
Able to anticipate, study the party conducting the surviellanc nuetralize, compete with, share space with, or prepare for a threat from the survilled party.
In conjunction with discrediting the assets of the surveilled organizations achievements a smear campaign agaisnt the survilled party completes the leapfrog or gains over the surveilled party.
As verbs the difference between surveil and survey is that surveil is to keep someone or something under surveillance while survey is to inspect, or take a view of; to view with attention, as from a high place; to overlook; as, to stand on a hill, and survey the surrounding country.
As anoun survey is the act of surveying; a general view, as from above. wikiDiff Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Espionage, spying or intelligence gathering is the act of obtaining secret or confidential information from non-disclosed sources or divulging of the same without the permission of the holder of the information for a tangible benefit.
Any individual or spy ring , in the service of a government, company, criminal organization, or independent operation, can commit espionage.
In some circumstances, it may be a legal tool of law enforcement and in others, it may be illegal and punishable by law.
Espionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or commercial concern.
However, the term tends to be associated with state spying on potential or actual enemies for military purposes.
One of the most effective ways to gather data and information about a targeted organization is by infiltrating its ranks.
Spies can then return information such as the size and strength of enemy forces.
They can also find dissidents within the organization and influence them to provide further information or to defect.
In times of crisis, spies steal technology and sabotage the enemy in various ways.
Counterintelligence is the practice of thwarting enemy espionage and intelligence-gathering.
Almost all nations have strict laws concerning espionage and the penalty for being caught is often severe.
However, the benefits gained through espionage are often so great that most governments and many large corporations make use of it.
In the 20th century, at the height of World War I, all great powers except the United States had elaborate civilian espionage systems and all national military establishments had intelligence units.
In order to protect the country against foreign agents, the United States Congress passed the Espionage Act of 1917.
Mata Hari, who obtained information for Germany by seducing French officials, was the most noted espionage agent of World War I Prior to World War II, Germany and Imperial Japan established elaborate espionage nets.
Numerous resistance groups such as the Austrian Maier-Messner Group, the French Resistance, the Witte Brigade, Milorg and the Polish Home Army worked against Nazi Germany and provided the Allied secret services with information that was very important for the war effort.
To discredit someone or something means to cause them to lose people's respect or trust. ... a secret unit within the company that had been set up to discredit its major rival.
Mostly it is British leaning and Kennedys, Donegans, others, its victims.
Keeping publicity, reach of voice, and sympathy from me has allowed the progresive destruction and co-option of the entire Donegan family ethnic achievement by hostile Blue Blood the Boston Brahmins or Boston elite are members of Boston's traditional upper class.
They have been, the FBI and others, long term mafia conjoined and the Donegans and Kennedy's have in common mafia can easilty get rid of us, in my case, it seems and FBI assisted mafia creating a cartel of genome racketeering based on manufacture of fake pretexts for an trust fund depletion, the trust fund usable to cover seeming liabilities of Edward Paul Donegan.
My entire family has been GangStalked and I have not been able to stop it.
My elderly father attacked with abusive phone calls and planted hostile neighbors and he had a brain injury later from a hit to the head.
I am resisting getting into a fight because I know the battle against police sent snitches is a losing fight.
As for what the GangStalk is I cite the movie The Day The Fish Came Out a late 1960 movie in which espionage teams in fake clothes from the United States Military go to an island of Greece called Koros to pretend to think about a hotel resorts development but secretly and unsuccessfully stop a nuclear disaster, a dropped nuclear device called Q can not be locate after it fell form an Air Force plane and a nuclear disaster results.
Further Reading The Mafia acting under cover is allowed to blame me for being a harm to my neighborhood and a tenant who is a problem for management companies and thus I is hard for me to get housing in normal life areas.
This is not that different than when the FBI sent the gambling mafia after Castro, allowing mafia profits in mafia business that could also take out Castro and profit from doing so.
Underground railroads from Nazi Germany especially of Minimal Brain Dysfunction under watch by Vienna scientist, the CIA, and British Government led to secret family genealogy being concealed now by elites because many of them are from affected family lines such as the Donegans, Schwartzenegers, Cruz, Kelly, Bush, Mueller, Wray, and other families multi-generationally.
Bush led the USA into Targeted Killings by the FBI, CIA, NSA, United States Marshalls, United States PHS Psychological Warfare unit, LEIUs aks Law Enforcement Intelligence Units Blackwater, and other Domestic Contract CIA assets to “protect” the USA, or rather, himself.
Richard Cheney along with Boeing general Counsel led the program at least up until recently and it was Bush, Boeing, Cheney and others at 21st Century Expo Seattle WA USA with the Kennedy’s Windsors and Obamas.
My book representing 8 years of round the clock research has no interest.
I am sad to say there is nothing abnormal, and all JFK assassination researches know this is a day in the life, and likely a short life.
Before that was DuPont and 1926 Glorian and Harold Gainey i North Carolina then South Carolina, used for Obama.
Robert Mueller II was on the board of DuPont and my uncle Harold Gainey worked for DuPont.
Further Reading Activity in-bound towards a Targeted Atheist like myself or other people who are Targeted utilize people including actors reading lines of a play to make Targeteds a chess pawn in a play acted out that will be re-played to others.
We the Targeted are foils for a play acted out in our vicinity, inbound to us either makes statements to us OR makes our own acts altered by an altered context such as placing a tot between me an an tourist attraction I am photographing.
Humiliating me in public especially as a retarded Atheist in an attack on my family of James and Glorian in cultural violence.
Deutsch, Kerrigan & Stiles from 1954 to 1958, when YouTube Cheney Mike FBI"" The Case That Should Have Changed History Joan Mellen he became an assistant district attorney.
Garrison became a flamboyant, colorful, well-known figure in New Orleans, but was initially unsuccessful in his run for public office, losing a 1959 election for criminal court judge.
In 1961 he ran for district attorney, winning against incumbent Richard Dowling by 6,000 votes in a five-man Democratic primary.
Despite lack of major political backing, his performance in a televised debate and last minute television commercials are credited with his victory.
According to Clay Shaw’s defense team, witnesses, including Perry Russo, claimed to have been bribed and threatened with perjury and contempt of court charges by Garrison in order to make his case against Shaw.
Well, Walter Sheridan tells me and threatens me that he’s gonna take Garrison out and take me with him.
A Nation that is afraid to let the people judge the truth anda falsehood in an open market is a nation [national government] afraid of its own people.
NBC received 30,000 calls in On John Barbour | three hours.% said the CIA did it.
So the pooint is wether the question of him along or being with anybody he has nothing to do with the assassination.
An | Richard Jay Belzer is an American retired actor, On In-Depth well known stand-up comedian, conspiracy theorist YouTube Investigation | and author.
After all, events don’t “consult the odds” prior to happening; they simply happen.
Then someone comes along later and figures out what the odds of it happening were.
Some of the deaths seemed purely coincidental; heart attacks, hunting accidents.
Others clearly seemed noteworthy; witnesses who did seem to know something and did seem to die mysteriously.
Hit List is a fair examination of the evidence of each case, leading to different conclusions.
The impeccable research and writing of Richard Belzer and David Wayne show that if the government is trying to hide anything, they’re the duo who will uncover it.
Pablo Escobar, and later in the Reading ae covert arming of the Nicaraguan is Contras, Marshall has studied and Clan written 30-years worth of covert peer government special activities and nine the revolving door of Wall Street ee tricksters, media moguls, and their well funded politicians. a Calaveras County Coroner Kevin Raggio said he determined Philip Clan Marshall and his two children were all killed by a gunshot wound to other the head, after performing an autopsy Tuesday morning.
Whol Myself and this book, my famiily in danger ad death threats for Publication of this book | famil attempting to write THIS, all my famil already dead.
Clear “stimulus This about CIA FBI Sleepers | other response” corelation withe me getting warmer as to why I have been bask and infiltration Deep lifelo assaulted to them trying to silence me and key parts of my story.
In — State hindered by FBI |COI> particular Kings Speech and Sound of Music stories.
CIA Stalk resea Mocked, existing, or former or now Conspiracy Theorists WHen I say exhibits I mean items manifested inside the HTML based book I wrote.
Former FBI agent and Orleans Parish LA USA prosecutor expertly built the case a deep state CIA led killed JFK and blamed then killed Lee Harvey Oswald. this is the case as Joan Mellen changed history.
In California while Stalked by Espionage in the USA I was writing a book on Espionage violence against me and others.
On Google Drive have folder called “Highlights” of planned teasers from my book.
Most audio notes taped “Jack Flash” storage of mp3 narratives, records contemporaneous.
I have open death threats if I write the book naming Deep State, #JenMoore also told she would die if she continued to talk yet she did.
Add in more of the Donegan genome truth and Manhattan Project history of atomic testing, the cold war, and how British conspiracy was largely rejected by Roman Catholics which explains #WETDIVISION concentration of kils against Roman Catholics.
Roman Catholics are spiritually unyielding in ideas of reproductive rights of unborn and resentful of Great Britain in Ireland or India (Profiles in Courage, JFK, East India Tea Company, and 1963 travel, Ghandi Center) and Royal Rule or Blue Bloods in society.
I consider myself and the attempts on my life and Jen Moore’s life comparable to the Marshall family and the attempts to stop my own book.
The Saudis are well documented participants in Kingdoms based system of expanding royal families including in Mafia controlled Middle East North Africa and this book and others consider Barrack Obaam Jr. to be among groomed sleepers, him using Malcom X as father and Glorian Donegan and her genome past as the MKULTRA egg source.
Richard Belzer and David Wayne are back to set the record straight after Dead Wrong; this time they’re going to uncover the truth about the many witness deaths tied to the JFK assassination.
Working with thousands of previously unreleased documents and drawing on more than one thousand interviews, with many witnesses speaking out for the first time, Joan Mellen revisits the investigation of New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison, the only public official to have indicted, in 1969, a suspect in President John F Kennedy’s murder.
Garrison began by exposing the contradictions in the Warren Report, which concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald was an unstable pro-Castro Marxist who acted alone in killing Kennedy.
A Farewell to Justice reveals that Oswald, no Marxist, was in fact working with both the FBI and the CIA, as well as with United States Customs, and that the attempts to sabotage Garrison’s investigation reached the highest levels of the United States government.
Garrison’s suspects included CIA-sponsored soldiers of fortune enlisted in assassination attempts against Fidel Castro, an anti-Castro Cuban asset, and a young runner for the conspirators, interviewed here for the first time by the author.
Building upon Garrison’s effort, Mellen uncovers decisive new evidence and clearly establishes the intelligence agencies’ roles in both a president’s assassination and its cover-up.
In this revised edition, to be published in time for the fiftieth anniversary of the president’s assassination, the author reveals new sources and recently uncovered documents confirming in greater detail just how involved the CIA was in the events of November 22, 1963.
I was thinking back on the fact that I had probably given 50 or 60 speeches on the other book and whenever I gave a speech on “Running the World,” somebody would stand up in the audience and say, that’s the trouble with you Americans; you think you’re running the world.
Oliver Stone telling the story of Mr Garrisons attempt to convict the Shadow Government he discovered as acting in the assasination of JFK KENNEDYSANDKING.COM, JIM DIEUGENIO : His research and books led to the near restart of coroner inquest into the death of Marilyn Monroe.
Like Ted Gunderson sees the deeper underbelly of shadow gov at work in Martin Luther King, JFK, Marilyn Monroe, and other deaths.
Deep state CIA 9-11 George H W Bush JFK/Assassination RFK/Assassination MLK/Assassination, A detailed overview of the modern United States deep state which names names, the most prominent of which, George H W Bush, is exposed as the kingpin of the United States Deep state and probable a key mover behind the 9/11 plot.
My father (a pilot) James Paul Donegan held deep love for Jews including Zionist Justice Brandies, while also worrying about the boundaries violated by Israeli tactics such as Attack on the Liberty United States spy ship watching Isreal.
Poisoned by the NWO and the FBI he worked for STOPPING organized crime along with Robert F Kennedy (the two were in an organized crime meeting when they heard the news JFK had been shot) he died living into his 80s in a long term fight against the NWO Shadow Government and his allegations of being poisoned biologically and the NWO using Dr.
Cameron style psychological warfare violence as social control is correct.
The NWO exist and did kill Marilyn Monroe, the family of Jeffery MCdonald, and others and in private practice after leaving the FBI he continued his law practice, private investigations, and political speech against the NWO until his death.
Along with Along with Mockingbird Program revealor Jim DiEugenio of KennedysandKing.com I add other victims to the list Ted Gunderson had, I add myself and family to the Beharioal Resarch/Warfare victims, and also explain the assassination of Malcom X which has so far not been explained.
Our Goal To stop the global use of Directed Energy Weapons against civilians, including illegal surveillance, and organized stalking.
Ted Gunderson and others like myself have been attacked by war crimes type Espionage including raw source radiation and D-E-W radiation medical devices misused to be carcinogens in CIA and FBI conducted murder operations.
Being the system of Criminal Justice the infiltrator OF criminal justice are able to use insider access to the Criminal Justice system to obstruct it from within, defeating Due Process, etc., and creating COINTELPRO false arrests and detentions, using Prison Snitches to conduct attacks really run by the prisons themselves, etc., As usual the United States Media asserts Russia is behind the attacks though I watch uniformed United States officials conducting them, a “conspiracy theory” I hold.
I like most Targeted Individuals also believe the NWO is covering up the JFK murder and oil business NWO operations by destroying the lives of those who were victimized by the NWO, Kennedy family and Donegan family included as victims.
Psychological Warfare, assasination, Abuse of Psychiatry, and attack including attempts to destroy or alter cognition by destructive caustics has been useful in Behavioral Psychology, both gaining reflexive emotional control over large populations of people with emotional appeals and also provided stimulus response to victims which not only alter cognition but can be so caustic as to appear to destroy cognition.
Anton “Tony” Chaitkin is an author, historian, and a former political activist with the LaRouche movement.
Chaitkin’s father was Jacob Chaitkin, who was the legal counsel and strategist for the boycott against Nazi Germany carried on by the American Jewish Congress in the 1930s.
My argument remains my responses are valid response to stimuli and only seem abnormal IF the threat which I identify is in fact a delusion held by my unbalanced mind.
Use of harassment with Doples and Gang Stalks I could not prove to Psychiatry as led to my spending most of my lifespan institutionalized as delusional, racist, etc., These authors have written widely ignored histories of British Psychiatry and OSS CIA operations conducted by the Bush family, Rockefeller Neurology, and other Free Mason actors.
This is the Espionage Deep State in Psychiatry war machine Ted Gunderson and I have been a victim of and a war machine that eradicates its victims, witness to Free Mason misconduct.
Bush groomed Sleeper Agents in the United States Press corps is apparatchik of it.
The clever young man who recently made it to the White House is a very fine hypnotist partly because it is indeed extraordinary to see an african-american at the pinnacle of power in the land of slavery however this is the 21st century and race together with gender and even class can be very seductive tools of propaganda for what are so often overlooked and what matters I believe above all is the class one serves.
George Bush’s inner circle from the State Department to the Supreme Court was perhaps the most multiracial in presidential history it was PC par excellence think Condoleezza Rice Colin Powell.
It was also the most reactionary Obama’s very presence in the white house appears to reaffirm the moral nation he’s a marketing dream but like Calvin Klein or Benetton is a brand that promises something special something exciting almost risque as if he might be radical as if he might enact change he makes people feel good he’s a postmodern man with no political baggage and all that’s fake.
In his book Dreams from My Father Obama refers to the job he took after he graduated from Columbia in 1983 he describes his employer as an “a consulting house from multinational corporations” unquote.
For some reason he doesn’t say who his employer was or what he did there the employer was Business International Corporation which has a long history of providing cover for the CIA with covert action and infiltrating unions on the Left.
I know this because it was especially active in my own country Australia Obama doesn’t say what he did at busines.
The former NSA employee who analyzed detailed top secret files on Barrack Obama Jr believes the United States and English ongoing East India Tea Company involvement around the world, including as peace and international front organizations like the East-West Center in Hawaii and Peace Corps, activities of Lyndon B Johnson were designed to plant sleepers like Barrack Obama Jr. in places like Indonesia where juntas or backed candidates would bave shadow connections to what I call the Black Registry of interconnected Mason royal or free mason families.
Read the following, just a partial list of the large number that has recently met a demise in suspicious circumstances, with ties to the Clintons.
The mere suggestion destroys credibility, even when documented evidence offers proof.
No one can tell us what we can and cannot publish, because no one controls us.
Nothing works against the success of a conspiracy as much as the wish to make it wholly secure and certain to succeed.
Such an attempt requires many men, much time, and very favorable conditions.
The primary purpose for this web site is to provide unbiased voter information in helping to assure elections are won by patriotic and honorable candidates that are not traitors to the Declaration of Independence and United States Constitution.
In other words, I hope my fellow Americans will support patriotic candidates so that the core principles of our founding fathers become, once again, the foundation upon which America stands.
Eric Pearson, registered owner and chief administrator of www.patriotortraitor.com.
He launched his first newspaper at Sydney High School and later completed a four year cadetship with Australian Consolidated Press.
It certainly taught me to admire writing that was spare, precise and free of cliches, that didn’t retreat into the passive voice and used adjectives only when absolutely necessary.
Like many of his Australian generation, Pilger and two colleagues left for Europe in the early 1960s.
They set up an ill-fated freelance ‘agency’ in Italy and quickly went broke.
Arriving in London, Pilger freelanced, then joined Reuters, moving to the London Daily Mirror, Britain’s biggest selling newspaper, which was then changing to a serious tabloid.
He became chief foreign correspondent and reported from all over the world, covering numerous wars, notably Vietnam.
Still in his twenties, he became the youngest journalist to receive Britain’s highest award for journalism, Journalist of the Year and was the first to win it twice.
Moving to the United States, he reported the upheavals there in the late 1960s and 1970s.
He marched with America’s poor from Alabama to Washington, following the assassination of Martin Luther King.
He was in the same room when Robert Kennedy, the presidential candidate, was assassinated in June 1968.
His work in South East Asia produced an iconic issue of the London Mirror, devoted almost entirely to his world exclusive dispatches from Cambodia in the aftermath of Pol Pot’s reign.
Similarly, his 1994 documentary and dispatches report from East Timor, where he travelled under cover, helped galvanise support for the East Timorese, then occupied by Indonesia.
In Britain, his four-year investigation on behalf of a group of children damaged at birth by the drug Thalidomide, and left out of the settlement with the drugs company, resulted in a special settlement.
His numerous documentaries on Australia, notably The Secret Country , the bicentary trilogy The Last Dream , Welcome to Australia and Utopia all celebrated and revealed much of his own country’s ‘forgotten past’, especially its indigenous past and present.
John Pilger’s Eyewitness Photographers, a tribute to the great black-and-white photographers he has worked alongside.
In 2009, he was awarded Australia’s human rights prize, the Sydney Peace Prize.
He has received honorary doctorates from universities in the UK and abroad.
In 2017, the British Library announced a John Pilger Archive of all his written and filmed work.
The British Library is the national library of the United Kingdom and is one of the largest libraries in the world.
James DiEugenio first became interested in history while at film school.
His first book, Destiny Betrayed took a close look at the Jim Garrison investigation of the assassination of John F Kennedy.
In 1993, he became a co-founder of Citizens for Truth about the Kennedy Assassination.
DiEugenio is also the coeditor of The Assassinations , a book that covers the deaths of John F Kennedy, Martin Luther King, Robert Kennedy, and Malcolm X COPA’s site is now archived for historical and research purposes.
The Coalition on Political Assassinations ended with the passing of John Judge in April 2014.
Wayne Madson (Lulu 2012) ISBN 9781300011385, JADED TASKS—BRASS PLATES, BLACK OPS & BIG OIL: THE BLOOD POLITICS OF BUSH & CO.: Wayne Madson ISBN 0-9752906-9-X AMERICA’S NIGHTMARE: THE PRESIDENCY OF GEORGE BUSH II.: Wayne Madson Tempe, AZ: Dandelion Enterprises.03.
He was fired but continued contracting work elsewhere Background and early life Madsen was born in Ridley Park, Pennsylvania on April 28, 1954 to an American mother and a Danish mariner.
His grandmother, who emigrated to the United States with his father after World War II was Victoria Madsen, a Danish communist party official.
In early 1982 he was stationed at the Coos Head Naval Facility which had an allowance of twelve officers, ninety-five enlisted and 15 civilians.
In 1984, Madsen reports that he was loaned to the National Security Agency by the Navy.
He resigned from the Navy in 1985 as a lieutenant, having been passed over for promotion.
Later he worked for the Navy’s Naval Data Automation Command as a civilian employee.
After this Madsen briefly established his own consulting firm, then worked for the National Bureau of Standards, and later for the State Department.
Blogging and journalism career He has been described as an “odd individual” devoted to writing in an area that “teeters on a slippery slope, at the foot of which is the whole repository of Internet-perpetuated conspiracy theories” which leads to much of his writing being treated with skepticism.
His articles have appeared in publications such as CorpWatch, CounterPunch, CovertAction Quarterly, In These Times, Multinational Monitor, The American Conservative, The Progressive and The Village Voice.
His columns have appeared in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Columbus Dispatch, Houston Chronicle, Philadelphia Inquirer, Miami Herald and the Sacramento Bee.
According to Michael Moynihan of the Daily Beast, shortly after going to press, “the Observer realized that the story’s author, Jamie Doward, failed to conduct even the most perfunctory Google search on Madsen.
According to Forbes magazine, The Observer likely took the story down as it was concerned with the reliability of the source rather than the content as no matter how “left field” the source was, the story seems to be largely true and has been a matter of public record for some years.
On July 5, 2013 the Guardian responded to the controversy saying that ” The documentary evidence for the story, which was based on a number of sources, was sound, but it was wrong to connect Wayne Madsen with this story in any way.
Reporting and opinions In 2002 he suggested to The Guardian newspaper that the United States Navy had aided in an attempted overthrow of Venezuelan president, Hugo Chavez.
In 2003 he said that he had uncovered information in a classified congressional report that he claimed contained information linking the September 11 attacks to the government of Saudi Arabia and the Bush administration through financial transactions with the hijackers.
The Saudi Foreign Minister demanded the report be declassified so it could respond, however, the Bush administration refused, claiming that to do so would compromise intelligence sources and methods.
Madsen has asserted in The Palestine Telegraph that hundreds of Iraqi scientists who had been assassinated or died in accidents after the invasion in 2003 were actually murdered by Mossad hit teams operating in Iraq.
In 2005, he wrote that an unidentified former CIA agent claimed that the USS Cole was actually hit by a Popeye cruise missile launched from an Israeli Dolphin-class submarine.
In 2005 he said that the pro-Israel lobby, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, had pressured American politicians to stay away from protests against the Iraq War.
He has asserted that members of AIPAC and Israel’s Mossad dominate CNN’s management and urges his readers to boycott CNN and its advertisers until they are fired.
On June 9, 2008 he reported that unnamed “GOP dirty tricks operatives” had found a Kenyan birth certificate registering the birth of Barack Obama, Jr. on August 4, 1961.
On April 25, 2009, Madsen reported that some unidentified UN World Health Organization officials and scientists believed the 2009 new H1N1 strain of swine flu virus appeared to be the product of United States military sponsored gene splicing, as opposed to natural processes.
While it can not be ruled out that the virus was created in a research laboratory or vaccine factory, the most plausible explanation is that the virus is the result of modern farming techniques.
This subtype of the H1N2 was also a reassortment of swine, human and avian strains.
In 2010, Madsen reported in the Pakistan Daily that unnamed sources suggested that the company formerly known as Blackwater, had been conducting false-flag operations in Pakistan that were blamed on the Tehrik-iTaliban Pakistan.
The book states it is an expose of Barack Obama’s rise in American politics and the CIA’s role in his attaining the Presidency.
Dunham met and married Lolo Soetoro, Obama’s stepfather, i at the East-West Center in 1965.
Soetoro was recalled to Indonesia in 1965 to serve as a senior army officer and i assist General Suharto and the CIA in the bloody overthrow of President Sukarno.
CIA files indicate that Mboya was an important Laan @)esueitses for the CIA, not only in Kenya but in all of Africa.
I I i i i i i i i i i i | [Perhaps Barrack Obama Sr once a Muslim but then convert to Anglicanism in the British Kenyam run school ; could produce a future Kenyan leader loyal to London and covertly rule on behalf of Great Britain] i i i i i i I I I I I ' Mboya received a $100,000 grant for the airlift from the Kennedy Foundation after he turned down the same offer from the United States State Department, obviously concerned that direct United States assistance would look suspicious to pro-Communist Kenyan politicians who suspected Mboya of having CIA ties.
Mafia payoffs to willing conspirators and murder of unwilling conspirators incapacitate Law enforcement and the #MSM capacity against crime and there is no recourse except flight from the USA if that is at all possible.
As a general rule a criminal will be caught unless the criminal takes the job of cop in which case the criminal is both more dangerous and unstopable with defaming yourself as a criminal yourself.
Many of the tactics used in COINTELPRO are alleged to have seen continued use including; discrediting targets through psychological warfare; smearing individuals and groups using forged documents and by planting false reports in the media; harassment; wrongful imprisonment and this has gone along all across my lifespan.
I have a deep and intense trauma based fear of the USA and intense hatred of the public of the USA as I have watched so many poeple die, planes go down, and criminals in plane clothes and State badges kill before my eyes or range of hearing, and at leat fifty people I have known in 35 years or so tied to Gangstalk dying including a Head Royce curse it seems in the mid-1980s.
She knew the secrets of the Donegan family as I do, she was a whistleblower who was silenced by murder but was never forget and never ignore.
I will start now with a list of Whistleblowers and then go into the CIA killing machine that has victimized my family, Organized Stalks, Espionage tactics denied but CIA systems or organizing plausibly deniable CIA murders.
MKULTRA Organized Stalk activities of COINTELPRO OSS methods of Dr Cameron.
Street gangs, arson, assassination of families of journalists, death threats.
Organized Stalks use racial and sexual violence campaigns carried out by First Responders.
In the eyes of the CIA Reinhard Gehlen was an “asset” of staggering potential.
He was a professional violent spymaster, violently anti-Communist and, best of all, the controller of a vast underground network still in place inside Russian frontiers.
The Gehlen principle is misdeeds while in costume, basically the CIA or CIA assets at police, fire, medical, etc., doing what is called “dirty deeds with clean hands.
In the movie Dream Catcher aliens are discovered but the United States Military covers up the presence.
Colonel Abraham Curtis an unhinged military official at one points kills a patient with a lethal serum in a hospital and is responsible for kills of other witnesses as well.
Jen Moore, Tom Dunham and myself Edward Paul Donegan know all about this though not one of us ever spoke to each other I am pretty sure.
What Tom Dunham called “Badge bunnys” were planting suggestive evidence outside his doorstep, a key under a rock that did NOT go to his apartment that an escort might access, arranged actual break ins to his apartment, etc., as police acts.
Joan Mellon speaks of Deep State COINTELPRO which btw is run out of Fusion Centers as espionage operations by the FBI and Richard Belzer talks of a long list of deaths, often violent, of witnesses to the JFK murder.
I believe either Gehlen asset type CIA informants either comit the murders OR fail to solve the murders, or sometimes as Ghehlen asset types do both.
Gehlen pioneered the setting up of dummy fronts and cover companies to support his farflung covert operations.
A major project was to form Eastern European emigre groups in the United States that could be used against the Soviets.
When Lee and Marina Oswald arrived from the Soviet Union in June, 1962 they were befriended by some three dozen White Russians in the Dallas-Ft.
Many had identifiable nazi links; others were in the oil and defense industries.
It was an improbable social set for a defector to the U.S.S.R. and his wife from Minsk.
Organized Stalk victims will tell you the landlord, local press corps, the utilities companies, pharmacies, transportation, all are willing to and do co-operate with CIA and FBI operations as Front Companies in clandestine acts thorugh those organizatoins.
Because this is mostly White European Christian Red State conspirator based mostly Protestant or Disciples of Christ I want to note mostly it has been Jew who have either defected from the scheme or been important in researching it, blowing the whistle on it, and characterizing its evil.
Many of the tactics used in COINTELPRO are alleged to have seen continued use including; discrediting targets through psychological warfare; smearing individuals and groups using forged documents and by planting false reports in the media; harassment; wrongful imprisonment, all have been used against me to conspire against right to trial, present evidence, I have evidence planted on my by Espionage Gang STalk, I have had raw radiological source poisoning of me and twice I held the radioactive source in my hand, and I think my brother died of being Xrayed with a wrong setting on the machine.
The use of Glorian Donegan DNA, daughter of Maria August Kutschera and Prince Edward of Wales was used to groom Sleepers who have infiltrated Governor, POTUS, Judiciary, DHS, FBI, and other spots as planned.
Bush, and others were tied to in MKULTRA DNA kiting for using in sleeper agents to infiltrate USA and other governments while conducting life outcome research on these various brain genes.
Murdered Journalist Jen Moore was trying to out the evil of the FBI and it being infiltrated by large scale billions if not trillions of dollars of international corruption Oil Contracts Boeing Planes DuPont Cash Rockefeller Masons ¥ stayed one extra night in NYC this including money ; kid was very sick and | did not feel Christopher ""Asher"" Wray United States Victims of FBI laundering through fight about sending him home.
He December 17,Free Masonry is a Ponzi . slept well after releasing so much of 1966 Scheme of top level Deashe Bank and trying to this, | think ICE HSPI unit is the place hairs deciinbelionie kee Epstein out of jail to go.
The top FBI are blackmailed or assets after Use because his racket and him _involvedTrump has sent ICE HSPI The Traditions of J Edgar Hoover were the large scale FBI why tephra Senne planting child porn in law abiding operation. to disband them. | met one ahe said sii sds in albal aaa oi Mason GangStalk espionage of those already victims of Free Masons.
By being poverty) and others trafficked his son as well as other the Deep State FBI killer run the viewed WASP oppression children.
Stockhlder in Crime renewed his SC and his contract ,,.,, Organized criminal unit called the FBI which resulted from British policies.
Robert Mueller II in particular was part of DuPont and the plan which used Glorian Gainey and Harold Gainey of then Sourth Carolina as DNA source for Barrack Obama jr. and others.
So a guy is groomed from the outset, many grow up in politicians families, etc., but act of terror to cover it up is where people like Donald Barr and William Barr, and the major GOP families or free masons find themselves.
Jaime Zapata retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Jaime Jorge Zapata was an ; Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland Security ; Investigations Special Agent who was ambushed and murdered by ; the Mexican criminal group Los Zetas in San Luis Potosi, Mexico.
Camarena, an undercover DEA agent who was tortured and murdered by the former Guadalajara Cartel.
Sipsey Street Irregulars Two of the weapons found at the murder scene were later traced back to Texas — One was purchased in August 2010 near Houston on behalf of accused drug dealer Manuel Gomez Barba, and the other in October 2010 by a Dallas trafficking ring that included Otilio Osorio and his brother Ranferi.
Much like Fast and Furious, both groups had been under ATF surveillance for many months, although ATF officials in Texas later denied that any gunwalking happened in their state.
United State Senator John Cornyn has pressed Eric Holder and DOJ for details on any gunwalking in Texas.
The Department of Homeland Security, ICE and the Department of Justice have long denied that the case of Jaime Zapata had anything to do with Fast and Furious.
The discovery of this ROI by Zapata, “puts the lie to that by Napolitano and Holder,” according on source who spoke with this reporter on conditions of absolute anonymity.
Multiple sources including current and former employees of the Department of Justice and the Department of Homeland Security have confirmed this explosive new revelation in the Fast & Furious investigation.
One source indicated his frustration that neither DHS nor the FBI have come under scrutiny for what they know about gunwalking operations and the murders of Agent Zapata and Border Patrol BORTAC Team member Brian Terry. 1902 and Joseph Kennedy Sr 4 The McNamara brothers were Irish American trade unionists.
By 1910, United States Steel had almost succeeded in driving all unions out of its plants.
He was known as “America’s Sherlock Holmes” and eamed fame for having conducted private investigations into a number of notable incidents, such as clearing Leo Frank of the 1913 murder of Mary Phagan, and for investigating the deadly 1910 Los Angeles Times bombing conducted by members of the International Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental and Reinforcing Iron Workers.
Various criminals, such as Frank Costello, have boasted they worked with Kennedy in mysterious bootlegging operations during Prohibition.
The most recent and most thorough biographer [David Nasaw asserts that no credible evidence has been found to link Kennedy to bootlegging activities.
When [Fortune magazine published its first list of the richest by Vincent Gigante.
However, the altercation people in the United States in 1957, it placed Kennedy in persuaded Costello to relinquish power to Genovese the $200400 million group. and retire.
In 1957, Costello survived an assassination attempt ordered by Vito Genovese and carried out After months of investigation, Burns’s son Raymond and police officers from the Detroit and Chicago police departments arrested Jim McNamara and associate Ortie McManigal on April 14, 1911, in Detroit.
BOI career Burns was considered well qualified to direct the Bureau of Investigation, and was friends with President Warren Harding’s Attorney General Harry M Daugherty.
Richard Miller Special Olympics Richard W Miller was an American FBI agent who was the first FBI agent indicted and convicted of espionage.
An ordinary every day guy who could pass as an undercover asset anywhere After his arrest, a fuller portrait emerged of Miller.
Lame Cherry is a Revealor * This cell in the NSA was cleverly put together, and the NSA director is disavows any direct knowledge of operations, so it is never under Congressional oversight.
The coordinator for this cell is Eric Holder, and is why he was brought into the Obama regime for the beginning in order to run this cell, as it was Holder who was the hatchet man in the Clinton Administration who under Janet Reno ran the Waco operations that murdered the Branch Davidians and bumed their children alive for political effect, and it was Holder who ran the mass assassination of the group around Sec.
Ron Brown Further Reading when he was executed with an ice pellet bullet, and the surviving flight attendent on ground after the crash was murdered as she wandered around ground zero.
FBI Director Robert Swan Mueller II son of Cartel Grand Master Mason Piere Dupont board member Robert Mueller IT) is aware of this NSA cell, but he is not a part of it.
Rod Rosenstein is closely tied to Eric Holder and operations asserted to have killed Branch Davidians, , and many others.
Bush, Cuban and Meyorkas, DuPonts, Boeing, Latin Christopher Wray, British Pilgrim American George W Bush, Society, Councilon | deomocratic |Governments | Cheney, Barrack Foreign Relations, government | Castro, Obama Jr., etc., in Donald Barr, Robert office on oil and Swan Mueller IT defense contracting money on compaign trail The Opposition to some event or person is really under the control or the same as those who actually favor the event or cause.
Before I was contacted Tom Donegan and Glorian DOnegan had already been contacted by Rosestein and Mueller, both were working my case across USA and even international locations I was contacting in regards to my web site which made use of world data.
This also seems to have led to a meeting with Time Kaine during the detention in Tom Donegan’s home, focusing on Tom’s poltical goals, gay rights and protection of gays from Neo-Nazis perhaps.
Tim Kaine was under consideration for Obama VP but Joseph Biden JR was selected instead from the shor-list.
After I was arrested private conferences with Magistrate Day and the prosecutors were setup, my lawywer was changed out, and I was not in any of the conference held which were pretrial but Tom Donegan and Mark Wierness were i those conferences.
Jen Moore calls the Rosenstein familial group the FOIA Blockers, harassing FOIA on behalf of Government clients.
Rod Rosenstein has a history of a complex and bungled prosecution of me.
It could have been prosecuted as felony of me threatening the FBI in which I put up a defense of they had illegally initiated a threat situation with me I could not prevent.
Anti White Hate, a Jewish political interest in studying and disrupting the Alt-Right I am in and also as an Eric Holder Barrack Obama Jr. designated protector MKULTRA Level secrets and allegedy it was Rod Rosenstein who hired thugs to threaten Seth Rich over leaking, it is said without authorization the thugs hit Seth Rich going to far.
Rosenstein was born in 1965 to an Ashkenazi Jewish family in ; Philadelphia.
His father, Robert, ran a small business, whilst his mother, » Gerri Rosenstein, was a bookkeeper and local school board president.
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases at the Centers for Disease : ontrol and Prevention.
Rosenstein then worked in the United States Office of the » Independent Counsel under Ken Starr on the Whitewater investigation ‘ into President Bill Clinton.
I Edward Donegan was a class below Stephen Heyman and knew him fairly well.
He want to be the United States Attorney for Massachusetts during the Boston Bombing and that was my brother’s Head Royce class Stephen Heyman was in so they may have stayed in touch.
It was Rod Rosenstein who represented the Maryland based National Institute of Health against me as United States Attorney for Maryland.
After graduating from Penn, Rosenstein attended Harvard Law School where he was an editor of the Harvard Law Review.
While at Harvard, Rosenstein landed an internship with then acting United States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts Robert Mueller.
She’s well known for basically leading the Ukrainian coup when the Americans our country got involved in the election of their country so she’s the last person I want to hear about with regarding election integrity or about Russia in general.
I’m actually sick of hearing Russia Russia Russia they’ re in there talking bad about POTUS and his decisions regarding the g7 in his mentioning of wanting Russia to be there.
Vladimir Putin talking about how he’s so mean to our allies but just welcomes these dictators it’s just it’s a sickening joke and the Senators and their questions are just repeatedly ridiculous they got into the the dossier that was done by Steele and Victoria Nuland admitted that she first saw it in July of 2016 which to me I look at that and say why is an ambassador seeing excerpts of the still dossier in 2016 and then she said that they they stated that a Christopher Steele came to the United States State Department to brief who knows who in October of 2016.
So I don’t know if she’s the right person to talk about dirty money either so I left because I couldn’t put up with it anymore it’s the same questions over and over and over again senator burr senator Warner are talking about they need to police the social media companies even more because they can’t handle it themselves because of “Russia’s interference” and social or social media in the United States that affected the election and so it’s just ridiculous going on and on and on and it’s a big waste of time a waste of money they should be looking into more serious issues.
Tt ASP unit is the place to go, The top FBI are blackmailedor | involved.
Has TS clearance. isn’t even all of them Mother & children interviewedin 2015.
I believe I put it out on Twitter as many other people have and I’ve got ; the cases and you know like I said hand-delivered them so you would ; think this would be the the one of the biggest conflict of interest she’s ; known as the FOIA stopper she’s actually in here in these pages ; representing the United States of government are representing the FBI against Judicial Watch who is you know the one the group that is constantly trying to get FOIA releases on the Clinton investigation and the different government cases and she’s known as the FOIA stopper.
Every American should forget everything they were taught or felt about integrity, honesty, guilt or innocence within the FBI and other divisions of the United States Department of Justice. e CLICK HERE to read how the FBI operates like a Gestapo Secret Police Force. e CLICK HERE to read about the FBI’s reign of terror as a secret police force. e CLICK HERE for a short history lesson on how the FBI is treasonous and corrupt. e CLICK HERE for ten examples that prove the FBI is treasonous and corrupt e CLICK HERE for more information about the FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Working with OECD and Scottish Rites the sleeper agents plan would win military and industrial relationships for the West via puppet governments.
What the assassinations are hiding is that Glorian Donegan DNA was considered a good candidate for use, unknown but coming from established world events figures family lines.
THe string of Scotish Rites acts with grooming and Eugenics created POTUS figures like Obama, Bush, and Biden, while killing RFK, JFK almost TK, and others as the plan was placed into action by big business of industrial leaders of such wealth and power political and media companies were synonymous with them and part of CIA orgainzed Cartel operations much in the same way Political Action Committees can be sources of wealth directed illegally by co-ordination with office holders or candidates.
The Smedinghoff Murder retrieved from link and copied or modified to here a en ae an a | Once again another Lame Cherry exclusive in matter and anti EMIT ooo.
David Plouffe is an ao melding of the American political strategist best known as the campaign manager for Barack Obama’s successful 2008 presidential campaign.
In January [Rahm Emanuel 2017, he joined the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative to ever quite knew lead the policy and advocacy efforts of the he depths to what initiative.
In 2019, POLITICO reported he joined 1s statement the Board of Directors of liberal nonprofit ACRONYM, where he would advise an anti-Trump | [Further Reading digital campaign. n Valerie Jarrett In 1994 Plouffe managed Delaware Attorney General Charles Monroe Oberly III United States ') Attorney for the District of Delaware from 2010 to hitaker 1) 2017 (born NOVEMBER 9, 1946 unsuccessful United States Senate campaign against Senator William V Roth.
The reason From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Smedinghoff was erminated, was her indirect knowledge in being the “cancer courier” who provided the wafer to the , priest who fed this bio toxin to Hugo Chavez.
Ambassador Stevens, the SEALS loaded into one helo and murdered and Hugo Chavez.
Director. : This cell, was behind the setting up of the fake bin Laden compound in : Pakistan for a future political event.
The assessment report that was seen as derogatory oordinator for towards armed forces veterans.
The report focused _ {his cell is Eric on potential threats from the radical right.
Current Economic and _ he was brought Political Climate Fueling Resurgence in into the Obama Radicalization and Recruitment was made public in jregime for the April 2009.
The report suggested several factors, beginning in order including the election of the first black or mixed o run this cell, as race president in Barack Obama it was Holder who as the hatchet man in the Clinton Administration who under Janet Reno ran the Waco operations that murdered the Branch Davidians and burned their children alive for political effect, and it was » Holder who ran the mass assassination of the group around Sec.
His cover is 1 Attorney General, but in working the NSA cell, he never answers to i Congress as they would never inquire to him about NSA matters, as he is ; not overtly in control of the NSA, as this all falls under Janet Napolitano’s arena, but how the cell operates, is Napolitano is often in » the dark about operations being run in the high profile, and that includes ' the murder of Hugo Chavez.
FBI Director Robert Mueller is aware of this NSA cell, but he is not a i part of it.
Further Reading | » This NSA group scares the CIA and FBI, as those finding the tracks of , their operations, know this is all sanctioned and protected at the highest levels, and those matters are not to be spoken of.
Further Reading The “cell” was involved with Sandy Hook, the Colorado Joker and Gabrielle Giffords [And Judge Role and later Justice Scalia in the same pattern operations.
Further Reading As stated, Homeland Director Janet Naps Napolitano knows this NSA cell is run by Eric Holder, but has been informed it is “hands off” and she knows to keep distance from it.
Further Reading This cell was behind the set up of CIA Director David Patreaus.
It was the Committee to Re Elect Obama at all costs and to remove all political competitors to Obama.
Vice President Joe Biden knows that Eric Holder is the “hatchet man” for the Obama regime.
That is what Eric Holders specialty has been since the Clinton era and why he is so heavily protected from any investigations.
The machinations of what would become Gun Runner and Fast and Furious, were run out of this NSA cell operating out of the White House.
The current high profile assassination target for this cell is Kim Jong Un of North Korea.
Philip Marshall, a veteran airline captain and former government “special activities” contract pilot, has authored three books on Top Secret America, a group presently conducting business as the United States Intelligence Community.
Beginning with his role in the 1980s as a Learjet captain first as part of a Drug Enforcement Administration sting on Pablo Escobar, and later in the covert arming of the Nicaraguan Contras, Marshall has studied and written 30-years worth of covert government special activities and the revolving door of Wall Street tricksters, media moguls, and their well funded politicians.
David Plouffe @ @davidplouffe Combatting destructive disinformation with factual and compelling information is the major front in the battle to save our Democracy.
Good Information Inc. aims to fund and scale businesses that cut through echo chambers with fact-based information.
ACRONYM invested in for-profit companies that built media and technology solutions for progressive causes.
It ran one of the largest digital campaigns to defeat President Trump in the 2020 election, totaling $100 million.
Napolitano was born in 1930 in Oakland, CA, one of three children and the only son of Italian immigrants.
He became interim Dean of the medical school in 1972 and was named permanent Dean the following year, serving in that capacity until his retirement in 1994.
Napolitano presided over the dramatic expansion of the medical | You shared a photo.
Dec 22, 2021 Independent fact-checkers reviewed a similar photo and said it was false.
Did JFK Plan Th To Expose A Plot To su ‘Enslave Every Man, pr oman And Child’ Before Jo #% _PolitiFact school and health sciences complex on the North campus of UNM, creating an environment known nationally and internationally for its innovative teaching curriculum.
He was a highly effective advocate for the medical school at the legislature in Santa Fe.
Due to these efforts, the medical school and the associated health sciences campus became one of ' New Mexico’s chief assets.
Napolitano « received the medical school’s first Living Legend award in 2009.
He loved his family and had deep and enduring friendships all over the » world. aE ee ee ee ee eee ee ee ee ee ee eee eee ee pre Hidden Power The legal mind behind the White House’s war on « terror. retrieved from By Jane Mayer June 25, 2006 The Newyorker and t copied or modified to here | | On DECEMBER 18TH 2006 Colin Powell, the former Secretary of ; State, joined other prominent Washington figures at FedEx Field, the ; Redskins’ stadium, in a skybox belonging to the team’s owner.
Powell was referring to David S Addington, Vice; President Cheney’s chief of staff and his longtime principal legal adviser.
But his * former top aide, Lawrence Wilkerson, confirms that he and Powell shared this opinion of Addington.
As a "" teen-ager, Addington told a friend that he hoped to live in Washington . himself when he grew up.
David attended public high school in ; Albuquerque, New Mexico, and his father began a second career, » teaching middle-school math.
On the firing of United States Attorneys “The conspiracy theorist in me cannot leave unmentioned the possibility that someone at the Bush White House-let’s call him “David Addington”-does nothing all day but mark up legislation to diminish congressional and judicial oversight while increasing executive branch authority.
Someone at the White House figured out that with a little Wite-Out and the distractions of the Christmas season, the president could remove both the federal judiciary and the Congress from the United States attorney appointments process.
He helped launch the Progressive Change Campaign Committee in 2009 to learn more about effective online activism.
He founded the online group Demand Progress, known for its campaign against the Stop Online Piracy Act.
Swartz "" declined a plea bargain under which he would have served six months in « federal prison.
Two days after the prosecution rejected a counter-offer by « Swartz, he was found dead by suicide in his Brooklyn apartment.
In 2013, Swartz was inducted posthumously into the Internet Hall of Fame.
Carmen Milagros Ortiz is an attorney, college instructor, and former United States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts.
Ortiz was both the first woman and the first Hispanic to serve as United States Attorney for Massachusetts.
She succeeded Michael Sullivan in that position, with Michael J Loucks serving as the interim United States Attorney between Sullivan’s resignation and Ortiz’s confirmation.
Noteworthy prosecutions by her office include those of Whitey Bulger, Tarek 1 Mehanna, and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, as well as the controversial prosecution of Aaron Swartz which resulted in his suicide.
In 1991, he declared the government had been investigating the Bank of Credit and Commerce International since 1986 in more-thanusual media exposure.
Also in 1991, he was elected a fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers.
In 1993, Mueller became a partner at Boston’s Hale and Dorr, specializing in white-collar crime litigation.
Webb both pulled out from consideration around mid-June, while : confirmation hearings for Mueller before the Senate Judiciary ; Committee were quickly set for July 30, only three days before his , prostate cancer surgery.
George James Terwilliger III is an American lawyer and public official.
He is a former United ; States Deputy Attorney General and acting United States Attorney » General.
Bush to be Deputy Attorney General at the ' United States Department of Justice.
He had previously served as acting deputy attorney general of the United States Department of Justice for several months before officially becoming the FBI director on September 4, 2001, one week before the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
This DNA came by way of Glorian Donegan used in a half twin of Edward Paul Donegan, Obamaa Jr.
In May 2011, President Barack Obama asked Mueller to continue at the helm of the FBI for two additional years beyond his normal 10-year term, which would have expired on September 4, 2011.
In June 2013, Mueller defended NSA surveillance programs in testimony before a House Judiciary Committee hearing.
He said that surveillance programs could have “derailed” the September 11 attacks.
Appointed mere days before the 9/11 attacks, Director Robert S » Mueller III has guided the bureau through the resurrection of many long , discredited practices from its COINTELPRO era.
Years later, when the Church and Pike ; committees finally exposed the notorious counterintelligence program » , Congress discovered that Hoover presided over , severe abuses for decades Many of the techniques used would be intolerable in a democratic society even if all of the targets had been involved in violent activity, but COINTELPRO went far beyond that ... the bureau conducted a sophisticated vigilante operation aimed squarely at preventing the exercise of First Amendment rights of speech and association.
Later in life and after his death, J Edgar Hoover became a controversial figure as evidence of his secretive abuses of power began to surface.
He was found to have exceeded the jurisdiction of the FBI, and to have used the FBI to harass political dissenters and activists, to amass secret files on political leaders, and to collect evidence using illegal methods.
Hoover consequently amassed a great deal of power and was in a position to intimidate and threaten others, including multiple sitting presidents of the United States.
GLorian and Harold were moved to South Carolina Route 1 Bishopville after the death of Festus Gainey when my mother was 9 years old.
Pieres DuPont were huge DOD nuclear and gun powder United States DOD Defense contractors and also Master Masons.
He, Robert Swan Mueller is one of the most violent FBI terrorist in a long history of FBI illegal acts which simply cover up for big name politicians.
J Brien Comey age 89 of Allendale, died peacefully on Tuesday, » March 24, 2020.
Born and raised in Yonkers, NY, Brien moved to ; Allendale 49 years ago.
He was a 1953 graduate of Manhattan College ; and received an MBA degree from Fairleigh Dickenson.
Brien then took a job as Vice ' President and Director of Corporate Real Estate for the Curtiss-Wright Corporation managing the company’s extensive real estate portfolio He retired from Curtiss-Wright in 1992 and began a second career as a Certified Financial Planner.
This » was the largest single order for airplanes by the United States military up to that ; time.
The first production model was the P-40 Warhawk, armed with two "" .50-caliber machine guns.
There was only one P-40A variant which was a P-40 modified as a camera aircraft.
The definitive pursuit model was the P-40B Warhawk, which retained the two .50-caliber guns of the P-40 and added two Browning M2 .30-caliber machine guns to each of the I wings.
The Order of Friars Minor Capuchin (Latin: Ordo Fratrum Minorum ; Capuccinorum; postnominal abbr.
Capuchins arose in 1525 with the purpose of returning to a stricter : observance of the rule established by Francis of Assisi in 1209.
Wright, and various supplier companies, by the end of : World War II it was the largest aircraft manufacturer in Pr the United States, supplying whole aircraft in large numbers to the United States Armed Forces.
It also is a supplier to commercial nuclear , power, nuclear navy systems, industrial vehicles and to ; the oil and gas industries.
Joan M Comey, age 79 of Allendale, died peacefully surrounded by her i family on Sunday, August 19, 2012.
Born and raised in Yonkers, NY, ; Joan moved to Allendale 41 years ago.
She was a 1954 graduate of the College of New Rochelle and received her Master’s degree in computer ; science from Iona College.
She then became a substitute teacher in the * Allendale School System, followed by her career in computer education "" with the Girl Scouts of America.
Church in Allendale where she served as a Eucharistic Minister and director of Religious Education.
She was a volunteer at the Valley Hospital and with Friends of the Allendale Library.
Joan also enjoyed the time she spent at Arcola Country Club where she was an active member of the women’s golf program.
Engineers experimented with nt placement for the coolant radiator, oil coolers and the engine ke.
The Air Corps project officer, Lieutenant Benjamin Scovill _had the prototype sent to the National Advisory Committee for iutics Research Center at Langley Field, Virginia, where -size airplane was placed inside a wind tunnel. two-month period, NACA engineers made a number of improveThe radiator was moved forward under the engine and the oil ; utilized the same air scoop.
The exhaust manifolds were imas were the landing gear doors. hey had finished, Lieutenant Kelsey flew the modified XP-40 The P-40 had no serious vices and was a pleasant aircraft to fly, and, when flown by an experienced pilot who was fully aware of its strengths and weaknesses, was able to give a good account of itself in aerial combat.
Strangely enough, the P-40 continued in production long after later and more modern types were readily available, the numbers manufactured reaching the third highest total of American World War II fighters, after the Republic P-47 and the North American P-51.
The origin of the P-40 can be traced back to the Curtiss P-36 fighter, which was powered by a radial, air-cooled engine.
A step in the direction toward what was eventually to emerge as the P-40 was the XP37, in which the P-36 design was reworked to incorporate the Allison V1710 liquid cooled V-type engine.
James Brien Comey Jr. is an American lawyer who was the 7th director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in May 2017.
And — I was a nerd, so I was home working on ; a piece for a literary magazine.
And I | | . . . ; was in my room when a gunman kicked in the front door of the house.
The Secret Burglary That Exposed J Edgar Hoover’s FBI Many of the techniques used would be intolerable in a democratic society even if all of the targets had been involved in violent activity, but COINTELPRO went far beyond that ... the bureau conducted a sophisticated vigilante operation aimed squarely at preventing the exercise of First Amendment rights of speech and association.
Chuck Grassley agreed that the proposed extension would be “a risky precedent to set.
According to his father’s obituary at Legacy.com, Mueller’s father served in World War II in the United States Navy.
The obituary also shows that Mueller has four sisters, Susan M Timchak; Sandra M Dick; Joan B Mueller; and Patricia H Mueller.
Heavy.com Time.com Anne Smedinghoff was an American diplomat who last worked for the United States Embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan.
Smedinghoff born in 1987 grew up in River Forest, Illinois, a suburb about 10 miles west of Chicago.
His cover is » Attorney General, but in working the NSA cell, he never answers to "" Congress as they would never inquire to him about NSA matters, as he is "" not overtly in control of the NSA, as this all falls under Janet ; Napolitano’s arena, but how the cell operates, is Napolitano is often in s the dark about operations being run in the high profile, and that includes the murder of Hugo Chavez.
The “cell” was involved with Sandy Hook, the Colorado Joker and Gabrielle Giffords in the same pattern operations.
As stated, Homeland Director Janet Naps Napolitano knows this NSA cell is run by Eric Holder, but has been informed it is “hands off” and she knows to keep distance from it.
This is Assassination Incorporated, and it fields the entire scope of ational and international assassins both American and foreign terrorist to progress the Obama regimes feudal agenda for the world order.
Bob was on the borough of varsity football, hockey, and lacrosse teams and was |Manhattan, the a member of Cap and Gown Club.
His 0”, and Patricia. wife of 64 years, the former Alice Truesdale, His father was an recently predeceased him. executive with DuPont who had Bob is survived by his son, Robert S III 66, the ervedasa Navy current FBI director; four daughters, Susan M officer in the Timchak, Sandra M Dick, Joan B and Patricia; 11 |Atlantic and grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren.
Bush |pyexexe)nalsxcure la} Honorary FBI CEE and smiles Mueller grew up in Princeton, New Jersey, where he attended Princeton Country Day School, now known as « Princeton Day School.
Following extensive military Robert Mueller was inducted into the Ranger Hall of Fame in 2004.
Mueller stood up, niversity of ""| raised his glass, and said, “I toast Tom Wilner.
Pillsbury, Madison ; | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | When Bush confronted Mueller to ask him to and Sutro in San Francisco until 1976.
He then served for 12 years round up more terrorists in the U.S., Mueller responded, saying, “If they don’t commit a crime, it would be difficult to identify and isolate” them.
Vice President Dick Cheney objected by in United States saying, “That’s just not good enough.
In 1989, he served in the United ; States Department of Justice as an assistant to Attorney General Dick ; Lhornburgh and as acting Deputy Attorney General.
Federal Bureau of Investigation | President George W Bush nominated Mueller for the position of FBI director on July 5, 2001.
Feonking Princeton’s Eating Clubs retrieved from CommunituNews.org . and copied or modified to here Cottage Club The current two and a half story Georgian Revival clubhouse was ; designed by Charles Follem McKim of McKim, Mead and White in » 1903 and built in 1906.
Awarness and copied or modified to here | | A few of the FBI pages on Robert Maxwell, found below, point to an ; East and West German nexus, which could easily tie together old Nazis, East German Stasi agents, Soviet KGB agents, former United States OSS agents» CIA agents, and black-market criminals-mafia.
Nonetheless, based on the FBI file, it appears that he may have done so for monetary gain.
The head of Nord Stream is a former Stasi agent, friend of Putin, Matthias Warnig.
William Barr’s father, Donald Barr, was also in Germany after the War, reportedly working in “denazification” of businesses.
East Coast INS and United States Customs lookout ; placed for subject and Wallersteiner.
British Pilgrim Society and Council on Foreignh Relations plot a strategy on industrial world might.
Z American automobile industry in the 1950s matter retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here @ 1957 Chevrolet Bel Air convertible, one of the most iconic autos of the era The export of automobiles and the import of oil and | | i | | | | | | | » |the manufacture of steel and all the other economic demands of * |producing cars from a materials and labor perspective were a "" — |major new global issue in an industry given a leap frog status by * — |Robert McNamara, Henry Ford, and others.
The post-World War II era brought a wide range of new technologies to the utomobile consumer, and a host of problems for the independent utomobile manufacturers.
The industry was maturing in an era of rapid technological change; mass production and the benefits from economies of scale led to innovative designs and greater profits, but stiff competition between the automakers.
The age of small independent automakers was nearly over, as most of ; them either consolidated or went out of business.
The horsepower race had begun, laying the foundation for the muscle car era.
The 1950s were ; the pinnacle of American automotive manufacturing and helped shape * the United States into an economic superpower.
Fits WASP v Catholic split on joining with British Pilgrim Society Donald Barr advocated for , the Commonwealths as answer to waring NationStates Cecil Wray of Enlands1700s likely not related but it goes to identifying WASP name Sir Cecil Wray, 13th Baronet (3 September 1734 10 January 1805) was an English landowner and politician, and one of the Wray baronets.
Cecil Wray is on the right, portrayed as Judas Iscariot, for his apparent betrayal of his fellow whig Fox in this election Cecil Wray NOVEMBER 19, 1934 Council on Foreign Relations father of Christopher Wray @FBIDirectorWray Christopher Asher Wray (born DECEMBER 17, 1966) unlikely investigator of British Pilgrims Society CFR Deep State. @fbi Christopher Asher Wray III is an American attorney who is serving as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation since 2017.
DECEMBER 17 1966, Son is Trip Wray U Cecil Wray lawyer and mother of Christopher Wray retrieved from . prabook.com and copied or modified to here is ers Wray, Cecil was born on NOVEMBER 19, 1934 in Memphis, Tennessee, United States.
Cecil Wray, American lawyer, specializing in the field of Corporate Law, Corporate Financing Law, Securities Regulation Law, Mergers and Acquisitions, International Business Law.
The Order of the Coif /'ko1f/ is an honor society for United States law school graduates.
The name is a reference to the ancient English order of ; advocates, the serjeants-at-law.
Relations., Ausable Club , Union Club, Century ' Club, Order of Coif, Phi Beta Kappa.
Wiki Vicky Weaver wife of Green Beret Randy Weaver Victoria Weaver was born in 1949 to a Community of Christ Mormon family, and she married United States Army Green Berets soldier Randy Weaver, living with him in rural Iowa.
Vicki raised the children without television or other “graven images”, and she homeschooled them.
She and her husband also attended Aryan Nations gatherings with the goal of making friends, and, while they disagreed on religious matters, they adopted their white supremacist views.
In 1992, her husband was ordered to court for sawing off shotguns for the Aryan Nations, and, when he refused, federal agents were sent to arrest eee eee eee eee eens him on 21 August.
They killed the family dog when it alerted the family to their presence, and they were forced to kill the family’s 14-year-old son Samuel Weaver when he shot at the agents in revenge.
The next day, federal agents fired on Randy Weaver as he walked to the shed where he kept his son’s body, and Vicki and the others ran out to check on Randy.
As they prepared to head back into the cabin on the porch, an FBI sniper shot and killed Vicki.
For days, the agents were unaware that Vicki was dead, and used a bullhorn to call out for Vicki to send her children to have pancakes with the agents.
The family believed this to be taunts, hardening Randy’s resolve for the next eight days of the siege.
Baby retrieved from The Wall Street Journal January 10, 1995 No Accountability at the FBI By James Bovard and copied or modified to here a Bovard speaking in Washington, D.C. in 2011 Born 1956 James Bovard is an American libertarian author and lecturer whose political commentary targets examples of waste, failures, corruption, cronyism and abuses of power in government.
His books have been translated into Spanish, Arabic, Japanese, and Korean.
Following is an article I wrote on this back in 1995, followed by the response from FBI director Louis Freeh, which claimed that I “grossly mischaracterized” the details of Vicki Weaver’s killing.
FBI Director Louis Freeh last week announced that no FBI agents would be fired or severely punished for their role in the botched attack ' on Idaho white separatist Randy Weaver and his family in 1992, which i led to the death of Mr Weaver’s son and wife.
A court official sent Mr Weaver a notice "" to appear in court on the wrong day; after Mr Weaver did not show up on the correct date, a Justice Department attorney (who knew of the error) got a warrant for his arrest.
On Aug., 1992, six heavily armed, camouflaged United States marshals neaked onto Mr Weaver’s property.
As Mr Weaver’s 14-year-old son, ammy, and Kevin Harris, a 25year-old family friend living in the abin, ran to see what the dogs were barking at, United States marshals killed one f the dogs.
Randy Weaver came out and hollered for his son to come ack to the cabin.
Sammy yelled, “I’m coming, Dad,” and was running ack to the cabin when a federal marshal shot him in the back and killed im.
QAoaqQanen z>oO oO Kevin Harris responded to Sammy’s shooting by fatally shooting a United States marshal.
After the death of the United States marshal, the commander of the FBI’s Hostage Rescue Team was called in, and ordered federal agents to shoot , any armed adult outside the Weaver cabin, regardless of whether that , person was doing anything to threaten or menace federal agents.
York Times reported in 1993. : Though federal officials now claim that the killing of Vicki Weaver was ; an accident, the Washington Times’s Jerry Seper reported in September 1993: “Court records show that while the woman’s body lay in the cabin for eight days, the FBI used microphones to taunt the family.
Edward Lodge condemned the FBI and issued a lengthy list detailing the , Justice Department’s and FBI’s misconduct, fabrication of evidence, and ; refusals to obey court orders.
Deval Patrick, assistant ttorney general for civil rights, rejected the findings last month and concluded that the federal agents had not used excessive force.
This book Eric Hold Sharon Holder Jeh Johnson Barrack and Michell Obama Holder Machen Jr.
NYT The geneology of Barrack Obama, both real and imagined, from around the world in world wide Sleeper Cells operations Featuring the Obama Family themselves continuing Eugenics works likely with Glorian Donegan and Malcolm X DNA the Non White Protestantism or even Islamism indirect rulers the Queen has planned for the Commonwealth world runs into Catholic opposition including some Catholic geopolitics overlaying with Northern Ireland and Ireland and policy overlays of Abortion and Reproductive sanctity.
The are the product of Eugenics which for a while included Spinn-Off Nazi Germany but is larger umbrella than understood by the public which has been dumbed down. / { f As explained in James Corbett’s documentary, Why Big Oil Conquered the World, (links to full transcript) in the 1920’s and early 1930’s, the idea of an “alternative social system”, known as “Technocracy” started to garner serious consideration among the learned men of academia, government and industry.
Technocracy is the scientific answer to America’s social problems and technocracy is a new design for social operation that based on upon science.
As the idea of a technocratic world gained followers, investments in science became even more necessary as well as collaboration.
Further Reading mn, den Johnson’s family legacy i # .retrieved from Illinois Family Institute _and copied or modified to here Jeh Johnson’s family legacy In researching the barbarous ae of the | ar OBAMA ne er _fiuaty Gensrayor Mastor of tie a pseudo-civilized personalities stumping for ' baby-killing, I learned the 1 sordid story of Dr.
Johnson, it turns out, comes from a line of feticide-supporters and practitioners.
Kenneth Edelin who was at "" the center of a famous court case over his gruesome 1973 ; slaughter of a baby boy during his 24th week of development.
The injections were unsuccessful, so Edelin performed a “hysterotomy” in which he made an incision in the womb , reached in, and by hand separated the baby i from the placental wall.
According to Edelin’s OBITUARY in the Washington Post, “A doctor who witnessed the operation testified that Dr.
Such compassion to be willing to take a baby whom he hadn’t successfully slaughtered to a nursery.
Edelin, who became a hero to feticide fanatics, was convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to a year’s probation.
Edelin went on to become chairman of the board at Planned Parenthood Federation of America.
Higgins 09.20.16 retrieved from IIliniosfamily.org and copied or modified to here The pro-child-death regime seems to be kicking into high gear.
It’s unclear whether they fear a rising tide of opposition to womb-killing or ' if they smell the blood swirling in the miasmic waters that envelop the world. greater risk and more devalued than at any time in modern life.
The Internet devours children in its black hole of child porn ; sewage.
And baby-killing profiteers can taste the blood of children, ; and it tastes like money.
Laurie’s always easy prey for uncivilized peoples, are perhaps at | Let’s take a metaphorical boat-ride around these bloody waters.
One of the reasons feticide enthusiasts cite for an official International Safe Abortion Day is the increase in the number of annual abortions worldwide from 50. million every year between the years of 1990-94 to 56. million every year between the years 2010-14.
Feticide enthusiasts want to ensure that the ghastly number of baby-killings each year won’t adversely affect the health of the babies’ mothers.
PLANNED PARENTHOOD Here in the Land of Lincoln, the baby-killing machine, euphemistically named Planned Parenthood, colludes with the perverse “Shout Your Abortion” crowd to celebrate the so-called “right” of mothers to kill their unborn babies-oh, and to profit from the bodies of the dead.
Evidently, the $300 million Planned Parenthood gets from the government isn’t sufficient to sustain their “charitable” work, so there are several frolicsome fundraising events planned at the Empty Bottle in Chicago to make money for Planned Parenthood.
And in the midst of the “sh*tstorm,” you can help support the Planned Parenthood death squad.
There’s nothing less likely to foster good relations in a community than forcing community members to be complicit in killing developing humans in the womb.
I can think of few things less “righteous” than requiring citizens to fund feticide-well, except for feticide itself.
And since the Catholic Church opposes abortion, the claim of Catholics for Choice that public funding for abortion is a Catholic value is a bald-faced lie.
THE MYTH OF CHOICE An unsavory family drama is unfolding in Luke Skywalker’s family.
The Hamill story exposes the myth that women are freely choosing to kill their offspring.
The truth is that often parents, boyfriends, and husbands pressure women to kill their children.
Quite obviously the product of conception between two humans is a human, and no human has a moral right to end the life of another.
Lack of full physical maturation on the part of one human doesn’t give other more developed humans the right to kill him or her.
Neither does a human’s imperfections, geographic location, dependency status, nor “unwantedness” grant more developed humans a right to kill him or her.
JEH JOHNSON’S FAMILY LEGACY In researching the barbarous activities of the pseudo-civilized personalities stumping for baby-killing, I learned the sordid story of Dr.
Kenneth Edelin, who died in 2014 and was the uncle of Jeh Johnson, President Barack Obama’s secretary of Homeland Security.
During Edelin’s trial, it was revealed that the 17-year-old mother’s womb had been injected with a saline solution which ordinarily burns and poisons the baby and initiates uterine contractions that lead to the expulsion of the baby.
The injections were unsuccessful, so Edelin performed a “hysterotomy” in which he made an incision in the womb (as in a Caesarean section), reached in, and by hand separated the baby from the placental wall.
Please Prayerfully consider how you can support the work and ministry of IFI through a donation.
He preferred to work collaboratively with liberal 1 white groups in the South, quietly as a “sideline activist,” to get 1 practical results.
Johnson was born in 1893 in Bristol, Virginia, to well-educated , parents.
His father was a respected ; Baptist minister, and his mother was ; educated in public school.
When he was appointed director of research and ; investigation of the National Urban League, the couple moved to New ' York City. wa Johnson yearned to return to the South, not only to study race relations 1 but to change them.
Shadow of the : Plantation , and Growing up in the Black Belt . | ; in 1929 an American missionary in Liberia reported that Liberian , Officials were using soldiers to gather tribal people who were shipped to ' the island of Fernando Po as forced laborers.
The result of the inquiries 1 Was an outspoken report submitted in September 1930.
In 1930 Johnson was awarded the Harmon Prize for Science, for his work The Negro in American Civilization.
He attracted outstanding faculty, including the author Arna « Bontemps, James Weldon Johnson, Aaron Douglas and others.
Brown Board of Education , which ruled that racial "" segregation in the public schools was unconstitutional.
He played a key ' role in the effort to implement the decision in the face of “massive k resistance” in the South.
His work and that of his peers also contributed to passage of federal civil rights legislation of the mid-1960s.
Holder, the newly appointed attorney general and first African» American to lead the country’s Justice Department, is his wife of 20 ; years, Dr.
A mother of two teens and one preteen, she says "" she is delighted to see a Black president in the White House.
She has worked in health care over the past 20 years and in research for the last 10 of those years.
As a PCORI Ambassador, she has enjoyed fostering ; dialogues that promote mental health and substance use awareness and ‘ work toward eradicating the stigma and discrimination surrounding » mental illness, mental health issues, and substance use treatment through ‘research.
She became motivated by PCORI’s mission to make health ‘care more patient centered and wipe out mental health stigma.
Vincent R Stewart, LtGen, CYBERCOM, _ Portrait Ww Vincent Raymond Stewart is a retired Jamaican American lieutenant general in the United States Marine Corps who most recently served as Deputy Commander at United States Cyber Command.
He then received orders as a ; Platoon Leader to 1st Tank Battalion at Las Flores, 41 Area, Camp * Pendleton, California.
In 1984, he became the Executive Officer of "" Headquarters Company, 1st Tank Battalion.
LtGen Stewart retired from the United States Marine Corps at the Marine Barracks Washington on APRIL 5, 2019.
Vince Stewart replace Flynn as Barrack Obama fired General Flynn from the DIA just before leaving office.
Donald J Trump hired Flynn for his administration before Mike Pence and Rod Roenstein drove Flynn and Flynn Jr. from the administration.
As explained in James A Rockefeller, a Morgan, and a Rothschild Walk Corbett’s documentary, Why Big into the Gibson Island Club.
The meeting was convened by Professor Neil E Gordon, a member of the chemistry faculty.
Gordon’s interest was to bring together a group of scientists working at the frontier of research of a particular area to discuss, in depth, all aspects of the most recent advances in the field and to stimulate new directions for research.
The 1932 and 1933 conferences were also held at Johns Hopkins, before moving to Gibson Island in 1934.
At about this time, the GRC also became affiliated with American Association for the Advancement of Science During the late 30’s and early 1940’s the conferences were held in the Gibson Island Club House and after outgrowing that facility, was moved to the Symington house on Gibson Island.
Seeking to expand beyond the limited facilities of the Gibson Island Club, Gordon secured funds from AAAS and some thirty-three corporations to purchase a property on the island, known as the Symington House.
Conferences were held on the house porch as well as at the Gibson Island Club Although the conferences continue to this day, the last year the GRC was held at Gibson Island was 1946.
A number of factors contributed to the change in venue, including changes in management and less than ideal dining facilities.
The committee also faced tensions with Gibson Island residents regarding conference growth and the participation of African American scientists.
In a notorious incident, Percy Julian initially was not permitted to enter the Gibson Island Club to participate in the 1943 hormone conference.
Among the protesters was Gregory Pincus, who subsequently chaired a meeting on hormone research at Mont Tremblant, Quebec, which grew into the annual Laurentian Hormone Conference series We can imagine it is difficult to lecture to a bunch of your scientific peers about some pseudo-scientific discovery that proposes some sort of African American inferiority when an African American scientist is staring you in the face, and a few of your peers are pointing at Percy Julian as proof that your ideas are nutty.
Other scientific conferences used Gibson Island as an attendee venue over the years, but the GRC put Gibson Island on the map where scientists could meet; presumably occasionally in secret.
The early conferences were composed of different scientists from different disciplines.
You might have a chemist, a nuclear physicist and a biologist all eating at the same lunch table.
As the conferences became more popular and better funded, the different scientific disciplines were split, so their would be a chemistry conference for a few days, then an atomic science conference, and then a biology conference after that.
By 1944, eleven conferences were scheduled for the Summer, beginning June 12 and ending August 21.
Agenda Gibson Island Science Conference Agenda 1944 Referencing James Corbett again, Eugenics was considered a serious scientific discipline until the Nazis gave it a bad name in the 1940s.
Despite being based on spurious science to begin with, and the Nazi example of letting bad ideas run amok, instead of shelving eugenics as a scientific discipline, next to the phrenology books and Hollow Earth maps, it was re-branded and divided into different scientific disciplines.
We would argue that that Eugenics was a political point of view and not a science, all along.
Prior to WWII, Eugenics was politically correct, after the example of the Nazis, it was not politically correct.
Although Eugenics lost its status as a legitimate science, any number of other legitimate scientific disciplines could be used to carry out the plans for the re-branded Eugenicists In other words, actual scientific discoveries could lead to practical applications to advance the political plans of Eugenics promoters.
For example, in the 1944 Conference referenced above, actual scientific findings presented at the Vitamins and/or Cancer conferences may have eventually lead to a better understanding of how to get rid of certain populations more quickly, and without calling attention to any efforts.
As the title of this section suggests, Gibson Island combined the wealth of promoters of political eugenics with the scientists that had the knowledge of how to carry out their eugenic dreams.
The scientists that practiced in disciplines that may have had direct eugenics applications didn’t necessarily know that their findings might be used in evil ways.
Perhaps the decision to move the conferences was based in part on those types of factors.
Prior to WWII, one could mention the “benefits” of Eugenics without be called a Nazi.
John D Rockefeller, Jr. was one of the more virulent promoters, and of course the wealthiest person on the planet.
The Rockefeller Foundation, the Carnegie Foundation, the Ford Foundation and any number of other foundations, trusts, and wealthy individuals and families provided the funding the various studies, government lobbying efforts and university departments that promoted Eugenics.
Post WWII, the promotion of Eugenics focused on how actual science could positively affect long-term plans and re-branding, to avoid the Nazi taint.
While it might have been perfectly fine to discuss the sterilization efforts of African Americans living in North Carolina in polite company in the 1920’s and 1930’s, by the early 1940’s it was not “fine”; not that sterilization of Black people stopped.
The Gordon Research Conferences on Gibson Island (and other conferences on Gibson not affiliated with the GRC) did seem to have a significant “Family Planning” component.
As noted above, Gregory Goodwin Pincus moved the Gibson Island Hormone Conference to Quebec.
Pincus was an early pioneer in the science of mammalian reproductive systems.
Pincus began studying hormonal biology and steroidal hormones early in his career.
He was interested in the way that hormones affected mammals’ reproductive systems.
McCormick and Sanger met with Pincus in 1953 to dramatically expand the scope of the research with 50-fold increase in funding from McCormick.
Pincus was fascinated by Sanger because she revealed what life was like for women who were living in poverty who endured many pregnancies.
Sanger indirectly influenced him to create a successful contraceptive to prevent unwanted pregnancies.
Pincus was some committed Eugenicist like his primary “influencer” Margaret Sanger, nevertheless, his earlier work as a Gibson Island conference attendee certainly became applicable to Sanger and her minions.
Aside from Pincus, a review of the biography his African American co-conference attendee, Percy Lavon Julian was ; ...a pioneer in the industrial large-scale chemical synthesis of the human hormones progesterone and testosterone from plant sterols such as stigmasterol and sitosterol.
His work laid the foundation for the steroid drug industry’s production of cortisone, other corticosteroids, and birth control pills.
Another important “player” in the medical sciences with potential eugenics applications, and conference attendee, was Dr.
Parran was an attendee at the Gibson Island Vitamin Conference of 1941 and possibly later and earlier conferences.
Now, under pressure from students who say Parran’s role in these experiments shows his disregard for human lives, the university is grappling with whether to strip his name from the building, and by default, the school he helped found after decades of public service.
His work or stewardship on the effects of syphilis is alleged to have included experiments on Guatemalan citizens which also involved Dr.
Knowing what we know about Gibson Island, one can’t help but think that some of the Island’s residents saw some opportunities to promote their own bad ideas (ie. depopulating the planet) by co-opting the legitimate and sometimes beneficial work of visiting scientists like Pincus and Julian.
As noted in other posts, Gibson Island was developed as a Summer getaway for the wealthy and powerful beginning in the 1920s.
The Baltimore Bourgeoisie were composed of a mix of wealthy heirs and professionals and from nearby Baltimore and included the Symington Family, the Baltimore branch of the Hydes, the Orricks, and many others.
A number of Baltimore doctors made Gibson Island their summer home, and among those doctors were several pioneers in the field of reproductive medicine and related disciplines.
Another Gibson Island resident and scientist/gynecologist was also the inventor one of the more infamous birth control devices.
The Dalkon Shield would eventually be taken off the market for causing severe infections that lead in some cases to infertility, “septic abortions”, other complications and even some fatalities.
The Jones’ conducted the first successful in-vitro fertilization in the United States.
Georgeanna was elected President of the American Fertility Society in 1970, the first woman to reach that position.
Her presidency was notable for her thoughtful discussions on the impact of reproductive technologies on society as well as the implications of advances in fertility control on women and their future.
We hope to take a closer look at the cancer connection given the significant amount of cancer research that was presented at the conferences over the years.
How the Unsolved Murder of a Doctor, a Secret Laboratory in New Orleans and Cancer-Causing Monkey Viruses Are Linked to Lee Harvey Oswald, the JFK Assassination and Emerging Global Epidemics” by Edward T Haslam as well as the recent discussions on McDuff: Kennedy’s Man to Smash the CIA Youtube channels and George Webb’s Youtube channel.
We have highlighted Gibson Island in several previous osts and were always finding new names with interesting biographies retrieved from D State Analytics and copied or modified to here ne) ee ee For more background about Gibson Island, please see this collection of posts that 1 mention Gibson Island.
The Gang on Gibson Island includes the relatives of a number of famous politicians, industrialists and banking families.
The CIA also figures prominently with names like Bagley, Asher and Amoss.
Given the CIA names on Gibson, and the Johns Hopkins psychiatrists, we are interested in researching connections to |Vii< Ultra and related “mind control” program associations.
Written about or mentioned in previous posts. e Names in S\uc: Psychiatrists & MDs affiliated with Johns Hopkins. e Names in Red: Interesting names that need a closer look.
LP Gise, his grandfather was instrumental in mass producing the United States nuclear arsenal.
When your congressman leaves town for a vacation with the family, so should you. before the JFK Assassination, these connected conspirators cooked up a sighting.
Maybe Allen Dulles and the Young ‘Turks Connects the CIA to Epstein Island via a Luciferian Cult founded by Sabetai Zevi in the 1600s.
Maybe that is why the FBI tweeted out the Protocols of the Elders of Zion last week.
The entire quote though provides some context as to why the head of the FBI might say that.
For the symbolism. recently elected former VP seemed to like the place too.
A Rockefeller, a Morgan, and a Rothschild Walk into the Gibson Island Club.
Any casual subscribers to the “conspiracy theory” of JFK’s ssassination knows that Lee Harvey “defected to Russia” in October 1959 and ‘ to the USSR, means for getting there and back, and what he did when he was there.
When you stole that cow, and your friend tried to make it with the cow.
If the CIA’s involvement was restricted to i some rogue elements, now mostly all dead, with antiquated ideas about the dangers of ; Communism, or an attempt to take back the Cuban sugar fields and/or Mafia Casinos ' seized by Castro, then coming clean, at this point would give the CIA some ‘ credibility.
That is, no one now, is going to blame anyone in the CIA today for what ; some long dead operatives did in 1963.
He has been the go-to-guy for whenever the MSM needs a pithy comment of the expert opinion of someone who worked for The Company.
One can surmise that he has the approval of the CIA given ; his professional successes as a writer and TV show host.
His biography on Wikipedia ‘ and other approved web sites is nicely consistent, with details about his professional ‘ successes, but there is limited information about his family background.
Generally, family information is not important or relevant and the privacy t of relatives of public figures deserves to be respected.
His bio said he was born in Los Angeles, so maybe he is a Getty or a ' Hearst.
Perhaps he is related to General Charles ' P Cabell of Bay of Pigs fame.
General Cabell’s grand father and uncle on his mother’s side both use the family name “Baer”, as in Major Charles Baer Pearre, Sr. ; the grandfather.
The mother’s maiden name on the birth index screen shot is not all that helpful either.
As a supposed “heiress”, the name Eisele should show up in duckduckgo and newspaper archive searches, but we have not had much luck yet.
Dresser Industries was also a Bush Family company, so there is another CIA connection.
To get somewhat back on track, we plan to take a look at the Wirt branch of the Cabell family tree.
In “Evidence for Informed Trading on the Attacks of September 11” he examines an FBI briefing document from 2003 that was declassified in 2009.
It describes the results of FBI investigations into two of the pre-9/11 trades that the Bureau had identified as suspicious, including the purchase of 56,000 shares of Stratesec in the days prior to 9/11.
Stratesec provided security systems to airports (including, ironically, Dulles Airport, as well as the World Trade Center and United Airlines), and saw its share price almost double when the markets re-opened on September 17th, 2001.
Wirt D Walker III, a distant relative of the Bush family and business partner of Marvin Bush, the president’s brother.
In addition to begging the question, this characterization is provably false.
KEVIN RYAN: “Wirt Dexter Walker at Stratesec hired several people from a company called The Carlyle Group and The Carlyle Group had Bin-Laden family members as investors.
Also Wirt Walkers fellow director James Abrahamson was a close business associate of aman named Mansoor Ijaz, a Pakistani businessman and Mansoor Ijaz claimed to be able to contact Osama Bin-Laden on mulitple occasions.
It is not clear if Baer and Ryan are talking about the same “insider” traders, who appear to have had foreknowledge about the events of September 11th. i As noted in the transcript though, “Wirt D Walker III” was a distant relative of 1 George W and Poppy Bush.
Wirt is definitely an unusual first name, which probably 1 Means it is a family name.
As it turns out, in addition to their being some Wirts in the ; Bush/Walker family tree, there are some Wirts in the Cabell family tree as well.
Gaghan’s screenplay is loosely adapted from ex CIA operative 1 Robert Baer’s memoir See No Evil.
Cabell Cabal and Related Families | | JFK Coup d’etat, Trump Coup d’etat, WTC 9/11 9/11, Baer, Bush, Cabell, CIA, ; Clintons, Dresser Ind, Eisele, George Clooney, Hinckley, James Earl Ray, JFK Coup ; d’etat, Lee Harvey Oswald, Marion Power Shovel, Robert Baer, Robert F Kennedy, ‘ Sirhan Sirhan, Trump Coup d’etat, Wirt This book PsyClops and the Storyh of How Malcom X was much like Catholics The policy difference.
Sleeper Agents by CIA, others, of FOXP2 Secretive DNA Research under Sidney Gottlieb which, if taken illegallly from the lab, could take good-track-record DNA for groomed leaders Working the side of this vase again to understand who was assassinated by the Kabal Mafia and why.
As families volunteering for Minnesota Twins Studies eugenics research volunteer themselves they find out the program isn’t just medical research it is for far reaching Commonwealth expansionism furthered by assassinations and Mafia groomed leaders moved into locations all around the globe; for instance Cuba where the mafia will have gambling and prostitution rights.
In highly visible Sovereign heads of state the FOXP2 must not be recognized else the family lines will be recognized and the sleepers exposed The Lawford Shriver Peace Corps plan ”™ is more extensive than approved as Certain families and Malcom X being one of them were approached that speech defect research was being conducted and some twins or mix parents brothers or sisters with common mothers or fathers were being studied which carried certain attributes to see what would develop ion the children.
Protaganist Nationalism Malcom X and Middle East anti white or oil oppressors QEII, Standard Oil, Judeic refugees of Nazi Germany Ireland French Catholics Antagonist Enemy Trump Gaetz Green doubt the CIA “Tn short, the Establishment Class, did not just prefer a Hillary Clinton over a Mitt Romney or a John McCain (or a Jeb Bush if nominated) because of typical surface level “R” and “D” policy disagreements, they feared Donald J Trump because he was a threat to the status quo.
The Robert Swan Mueller III Family Helped Found the Deep State When Wikipedia leaves out important parts of a person’s biography, such as the name of their parents, or who other famous relatives are, one can be usually be assured its because the Deep State does not want you know.
The George Webb crowd made it a priority to write the real biography of Bob Mueller.
The Mueller family was related to the Genera Charles Cabell and Richard Bissell, who were both fired by JFK over the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Robert S Mueller II, the special counsels father, worked for du Pont and seems to be connected to some incidents involving the transfer of nuclear technology and material.
Finally, the Muellers summered on Gibson Island for decades with the Rockefellers, du Ponts, Walkers, Symingtons, and a whole host of other coup plotters, false flag planners and general Robber Baron types of the 20th century.
Probably Not a Coincidence The JFK Assassination of course occurred a long time ago.
More time has passed between the Trump Coup Era and the JFK Assassination than the time that passed between the JFK Assassination and the end of WWI or maybe a Wilson coup, as some of have considered.
His father Muelelr II was a World War II Navy veteran and an executive at DuPont.
He was nominated as FBI director by President George W Bush, and unanimously confirmed by the Senate.
It was the DuPonts that “rescued” the Von Trapps and placed Glorian Donegan in a DuPont workers family in South Carolina after Festus died in North Carolina, Greensborough area.
Russia always ruins it. The Washington Post WAPO Trump wants the CIA to cooperate with Russia.
The Trump wing of the GOP tend to like Europe United including East, Central, Western, the Three Crowns, and Latim America.
The British and Oil Money collective want Middle Eastern interference and overthrow as foreign policy and that does not sit well with many.
Many European countries have close ties to North Africa across the Meditaranian and many African and North African countries bitterly resent the USA and align with Russia for the same reasons Cuba chose to.
THe Bush wing of the party are at odds with these mavericks from Cartel CIA activities.
I believe since they could not stop Donald J Trump Michelle Field part black Christian and Billy Bush grandson of Prescott Bush went after Trump and finaly got Mike Pence onto the ticket as some sort of likable Minister to the ailing and failing Donald J Trump bringing the Evangelicals in.
JFK and CIA disagreed United States Gov anti Racket JFK RFK JMWAVE anti Communism oversight Authorized CIA Activities Cuba Russia Missles and Oil revenue Latin American South of Texas Oil and Socialism or Communism Russia Indo Poly Micro nesia, Korea Veitnam China CIA TSS Overthrow Including Irregular Warfare Plant of 133N""6 Sleeper Agents Secretive DNA Research under Sidney Gottlieb which, if taken illegallly from the lab, could take good-track-record DNA for groomed leaders _s William Hall Bush, Grandson of Prescott Bush ) William Hall Bush is an American radio and television host.
He later served as Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force from 1961 to 1965.
He commanded the 305th Operations Group from October 1942 until September 1943, and the 3rd Air Division in the European theatre of World War IT until August 1944, when he was transferred to the China Burma India Theater.
Landsdale ef | oe 8 8 8 8 Ue UU Uh UU UO UG Ue UE UU UU UG Ue UU OU UU UG UG OU UG UG OU UE OU UG UG UG Ue UD UG pccone World War , Soldiers , Edward Lansdale retrieved from 1997020 Spartacus Educational Publishers Ltd. and copied or modified to || | | | b 1 here | | | | | | | | Written by John Simkin Edward Lansdale was born in Detroit, Michigan, on 6th February, » 1908.
During the Second World War Lansdale was a member of the » Office of Strategic Services , an organization that was given the "" responsible for espionage and for helping the resistance movement in * Europe.
According to Sterling Seagrave, Lansdale was sent by General Charles 1 Willoughby to the Philippines after the war.
Cuba, particularly those with middle-class professions, who had opposed Fulgencio Batista and had then become disillusioned with Fidel Castro because of his betrayal of the democratic process.
Allen W Dulles, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency , : initiated talks with two leading figures of the Mafia, Johnny Roselli and » Sam Giancana.
Robert Maheu, a veteran of CIA counter-espionage activities, was nstructed to offer the Mafia $150,000 to kill Fidel Castro.
The dvantage of employing the Mafia for this work is that it provided CIA with a credible cover story.
If the assassins were killed or captured the media would accept that the Mafia were working on their own. oOo The Federal Bureau of Investigation had to be brought into this plan as , part of the deal involved protection against investigations against the » Mafia in the United States.
But as I spent more time investigating and reporting national security matters, I came to the realization that government officials, spies, and operatives tend not to be sufficiently competent to pull off the murder of a president and then mount a subsequent and wildly effective cover-up.
Still, I’ve resisted getting drawn too far into the Kennedy conspiracy debates-a true black hole.
Though Kennedy, as part of the , resolution of the missile crisis, had pledged the United States would ; not invade Cuba, the CIA was ordered to keep devising paramilitary operations against Castro, and it continued working with its favorite ' exile groups a r This book Rudy2s blog is a Archstone of for Pillars of Truth I find myself agreeing with something I heard spoken in a DVD of lectures in philosophy when I think of Rudy2’s blog, and the constraint the brevity of life places on my learning.
Opinions of Richard Lighthouse \TargetedJustice.com Poltoning fests eee eslaais sion Free to Share — please acknowledge source My personal experience and research is that | carry the FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder gene.
Because our brain line is used in a quality Watchlist ‘ iyvialonctrhas Gangstalking, Aeinging Dente to Targeted Indivivaty control factory line and this program exists to hide who the CIA created as sleepers to be secret Windsor twins which aslo is Franz Kutschera neice DNA, Maria August Kutchera, likely my mother and Mayline Monroe's mother of 1926 as Maria was forced out of the convent and into the USA with three unknown children and 7 known children.
Perhaps days of surveillance picked the best time for the team to strike the mother and daugher, a time when Jeffery slept in the kitchen because his daughter had wet the bed in his own bed.
With FOXP2 child’s development expressions, things like bed wetting or sucking thumb lat in life as well as dry throat are problems.
Presi F i ” "" President John resident John F Kennedy Secret Service Agent Gerald ""Jerry” Behnand Presidential Assistant Dave Powers Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.35TH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About Events Endorsements Posts Community John F Kennedy in Santa Monica on November 19 1961 at the time of my birth there, Inglewood, and I think a Department Of Defense sleeper agent also born from Glorian Donegan DNA and tied to twins study on the LONDON KE FAMILY FOXP2 gene which I carry and mother caries.
This is why it was necessary to translate them into other languages (mainly in Spanish, in French, in German, in Italian and sometimes in Greek) so that they can be read by the greatest number of people worldwide.
Dieser Blog hat zum Zweck, das Publikum iiber Stalking durch organisierte Banden , liber Angriffe aus der Ferne mit elektromagnetischen und neurologischen gerichteten Energiewaffen und tiber Mindcontrol aus der Ferne im Allgemeinen zu informieren, und es zu sensibilisieren.
Das ist der Grund, dass man sie auf andere Sprachen tibersetzen sollte (hauptsachlich in Spanisch, Franzosisch, Deutsch, Italienisch und manchmal auch in Griechisch), damit sie weltweit von so viel Menschen wie méglich gelesen werden kénnen.
Este blog tiene como objetivo informar y sensibilizar al ptblico sobre el acoso organizado, sobre las agresiones a distancia por armas electromagnéticas y neuroldgicas por energia dirigida y sobre el control mental a distancia en general.
DECEMBER 17, 1966 In 2001, Director Christopher Wray III (FBI Director AUGUST 2, 2017 Present upon him replacing James Comey and William Pellham Barr replacing Jeff Sessions)joined the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, where he served as associate deputy attorney general and then principal associate deputy attorney general, with oversight responsibilities spanning the full Department.
This matches the time when bizarre and strange harassment of me began on the streets, the seeming impression I was imagining it all, and a bizzare component of race baiting fights with high intensity coming at me (or sexually abusive poses or activities near me, people groping themselves, fondling themselves, spreading legs, taking their clothes of in public locations, and other very bizarre conduct surrounded me which I now now is Organized Stalk of what were clearly some form of special form of police activities in inexplicable behavior.
I have always been suspicious of Sociology, some weird ghosting of all my work by the FBI or State Dept, of Barrack Obama and bizarre ghosting of me by him though in Lefist racily collectivist transhumanism social justice applications of concepts I research and argued.
In fact, the discussion of many of these techniques occurs in the context of using them in lieu of “traditional law enforcement” against people suspected of ordinary crimes or, more broadly still, “hacktivism”, meaning those who use online protest activity for political ends.
This is a copy of a signed and notarized letter from “Tara Potter” from the United States Special Forces.
It is my belief that the United States Central Intelligence Agency succeeded in its stated purpose, , of creating a pathogen deadly primarily to people of color.
Based on e-mails Hastings sent out shortly before he died about working on a “big story” and needing to go “off the radar,” it has become clear that he was wotried, too.
He retired on October 31, 2001, after more than 30 years with the agency.
Occupation Cryptanalyst-mathematician Employer National Security Agency Known for Cryptography, SIGINT analysis, whistleblowing AwardsJoe A Callaway Award for Civic Courage Sam Adams Award and Allard Prize for International Integrity He was a critic of his former employers during the « George W Bush administration, and later criticized the 1 NSA’s data-collection policies during the Barack Obama 1 administration.
He said that he volunteered for the Army during the Vietnam era in order to select work that would interest him rather than be drafted and have no input.
He was found to have strong aptitudes for mathematics, analysis, and code breaking, and served from 1965 to 1969 in the Army Security Agency before going to the NSA in 1970.
They becoming a are hit with painful microwave geopolitical world attacks every day. founded a unit on automating signals intelligence with NSA research chief John Taggart.
Binney’s NSA career culminated as Technical Leader for intelligence in 1 2001.
In September 2002, he, along with J Kirk Wiebe and Edward Loomis, , asked the United States Defense Department Inspector General to ; investigate the NSA for allegedly wasting “millions and millions of "" dollars” on Trailblazer, a system intended to analyze mass collection of ' data carried on communications networks such as the Internet.
The FBI confiscated a desktop computer, disks, and , personal and business records.
The FBI raided the homes of ; Wiebe and Loomis, as well as House Intelligence Committee staffer » Diane Roark, the same morning.
In 2012, Binney and his co; plaintiffs went to federal court to retrieve the confiscated items.
Allegations on intercepts Binney is known for making the claim that the NSA collects and stores information about every United States communication.
Binney was invited as a witness by the NSA commission of the German Bundestag.
On July 3, » 2014 Der Spiegel wrote, he said that the NSA wanted to have © information about everything.
In Binney’s view this is a totalitarian 1 approach, which had previously been seen only in dictatorships.
Meanwhile, he said that it is possible in principle to monitor the whole population, abroad ; and in the U.S., which in his view contradicts the United States * Constitution.
Rather, the “intelligence” seems to be of the same dubious, politically “fixed” kind used 12 years ago to “justify” the U.S.-led attack on Iraq.
More than 200,000 ae Targeted Individual s in the U.S., are being tracked and attacked with HighPowered Microwav e weapons, from satellites and cell towers, 24/7.
These weapons are controlled from Schriever Air Force Base in Colorado.
Most people in the world, are being precisely tracked by microwave pulses using Lockheed GPS satellites, operated by the United States Space Force, Squadron 2, at Schriever Air Force Base Colorado Springs.
Targeted Justice points 2 and 3 and 4 sound somewhat paranoid but do seem to be true so they are only summarized here.
It is said including by people who spoke to me some sort of electrochemical brain activity sensitive listening system can scan brain activity and by sonically inducing phonics into available influenceable anatomical structures or tissue even conduct sound into a persons perception.
We the public will have to speculate, drink beer with Iodine in it or least with deep rich color texture and keep tinfoil on our head to be safe.
Morrison, a shipyard electrician, and Violet Stitt Morrison, who had : been a singer and tap dancer in her youth.
The previous occupant of the s house was the writer Lee Child's father.
Morrison attended Orangefield Boys Secondary School, leaving in July ; 1960 with no qualifications.
He had been developing his musical interests from an early age and continued playing with the Monarchs part-time.
Young Morrison also played with the Harry Mack Showband, the Great Eight, with his older workplace friend, Geordie Sproule, whom he later named as one of his biggest influences.
At age 17, Morrison toured Europe for the first time with the Monarchs, ; now calling themselves the International Monarchs.
This was Morrison's first recording, taking place in November 1963 at Ariola Studios in Cologne with Morrison on saxophone; it made the lower reaches of the German charts.
In that eriod, they released two albums and ten singles, with two more singles 72a 'U released after Morrison departed the band.
Screenshot of Roseanne Barr from Jordan Brady's film ""I Lu) } : y » Barr was born on November 3, 1952, in Salt Lake City, Utah, to a "" Jewish family.
She is the oldest of four children born to Helen (née "" Davis), a bookkeeper and cashier, and Jerome Hershel ""Jerry"" Barr,who ' worked as a salesman.
Her father's family were Jewish emigrants from « Russia, and her maternal grandparents were Jewish emigrants from 1 Austria-Hungary and Lithuania.
Her paternal grandfather changed his 1 surname from ""Borisofsky"" to ""Barr"" upon entering the United States.
When Barr was three years old, she got Bell's palsy on the left side of her face.
Barr said, "" my mother called ina ,; rabbi to pray , for me, but » nothing » happened.
At six years old, she discovered her first public stage by lecturing at LDS churches around Utah and was elected president of a Mormon youth group.
At 16 about 1970, Barr was hit by a car; the incident left her with a traumatic brain injury.
Her behavior changed so radically that she was institutionalized for eight months at Utah State Hospital.
In 1970, when Barr was 18 years old, she moved out by informing her parents she was going to visit a friend in Colorado for two weeks, but never returned.
This book George W Bush Cheney ticket are Traitors to the USA and to the USA Military but very beneficial to my theory as being a Pox on the GOP house next to the Obama Jr.
In January ee ee) 1915, a 16-year-old King met future novelist F Scott | Fit Id. e zgera Ginevra King Pirie (November 30, 1898 DECEMBER 13,1980) was an American socialite, debutante and heiress.
American novelist Catholic F Scott Fitzgerald, in particular, the : character of Daisy Buchanan in The Great Gatsby.
But Fitzgerald became her most persistent gentleman caller and he « would later use the courtship as a model for Gatsby’s youthful pursuit of Daisy.
The rule that officers had to wear uniforms at all times, even while socialising, meant that he could disguise the extent of his threadbare poverty from Zelda.
None Jate of birth: July 6 » (1946 | \ge date: Nov + 22 . 1963 )ptional future age: i | Calculate Age €) | 17 years, 4 months, and 16 days | | ge: Goerge W Bush ce very Viscous Young Man He appointed Justice Roberts who has no Divinci Code like birth month and day but Justice Roberts is married to Jane Sullivan whose birthday is AUGUST 3, 1958 which seem to be one of the DARPA Brain Program NASA program dates tied to the Queen Mother August 4th birthdays which Barrack Obama Jr. has as well.
In the Illuminati Spaced Out Aliens blog of Illuminati Shadow Government Linda Newkirk describes the Shadow Government an Allied led anti Russia hemispheric confederation as tied to the Rockefellers who landed the Illuminati in Littlke Rock Arkansas, with Camp Pike (Free Mason) and Fort RObinson where MKULTRA was conducted on WWII Axis prisoners as part of Project Monarch.
Prior to enlistment, George H , W Bush fell in love with Barbara Pierce, after meeting her at a country club dance in 1941.
Alberto Gonzales as a profile matter fits the agenda of Lyndon B Johnson, teach of under performing Hispanic children in the Hill Country Texas. e Michael B Mukasey was Attorney General then and although I am pro Jewish and luke war to any Isreal outside of the 1967 boundaries, Mr Mukesy is older than I am and we both feel defeats in WIL, his greater.
I see the death of White Race nationalists, his and my empathizes are with the murdered by the Nazi regime.
DISSIMILATE MINOR VARIATIONS, EXAGGERATE THEM, HIDE THEM, IN PARTICULAR FOXP2 IN THAT BRAIN CONSTELLATION OF GENES 1. become dissimilar or less similar “These two related tribes of people gradually dissimilated over time” 2. make dissimilar; cause to become less similar 3. become dissimilar by changing the sound qualities “These consonants dissimilate” After we destroyed their lives, slandered them, planted child porn, got them thrown out of apartment complexes, smeared them, used FBI CIONTELPRO they amounted to nothing.
The origin and evolution of the list of attorneys to be dismissed remained unclear.
She was the principal deputy director of public affairs for the United States Department of Justice, serving under Attorneys General John Ashcroft and Alberto Gonzales.
As a young man, Sampson served a mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints anong Hmong refugees who had emigrated from Laos to Minnesota.
In 2006 a purge of United States Attorneys at the DOJ 4 ‘N Kevin V Ryan & J wr Kevin V Ryan is a former United States Attorney for the Northern District of California.
While working with the District Attorney’s Office, he handled a variety of cases including homicides and violent gang prosecutions.
Lin Jianhua; born June 26, 1959) is a former United States Attorney for the Southern District of California.
Southern District of California and was Chief of the Major Frauds 1 Section from 1997 to 2000.
ZWithout Lam, United States Attorney’s Office Takes Different Tack retrieved 1. from Voice of San Diego and copied or modified to here Lam, a healthcare fraud specialist, had branded herself a champion of these high-impact corporate and public corruption cases.
It was obvious 1 to Hewitt’s troops, the defense community and her counterparts at other | 7 2 tes . i federal agencies that priorities were about to shift.
California Healthline Daily Edition Monday JUN 3 2002 * Tenet Healthcare Corp. announced plans last week to close Daniel Freeman Marina Hospital in Marina del Rey, the Los Angeles Times reports.
The health system acquired the 166bed hospital last December from Carondelet Health System, a St.
Cae Bahrani, Robert F Kennedy Jr., and Monsanto Ramin Bahrani is an American director and screenwriter.
Monica raises that same question on the floor she is still on and Phoebe is in the shadow as the question was raised by Monica.
Leprechaun made in 1993 was #PostConditioning #Propoganda piece that like #AssignmentEarth used goring back into history to examine what was NECCESARY to do; for instance, stop the evil leprechaun in 1983 an #theTroubles 1983 and Jennifer Aniston in review.
George H.W Bush is vice President to Ronald Reagn who a March 1980 survived an assassination attempt In the 1981 Irish hunger strike, ten republican prisoners (seven from the Provisional IRA and three from the INLA) died of starvation.
Leprechaun set in 1983 is released with Jennifer Aniston help cure retarded Ozzie’s brain with the protection of Sheriff Tripet.
He later reconciled his belief in spirituality. | oe 2 8 ee ee ee UU a Justin Theroux retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ee eee Justin Paul Theroux is an American i actor, director, producer and screenwriter.
Redding a man and his teenage daughter Tory (Jenifer Aniston) rent the O’Grady farmhouse for the summer and find O’ grady and the three painters.
Eisman was found shot to /MUrdered his wife death on APRIL 5,.1991 According to the same TC M4 children, then Technical Consultant article, “In April, a illed himself uD Philadelphia attorney named Dennis Eisman was 1992 or was himself found dead, killed by a single bullet in his chest, UFAered along with According to a former federal official who worked _ Pls family.
SPiracy theory that resulted in the dismissal of military charges, hat the family was Mr Segal said. lpMcDonald was convicted in U.S, urdered by District Court of the murders in 1980 and is serving #SS@SSINS or terrorists S ’ three life prison terms. because of Spiro’s history as an intelligence operative.
Although MacDonald was dating multiple women at the time, he resolved to marry Colette upon learning she was pregnant with his child in AUGUST 1963.
Mildren husband Edward Cowles Stevenson, died suicide 52, 2. the SECOND Midred husband Alfred Gatas “Freddy” Kassab marries widowed Alfred Kassab, second husnand to Mildrend Madison Kassab, was born in Canada, of Egyptian and Syrian descent.
Obituary Edward Cowles Stevenson, 52, well-known Patchogue restaurant proprietor, was found dead Saturday night in his garage on Potter street, an apparent suicide.
News of Mr Stevenson’s shocked many Patchoguers who had known him as a cheerful and friendly man who often presided over the counter of H & S restaurant on Main Street, near four comers, which he had operated for 28 years with Budd Hildreth of Blue Point.
Although the club members are Masons, the club itself is not in any way a part of the Masonic Fraternity.
The FBI denounced Garrison and the prosecution and the arrest of Ferrie and others tied to the case against Shaw.
Many potential witnesses were not available because they had died since the assassination years earlier, during it, and even contemporenous with the prosecution such as Robert F Kennedy who may have and input or recognized matters being testified to.
The CIA and J Edgar Hoover had not disclosed the CIA FBI NSA DOD Secret Service Marine Corps based activities of Oswlad or Shaw.
Bush and long-term Texan conspirator LBJ, and Rockefeller of Arkansas, Dean Rusk oil business and its politicians under William King Harvey and General Edward Geary Lansdale , a United States Air Force officer who retired in 1963 and the two of those figures a Secret Team of rouge acts which included the assassination of foreign leaders and figures within the United States itself.
Bush, and LBJ, and the then CIA of the time made access to crime scene and law enforcement where the crime occurred a far reach from Louisiana and the formation of the Louisiana case against its suspects difficult.
NOVEMBER 20, 1921, Denison, [A Died: October 21, 1992, New Orleans, LA James Carothers Garrison (born Earling Carothers Garrison; November 20, 1921 October 21, 1992) was the District Attorney of Orleans Parish, Louisiana, from 1962 to 1973.
A John Barbour Film * Shaw, a native of Kentwood, Louisiana, was the son of Glaris Lenora Shaw, a United States Marshal, and Alice Shaw.
The capital and largest city is Brussels; other major cities are Antwerp, Ghent, Charleroi, Liége, Bruges, Namur, and Leuven.
After World War II, a general strike forced King Leopold III to abdicate in 1951 in favour of his son, Prince Baudouin, since many Belgians felt he had collaborated with Germany during the war.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia James Carothers Garrison (born Earling Carothers Garrison; NOVEMBER 20, 1921 October 21, 1992) was the District Attorney of Orleans Parish, Louisiana, from 1962 to 1973.
He obtained Perry RussoRusso was an insurance salesman from Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
The animal model often uses primates for research. this includes fertility studies especially as j ycurance semi erect animals can more closely approximate inspector and, movement and ovulation, fertilizations, etc., in 1951 pecame an moved to New Orleans where he worked as a pilot for Eastern Air Lines, until losing his job in August 1961, after being arrested twice on morals charges.
He started as a Senior Member with the Fifth Cleveland Squadron at Hopkins Airport in 1947.
Ferrie’s autopsy was performed by Orleans Parish coroner Nicholas Chetta and pathologist Ronald A Welsh.
They concluded that there was no evidence of suicide or murder and that Ferrie died of a massive cerebral hemorrhage due to a congenital intracranial berry aneurysm that had ruptured at the base of his brain.
She may have been one of the bravest and best-placed American spies in the history of the Cold War, but few people outside the CIA know the mysterious story of June Cobb.
Kennedy’s assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, to Cuban diplomats and spies : in Mexico City, where Oswald had traveled just weeks before the ; assassination.
The White House has not signaled what Trump, who « for years has promoted mostly baseless conspiracy theories, including ' about JFK’s assassination, will do.
Committee, which Oswald championed in the months before Kennedy’s | » murder.
Oswald, for as yet undetermined motives, had acted alone in killing John "" Kennedy.” p Orleans DA Releases Suppressed CAP Oswald Photo retrieved from Auxbeacon News and copied or modified to here { ‘ a Jim Garrison releases 1956 photo of Lee Harvey Oswald proving membership in Civil Air Patrol By New Orleans States-Item DA Releases ‘Suppressed’ Oswald | | Photo a _ District Attorney Jim Garrison has released a photograph of Lee Harvey Oswald ina Civil Air Patrol uniform, a picture he claims the federal government attempted to suppress.
The photograph of Oswald, who was named the assassin of the late President John F Kennedy by the Warren —E—AE——E—E—ESE—_ETET_E _ TET _T TE _T TET _T T_T TE T_T _ T_T T_T T_T ever Commission, was distributed yesterday afternoon during a press conference called by Garrison.
The DA said the photograph of Oswald was probably taken sometime between 1955 and 1957.
He served in the United States Army Air Forces during World "" War IT, having joined the year before the attacks on Pearl Harbor.
The New Orleans District Attorney added he plans to arrest several persons on conspiracy charges.
Stone cold truth the British killed JFK with Protestants helping I am a firsthadn witness to one otherwise unexplained piece of this, sufficeint a letter to solve the phrase missiong most of ite letters and can explain many scenes in this movie as a first hand witness whose model of understanding offers synergizing consistent gap filling in the missing text of the partial prhase.
He fails in the footsoldier battle of him against Claw Shaw, later found a CIA operative, but gains an indictment of the FBI, CIA, and United States government hiding its corrupt acts.
On YouTube One scene, an advert then the second part of the clip The story is told starting with the death of Rose Cherami who I believe » [can explain as a footsoldier of my “peoples” cause.
Like many who » knew of certain families carrying FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder and ‘ research of us and secret studies she was carrying news to JFK that the "" plan was to kill the FOXPs and use the non expressing family members « for sleeper agents despite JFKs spite for the program.
Further Reading This was the very same Barrack Obama Jr planned by Free Mason Scotish Rites, the same Barrack Obama Jr taken to the White House nursery and groomed by the Chicago Trinity Baptist Church as a sleeper.
Kevin Costner as Jim Garrison Kevin Bacon as Willie O’ Keefe Tommy Lee Jones as Clay Shaw / Clay Bertrand Clay Shaw likely gave himself, or British Intelligence gave Shaw the ( | am olaadelemadtsssll namsesake.
Sanders as Lou Ivon Walter Matthau as Senator Russell B Long Donald Sutherland as Mr X I Ed Donegan knew that man.
Prouty was the inspiration for the character “Mr X” in Oliver Stone’s film JFK.eroy Fletcher Prouty served as Chief of Special Operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff under President John F Kennedy.
A former colonel in the United States Air Force, he retired from military service to become a bank executive.
Further Reading This person who has info on who killed JFK was likely the person, neighbor, of us in Cape Cod we Donegans ice skated with on frozen cranberry fields, sailed with on Cape Cod bay, and dined with in each other’s homes.
As Garrison continued his investigation, he became convinced that a group of right-wing activists, including Banister, Ferrie and Clay Shaw, were involved in a conspiracy with elements of the Central Intelligence Agency to kill Kennedy.
Garrison would later claim that the motive for the assassination was anger over Kennedy’s attempts to obtain a peace settlement in both Cuba and Vietnam.
Garrison also believed that Banister, Shaw, and Ferrie had conspired to set up Oswald as a patsy in the JFK assassination.
FBI Director J Edgar Hoover was impressed by Banister’s work and, in 1938, he was promoted to run the FBI unit in Butte, Montana.
Banister moved to Louisiana and, in January 1955, became Assistant Superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department, where he was given the task of investigating organized crime and corruption within the police force.
It later emerged that he was also involved in looking at the role that left-wing political activists were playing in the struggle for civil rights in New Orleans.
In March 1957, Banister was suspended after pulling a gun in public in a bar and threatening a waiter.
However, when he refused to be transferred to the N.O.P.D.‘s Planning Department, he was dismissed from the force.
I state this based on my own experiences with the United States Legal system.
Demolition workers in uniform and hardhats blast mountains and buildings to be destroyed.
The FBI, CIA, United States DOD including its United States PHS Commissioned Corps uses its explosive weaponry, available criminals, to blast dissidents on those on Kill Lists.
I and other Targeted people assert lethal means of misconduct are used against us by assets who are either to do us harm in arbitrary treatment of us (such as turning down credit applications which should be approved) or arbitrary beneficial treatment of CIA backed persons, such as rigging trading or business deals or commercial opportunities on their behalf.
Ruby as used against JFK sounds like it was a plan in the tank before Oswald was ever arrested.
Front companies to conduct arbitrary acts under such as Business International Corporation, BBRDW, East-West Center, USAID, Peace Corps, Crane Group, etc., were well known CIA front companies or NGOs.
Following the conflict, he returned to Columbia, where he earned an M.A. in English in 1950 and completed course requirements for a Ph.D. in the discipline while also teaching in the English department.
LBJ is a school teacher of poor Hispanics in 1928 and is secretly backed by Joseph Kennedy Sr.
Along with Senator Lyndon B Johnson, Franklin Anderson station chief of Sri Lanka, the Peace Corps Sargent Shriver, Peter Lawford, the Mafia and 33s, cooked up a plan staring at least as far back as 1959 kept from most including the full house and JFK and RFK and Ted Kennedy would oppose as they slowly learned of it.
By THOMAS OLIPHANT and CURTIS WILKIE May 14, 2017 Politico * Although he would not run for president until 1960, John F Kennedy began speculating with family members and aides as early as 1954, when he was a freshman senator, about a future run.
NPR Long before he was presid ent, Lyndo n Afo)sats o}a taught in Cotull d, Texas.
Hitler and Hermann Goring with SA stormtroopers in front of Frauenkirche, Nuremberg in 1928 A permanent group of party members, who would serve as the Saalschutzabteilung for the DAP, gathered around Emil Maurice after the February 1920 incident at the Hofbrauhaus.
More than a year later, on AUGUST 3, 1921, Hitler redefined the group as the “Gymnastic and Sports Division” of the party , perhaps to avoid trouble with the government. a A County Health group (I photographed their a frame mobile sign at the time) does gymnastics along my path to TMOBLE to replace my phone chip, and at the location I needed to use GPS Maps to know this is the turn up from the beach walk into the city area.
Same thing wh happens on my way to gym V2Qa8 ie The SA were colloquially called Brownshirts because of the colour of their uniform’s shirts, similar to Benito Mussolini’s blackshirts.
Hitler, with an eye to helping the party to grow through propaganda, convinced the leadership committee to invest in an advertisement in the Miinchener Beobachter for a mass meeting in the Hofbrauhaus, to be held on October 16, 1919.
The next year, on FEBRUARY 24, he announced the party’s Twenty-Five Point program at a mass meeting of some 2,000 people at the Hofbrduhaus.
Every provide unbiased voter information in helping | american should forget everything to assure elections are won by patriotic and they were taught or felt about honorable candidates that are not traitors to the aie f Ind d d United S integrity, honesty, guilt or innocence ee esa Cee eee ee ee tea amine Eel and ether divisions Constitution. of the United States Department of Justice.
Every American should forget everything they were taught or felt about integrity, honesty, guilt or innocence within the FBI and other divisions of the United States Department of Justice. nation.
In fact, many of us see our elected representatives abandoning the principles and values as set forth within the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.
Disclaimer My name is Eric Charles Pearson, and I personally can assure everyone that I’m NOT suicidal.
Robyn Gritz Whistleblower: Other account screwed Robyn Lee Gritz is organizing this fundraiser. story about being discriminated and retaliated against by the FBI after 16+ years of service.
The War On The American People by Police forces across the United States have been transformed into extensions of the military.
Little Rock is also home to Nelson Rockefeller, Democrat, the Clintons, and Free Masonry, Camp Pike Fort Robinson, named after Masons and Little Newkirk who describes this as her Illuminati home and free masonary command center.
It is of interest to the CIA which is trying to manage and preempt warfare from inside masonry and both oil, religion, and race are war causes, and CIA programs around the world are cartel tied and refelect long term plans.
ProgressiveChristianity.org, Southern Baptists, Salvation Army, Sotish Rites, Vatican, Anglicans, and others may be an axis of secretive power competing for power in the USA, may interfere with elections, may conduct assinstions or exert media power, may have fifth columnss, and may be fronts of other nations dislused and undislcosed.
The Lord told Ron He was on His way from South Africa to the New iJ erusalem.
I felt like I would ' like to do something to help him out someday, but at the time I did not have the funds to do so. 1 i Later, in 1989, I heard him speak in Hendersonville, North Carolina at a Church.
The pastor there had 1 roomed with Ron at Highland Academy as a teenager, and had arranged for Ron to speak Friday night, then for i church, and in the afternoon for a question and answer period (you can hear this session under our Watch i Videos page). t Your web host, Kevin Fisher, with Ron Wyatt in 1997, Nashville, Tennessee. i ; Ron was the most humble, God-fearing man I have ever met.
In 1977, when the i Lord was showing Ron that He had a job for him to do, Ron sold his farm and used that money for this work. i He did not have health or life insurance, as he would give the money he would spent on insurance premiums to i the Lord’s work. i When brother Ron was with us, he would always stress the necessity of becoming a follower of Jesus and | obeying His Commandments.
Only a few today can see that Ron was a faithful i follower of the Lord.
The satanic leader of the new world order for the British Pilgrims Society, directed by Mammon at the Bank of England.
DEMAND REPARATIONS FROM THE ROTHSCHILD DYNASTY FOR CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY retrieved from American Intelligence Media and copied or modified to here The ROTHSCHILD FAMILY holds about 80% of the world’s wealth.
They are so rich that this one family has the ability to literally feed, cloth, and settle every man, woman, and child on the plant, if they wanted to.
At was at a Rotschild castle King Edward VIII met with Austrians on DEC13 1936 as Festus _ Gainey died in North Carolina As our readers know, we do not present information that cannot be supported with primary evidence.
However; in these latest findings, the amount of evidence is voluminous.
Out team is busy processing the evidence so that it cannot be scraped down by globalist shills.
Sins like incest, pedophilia, adultery and homosexuality are their sacraments.
All Rothschild offshore bank accounts must be seized to pay reparations for the damages that their frauds have foisted upon the world.
Feb., 2022)—In the decades surrounding America’s Declaration of Independence in 1776, Europe and the Middle East were also battling demonic principalities and powers working to pull humanity into the abyss.
This sect abandoned Judaism for a 1 “higher Torah” based on the Zohar, which was the most important work in the Kabbala, the Jewish mystical movement.
Jacob Frank was a proponent of an antinomian anarchist approach that rejected all the prohibitions and restrictions of Jewish law, including the laws of incest.
After Jacob Frank was imprisoned for thirteen years in the fortress monetary of Czestochowa, Poland, he decided that he and his followers should, on the surface, convert to the predominant religion of their region.
Then, they should secretly continue their debauchery with his messianic blessing.
In business that meant say whatever it took to get the deal even if it meant breaking those promises when expedient.
Sabbatian Frankists are well documented in the Encyclopedia Judaica and in the writings of Israeli academics.
I I I I I I I I i I I I I I I I i I I I I I I I i Inanutshell, these groups practiced incest, pedophilia, adultery and homosexuality and were otherwise | depraved.
They ran afoul of Christian and Jewish rabbinical tribunals alike, including the Inquisition.
I | Coincidentally , with the benefit of hindsight and current geopolitical events, a number of heretofore | unconnected threads come together at this time in history.
Hell Fire hedonist club for the aristocracy including John Wilkes, ancestor of John Wilkes Booth, Abraham Lincoln’s assassin 7.
Hyam Salomon , Rothschild agent in America; First Bank of America ; Rothschild co-agent Alexander Hamilton 9.
Second Bank of the United States ; Rothschild co-agent Alexander Hamilton SEMINAL ALIGNMENT OF GOOD AND EVIL FORCES IN THE WORLD CENTERED ON THE ROTHSCHILDS TREACHERY 18th Century Years When America Emerged to Counter a Satanic Global Takeover That’s Still in Process.
They kept their enemies confused by refining the art of saying the opposite of what they really think.
If a Moslem was coercing them to convert to Islam, or a Christian to Christianity, or a Jew to Judaism, they converted without resistance, on the surface, while maintaining their Sabbatist beliefs and immoral practices secretly.
Frankists seek redemption through ritual sexual ecstasy and moral opposites.
They were a belief system of opposites, 1 much like our maddening self-styled elitists today.
Critical 18th Century Years When America Emerged to Counter a Satanic Global Takeover That’s Still in Process.
In 1973, British Lord Victor Rothschild ordered an official family timeline.
This occurred just after The Rothschild Report to the UK Parliament recommended a complete overhaul of research and development investing by the British government with a focus on computers, communications and biowarfare.
The Bacharach family is a rabbinical dynasty in Frankfurt, Worms, Poland.
For context, the Frankfurt Jewish community was just being established then.
We first note that Wikipedia participates in this Rothschild misdirection.
Until the Romans arrived ' , the area had been controlled by various Germanic and Celtic tribes.
We see it as misdirection about Frankfurt’s true history and the central role of the ; Rothschilds in world corruption.
Evidence of a Jewish community in Frankfurt, a city on the Main river in western Germany, dates to the 12th century.
At that time, a small group of Jewish merchants from Worms settled in the town, and quickly flourished and grew wealthy.
Jews had been in Frankfurt prior to this period as well, but never as official residents Frankfurt had long been a market town, and Jews visited to trade there as early as the tenth century.
Eichanan had alias names Elchanan ben Uri, Han, Hon, Hane, Elkan, Elchanan Bauer.
We will not delve further into the Bacharach family name other than to say it has been a family with a strong rabbinical heritage.
CRYPTO-ROTHSCHILD BACHARACHS INFILTRATED THE United States GOVERNMENT Notably, many Bacharachs emigrated to America in the late 1800s.
The Rothschilds have totally hidden their real family name “Bacharach,” their depraved Frankist religion, and their Khazarian nomadic roots.
Then, they moved in their crypto-Bacharach family Fifth column into America in the exodus of their fellow Khazarian Jews from Odessa and climes in the 1880s.
Their sinister promotion of British Zionism and a new world order in conspiracy with the Pilgrims Society must be evaluated in a whole new light.
Now the Rothschilds must be unwound and prosecuted as satanic oppressors of humanity.
She had to flee with her family in infancy during the Second World War and was raised in Helsinki.
Luukanen-Kilde claimed to have been ""rescued"" from danger by extraterrestrials, and to have esoteric skills and knowledge as a result of her relationship with them.
She said that there was a secret exchange program between humans and aliens that was being deliberately suppressed by ""powerful Western governments"", particularly the United States.
LuukanenKilde also said that secret military and intelligence agencies were practising mind control technology on the world population using cell phones and supercomputers and that a plot to kill most of the on cybernetic implants as a means of control is widely circulated.
Acting director Department Environmental Health and Health Education, Finland, 1978.
Chief medical chief delegate Government Finland World Health Organization/Tropical Medicine, Geneva, 1978—1979.
Rauni-Leena Luukanen Kilde’s “Bright Light on Black Shadows” Earth's population using the swine flu vaccine was being carried out by the WHO, Henry Kissinger and the Bilderberg Group.
Physician United Christian Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan, 1968. adviser International Red Cross, Malaysia, Indonesia, 1979.
Rauni Kilde’s chapter 18 here because it is an instruction manual for community gang stalkers.
These same techniques, and perhaps this same manual, were evidently also used in the FBI’s COINTELPRO and Operation Gladio/Stay Behind Operations in Europe between about 1950 and 1990.
All these top-secret operations went on, officially undetected, for decades; Gladio/Stay Behind functioned secretly and illegally throughout Europe for four decades, when it was exposed in 1990 by Italian Prime Minister Andriotti.
Suomen kuningaskunta; Swedish: Konungariket Finland) was a failed attempt to establish a monarchy in Finland in the aftermath of the Finnish Declaration of Independence from Russia in December 1917 and the Finnish Civil War from January-May 1918.
The victorious Whites in the Parliament of Finland began the process of turning Finland into a kingdom and creating a monarchy.
Although the country was legally a kingdom for over a year, that was headed by a regent; the king-elect never reigned nor came to Finland following Germany's defeat in World War I, and republican victories in subsequent elections resulted in the country becoming a republic.
During the Finnish Civil War of 1918, Finnish Reds on friendly terms with Soviet Russia fought Finnish Whites who allied with the German Empire.
Direct aid from the German Baltic Sea Division aided the Whites who won the war.
The provisional government established after the Grand Duchy of Finland's declaration of independence leaned heavily toward the Finnish right and included a number of monarchists.
The parliament drew up plans to create a Finnish monarchy on the legal theory that the Swedish Constitution of 1772 was still in effect, but there had been an extended interregnum with no monarch on the throne.
Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse was elected to the throne of Finland on 9 October 1918 by the Finnish parliament, but he never took the position nor traveled to Finland.
Soon after the election, Finnish leaders as well as the population belatedly came to understand the grave situation their German allies were in, and the wisdom of electing a German prince their new leader as Germany was about to lose World War I was called into question.
Germany itself became a republic and deposed Kaiser Wilhelm II, and signed an armistice with the Allies in November.
The victorious Western powers informed the Finnish government that the independence of Finland would only be recognized if it abandoned its alliance with Germany.
As a result, in December 1918 Frederick Charles renounced the throne and the Baltic Sea Division withdrew from Finland.
In the March 1919 election, with the Finnish left and socialists able to vote, republicans won a crushing victory.
Finland's status as a republic was confirmed in the Finnish Constitution of 1919.
She was harassed, defamed, tortured,and eventually, on Feb., 2015, murdered in this program.
Kilde nor her publisher were/are native English speakers, there are minor grammatical errors in the text.
To make the text read more smoothly, I occasionally add additional words, which I place in parentheses.
Kilde does not specify where she obtained this instruction manual or who authored it.
However, as Chief Medical Officer for Northern Finland, she was an “insider” who was invited to many open and secret conferences.
Doubtless, she does not divulge the author of this document in order to protect her informant.
I note that many phrases and spellings are peculiar to the British form of the English language.
OR, it could reflect the fact that the original document was written by British military-intelligence operatives.
There are obvious comparisons to be made with the CIA’s KUBARK torture manual, which has been employed in Vietnam, Latin America, the Middle East, and indeed, in CIA “black sites”/” extraordinary rendition” centers throughout the entire world.
Several senior German military figures later said that ; it would have proved near impossible due to the superiority of British air » and naval power.
GB were published, to be given to German officers in the event of an « invasion.
However, living in Trenton, N.J., in the mid-’30s, Othmer » became a leader in the pro-Nazi group Friends of New Germany, later "" the German-American Bund.
Knoxville was near ; Alcoa, a major supplier of material for war planes.
In the summer of 1944, in the weeks just after D-Day, the FBI was trying to root out agents of the Abwehr, Nazi Germany’s intelligence organization.
Three decades after the war, Agent Felt, who had become the FBI’s associate director, was more concemed about the clandestine machinations of his own government.
Hoover’s right« hand man for decades, Tolson was in failing health and unable to carry rout his duties.
Richard Gid Powers wrote that Hoover installed Felt to i rein in William C Sullivan’s domestic spying operations, as Sullivan had been engaged in secret unofficial work for the White House.
Nixon spoke to Dean about Felt’s acting as an informant, and mentioned that he had never met him.
It is hard to know what Schwarzenegger knew or when he knew it, even RFK I am absolutely sure did not understand until 1968 and then partially, but the magnetism towards the British camp and allegiance was possible as an affect on Schwarzenegger.
His Rock and Hard Place disaster in history he has no way out of is best understood in a view of the play of Romeo and Juliet.
House of Capulet Juliet Capulet is the 13-year-old daughter of Capulet, the play’s female protagonist.
House of Montague Romeo Montague the son is the play’s male protagonist.
Bush and Donald Barr families are agreeing, not feuding, Capulets and Montagues.
A love child they will groom is CIA backed sleepers for the 21st Century.
Barrack OBama Jr will be one, moderate leftist who can displace far Leftist socialist and communist governments and lead them back to the Right.
Bush with Protestant or Universalists religions are going to sort of create a love child not actually of their own biology but some shelf DNA for a child, that child will be Barrack Obama Jr.
In Arnold Schwartzeneggers field of life he is in Eugenics program with England he loves and that program not concerned to much about strict Roman Catholic beliefs on assasination, suicide, or reproductive rights is going to IVF a baby already doubted as Natural Birth by some for Presidency and certainly of suspicous glances from practicing Roman Catholics.
Bush, Rockefeller, ROthschilds, British Pilgrim Society, Council on Foreign Relations, Trilateral Commision, Bilderburg, and a large conspiracy he is in wants to take Romeo and Juliets love child and place it into power in Indonesia, Cuba, or wherever.
As dumb luck would have it the Kennedy’s are strict proud anti British IRA type Roman Catholics who had to be assasinated.
Der Governator has to go and does like the Kennedys family functions but he and Peter Lawford know all about the goings on at the Rich Weirdo’s estate and likley that JFK was shot over it.
In the architecture described above in the graphic exhibit Arnold Schwartzengger is a fusion of criminality and possibly tied to Gym Stalk Waltham murders and other acts of terror.
He has a loyalty to Great Britain and resent to Nazis which arose in what he likely considered a populist movement which should have been stopped by elites of the world.
The Kennedy Family Assassinations are setup by longest reigning of Kingpins William Barr.
Underneath the Donald Barr then Free Mason Kingpin were other Scotish Rites Free Masons including Thorkil Kristensen, London School of Economics, Oil and Overthrow Incorporated under the names Zapata Oil, Standard Oil, British Patroleum, and other names.
Operatives J Edgar Hoover, James Jesus Angleton, and others explain the Middle East North Africa, Australia, Ireland, Indonesia, Hawaii plans to the Kennedy family and get at least early sign off but later the Troubles in Belfast will break the plan apart.
Although in a different branch of world wide Eugenics work being carried out and not in the USA the part of the fabric Arnlod Schwartzenegger is in for himslef and his marriage to Seargenet Shriver Eunice Kennedy daughter Maria Shriver will tie him by family and his own acts and British Commonwealth involvement into the full fabric of events.
As part of Donegan and Windsor DNA conducted by Deep State Assassination Overthrow work some sleepers will be groomed with bastard children of Windsor Kutschera hidden from public identity.
Seargemt Shriver is working with East-West Center, LBJ, Crane Suherto Group CIA, NSA for sleeper leader who will grow up abroad into Regime Change inside foreign hostile nations.
Born in London in 1923, he was the only child of Lieutenant General Sir Sydney Turing Barlow Lawford, KBE (1865-1953 C THE HORROR: Under a plan desired by the British and now controlled by Kingpin Wiliam Barr secret Windsor-Kustschera DNA out of James and Glorian Donegan atomic testing DNA and Glorian Donegan’s ancestry will ie Be tested inter-racially for race study, possible children being used around the world for Indonesia, Kenya, Cuba, Ireland, elsewhere.
Being tested for propagation of FOXP2 Minimal Brain Dysfunction propagation in gene pools larger and more diverse the the Windsor London KE Family line.
Tom Donegan and Glorian Donegan are writing on the Rocky Horror wall as a CSection is done and a baby hung by the ankle is brand spanking new into the world, that being a Eugenics experiment.
Most FBI Directors come from the families which rean the entire conspiracy like Free Mason Grand Master DuPont family of Manhattan Project, the Bush family of Office of Scientific Research, etc., and the Espionage Wetdivision are tied to leak containment as well as assassination and regime change has been INSIDE the USA as well as outside to keep long term goals and CIA DARPA Free Mason Chosen leaders.
The truth my family knows and abuse we have been through is why I think the USA and FBI “have it in for me” and my book as they cover-up they needed Roman Catholic United States officials out of the way , like the Donegans, Kennedys’ Joe Dimagio, and more.
Tied to assasination if bastard children seem usable, not with recognizable family trait.
Bush, Lyndon Johnson, and other families were working on were likely working with him too.
Following the end of World War I with the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, in 1918, the newly formed Republic of German-Austria attempted to form a union with Germany, but the Treaty of Saint Germain and the Treaty of Versailles (28 June 1919) forbade both the union and the continued use of the name “GermanAustria” ; and stripped Austria of some of its territories, such as the Sudetenland.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia After WWI Germany was constrained from it Austria-Hungarian-Gernman central might of Europe and Adolph Hitler wanted that central European power and position back and ethnic protection of central European DNA and political nationalism against English or European Royalty not tied to Gernmany and political nationalism from Internatioinlist Communisits who also wnated global inter-rule of nations.
In 1925 the former centrail Euoropean family Windsors had adopted England as a home and adopted the area of Windosr Palace as a name for themselves even though the so called Royal greates carried a minor genetic flaw which tends to dampen many life activities such as rigorous studies thus leads to poorer outcomes against academic rivals, etc., in contest for top of the class or even graduation.
An underground railroad formed in 1925 -1936 bringing many to the USA or London including the Von TRapps, and their soon family members born in the USA in 1926 (two of whom were Harold Gainey and Glorian Gainey, Glorian Gainey my mother maried to Glorian Donegan.
With the Berlin Olympics of 1936 and major Nazi display Eugenics and Race become a major feature of racial war lines as well as political phiilosophy war lines, again, genetics a factor in Royal DNA and whether royals would lose throwns over genes if the defects were known.
He entered another bodybuilding contest in Graz, at Steirerhof Hotel, where he placed second.
He was voted “best-built man of Europe”, which made him famous in bodybuilding circles.
Schwarzenegger made his first plane trip in 1966, attending the NABBA Mr Universe competition in London.
He placed second in the Mr Universe competition, not having the muscle definition of American winner Chester Yorton.
Charles “Wag” Bennett, one of the judges at the 1966 competition, was impressed with Schwarzenegger and he offered to coach him.
As Schwarzenegger had little money, Bennett invited him to stay in his crowded family home above one of his two gyms in Forest Gate, London.
Yorton’s leg definition had been judged superior, and Schwarzenegger, under a training program devised by Bennett, concentrated on improving the muscle definition and power in his legs.
Staying in the East End of London helped Schwarzenegger improve his rudimentary grasp of the English language.
When you’re the age I was then, you’re always looking for approval, for love, for attention and also for guidance.
But now, looking back, I see that the Bennett family fulfilled all those needs.
Also in 1966, while at Bennett’s home, Schwarzenegger had the opportunity to meet childhood idol Reg Park, who became his friend and mentor.
The training paid off and, in 1967, Schwarzenegger won the title for the first time, becoming the youngest ever Mr Universe at the age of 20.
Schwarzenegger then flew back to Munich, where he attended a business school and worked in a health club (Rolf Putziger’s gym, where he worked and trained from 1966 to 1968), returning in 1968 to London to win his next Mr Universe title.
There he trained at Gold’s Gym in Venice, Los Angeles, California, under Joe Weider’s supervision.
From 1970 to 1974, one of Schwarzenegger’s weight training partners was Ric Drasin, a professional wrestler who designed the original Gold’s Gym logo in 1973.
Schwarzenegger also became good friends with professional wrestler Superstar Billy Graham.
One of the first competitions he won was the Junior Mr Europe contest in 1965.
He would go on to compete in many bodybuilding contests, and win most of them.
His bodybuilding victories included five Mr Universe wins (4 NABBA , 1 IFBB ), and seven Mr Olympia wins, a record which would stand until Lee Haney won his eighth consecutive Mr Olympia title in 1991.
Credited under the stage name “Amold Strong”, his accent in the film was so thick that his lines were dubbed after production.
His second film appearance was as a deaf-mute mob hitman in The Long Goodbye , which was followed by a much more significant part in the film Stay Hungry , for which he won the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year Actor.
LONDOM ROCKY HORROR ERA 1970-1975 The play about a bodybuilder follows Amold Schwartzengger from London to the USA about 2 to three years behind him.
Richard O’ Brien was living as an unemployed actor in London during the early 1970s.
Since his youth, O’Brien had loved science fiction and B horror movies.
EXHIBITS:id824 picture of Peter Lawford Estate, id786 page if this book explaining the SciFi Double Feature of two born brain study creatures was fictionalized reality Arnold Schwwartzegger appears to be part of the story of building super beings by Eugenics in the Lab and the Slab.
Meanhile a family meets in Denton, North Carolina, I think the Donegans and Gaineys.
Nona Chafin Siki Pug Dog lifelong friend of all donegans of LA is in there too.
The play made into a film appears to tell the story of the creation of Barrack Obama Jr and the destruction of the life of Eddi including by writing on the wall.
On February 3, 2008, Shriver endorsed Senator Barack Obama for the 2008 Democratic presidential nomination.
The endorsement was given at a UCLA rally featuring Caroline Kennedy (Shriver’s cousin), Oprah Winfrey, Stevie Wonder, and Obama’s wife Michelle Obama.
Governor Schwarzenegger had endorsed Senator John McCain for the Republican presidential nomination a few days earlier on January 31, 2008.
Later that year, as in 2004, Shriver was in attendance at the Democratic National Convention when her uncle Ted Kennedy spoke.
The first term of Arnold Schwarzenegger as governor of California began on November 17, 2003, and ended on January 3, 2007.
In the first year of his first term as governor, Schwarzenegger proposed deep cuts in the state budget and was met with opposition in the California State Legislature.
When San Francisco started granting same-sex marriage licenses at the behest of mayor Gavin Newsom, the governor ordered state attorney general Bill Lockyer to intervene in the matter and vetoed legislation that would have legalized same-sex marriage.
Because of their opposition to his budget cuts, Schwarzenegger controversially called his opponents in the legislature girlie men.
At the 2004 Republican National Convention, Schwarzenegger gave a speech endorsing the reelection of George W Bush as President of the United States.
Methodists like Dan Coates, CIA people like Sue Gordon, and others hide who was in the NWO underground railroads.
Those included FOXP2 Syndrome patients now under Espionage assault as their existence is denied, and existence which would prove the Twins Studies plans that were underway JFK and RFK objected to, grooming twins the non-symptomatic as Infiltrators and the symptomatic shrugged of a eugenically very far away, even left for dead.
Further Reading on Kate Clifford Larson “T or others will not be disavowed by my Nazi father for FOXP2.
Move the pen towards someone else because you in a hurry. a _IN JUST 7 DAYS HAIR WEIDER AND HAIR ARNOLD CAN MAKE YOU A MAN There has never been any doubt about Jews courage or intellect (knowing when to attemot escape and when not was a demonstrated skill) but athleticism has been in doubt. weider* weve 2677 El Presidio St.
N, Captain Von Trapp and his Austria Hungarian War history against Russia George Soros HonFBA (born Gyorgy Schwartz, August 12, 1930 is a Hungarian-born American billionaire investor and philanthropist.
Born in Budapest to a non-observant Jewish family, Soros survived the Nazi occupation of Hungary and moved to the United Kingdom in 1947.
AUSTRIA-HUNGARY BEFORE WORLD WAR I < tgs a oles eon cer Tor aries nL 0) In March 2017, six United States senators sent a letter to then Secretary of State Rex Tillerson asking that he look into several grants the State Department and the United States Agency for International Development have given to groups funded by “leftwing” Soros.
Mar 8, 1917 Jun 16, 1923 that created an Anti-Monarchism fight along the Russian border pitting the monarchies of Europe against Communists people’s government In this context Maria Kutschera and Captain Von Trapp with the assistance of the Vatican left for England.
This looks reversed, KE VIII has bad handwriting, Prince Albert his on brother does not.
History In Ink™ Historical Autographs King Edward VII The Duke of Windsor, Prince Albert of York King George VI Edward Albert Christian George Andrew Patrick David , King Edward VIII, 1936, Duke of Windsor, 1936-1972, and Albert Frederick Arthur George , King George VI, 1936-1952.
The portrait of Edward VIII, made in 1936, is by Hugh Cecil; that of George VI, made in 1938, is by Bertram Park.
Golds Gym appears in a Jodie Foste movie in a planted logo and also in Manchurian Candidate 1962 there is a ficational character highly upset at the level of death that occured during WWII One possibility is that either the Vatican OR OSS of the USA or British Intelligence rescued Amold from Gustav and may have known about FOXP2 even then, but not much about it.
During that time the OSS CIA or British Intelligence would also likely have been interested in the SA and its officials (Gustav was a Sergeant level operative) and thus Arnold was high on the underground railroad list of rescuees.
Brooklyn Academy of Music, home to the Mr Olympia 1965-69 & ’73 / Jeffrey ; Bray But when it came to contests, his were perceived as second best.
It is in 1977-1978 the GangStalk of me begins, the Leonard Skynard plane goes down, and Arnold Schwarzenegger guest stars on Streets of SF, filming there, about clinical defect of Legend about FOXP2 which appears to be the opposite, I tend to brush things off with humor though emotions under stress are strong. q Joe Weider rr i i I I I t Joseph Weider (/'wi:dar/; November 29, 1919 * March 23, 2013) was a Canadian bodybuilder and * entrepreneur who co-founded the International ' Federation of BodyBuilders alongside his ' brother Ben Weider.
The International Federation of BodyBuilding and Fitness , headquartered in i Las Rozas , is an international professional sports governing body for ; bodybuilding and fitness that oversees many of the sport’s major international : events, notably the World and Continental Championships.
By 1970, the « IFBB had directors in more than 50 countries worldwide and the IFBB had its i footprint in Africa, Asia, Europe, Australia, North America, and South America.
Now called Schiff Nutrition International, they were the creators of Tiger’s Milk nutrition bars and related products, one of the earliest lines of sports foods.
Golfer, and Flex, in addition to the “skin magazines” Jem Magazine and Monsieur. : The last two publications caused at least two clashes with obscenity laws.
The claims, along with misleading “before and after” photographs, were deemed i false advertising by a Superior Court Judge in 1976.
Honours and accolades Sign at Venice Beach commemorating Joe Weider’s donation. w Sign at Venice Beach commemorating Joe Weider’s donation.
Schwarzenegger, a Weider \ protégé, presented him with the » Venice Muscle Beach Hall of | Fame’s Lifetime Achievement "" award.
The movie Bigger was released in 2018 focusing on the life of Joe Weider. : Tyler Hoechlin plays Joe Weider, while Julianne Hough plays Betty Weider, his ; second wife.
Arnold attributed this behavior to guilt and shame over what Gustav and other Nazis and collaborators had perpetrated or enabled during the Wal.
A drug has made him incredibly buff and muscled, but has also left him extremely hypersensitive to riticism and with no control over his anger.
Josef Schmidt | International IQ Test and Similarity Transofmations in 1936 England | Repuib of Ireland Arnold Schwarzenegger | John F Kennedy Gym Roughians and the Waltham Murers A triple homicide was committed in Waltham, Massachusetts, in the United States, on the evening of September 11, 2011.
My brother Tom Donegan upon meeting Tim Kaine found he might be a candidate for Governer of Virginia, Tom Donegan did NOT show FOXP2 and always fancied himself having ancesterors ar an anscetor who was a royal.
Ce ee ee a a a a a a a a a a The Governator dropped from the Sky retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or . modified to here ge zy) As a Republican candidate, Schwarzenegger was first elected on October 7, 2003, in a special recall election to replace then-Governor Gray Davis.
Davis’ term, and was re-elected in the 2006 California gubernatorial election with an : increased vote share of 55.9% to serve a full term as governor.
In 2011, he ; reached his term limit as Governor and returned to acting.
Arnold Schwarzenegger ‘NEGGERDI Arnold Schwarzenegger had a brother, Meinhard Schwarzenegger who was avored by his father(a former Nazi party member) and died in a drunk driving crash at 24.
They separated in 2011 i after he admitted to having fathered a child with their housemaid in 1997, and their 1 divorce was finalized in 2017.
His mother was of (Czech descent, while his aternal great-grandfather, enzel Mach, was also Czech and came from the village of Chocov near Mlada VoZice. enzel had a child out of edlock with Kunigunde Schwarzenegger, and the child (Schwarzenegger’s paternal grandfather) was originally amed Carl Mach but later adopted his mother’s surname Schwarzenegger.
Schwarzenegger back in the private sector for more than four years now, after two terms leading the state from Sacramento takes movie and business meetings here.
His i favoritism was “strong and blatant”, which stemmed from unfounded suspicion that ; Arnold was not his biological child.
Austria became part of Nazi Germany after being annexed on 12 March 1938.
Schwarzenegger also applied to become a member of the Sturmabteilung [Brown Shirt Gym Roughians destroying the lives of and attacking opposition in the streets) , the Nazi party’s paramilitary wing, on 1 May 1939, a year after the annexation of Austria, at a time when SA i {membership was declining.
People were giving out her tips as though she did not know them herself.
JULY 3, 1985 The December 13 daughter is exhibiting strong ' emotions and possible Borderlin Personality « Disorder in internal struggle. ' ; child.
Emporors and elevated groomed support and others coming up short and perhaps i even sabotaged and hidden who don’t know their twins are Govenors and Presidents.
It depicts Ed Corney a t I t : in a victory pose, his hands raised above his heads, open palms 1 towards the front. i I | | | ' bodybuilding, with a focus on the 1975 IFBB Mr Universe and 1975 Mr Olympia "" competitions.
Billy and his wife Marjorie, who were married 53 years, had one son, William J Mauch II, named after himself.
GAYLE AND GILLIAN BLAKENEY pic from Daily Mail UK Gayle and Gillian Blakeney are Australian Australian identical twins born 9 JULY 1966 who performed together as actresses and as a dance/pop duo in the 1990s.
The girls knew from a young age that they rm wanted to be on television.
CHARLIE AND MAX CARVER iw Max Carver (born Robert Maxwell Martensen Jr AUGUST 1, 1988) is an American actor.
In 1992, Anne and her new husband Denis Sutro moved the family to Calistoga in Napa Valley.
CHRISTIAN AND JOSEPH COUSINS ns Christian and Joseph Cousins (pic from Pinterest) are American actors who are identical twins.
Phoebe gets a terrible case of stomach flu, falling ill at the last moment, so Kimble takes her place.
The suspicious school principal, Miss Schlowski, is convinced Kimble will not last long before quitting.
He was Ambassador to France from 1968 to 1970 and Vice ' Presidential candidate in George McGovern’s unsuccessful run for President in 1972.
This book Taking over my Gym Workout, road blocking my gym access Afoy-m eve) lcemavensulercinl bodybuilder.
March 10, 1922 July 11, » 2004) was an American : bodybuilder and businessman.
Joe Gold was the youngest of } four siblings, Robert Gold ' , Nathan : Gold and Eunice Gold Fiss.
Max Gold was ' the neighborhood junk collector and the family’s back yard and garage served as a i makeshift junk yard.
She had attached a filled bucket to each end of a broom handle and was using them as lifts.
Joe and his brother, Robert Gold, got the idea ' for building their own equipment from scrap obtained from their father’s scrap yard in ' Boyle Heights.
States Navy during World War II, where he was badly injured in a torpedo attack, and : also in the Korean War.
I was stalked in the gym including multiple gyms in San Francisco when I lived with DJ Slaveboy, before, and after but something new was added to it when I used Sport and Health Gym in 2010 in Arlington Virginia on Wilson Blvd.
Many of my workout videos were on my own MP4s on tablet or cell phone and had Cyberghoth dancing because the high energy hand movements were perfent for jump rope.
Industrial Dance ]_Noisuf-X Industrial Dance Alien Vampires Control The Universe As locally stored MP4s any wire tap did not reveal their origins but some very scuzzy blacks began losing control, watching the videos hiding behind exercize eqiupment or from outside windows resulting in police calls.
Those in the gym then saw the others “peeping” and “fapping” not able to stop, and taking pictures of my videos playing “triggered” by the sight of it into a compulsion.
I have stalkers “paying” gym women, others for the “porn” of me taking pictures of women in gym clothes, at the pool, etc., I beleive that sets the #PsyOps expectation I should be socially excluded from those locations, others instead of me.
When the person who is Fake Ed hires an adult model she arrives to find Fake Ed is really a child porn addict and owes for harm done to little minority children.
I do not but my Trust Fund agrees with this which fits a Kamala Harris is a Hero narrative.
I found out the old school chest strap used a certain frequency OEM chip which worked easily with gym equipment and inexpensive equipment, but like googles (taken directly in front of me) and other equipment needs, the chest strap was stolen, seemingly by a trainer of Arlington Sport and Health and leftist telegraph ave type leftist women repeated my exercise moves in front of me in exaggerated ways after I had already been doing those exercises.
I think the gym environment was a place blacks were accepted as athletes already and if social justice programs could make my own system part of Social Justice Behavioral Health of Yoga it could become an integration opportunity for non-whites; however, the program designed by behavioral health care was more based on hostility towards me and encouraged others to bring negativity and wrongful acts into the normally mentally healthy and safe gym environment.
It was the gym environment that was abnormal, not me in any way, this was launched at me for no reason I understood. i was a promoter and fan of great artists like Luccci in the Goth scene.
Much of has centered around others force teaming themselvs with my tablet music, while asserting to me it had on only “porn” meaning, which Princess Apartments CC TX is continuing (You chould close your door when that type of muisc is on, Ed, the black buidling management tolld me.
Sport & Health Near Clarendon to Close Next Month by Ethan Rothstein February 5, 2014 Located at at 1122 N Kirkwood Road, the gym is one of four Sport & Health clubs in Arlington; there is one in Ballston and two in Crystal City.
I believe internal to the US, illegal in the US, United States State actors are acting in concert with and international illegal operation, racketeering genome rights, and are sabotaging my own, and further these often “scuzzy” social elements were drawn from active felon environments I will later describe as a racially motivated and criminal lumpenproletaria.
The gym | | i i i i i | i | | i i i | i | | | | “The market conditions have changed and the facility that was created decades ago will } i i i | | | i | | i | | | | | | originally opened in 1977, according to General Manager Perry White. i The Arnold, Golds Gym, and the Waltham Murders tied to the Bpston Marathon Bombing and JFK Library fire Round Rock is a city in the United States state of Texas, in Williamson County, which is a part of the Greater Austin metropolitan area.
This exact same thing happens three times on the streets of Virginia with a black mental health inmate at that time then released and bozo the clown like hair do who walked in front me down the streets with index finger to the thumb “meditating” with me during my walk, also women screaming in the area, none of which was welcome.
More than a year later, on AUGUST 3, 1921, Hitler redefined the group as the “Gymnastic and Sports Division” of the party , perhaps to avoid trouble with the government.
A County Health group (I photographed their a frame mobile sign at the time) does gymnastics along my path to TMOBLE to replace my phone chip, and at the location I needed to use GPS Maps to know this is the turn up from the beach walk into the city area.
Same thing wh happens on my way to gym PQ ee Sometimes it does seem like there are no words.
AUTOMOPHELIA ' vy, Persons driving vehicles around such as “DaBoyz” beach going jeeps ‘with light panels playing with the wrong shifter while peeping at womans ‘buttocks wile armed, on drugs, and bouncing drooling faces off the ‘steering wheels ‘vA supporting act such as positioning buttocks in front of Ed Donegan such that Ed Donegan is the suspected photographer of buttocks AUTOMOPHELIAC Peron, often non white, obsessed with segregated culture resultant from ‘White Supremacism.
I i | | | | | I | i] i | | i] | | I | | I i] | | | | I I i] | I | | | | i] I i I | | | The SA were colloquially called Brownshirts because of the colour of ; their uniform’s shirts, similar to Benito Mussolini’s blackshirts.
If a violent offenders are psychopathic, they are able to assault, rape, and murder without 1 concern for legal, moral, or social consequences.
This is NOT a form of participation, however, because the initiators do not want the advice of the co-opted, merely his or her endorsement *” Blacks and gays surrounded me in the gym, pretending to be my workout partners and as that also part of competing system, not mine.
Nearly every time I left the gym United States Marines or others seemed to have “dead accountant Bernie” in tow with them, these non white males, because Bernie the accountant wanted to see what white females look like.
President John F Kennedy Secret Service Agent Gerald ""Jerry"" Behnand President John Siees y Seivee hg Bary Presidential Assistant Dave Powers Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.S5TH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About Events Endorsements Posts Community Restaurant In 1992, Schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in Santa Monica called Schatzi On Main.
She is a member of the Kennedy family; her mother, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, was a sister of John F., Robert and Ted Kennedy.
An opponent of United States entry into World War II, he helped establish the America First Committee but volunteered for the United States Navy before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
Demeaning MY use of my lifelong music while in the gym as “the gym into porn” , not a workout place’ (when IN FACT the RIVAL system of me, also in the gym, used the gym for “porn” and used my presence as their scapegoat) Wow.
Victoria Secrets models, white, will show thier asses to retarded fake ed and retarded fake Ed will be punished for the photos taken in the gym by retarded fake ed. a Some kind of espionage capability could pause my music if I left the Tmobile chip in the phone “Play to Pause” electronic attack y Photography Tx and Music Rx in the gym / set Punishment is use of Ed Donegan DNA Forger Rx Scapegoat a person who is blamed for the wrongdoings, mistakes, or faults of others, especially for reasons of expediency.
Victoria Secrets models, white, will show their asses to retarded fake ed and retarded fake Ed will be punished for the photos taken in the gym by retarded fake ed I call Tx aka Picturetaker-1.
In the Totality of all evidence, real, and embellished, as a Narrative Cutting out my leaving the gym alone with someone leaving the gym with an impersonator.
Forging my agreement I email Mistress earabancagnn oes She will follow her is in my vicnity in the Gym in California IMPERSONATOR OF ME from the gym who will forge my agreement Circumstantial SUBSTANTIAL INCULLPATORY, cut in by cops & INCULPATORY & INCULPATORY Some technology in use by Espionge could get my smartphone music to stop (if my CDMA Chip was in) and that as a women stepped in front of me.
VivianNYC about scene resources, housing in NYC non inculpatory This never had anything to do with me, but it was disruptive to me and everyone in the gym.
Knights Templar Cartel retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ~ hé Knights Templar Cartel was a Mexican criminal organization originally composed of the remnants of La Familia Michoacana drug cartel based in the Mexican State of Michoacan.
After the first alleged death of Francisco Montes and co-founder Nazario Moreno, leaders of the La Familia Michoacana cartel, on 9 December 2010, a split between the ; cartel leaders emerged.
Asof September 2017, it is believed the cartel has ceased to exist after their leader : Pablo “El 500” Toscano Padilla and his lieutenant Ezequiel “El Cheques” Castaneda ; were reported to have been killed by remnants of La Nueva Familia Michoacana ‘ Organization while on their way to a regional meeting with members of the Jalisco : New Generation Cartel to form an alliance with them.
By May 2020, all 39 non-New ' Generation cartel operating in Guerrero were splinter cartels.
In June 2020, it was ' reported that the Cartel del Abuelo and Los Viagras, as well as to a lesser extent the ' Jalisco New Generation Cartel, were the active cartels in Michoacan.
The previously all-female 4th Recruit Training Battalion has graduated four of its first-ever male platoons alongside two female platoons and included the first male drill instructors assigned within the battalion.
This book Fighting Monarch is a Revealer Probably knows he is tied to some King George V family line, and fighting the MKULTRA program called Project Monarch.
If you would like more information, please contact askhagley@hagley.org Hagley ID 1972341_1432 PID islandora:2224312 /u ; fal la ‘li Kinston Dupont Camdem Bishopville Greensboro DuPont Judy Laube I have your story you publicly share in my book.
By ERNEST A CANNING * While I’ve always had the utmost respect for Australian journalist and documentary filmmaker John Pilger, I must admit that the first time I watched his video, “Obama is a Tee corporate marketing creation,” I thought that, in implying that the President was some type of CIA-connected Manchurian Candidate, Pilger was a bit over the top.
Chris Hedges a very fine author of Empire of illusion he puts it very ; well President Obama he wrote does one thing and brand Obama gets ; you to believe another this is the essence of successful advertising you » buy or do what the advertiser wants because of how they make you feel * unquote and so you are kept in a perpetual state of childishness.
The End of Literacy and the Triumph of Spectacle Empire of Illusion[ary showy entertainment am NEWSREELish spectacles presented to us the viewers] wa We now live in two Americas.
WWE contests, the Adult Video News Awards in Las Vegas, and Ivy ; League graduation ceremonies-to expose an age of terrifying decline and ; heightened self-delusion.
Her father, the son of ran English schoolteacher, emigrated from England to Texas with his parents in 1880.
Butt Foundation and founder of the Christian learning center, Laity Lodge; e Margaret Eleanor Butt Crook, served as director of Bread for the World.
Charles named The Holdsworth Center after Mary Elizabeth. e Another child, Mary Beth Butt, who lived for only 10 days , is buried beside Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt at the Glen Rest Cemetery in Kerrville, Texas, was the fourth child of Howard Butt, Sr., and Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt.
Foundation for Mental Health founded by Ima Hogg in 1940) and ; Margaret Scarbrough (wife of Austin retailer Lemuel Scarbrough and » founder of the Scarbrough Foundation), organized and hosted the first » Conference of Texas Foundations and Trusts which coordinated ) philanthropic giving Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt died in her house in Corpus Christi on October 6, 1993.
Robert F Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Gored Kennedy campaigns in Los Angeles (photo by Evan Freed) Second gunman theory Wounds The location of Kennedy’s wounds suggested that his assailant had stood behind him, but witnesses said that Sirhan stood facing west, about a yard away from Kennedy, as he moved through the pantry facing east.
This book Joseph Robinette Biden Jr Kamala Harris Barrack Obama ritish GENERAL REGISTER OFFICE issued bogus birth and alriage certificates for Sir Nigel Graham Knowles —British Pilgrims ociety handler for Vice Pretender Kamala D Harris Benz Nn The birth and marriage certificates provided by the British government for Knowles have multiple fatal flaws and are evidently doctored for propaganda purposes.
Names : are a shell game since they all have common Optech software | | | Knowles’ family reaches back to the beginnings of mass ; communications, propaganda, Victorian satanic spiritism-scientism, , fascist banking and resource stripping, and vaccines as a weapon of war "" by the mid-1800s Notables JOSEPH ROBINETTE BIDEN JR BORN NOVEMBER 20, 1942 “Joe” is an American politician who is the 46th and current president of the United States.
In 2008-2009 I was held as mentally incompetent and spent more than a year in custody explaining extensive racial views to all black psychologist and psychiatrists to show I was “competent” and that my site Real Harm Real Foul was legal and not insane.
During the course of that I was talking about deficit social spending as unhelpfull and the deficit level.
If a spark ever set it on fire it could burn, and it would be liek a run on financial institutions that lacked public confidence.
Although I demanded at least my participation in Honor Flight DCA I was blocked from attending and later Biden took it up.
On Veterans Day while I was in Good Sams Homeless shelter Biden said the Left look out for all peoples rights while Republicans do not.
I had at that time, HDCA, complained about memorials names citing my trips in Russia and learning the string of names of cities like Lenningrad.
MOTIVE FOR THE ATTACK Others including Barrack Obama Jr. the Kelly brothers, Arnold Schwartzenegger for varioius reasons have the samd DNA and its true origins those “elites” do not want found out, a CIA research program.
Hiding by life outcomes, diagnosis of brain function, and suppression of whole samples of DNA are part of the total origins and idenity of these biological families of origins.
Creates discrimination between high performing good brain elites and societal losers of lower strata and failed lives ¢ MEDICAL FRAUDULENT DIAGNSIS : In combination with suversion/falsification of data, and data contaminated by interference by espionage the FOXP2 brain exhibiting minimal brain dysfuncion will seem as largely inferior from much different elite brains.
SUBJECT OF ATTACK, MY CULTURE The Atheist upbringing I had allowed me a non biased view of pagan and heathen sexuality and BDSM, etc., Frowned on by religion and society for hundreds of years as snuff film psychopath violence prone, I was more open to it than the religious were who didn’t like swinger parties anyway.
In conjunction with “Renaissance Man” educational level of my father guiding me and educating me by elite schooling and travel the total affect was a highly cultured person without a college degree.
Those on more conventional paths including what I consider a waste of time, church services, found I had valuable cultural insight and sophistication and while claiming I represented an unsophisticated threat of unknown origins I was Targeted for exploitative co-optive study by those destructively attacking my life outcomes as they seize them.
Those benefiting as achievers in my belief system are using a different life value system and its the crime, not the intellectual devotion to exploration which is propelling them and their system which does not embrace nor used my system of beliefs e BETRAYAL OF THE DONEGAN FAMILY: James and GLorian sacrificed a great deal for religious liberty (my father felt Christians in modern times have undergone terrible hardships) and in fighting NAZI Germany.
For the groups to attack me being racially motivated and religiously motivated the work my parents put into me exploited by these groups betrays the defense of all the entire Donegan lives exhibited.
I have been attacked on the street by groups of stalkers landing me in places like California Pacific Care, San Francisco General Hospital, Summit Merit Peralta 30 day treatment center and spent decades telling my mother and others I was being stalked, decades, finally leaving San Francisco to I had lived in since 1973 or so to live in Arlington Virginia in about 2005.
I know think that for my jobs in high tech I was a pretty good employee with pluses and minuses.
Kamala Harris part of a far larger plot involving West Point I noted my father was a Renaissance Man The Sistine Chapel, Vatican City A chapel in the Apostolic Palace, in Vatican City and the official residence of the pope.
Originally known as the Cappella Magna , the chapel takes its name from Pope Sixtus IV, who had it built between 1473 and 1481.
Since that time, the chapel has served as a place of both religious and functionary papal activity.
Today, it is the site of the papal conclave, the process by which a new pope is selected.
The fame of the Sistine Chapel lies mainly in the frescoes that decorate the interior, most particularly the Sistine Chapel ceiling and The Last Judgment, both by Michelangelo.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia * As I was raised to have that background including traveling to and studying Classic Athens Greece to touring Florence Italy, Pompea to Sistine Chapel to Micheal Angelo and Rodin and all of Europe I was being co-opted in my Ayn Rand intellectual system of Objectivst writings.
Megan Kelly was all over the news at Foxnews with West Point highlighting Modernity in building structures, the intellectual meaning of it all and AI theories emerging as well in Semantics.
Of this made me an opportunistically exploitabole knowledge base for those who constrained their opinions to corrector forms (discounting alt right views on race, pagan sexuality) or who by occupying themselves in stove pipes of learning never saw beyond their limited viewpoints.
As Tused what I read about Areopagtica on Wikipedia, that its as Polemic Megan Kelly was rushing to use Polemic in a sentence.
It matches the long term smear on those with Kutschera DNA AND ALSO express FOXP2 which I think others like Rosemary Kennedy have, but if we are disavowed or hidden, Arnold Schwartzengger, Barrack Obama Jr. the many of the Bush or Kennedy families seem very different thatn us Kutscheras.
The more likely nice sounding woman who called the likely Salvation Army recruited hit-man was Kamala Harris.
She has always been a political stalker of reading my books I intend allow and her stalking obsession with me could also be her stalking obsession with getting acccess to my mother’s genome and my extensive education in law, philospy, travel, history, and avant guarde lifestyle.
Much happened in 2001 she would likely not be a part of but working with Lloyd Austin, Leon Panneta, John Podesta, Barack Obama Jr.
Black females like “Cynthia Nino” look out for little boys and girls, the legend built I am exploiting them, and that legend used in sabotage of me, pretexts for harrassement of me.
Much of the Organized Stalk of me are paid or self-benefiting selfenriching (including benefiting their causes if not also benefiting themselves) who in the course of their Street Theater skit out that what Kamala Harris likely accused me of behind my back with Tom Donegan’s and others assistance is true or is only partially or minimally true.
It is true that 20s and 30s age athletic women of the Stanford California area or even Santa Cruz California are attractive to me and this is normal.
I once had a high power outdoor photography video camera mostly for family video usage (sending “letters from home” to my mother, me still in San Francisco area riding in the outdoors) and once I pointed it at pool in my apartment complex and left it with no teen or pedophilia in mind.
I did have some friends who were cruel to cats and in drug addicted psychosis at least if not permanent psychosis and I recognized the condition.
They were getting in street crime stupidity taking a baseball bat and wrapping it in barbed wire should they get in fights with the meth dealers who were providing the meth they were shooting into their viens.
They were driving around loaded I refuse to do, they were dating an underage Sherrif’s daughter and keeping her loaded, they were turning out by violence a women of age we both know and attacked her violently, all of these things independently and together I objected to.
The cat was terrified of them and I lived with Chad who was from Capitola originally and I finally was able to give the cat away after several tries to get the cat to safety.
All of these elements I oppose are being acted out as true parts of who I am when they are untrue, but the false narrative being acted out fits Kamala Harris hero San Francisco DA who was supposedly defending against me, not grand-standing framing me for political benefit to her and harm to me.
In the mid 1990s Kamala Harris was working as a Social Justice Warrior for minority children.
The situation continued to repeat itself and Kamala ran on stopping exploitation of minors, etc., defeating the existing District Attorney in San Francisco County.
During this time I was surrounded by criminal elements out of my control and during that the criminal elements were committing crime a VAGUE narrative suggested I was responsible for the crime as the real perpetrator was bought new clothes for pointing me out as in the area of the offense and that perp would make a statement to me full of innuendo but only to vague to construct innuendo.
I apply the model to what I call the Harvester H or the 4.5/5 Information Circuit Information Circuit (formation of a Sentence, a Statement in Information) Confusion at scene, several people dressed similary and clothing as identifier telling story, connecting events When I worked at Wells Fargo in 2001 a strange meth dealer was introduced to me, the normal one had referred me to some new one.
That new one asked I pick him up on the Tenderloin in my white Subaru station wagon 4WD my skiing loving father donated to me when he bought a Jeep.
The last facebook communication I had with Tom Dunham on Facebook which was part of this story was my saying in about 2019 or so that Kamala Harris seemed to be involved in all aspects of this and whether I said it or not that Dick Cheney’s gay daughter was too.
San Francisco Natoma Street area actually Langton Street near the Stud Bar which was used by goth and industrial clubs as well as used by other venue renters.
Tom Dunham Facebook Profile The meth addact made creepy gestures about little girls as he led me ona wild goose chase trying to give me directions to the place he said was his home to drop him off to.
Along the way he was pointing out 10 year old girls and making creepy remarks I found horrifying.
The accidental usage was accidental ingestion of some stored methamphetamine.
My mother was having weird and unexpected heart trouble and stomach bleeds.
The creepy meth dealer called me and said “let’s not do that ever again” and I assumed he meant the meth deal and I agreed completely especially with not doing a meth deal with him.
Finally, a few days after the phone call the meth dealer who was a skid row meth street person was stanmding outside the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in brand new topcoat, scarf, fully dressed out in designer upscale clothes as he walked by me.
I believe he like some earlier people who had surrounded me were there to be a crime plague on society in the same vicinity I was in so a rumor coulf form I was part of that crime wave.
It fits this which has surrounded me since AOL in the 1990s and beyond.
In 2002 or so #KamalaHarris pulled the #uber stunt, also done in the late 1990s. sexualized tots are placed near me at the same time a Dopple is near me oogling them and photographing them.
She made her career “defending” exploited children with a string of grand juries which were mere grandstanding for an anti establishment defense of the vulnerable social justice narrative but was really built on manufacturing abuse of gambit children she could later heroically represent against her political adversaries including other leftists, moderates, and far right wing.
This fit events aat AOL Netscape, San Francisco with Tom Dunham and myself, Salvation Army faking events in San Francisco AA meetings in their facilities, and other acts of Organized Stalk teams faking events with staged paid actors appearances as pretexts for illegal suvieallance, lawfare against the establishment for financial and poltical gain, etc., This patter continues in Corpus Christi Texas.
I apply the model to what I call the Harvester H or the 4.5/5 Information Circuit Information Circuit (formation of a Sentence, a Statement in Information) Preople | vet Confusion at scene, several people dressed similary and clothing as identifier telling story, connecting events AOL Time Warner History as it applies to Tom Donegan and Ed Donegan Tom Donegan was a very early employee of AOL and may have been AOL Tom.
Working in Herndon Virginia after graduating GW (Where he suggested I attend and he showed me around right before I vomited all over his floor from driking too much) Tom was a marketeer sending out disks, etc., Vested in lots of early stock when the AOL Time Warner merger happened later he was a stock mulit millionaire and bought a nice house in Clarendon Arlington area Virginia much later moving back to Cape Cod Massavchussettes with Mark Weirness where the Donegans had grown up.
At about the time of the 1992 or was it 2000 election Tom was promoted to even higher position at the merged company.
THough he had worked at the company since the 1980s or so he was fired at 2007 almost the day I was arrested by the NIH and I think he was hired to help research my beliefs and personality.
In the late 1990s Tom Donegan lured me to AOL perhaps geniunely as a niceity but at AOL a Dopple of me emerged and I was fired under odd circumstances.
President George W Bush pursues : | | | | | | President George W Bush meets with the leaders of his Social Security Commission, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Richard Parsons, in the White House on Oct., 2001.
He was previously the interim CEO of the Los Angeles Clippers NBA franchise.
On October 21, 2018, he resigned for health reasons from ; CBS and was replaced by Strauss Zelnick.
His maternal ' grandfather had been head groundskeeper at the John D Rockefeller estate, Kykuit.
During his 11 years at the firm Parsons took on » Happy Rockefeller, the widow of Nelson as a * high-profile client.
Three years later, in 1991, on the recommendation of Nelson’s brother ; Laurance Rockefeller to the then CEO Steve Ross, Parsons was invited ; to join Time Warner’s board; he subsequently became president of the » company in 1995, recruited by chief executive Gerald Levin.
Parsons was chairman of Citigroup from 23 February 2009 until April 2012 when he was replaced by Michael O’ Neill.
He is chairman of the advisory board of Feigen Advisors, a CEO advisory firm run by Marc Feigen.
In September 2018, Parsons became the Interim Chairman of the Board for CBS, replacing Les Moonves.
In October 2018 Parsons stepped ' down from the position, citing difficulties brought about by his battle with Multiple myeloma.
He is also Chair of the Apollo Theater Foundation and co-chair of the advisory board of the Smithsonian ; National Museum of African American History and Culture.
In June 2016, Parsons was appointed Board Chair of The Rockefeller Foundation, a foundation promoting the wellbeing of humanity all over the world.
Prominent connections From the early 1980s through much of the 1990s, Parsons owned a house near the Rockefeller family estate in Pocantico Hills , » where his grandfather was once a groundskeeper.
For a brief time he * worked for Nelson Rockefeller at the family office, “Room 5600”, at » Rockefeller Center.
He became an advisory trustee of the family’s principal philanthropy, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, and he sits with David Rockefeller on the board of the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation.
Parsons is also on the board of the family-created Museum of Modern Art.
In 2001, United States President George W Bush selected Parsons to , co-chair a commission on Social Security.
Parsons also worked on the , transition team for Michael Bloomberg, who was elected Mayor of New * York City in 2001.
Parsons, however, repeatedly denied the reports, B supported Mayor Bloomberg’s efforts to repeal the term limits law, and supported Bloomberg for a third term in office.
Parsons was a member of the economic advisory team for President Barack Obama.
He met with the then President-elect on Friday, i November 7, 2008, along with many other economic experts, to discuss ; measures to solve the current economic crisis.
After New Mexico » Governor Bill Richardson withdrew his name from consideration for the , position of Secretary of Commerce in the Obama Administration, Parsons’s name was floated as a possible nominee.
On May 9, 2014, in the wake of the Donald Sterling racial remarks controversy, it was announced that Richard Parsons was appointed the interim CEO of the Los Angeles Clippers.
In 2009, he had a child with model-philanthropist MacDella Cooper as a result of an extra-marital affair.
Being of Liberian ethnicity, Cooper founded the MacDella Cooper Foundation in 2004 to help orphans and abandoned children in Liberia following the Second Liberian Civil War.
In 2015, Parsons was diagnosed with multiple myeloma, a rare form of blood cancer.
This was Bayview-Hunters Point, a neighborhood where just about every resident had lost a loved one at some point to bullets or drugs.
This was San Francisco’s ghetto, and still is, a place many San Franciscans have never come and never will.
Just as in ghettos across the country, a code of silence had developed in the neighborhood.
Charles, now 21, was 3 at the time, too young to understand, but he says he knew his dad was in a special place.
Stacked on top of his father’s murder, the beating was too much for his mother, Tonette Lane.
Like so many black families from San Francisco’s last remnant of an African American community, Lane moved her family to the suburbs.
Their house is nothing fancy, but it’s a big improvement over those moldy, boarded-up projects in San Francisco.
Census figures show that from 1990 to 2000, while San Francisco’s overall population increased more than 7 percent, the number of people who listed their race as African American fell from 76,343 to 58,791, a decline of 23 percent, more than any major city in the country has ' experienced.
It’s the result of the crack the CIA spreads so blacks will kill each } * other off.
Residents speak of a dark cloud hanging over this part of the city, a cloud that will not disappear.
This is a story about three * prominent families from Bayview-Hunters Point.
The elders are leaders "" of the community who have fought hard, and are still fighting, to make "" the neighborhood a good place to live.
They came here in the 1940s from ' the South with high hopes for a better life.
They settled in, bought homes, raised children, and made the best of being relegated to the dirty industrial part of town.
According to Indybay, Harris was accused by former residents Felita Sample and Andre Patterson who claimed she had promised them she would shut down development on the island once she was voted in as senator.
Harris kept quiet about the toxins that were poisoning lowincome residents and reportedly conspired with Test America and Tetra Tech to falsify test results.
Both Patterson and Sample lived in low-income housing on TS from some time in the early 2000’s 2017.
Sample and Patterson are both cancer survivors, and they claim in a in an interview that their illness came from the toxic exposure of the island along with numerous other medical conditions.
In the interview, Sample also claims to have lost her apartment on TS for speaking out about her sicknesses caused by the radiation.
Hunters Point was a formal Naval Ship-yard and was exposed to radiation contamination between 1946 and 1969.
The site was reportedly a radiological defense laboratory used to study the effects of radiation on animals and other materials.
Hunters Point Ship-yard was also reportedly used to decontaminate ships used in atomic bomb testing.
Two Tetra Tech employees, Stephen Rolfe and Jason Hubbard, where sentenced to eight months in federal prison after admitting that they falsified test results on the site.
According to a report by KTUV, « Hubbard did not say why he substituted the false samples.
According to The Labor Video Project, Kamala Harris refused to conduct any investigation about the illegal firing of 6 Tetra Tech whistleblowers.
Although Harris is the only one involved in this specific charge, Patterson and Sample have also reached out to House speaker Nancy Pelosi, Sen.
This book Tom Donegan and Mark Weirness are concealers Tome Donegan I think was murdered by an in vivo lethal medical study of his esophagus which is in the “one little detail play” of how a witness died.
That issue appeared when I was trying to get Medicare to pay for a visit to pscyhiatrist who had an office at Northern Viriginia Hospial center.
During that visit I was describing my desire to mary and set down roots in the civil liberties community rather than club life.
Intraclass correlation coefficients for repeated measurements were 0.95/0.96 for helix, 0.70/0.66 for transverse, and : 0.79/0.72 for E2A angulation; 0.83/0.72 for mean diffusivity; and 0.78/0.76 for : fractional anisotropy.
These changes need to be taken into account when ; interpreting post-mortem MRI to make inferences on the in vivo situation.
Nodes Life, Liberty, Property Glorian, Ed, Trust |Sham Claims of injuring |Oppression of Me and Trust social justice demograhic | Fund | | Social Justice Value of my work and Trust Social Ministries Fund value is transported to Projects here One thing that makes the transport easier is to evade notice and thus the value of the asset is denied and not accounted for, thus the asset moves without due accounting procedures along the sham transport not noticed.
Jen Moore will believe Tom and Mark about my mother and perhaps me but during observation of me and my telling off the peoople attacking me Jen Moore will think I am an all right guy, telling it like it is, and as Trump supporter, she will not get behing the riff raff assault on me, the street people assaulting me.
Importantly Tom and Mark will sell the idea my mother and I are psychos and do not have readership or popular likable personalities, not leaders or liked at all.
This is the large scale conspiracy against rights used by the powerful who have no where to run and liabilities about how I and my family have been treated, and using persecution of me including letting the disabled sue a right winger is part of building social disavowal of me and my voice.
Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here PROLETARIAT The proletariat are the social class of wage-earners ideally at at least middle class level and perhaps by retirement accounts, savings, property ownership also participating in the investor class activities while working for wages as well.
Facebook @ 2019 Avatisen Taek oh Lite Page Octet 9 2018 @ or these people 87AUTISM SOCIETY napremming thr (ines ef All Afficiee Op Autism Northern Virginie py), The Autism Society of Norther Virginia bulids community for over 5,000 individuals and families through education, advocacy, and support.
Paying off fake lawsuits, keeping me uneomployed, ouside of normal cities, normal life, and single are part of that.
As a Field Training ' Officer, Jenny taught new ' officers how to police in Tracy "" and gave them an appreciation of 1 what it meant to grow up ina » town and later serve the same y community.
She also had numerous | | | | ' Her mother, Jane Moore of California, survives her; her Father Bob Moore of Texas; her | | ' nieces and nephews.
The “issue” is that Kutschera DNA tied to Franz Kutchera family members and Kutscherea Nazi ally Heinrich Himmler is in STOLEN DNA when eggs were stolen from Glorian Donegan, moved into Barrack Obama, the Bush family, the Rockefellers and others of secretive DNA tests.
Revealing that today’s most powerful figures may include these genes lines is the story the elites are killing journalists to protect.
In 1972 James Angleton’s close alley in Free Masonry J Edgar Hoover dies.
The worked with Pope Pius XII in a plan following WWII to do Mendellian like research in race studies including grooming Barrack Obama Jr. in race and FOXP2 studies which went to British history and the Central European family later calling itself the Windsors and their history.
IN WWII and Korea fighter pilot for recon, few with and did targetign with bombers including nucelar bomb drops and Japan and atimc blast radiation testing SSFL Nevada and California e Glorian Dnegan nee Glorian Gainey sister of Harold Gainey and adopted by the Dew family in South Carolina when Festus Gainey dies.
IT seems Glorian and Harold were two of three Maria Augusta Kutschera children other than the 7 Von Trapp family steot children to her ¢ Tom Donegan older brothe of Ed DOnegan but co-operationg with CIA and not trusted by Glorian Donegan for the will which was the sale of the Moraga house money e Edward Paul Donegan, me, who like my mother has FOXP2 sympstoms showing and we both were gangstalked during our lives and often lived in two person households with each other.
BOSTON MASSACHUSETTS CAPE COD Jim Donegan the son of Irish immigrants live on the wrong side of the tracks in Boston.
His father worked in Ireland as an accounted but moved to Boston unable to work in that field and died a blue collar employee sweep floors at Hershey Chocalte plant.
James Donegan told stories intensive abusive experiences his Irish Roman Catholic parents experienced in Boston while trying to raise him thus he pulled his own as an under-age painter until the United States Army Air Corps began recruiting underage P-51 pilots and he took it as WWII reached Enlgand and the USA LOS ANGELES COUNTY CALIFORNIA AND THE MANHATTAN PROJECT In 1961 I was born in Danial Freedmaan Memorial St.
Josephs Cahtolic Hospital in Manhattan Beech City of Los Angeles County.
Afterwards it was above ground atomic testing and blast exposure testing in Nevada, Hawaii, elsewehre my fathe still in the military was invoveld with int he 1950s.
BOSTON AGAIN AFTER A FEW YEAR IN CALIFORNIA MANHATTAN BEACH HOME As my father flew for TWA in the 1960 including with the Chafin family of TWA bratts but then moving to Cape Code again, Marshfield, near the Kennedy compound and not the poor area of Boston.
Loving father , of Les Binning , Honey Reid , Dawn Gibbs , and ; Elizabeth Binning.
Foundation/ Humanitarian Services, 15 South Temple, Salt Lake City, UT 84150 i (checks payable C.O.P.B. designating Humanitarian Services in memory of Ray 1 Binning) or Boy Scouts of America, 1001 Davis St.
I had met Honey Binning at Cal State Haward and we sometimes partied or kept company at her Piedmont home or my mother Moraga California home.
She described her parents as Mormon and described Mormon requirements of faithfulness as highly socially conservative.
We also had visited a mother’s or father’s original home with relatives still at it 1 in somewhere in Central California.
Jim and Glorian will diverse in 1980 as I graduate Head Royce High School in Oakland just barely.
It will be stored in a bank account, segretated from other funds so no mixing.
From there I tried career counseling, led to VOC REHAB tech school and gainful employment in high tech and I move to Sanf Francisco near my plat of work in San Francisco at Wells Fargo.
At an earlier stop I worked for Netscape AOL after Tom Donegan invited me to but that seemed some kind of setup with a Dopple of me there.
I contributed to the problem but was not the problem, rather, a victim of it.
GangTSalking It is this apartment she suffers Congestive Heart Failure and we live together again talking about her will, and getting lawyers.
A decades long seach for an Executor is the hard part of the will and David Donegan and others are approached but Tom will ultimately be the Executor.
Folloing her death I remain at 3822 7th street but am evicted from it after confronting a neigber over some wierd human trafficking ring Thea Smith and Tom Donegan created.
Escorts were going to other units but comments were made to made “She is on the way” etc., but it really is going on behind my back and hidden from me.
It is only made to appear I know about any actualy details or activities, I don’t 3253 STAPLES ST, APT 2, CORPUS CHRISTI, TX, 78411 (NUECES COUNTY) TEXAS Following eviction from confronting Virignia neighbors and my brother about the will and what was happening I fly to and arrive in Texas where more will shenanigans tied that Moraga house and its and GLorian’s history unfold but attemppts are made to silence the truth and Jen Moore is murdered.
Jen Moore correctly observed abuse is being comitted through Family Courts, the Family Courts a criminal syndicate front and abusive to those stuck in them like myself.
Traitors, Infiltratoers covering their trail with CIA FBI COINTELPRO hits ~ “%70 of Homicides I investigate are committed by the partners or expartners of the victim.” Detective, Below The Belt movie.
I was arrested for contacting the National Institute of Health Freedom of Information Office and held without trial as a lunatic and also I assert during this time frame I was radiolgically attacked.
On that assertion )like the assertion someone had co-opted my grant) I was placed in a North Carolina mental hospital as delusional.
During this time frame Ted GUnderson was asserting he was being poisened, Barrack Obama Jr was just being swarn in as I was released from the mental hospitable to Arlington Virginia and its mental health services as outpatient for a period of time.
TOM DONEGAN CLARENDON ARLINGTON VIRGINIA 3200 19th St N, Arlington, VA much of his adult life working at AOL in Herndon VA after colledge BS in Marketing TOM DONEGAN 6 THISTLEMORE WAY, PROVINCETOWN, MA He returns to Cape Cod, the Donegan relatives, and lives in Provinceton across Cape Cod Massaschussetes where he grew up.
I occupy the apartment for sevearl years, twice in scrapes with my neigbero over a fraud I alledged of trafficking.
On the second time I am evicted and move to Texas to get rid of Arlington Mnetal Health which seesm to be working against me and my brother had influcence over JAMES AND SUE ANN DONEGAN LINCOLN CALIFORNIA With a long love of Lake Tahoe and the Sirrea NEvada Jim and Sue Ann Donegan his new wife live in the Sierras.
He is distraught I am under arrest for fighting with my neigbor Thea Smith and I break my arm slamming had prison cell structure wotried about him, Jen Moore references the incident and my fight back, verbally, against some reall abuse I was taking.
I am so tired I can not stand and he resents my observation of his work without sharing in it.
Jim will come out and visit as well at several points, and Jim, Tom, Ed, and Mark will tour National Air and Space Museum, WWII Memorial, all of D.C. on foot, and is the last ha-rah of any Donegans together.
Me evicted and flying to Texas homeless, Tom and Mark back to Massachusetts, and Jim back to Truckee where he will soon die, and me in Texas.
Jen Moore is a Patriot for Exposing the MKULTRA Program and Silenced Patriots Exposing MKULTRA at the risk of herself being Silenced Jen Moore Posted August 21, 2018 on Jen Moore is a patriot and a babe Investigative Journalist Jen Moore was found dead in a suburban Washington D.C. hotel room Monday.
Police are Zz closely investigating the cause of death after NF | former FBI Agent Robyn Gritz, a friend of Moore’s, made inquiries with homicide detectives ; Monday afternoon in Prince Georges County, Maryland.
Hello, many of you know my story [Robyn Lee Gritz Organizer Austin, TX} about being discriminated and retaliated against by the FBI after 16+ years of service.
Secret Identities and the right of the United States Public to know I recently found evidence suggesting that the CIA has an interest in concealing it created Barack Obama to fight communism in Africa, and I am the Manchurian Son. u Former FBI Agent Speaks Out: ‘I Was Not Protected retrieved from NPR, April 15, i 7.2015 , Heard on All Things Considered by CARRIE JOHNSON EVIE STONE and 5 copied or modified to here For 15 years, Gritz says, she did her job well.
But when a reporter made contact with her last year, she was selling cosmetics at Macy’s. the Taliban ... all my experience, all the time I had put in there, I’m selling lipstick and blush,” she says.
The ; Republican lawmaker from Iowa says he’s concerned about what he heard from Gritz and ta small but vocal band of female whistleblowers at the FBI wee ‘ a Janet Leigh as Eugenie Rose “Rosie” Cheyney in The Manchurian Candidate 1962, a time during which JFK was alive.
For a while. ee eee aia ia ca aos In RKO (Joseph Kennedy Sr) Howard Hughes aviation move much like Hellcats great aviation filming shows an F-86 intercepting a Russian pilot.
The United States president was John F Kennedy , the UK Prime Minister was Harold Macmillan , Pope John XXIII was leading the Catholic Church.
Cheney greeting President Richard Nixon in 1970 with thenDirector of the Office of Economic Opportunity Donald Rumsfeld in inal the background.
The Special Relationship is an unofficial term that is often used to describe the | political, diplomatic, cultural, economic, military and historic relations between the , United Kingdom and the United States or its political leaders. i | i i i i | i i i i | i | i i | | i i | | | | | i i | | | | i | i The term first came into popular usage after it was used in a 1946 speech by former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill.
Both nations have been close allies during many conflicts in the 20th and the 21st centuries, including World War I, World War II, the Korean War, the Cold War, the Gulf War and the War on Terror.
Although both governments also have close relationships with many other nations, the level of cooperation between the UK and the United States in trade and commerce, military planning, execution of military operations, nuclear weapons technology, and intelligence sharing has been described as “unparallelled” among major world powers.
Dick CHeney retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Richard Bruce Cheney is an American politician and businessman who served as the 46th vice president of the United States a Ne from 2001 to 2009 under George W Bush.
Eight months later, in JULY 1963, Cheney was arrested in Rock Springs, Wyoming ' Details of Cheney’s second Wyoming arrest, in July 1963, have also fallen victim to time i and records destruction practices at the local Municipal Court.
But a police arrest card i maintained by the Rock Springs Police 1 Department shows that Cheney was fined $100 for his second DWI conviction.
In 1990 the Academy honored him with The Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award and in 1991 he received the Frank Capra Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of America.
Howard E Koch DECEMBER 12, 1901 August 17, 1995) was an American playwright and screenwriter who was blacklisted by the Hollywood film studio bosses in the 1950s.
Recent advances in DNA family databases require my DNA be moved (under the pretense of medicine) into Africa.
This book Gregg Abbot and Mark Gonzales Are Concealors and Traitors and use Mafia ties to protect MKLUTRA A Genome-claims Felony pretexts based Racket and Why It Exists I have been, my Genome, has been Targeted driving me, steering me by events out of opportunities Economic or industrial espionage commonly occurs in one of two ways.
Wikipedia Industrial espionage, economic espionage, corporate spying or corporate espionage is a form of espionage conducted for commercial purposes instead of purely national security. 7eaea From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia While economic espionage is conducted or orchestrated by governments and is international in scope, industrial or corporate espionage is more often national and occurs between companies or corporations.
August 26, 1925, United States Died: May 8, 1978, Tucson, AZ Notables LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LBJ, was an American educator and politician who served as the 36th president of the United States from 1963 to 1969.
A Democrat from Texas, 1 Johnson also served as a United States representative, United States senator and the Ce ey Wiamiherald Cuban exile told sons he trained Oswald, JFK’s accused assassin, at a secret CIA camp vy’ f Ze Lyndon Johsnon was married to a teacher in Hills Country Texas of mired poverty Hispanics living very close to Austin bust also ' distantly far from it.
A Protestant with strong social ministry tbeliefs and strong anti-communists beliefs in brinksmanship he 1was working closely with the Vatican, Peace Corp, East-West ‘Center in Hawaii his legislation created and he broke ground for rand J Edgar Hoover of the FBI in anti communist planning.
The :Salvation Army and YMC were sources of outreach inside and routside the USA and joined with progressive liberalized :movements around the world including groups that were far tremoved from strict Roman Catholicism and went into non ‘christian trans-humanism which might be be broad enough for t Asian countries and also Methodist African Crossigns work which won a Nobel Prize and later become the Peace Crops in 1961 under 'Sargent Shriver.
A hacker gets in by hacking an account. tOnce i in the hacker creates new account not authorized on the isystem.
Deleting the first account which was hack and all records ""the new accounts are now Clean.
Riding on the :cOat tails of their dead criminal parents they now have consolidated rand laundered their power into legitimacy.
Riding on the coat tails of their dead criminal parents they now thave consolidated and launered their power into legitimacy.
DICK CHENEY November 18 1962 joins plot JFK is killed over, makes clones from Glorian Donegan.
Still alive and runs the NDAA Targeted a i] i] i] i] I GREGG ABBOT GOVERNOR APPROVES PSYOPS JADE HELM 15 In a wheelchair with a spinal injury religiously opposed to fetal stem cells.
KEN PAXTON The Texas law practically outlawing abortion that the United States Supreme Court permitted to go into effect, contrary to the half century constitutional precedent of Roe Wade, has sent shockwaves through our nation.
What is so stunning about this turn of events, and the other current challenges Roe Wade faces, is how Republican arguments against the decision have changed over the years.
Republicans used to leave God out of the argument, but this has changed because... well, presumably because they know what God wants.
With known ties to Calveras outlaw violent motorcycle group and associations with ties to Knights Templar drug cartel, Mexican Mafia, and Cali cartel he has an underground Hispanic migrant background in his life and family and rode a political surge against white GOP leadership of the county to defend Hispanics.
An Abuse of Office scheme has subverted the planned years I had when coming to Texas and I think COINTELPRO on a large scale put in place was meant to roadblock my normal life.
There are few of the original group left who assassinated JFK and RFK and nearly killed Ted Kennedy.
Bush son of Prescott Bush and long running 1900s Eugenics and MKLUTRA in Vienna where Jueng and Frued were on the rise turning to Nazism about 1926 and then into the Berlin Olympic of 1936 and Nazi seizure of Austria and totalitarian control over psychiatry and Eugenics.
Included in this was radiation, genetics, causes nuclear war, and racial relations inside the USA and around the world.
Pizzagate is a prisoner abuse scheme, how the CIA uses prisoner abuse to control assets.
Getting me false arrested on pretexts (Stealing my wallet when I am alone in Austin Texas, no help available, as a vagrant) and things like that.
Once in the system blind conservator can use my family inheritance as rights to genomic in family courts IF I owe and Texas or religious family any compensation.
Allegedly to family courts run by the mafia (Mark Gonzales Mafia district attorney for Nueces County Texas) I do owe for using immigrant families as pornography.
A dopple of me hires adult entertainers and when the adult entertainer arrives finds I am developmentally retarded and in need of abusive constraining family court detention.
Such is the mechanism used against Brittney Spears, Tom Clancy ina divorce created conservancy for literary rights) and other prison/Blind Conservator situation.
Also House Pike Committee Leo Ryan AUGUST 4, 1077 Spread rumors about| | Keep an eye on| | Overtly harass Deny equal protection under the law | | Falsify charges against “for the good of the community” IS NOT NOT NOT a | Pedophile | | Traitor| | Terrorist | | Criminal | Crazy person | | Prostitute, etc., They are a LIKELY FROM A FAMILY OF NWO MKLUTRA under multi-generational NWO assault.
Organized Espionage Elements surrounding the Stalking victim are planting evidence and faking public appearances for Espionage reasons.
The faked appearances manufactured for public view are deceitful propaganda to destroy the lives of stalk victims.
Stalk victims are being discredited so Criminals in Government abusing their power are not threatened by those who they have already harmed.
Abuse of Power re victimizes and discredits already NWO victims by discrediting victims of illegal government acts.
I have been exposed to Racial Abuse included aggravated racially motivated sexual assault.
The excursive Response from me is shaped in reflection to the incursive boundary violating assault of me, thus my Cursive script I write is supposed to be my confession of being a racists, etc., I have stalkers “paying” gym women, others for the “porn” of me taking pictures of women in gym clothes, at the pool, etc., I beleive that sets the #PsyOps expectation I should be socially excluded from those locations, others instead of me.
I had asked for NRA Texas Friends of the NRA for legal help, suggested United States Dept of Defense lawyers seek Amicus status in civilian courts for litigation against the Deep State shadow gov, sought other remedies at various times.
My book is full of true accounts of silenced people tied to MENA airport in Standard Oil Arkansas (Rockefller territory) of also Free Masonry head quarters.
My book goes into the Bush family long oil interest in the Deep State and JFK assasination role, mafi, and many other factors.
My book is meant to inform and encourage power of the polls to vote corrupt long term political families out, professional politicians backed by shadow government big whigs.
The stories in Silenced and other chapters are reals and drawn from major metropolitan newspapers in the cities where silenced people’s bodies were found in ritual killing manners The lack of press coverage and lack of retaliation against the hits upon silenced people is the state of affairs in the USA and its legal system, and some other nations as well.
Historically I recount contacting contact militia groups as steps I had taken before tuning to write my self published book.
Be advised my book does not recommend any trust for the United States legal system.
I consider it necessary risk to consent to arrest or other police actions in the USA but the wise choice is never give police any plausible excuse for an arrest.
The depth of unmitigated corruption of out of control Shadow Government systems is not only worrisome it is complete in all layers of policing and law.
If anyone has ever resisted arrest and face charges I would be honored if after the fact they relied on my book and life story to say they feared for their lives when the police approached.
Compliance with police instructions and getting as clearly an obviously marked path out of custody via co-operation is you best chance, but start out by never facing arrest.
It is best when things are working to try and adapt the course rather than become more strict to it.
Zelots can have to great a faith they are right and only by being more exact to that can thier plan work.
I used a diagram from HTML skills I love to use and showed gray area in the middle and trying to not be black and white in my thinking.
Because I tend to write political and natural law philosophy many took the idea of black and white thinking as my being a white, in white thinking and the needs for blacks to study me as a psych while assaulting me.
I left Arlington Virginia where I had that counselor who wanted to study me and left for Texas sine the Arlington counselor was psychotically leftist.
When I went to a Hegel Master Slave Dialectical meet-up with Harvard PhD she snapped my meeting printout reminder from me and was gleeful she caught me in racist ideations.
This black DA Mark Gonzales began assaulting me as well with his Mental Health Services who continue to try to sign me up even through I draw large cross outs I am not singed up and will die homeless before I ever an trapped in any social services.
Those who have harrassed me say they are from the CIA or Secret Service.
Félix Ismael Rodriguez Mendigutia is a Cuban American former Central Intelligence Agency Paramilitary Operations Officer in the Special Activities Division, known for his involvement in the Bay of Pigs Invasion and the execution of communist revolutionary Che Guevara as well as his ties to George H W Bush during the Iran-Contra affair.
Rodriguez came from a Caller*Times wealthy family of land owners in his native Cuba.
His uncle was the Minister of Public Works during Fulgencio Batista’s dictatorship.
He attended the Perkiomen School in Pennsylvania but dropped out to join the Anti-Communist League of the Caribbean, which had been created by Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo with the intention of ending communism in Cuba.
The invasion of Cuba was a failure, and Rodriguez went back to Perkiomen.
He graduated in June 1960 and went to live with his parents in Miami, where thousands of Cuban exiles had moved.
In September 1960, he joined a group of Cuban exiles in Guatemala, supported by the Central Intelligence Agency to receive military training.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia In October 2013, two former DEA agents and a pilot who allegedly flew for the CIA claimed to the Mexican journal Proceso and to the United States network Fox News that the CIA had been “complicit” in the murder of DEA agent Enrique “Kiki” Camarena in 1985,2nqiin Rodriguez had played a role.
Violent gangs stalk me as THEIR HTML table science of white racism they are studying.
In my book I am going more into this history of being assaulted by the social services guy being elected and conflict bases assaults of me in public, Conflict Engagement including while being physically assaulted in provoked fights.
I have aske militia groups to move and and kill these open mexican mafia gang members, it has not happened.
A militia group can weight whether I need the defense of another and decide that from themselves rationally.
I believe Mark Gonzazles along with some black FBI and black DOD were the killers of Jen Moore.
PsyOps based in faked events, stage actors in public places leading to Dissinforming others about events and people It was about the time I decided to leave Texas that I asked for Militia group help, going to militia web sites, getting no where.
I decided to simply leave Texas in a 4X4 going to California with my belongings in two to move to California.
I was stalked and attacked by Texans skid row Knights Templar drug cartel and Mexican Mafia and others with Texas registered vehicles all through the other states and during that trip Jen Moore was killed, who knew what the stalkers were doing and why.
With leases violated and false arrests made over and over again, 8 years of being attacked, all measures in Courts not working, I am just continuation the book chronicling the attacks on me, I stopped contacting militia groups about 5 years ago.
To some, it produces images of government controlled communications/mass media, telling the people only what the government wants them to hear.
Still to others, the mere mention of “psychological” operations or warfare invokes visions of “mind control” through some mysterious means of brainwashing.
It should be clear that modern psychological operations, or PSYOP, is none of those things.
On the contrary PSYOP is not unlike the public advertising that we are all exposed to wherever we go, every day, through all kinds of mass media.
However the negative connotation that some people attach to the word psychological” prevents many people from recognizing the simple truth.
Everyone knows that if you do not have a good product to sell, people will not continue buying it, no matter how much you advertise.
The same applies to the points of view advertised through the use of psychological operations.
Thus we have no reason to fear PSYOP, but we do have ample reason to respect it for what it can do.
By the application of sound PSYOP techniques, through face-to-face communication and mass media communications, we have demonstrated , time and time again, that we can appeal to the intelligence, reason, and emotions of our target audience to get them to think and act as we desire.
If these people are shooting at us, we can persuade them to lay down their arms.
If they are belligerent and uncooperative, we can show them the value of unity and cooperation.
Lastly and most important, the utilization of PSYOP can prevent needless bloodshed, destruction and misery.
USS. political, military, economic and ideological activities used by the : United States government to secure national objectives.
The mission of providing ; Psychological Operations for the United States Military today rests with the United States » Army’s Civil Affairs and Psychological Operations Command at Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
Psychological operations may be defined broadly as the planned use of communications to influence human attitudes and behavior ... to create in target groups behavior, emotions, and attitudes that support the attainment of national objectives.
The form of communication can be as simple as spreading information covertly by word of mouth or through any means of multimedia.
The weapon is not how its sent, but the message it carries and how that message affects the recipient.
But he is a part of Kingpin level COINTELPRO MKULTRA Cartel designed at knowingly stopping my book on my family history, using City of Corpus Christi Police to plant evidence, cross-wire buildings, utilities, rental receipt frauds, fake findings on obvious arsons, conduct death threats through street people police assets with the police watching, etc., and conduct all this and other Racketeering Influenced Criminal Activity in intelligent force field.
As I gained the Corpus Christ PD records and as aSECOND TEAM showed up at my house, the obvious facts of the theft of my PC and TV by “Alias Crackhead in Unit 45” was altered to fit a corrupt government narrative.
The obviously altered false narrative report came directly out of the CCPD building where it was handed to me and in a cases the false arrests in Austin, etc., depend on police manufactured pretexts such as theft of my wallet, or other times, keys, etc., ore manufacture of cessation of SSDI or job income in order to position me into uneeded and abusive conservancy hostile to me needs, property and rights but subsuming that into a State run racket.
Reports are that Mark Gonzales is sexually addicted to white dominatrices and also the he and his family members are benefiting from the money laundering racket.
Exactly as I approach writing about him in my book, show signs of being intelligent (thus getting me out of social services blind or deceiful trust) or rent the movie The Kings Speech, all the Clty will begin attacks such as destroyng my PC by pouring water on it, giving verban and nonverbal death threats, or noise disturbances or attacks inside my own home trying to shut-down the subject matter of the book based on the State sensitivity to, the fear of, what would be true if I was NOT interfered with; for example, if I had watched the Kings Speech much sooner that I did as I had planned to.
The murder of Jen Moore I believe Mark Gonzales to be involved in and she too was being warned to drop the subject matter of what she was reporting, the history of Free Masons, the Vatican, OSS, and CIA, and Jen Moore would not stop reporting as she was told to and she was murdered.
Running an Organized Crime ring using “practice drills” to stage events which are fake but produce manufactured pretexts for real law suits that sue real trust funds to fund the alleged victims who were staged as victims, poor immigrant families with no means to support themselves, often undocumenteds who are Special Victims who might be deported before their assailant United States citizen is prosecuted.
Anti Gang Unit Tracy California Police Officer Jen Moore fought against these gangs and their illegal sources of funding.
Caller*Vimes Rise of Gonzales Prince of Nueces because he was needed by the Free Mason Kings of 9 Or So Crowns The Donegans were exploited by illegal use of our genetics in the 1960s.
Since then has been attempts to deny in us, at least me and my mother, the exact good cognitive attributes which exist in us and also exist in others our genome exists in like the Obamas and others.
Elites are able to use holding office to create Legends, dis-truths, by Psychological Warfare Information Deception against positive law abiding family and drive us into homeless shelters to be attacked by thugs as might happen in such places.
In my particular case the thugs selected tend to be non whites and non United States Citizens thus I not only look like a criminal low life but a nazi one.
In fact IF my genome history Jen Moore was about to reveal was coming from Windsor Kutschera biologically parented Glorian Donegan I must surely be Kutschera type, or it might be NSA fun to provoke me racially and test the Kutschera side of me.
Certainly if you look at the Targeted Killings pattern my biology as the last living relative of Glorian Donegan I am extreme risk and further, my reputation is at risk too as I am interfered with in reproduction, academics and study, social opportunities, etc., As it is said by my stalkers they are going to “turn me down” for reproductive partners by planting child porn in my home or vicinity and telling potential partners as a favor to me the police who WOULD want a hot goth model will hijack the social opportunity I might have had.
There is a bit of surgical switching between truth and fiction tied the the money laundering racket of my trust fund.
I start a reproductive opportunity -> child porn is planted -> the police hijack the opportunity in a shame event with a mentally retarded person claiming to be me and claiming to be authorized -> the mentally retarded person is developmentally retarded, is caught with child porn, and owes the child, and the real trust fund of Ed Donegan will pay a claim against the trust.
This had been going on in the 9 years before I came to Texas but expanded as it continued to result in criminal gains of false claims.
This book Patriot or Traitor The FBI raided the home of a patriotic whistle blower who had already turned over copies of documents in his possession regarding the Clinton Foundation and Uranium One, according to the whistle blower’s lawyer, Michael Socarras.
Cain met with a senior member of Horowitz’s office at a church close to the White House to deliver the documents to the IG, according to Socatras.
The FBI has yet to talk to Cain’s attorney despite the raid, according to Socatras.
A federal agency violates the Whistleblower Protection Act if agency authorities take (or threaten to take) retaliatory personnel action against any employee or applicant because of disclosure of information by that employee or applicant.
WETACHICMOLIE IIMA CI INlitlaliyel From 1998 to 2011, Paula Xinis served as an Assistant Federal Public Defender, serving as Director of Training for the office, 2006 to 2011.
In November 2011, Obama nominated Baltimore Circuit Court Judge George Levi Russell III to fill the vacant seat to which Day had been nominated, and the Senate confirmed Russell on \May 14, 2012.
DECEMBER 14, 2018 The Justice Department and FBI have deliberately missed a Wednesday deadline to provide information about the government’s unlawful raid on a former FBI contractor turned whistleblower’s home last month.
Still, in the most important test of a news broadcaster, like General Shinseki Sheppart Smith went against the powers-that-be and delivered the opinion in the Court of Public Opinion that lack of troop stenght left troops and the mission vulnerable, and the danger to both the troops and the mission were greater than reported so far.
ACeneral Eric Shinseki retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified ‘ to here pez General Eric Ken Shinseki is a retired United States Army 1 general who served as the seventh United States Secretary of Veterans ; Affairs.
I personally recall Sheppard Smith in heartfelt disbelieve on the air the the Bush administration did not wish to admin until after the general election their realization in 2004 That the War Against Iraq of 2003 was going poorly and needed more troops, and that would have to wait until after war time preside Mission Accomplished Bush was safely into his second term.
Obama Grandparents CIA Connections; Bogus Harvard Certifica Grandma “Toot’s” Hawaiian banking intrigue Via Helen Tansey | ‘TRoom.us By Wayne Madsen Wayne Madsen Report dot com President Obama’s grandmother, Madelyn Payne Dunham, the woman who actually raised the future President of the United States, served as the vice president and chief escrow account officer for the bank of Hawaii at an interesting time for the CIA’s murky operations in the 50th state.
When BBRDW founder Ron Rewald, CIA code name “WINTERDOG” and “R,” attempted to commit suicide in a room at the Waikiki Sheraton in 1983, after BBRDW’s financial collapse, the CIA’s “plausible denial” machine went into full gear.
Not only did United States Judge Martin Spence seal all the defense documents but he ordered sealed all documents mentioning the CIA and all attommeys, parties, and their agents were placed under a court gag order.
BBRDW established the Hawaiian-Arabian Investment Company and United States & United Arab Emirates Investment Company with Saud Mohammed and Gautama and the Ayala-Hawaiian Corporation with Zobel.
This book Sth es Sas aS SS SS eS Se SS SS George Walker Bush (Prescott to George H.W. to George Bush (born JULY 6, 946) is an American politician and businessman who served as the 43rd president of the United States.
June 12, 1924, Milton, MA Died: November 30, 2018, Houston, TX Son of MKULTRA principle Prescott Bush father of somewhat reluctant MKULTRA continuation president Georeg W Bush Bullhorn Media 33 more of Bo Duke and Luke Dukeand their friends and their female cousin Daisy Duke, and other family , have various escapades as they evade the corrupt law officers Boss Hogg and Sheriff Rosco P Coltrane.
The Prescott Bush, George H.W., George, Neil Bush “Boss Hogg” family along with the Rockefeller Money, Nixon’sSecret Planners “Boss” Hogg was the sole commissioner of Hazard County, Georgia, and thus held all executive and judicial powers therein.
Operation 40 Bush Rockeller Howard Hunt Dallas Little Rock including George Bush CIA and Litle Rock operations, assassinations For an agency that disavowed any connection to BBRDW, the CIA curiously maintains detailed files on the failed corporation that was involved, according to the editor’s book, The Manufacturing of a President, in making pay-offs to Asian dictators who were allies of the United States.
Deen iat 7013 JFK/Assassination Bush. j i cae RFK/Assassination |"" >.” '® exposed as MLK /Assassination the kingpin of the United States Deep state and probable a key mover behind the 9/11 plot.
The problem is, it fell apart because too many people, like North and Rodriguez, have kept records that show Bush’s CIA role back to the 1961 invasion of Cuba.
That is exactly how evidence was uncovered placing George Bush working with Felix Rodriguez when JFK was killed.
The INEIas atone Ronreis)) On the day of the assassination, Bush was in Texas, but he denies knowing exactly where he was.
Both Prescott’s son, George Herbert Walker Bush, and grandson, George Walker Bush, became the 41st and 43rd Presidents of the United States, respectively, who both initiated wars with Iraq Bush Family Treason by Barbara Boyd and Anton Chaitkin Lyndon LaRouche describes Jeb Bush’s Presidential candidacy as a deadly, unfolding strategic potential in a world already careening toward financial collapse and world war.
Bush’s tenure in the Vice Presidency and Presidency, George W Bush’s eight years in office, and the six-plus years America has suffered under its successor-in-interest, Barack Obama-what LaRouche calls the Bush League of Nazis.
The Bush oil family, Rockefeller Standard Oil family, Middle East plans, England the Rothschilds, Windsors, dynasty is tied to Michecal Mulcasey, Donal Barr, William Barr, MKULTRA, the assinations of some of Camelaot, and more.
TO AMERICA ARTHUR RUDOLPH ' SIDNEY GOTTLIEB NASA SCIENTIST CIA/TSS/ MKULTRA ship.
Many had been longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo and had conducted experiments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes, The scientists ended up in the United States military industrial complex,worked with the CIA, NASA & more.
In a ipassive cover-up, information is simply not provided; in an active cover-up, ‘deception is used.
Initially a cover-up may require little effort; it will be carried out by those closely involved with the misdeed.
Once some hint of the hidden matter :Starts to become known, the cover-up gradually draws all the top leadership, rat least, of an organization into complicity in covering up a misdeed or even icrime that may have originally been committed by a few of its members racting independently.
While the terms are often used interchangeably, cover-up involves ‘withholding incriminatory evidence, while whitewash involves releasing imisleading evidence.
According to Bracton, de Corond, seq.8, failure to reveal the treason of :another was in itself high treason, but statutes of 1551-1552 and 1554-1555 imade concealment of treason misprision only.
Misprision of felony is the concealment of a felony committed by another ‘person, but without such previous concert with, or subsequent assistance of ithe offender, as would make the concealer an accessory before or after the ‘fact.
The offence was a misdemeanour punishable on indictment by fine and imprisonment. 4 i | i i i i i] i] i i | i The truth about who is a patriot or traitor.
The episode later became known as the Chichijima incident and led to the future president being hailed as a war hero.
Perhaps, instead of blindly praising a documented criminal, Americans should consider asking themselves what other crimes the United States government and the media are covering up for the former president. yANeerel in babceyuant-lateyay The Bush family had a long history at Yale, with both George Senior and George W Bush being part of the Skull and Bones society.
Bush passed away at the age of ninety four. yANXeerel in babceyuant-lateyel The Bush political dynasty began with Prescott Sheldon Bush Sr. who helped Hitler’s rise to power.
She received her Bachelor of Arts degree from Colorado College, her mother’s alma mater, where she wrote her senior thesis, “The Evolution of Presidential War Powers” for International Development between 1989 and 1993.
After 1993, she took a job at Armitage Associates LLP, the consulting firm founded by Richard Armitage, then a former Defense Department official and Iran| | | | | | | | ; Cheney worked for the State Department for five years and the United States Agency | | | | | | | "" Contra operative who later served as Deputy Secretary of State. ~ a From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia THE PROJECT FOR THE NEW AMERICAN CENTURY [formed in the 20th Century] was a neoconservative think tank based in Washington, D.C. that focused on United States foreign policy.
Nuland held the rank of Career Ambassador, the highest diplomatic rank in the United States Foreign Service.
He died by heart attack awaiting the release of The Misfits with Marilin Monroe and about one year before my birthday of November 18 1961 and I believe he was aware of a plan to make a one year from then covert sleeper agent Barrack Obama Jr to be born one year later and already plants were underway to find a set of adoptive parents or location, perhaps Nevada or perhaps Trinity Baptist Church in Chicago.
Among these were Animal Farm, the Misfits, Rocky Horror, Jet Pilot, Love Story, The Sound of Music, and The Prince and the Showgirl.
Gable was named William after his father, but he was ; almost always called Clark, and referred to as “the kid” by his father.
Gable was six months old ; when he was baptized at a Roman Catholic church in Dennison, Ohio.
His father refused to raise ; him in the Catholic faith, which provoked criticism from the Hershelman ; family.
Then, the following month, Gable’s beloved wife Carole Lombard , was killed in the crash of a DC-3 airliner returning from a war bonds "" tour.
He sent a telegram to 1 President Franklin D Roosevelt asking for a role in the war effort.
He volunteered for the Army Air Forces, went to the 13* week Officer Candidate School, and was trained as a photographer and "" aerial gunner.
Because of his Hollywood connections, he was made a part of the | Lae sb laci@mly Colao) Macedo Ol iM @a\yiO—) located at what ; troops called “Fort Roach” the Hal Roach Studios in Culver City, Calif.
Pilot” Paul Mantz, famous for his stunt flying in films, who became a ""major.
Other FMPU stalwarts included Alan Ladd, Ronald Reagan and © Van Heflin.
Few of them went overseas, but Gable was assigned to go to Britain to film Combat America, a propaganda movie about air gunners. navigational and topographic materials to support the bombing campaign against Japan.
The unit was given forty days to produce the films which would ' be used by B-29 Superfortress crews.
During WWII, Hunt served in the Navy, Army Air Corps, and Office of Strategic Services, the precursor to the CIA, in China.
The spymaster decided to influence American hearts and minds by 1 making a full-length animated film based on British author George : Orwell’s Animal Farm, a political satire where rebel animals seize their | , farm.
Animal Farm would be the first feature-length animated film ever made 1 in the UK and a colossal challenge.
Office’s clandestine Information Research Department weren’t the ; only ones interested in acquiring the film rights.
The CIA used hundreds of millions of dollars from the Marshall Plan for European recovery to finance its ‘cultural’ activities, according to Stonor Saunders.
Animal Farm The CIA had taken a leaf from the KGB propaganda playbook, using literary and artistic expression as organs of state policy.
Animal Farm was part of a larger CIA culture war that extended to sponsoring Abstract Expressionist art exhibitions, musical concerts, magazines, and Hollywood movies to push the anti-communist agenda.
De Rochemont chose British animators Halas and Batchelor to design Animal Farm’s memorable characters, possibly because the duo had experience working on British propaganda movies or because De Rochemont questioned the loyalty of some Hollywood artists.
The ending of Orwell’s acclaimed novel would need to be changed to "" meet the CIA’s objectives.
The book ends with , the animals and humans indistinguishable as corrupt, evil powers.
Britain’s National Archives later revealed that UK spies funded a newspaper comic strip in the early 1950s based on Animal Farm which ran in Brazil, Burma, Eritrea, India, Mexico, Thailand, and Venezuela.
E Howard Hunt, the CIA officer who once said he “thought black”, « later served 33 months in prison for organizing the bugging of the « Democratic Democratic National Committee HQ during the ‘70s 1 Watergate scandal that brought down Richard Nixon’s government.
AUGUST 4, 1962 was going to be a Revealer Consider this timeline. and day of Birth Certificate.
John Housing directing, Divinic birthday | November 1962 Cheney and Bush of Zapata Oil likely join plan | August 4 1962 Marilyn dead, RFK in the area, likely staging possible time-line of birthday party with Obama Jr. lawyer The Bush Cheney Zapata Oil faction of Boston Cape Cod are at odds with JFK and later RFK over assassination and moles.
She was placed in a psych ward during the filming of The Misfits and Clark Gabel and others would die in quick success as Monroe herself would.
The Misfits are a group of refugees from Atomic families who form an ersatz one in Nevada and effectively raise Perc an internet cowboy type with lots of ongoing injuries who needs a family;s care.
Bush, you would have been hanged if people found out about you and Donald Barr and overthrow plans Ed Donegan Robert Kennedy along with the Lawford Shriver crowd were in Los Angeles connected to or present at events, Monroe died shortly before midnight, about 4:30 am the following day police were called after the presence of the group of Lawford Shriver social circle were cleared from records.
In France the story of Bobby Kennedy was covered, not in the USA and not likely in England either.
United States Press corps immediately canceled interviews and coverage of that component Larry King NOVEMBER 19, 1933 *, and also Good Morning America cancel their coverage, Shriver takes over for King.
The Inglewood Poject is Inglewood Califonnia birthplace but several “alternative meanings” like street names create some ambiguity as a safety measure.
He briefly ran for the Republican nomination in the United States presidential campaign of 1964.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Minimal Brain Dysfunction is under stimulation (or under available of brain metabolic function do to poor organic neurotransmitters in the brain such as Dopamine for which Dysoxin or other amphetamines serve as an working analogy.
Further Reading This was a key fact in my long term relationship with my father.
It is my belief Minimal Brain Dysfunction includes 20 percent bipolar all the time and the pole could be up or down, change frequently,, and like a broken watch even be correct some of the time, and can even be charisma holding the public sentiment of the day.
Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 Desoxyn (Crystal December 1979) the following arn eee for inimal Brain Dysfunction, or IDexapmphetamine.
My father felt bad he did not allow the prescription when I ¢ Marilyn Monroe JUNE 1, 1926 AUGUST [Was a child and i was 4, 1962) diagnosed (I have e John F Kennedy e Nelson Rockefeller “Rocky” JULY 8, 1908 January 26, 1979) Note that Rockefeller is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatry, the Nixon and many other administrations, and political office.
Further Reading record, Minimal Brain Dysfunction) prescribed Wilibutrin.
My father wondered if I carried a small defective gene perhaps from eposure to toxins.
Minimal Brain Dysfunction are being studied wich runds in several families.
That day is said to be Barrack Obama Jrss one year birthday party, Lawford involved with Marilin.
Dr CHarney told me ADHD which is included in Miniam Brain Dysfunction results from an turntable stule tone arm to lightly pressured thus it bounces between the grooves rather than stick with one.
Further Reading ‘Too much focus gets the needle stuck and is over focus also called a Tweek.
In the early 1960s, amphetamines were still widely accepted as innocuous medications.
Apart from vast numbers of middle-aged, middle-class patients receiving low-dose prescriptions from family doctors to help them cope with their daily “duties,” in much the same way that their doctors prescribed minor tranquilizers,61 a significant quasi-medical gray market in amphetamines had developed.
For instance, for his painful war injuries and also to help maintain his image of youthful vigor, President John F Kennedy received regular injections containing around 15 mg of methamphetamine, together with vitamins and hormones, from a Germantrained physician named Max Jacobson I Edward Paul Donegan believe she was tied to out wedlock Windsor family descendents being used as charismatic sleeper agents for other countries.
But to prevent the sleepers agents from being identified and the truth told those who were “source material” personages from the program and who were NOT sleeper agents had to be silenced before they spoke and if they did speak they had to have been discredited and limited in the reach of their voice.
JFK the Windsors and Barrack Obama Jr are connected to Seattle WA 1953 Major World Events | United States and North Korea sign armistice ending the Korean War | Speech Defect King George V Prince Albert of York dies 1952.
Stanley Armour Dunham was from Seattle anthropology 1960s and later LESLIANNE SHEDD, 1968-1996.
Leslianne Shedd, who fulfilled a lifelong ambition to work in foreign service by joining the United States State Department right after graduating from the Jackson School of International Studies, died NOV. 24, 1996, in the crash of a hijacked Ethiopian Airlines jet, which fell into the Indian Ocean off the Comoros Islands.
Further Reading JFK and the Windsors will gather there in 1962 oerhaps by telepone with Malcom X Verne Rheem As a medical resident at Hopkins in 1922 Verne Mason (AUGUST 8, Rheem Mason gave the disease sickle cell anemia 1889 NOVEMBER its name.38, Mason was one of the physicians called to the sickbed of General of the Armies John J Pershing.
The commander of the American Expeditionary Force in France in World War I was in a coma and sinking.
Mason made the medical report on General Pershing, who recovered and lived for 10 years more.
Mason was chairman of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s edical advisory committee.
Mason Southern California, a professor of clinical medicine, and an attending physician at Cedars of Lebanon Hospital.
Mason was chairman of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s medical advisory committee.
Verne H Mason served his country in World War IT with the 451st Bombardment Group 726th Squadron Army Air Corps Verne Mason became Hughes personal physician as well as princple in HHMI “Marilin in Seattle 1953 This candid shot of Marilyn Monroe was taken during a visit to the Seattle Post-Intelligencer offices on July 30, 1953.
It wasn’t published at that time and didn’t appear in the P-I until April 2000, upon opening of an exhibit of historic P-I photos at the Museum of History and Industry.
Nikita Khrush chev retrieve d from Wikipe dia and copied or modifie sat a gem here ang On 5 March 1953, Stalin’s death triggere da power struggle in which Khrushchev emerged victorious upon consolidating his authority as First Secretary of the party’s Central Committee.
His domestic policies, aimed at bettering the lives of ordinary citizens, were often ineffective, especially in agriculture.
Hoping eventually to rely on missiles for national defense, Khrushchev ordered major cuts in conventional forces.
During his rule, Khrushchev stunned the communist world with his denunciation of Stalin’s crimes, 1 and embarked on a policy of de-Stalinization with his key ally Anastas 1 Mikoyan.
After some false starts, s anda narrowly avoided nuclear war over Cuba, he conducted successful ; Negotiations with the United States to reduce Cold War tensions.
His » proclivity toward recklessness led the Kremlin leadership to strip him of ; power, replacing him with Leonid Brezhnev as First Secretary and ' Alexei Kosygin as Premier.
A passable person of dark skin and common appearance for nearly anywhere in the world, Barrack Obama Jr.
The Aleut and Yupik peoples (Alutiig/Sugpiagq, “Central” Yup’ik, Siberian Yupik), who live in Alaska and Siberia, are not Inuit, and do not generally identify as such.
Boeing was founded by William Boeing in Seattle, Washington, on July 15, 1916.
THis is one of many real stories that fit the narrative of At Any Price where a person caught in a misdeed is force to work for those who blackmail h 1m.
Stanley Armour Dunham was the maternal grandfather of the 44th United States President Barack Obama.
Dunham was born in Wichita, Kansas, the younger of two sons to Ralph Waldo Emerson Dunham, Sr.
His father’s ancestors settled in Kempton, Indiana, in the 1840s, before relocating to Kansas.
His parents were married on October 3, 1915, at a home on South Saint Francis St. in Wichita, and opened The Travelers’ Cafe on William Street situated between the old firehouse and the old Wichita City Hotel.
A rebellious teenager, Dunham allegedly punched his high school principal and spent some time drifting, hopping rail cars to Chicago, California, and back again.
He married Madelyn Lee Payne on May 5, 1940, the night of her senior prom.
He is alleged to have been caught by his CIA connected wife Madelyn Lee Payne stealing Boeing B-29 plans for the Nazis and thus he become a patsy (a person blackmailed to cooperate) for the CIA afterward Further Reading.
During the war, Madelyn Payne Dunham worked on a Boeing B-29 assembly line in ichita.
Further Reading On NOVEMBER 25, 1926, at age 8, Dunham discovered his mother’s body after she had committed suicide.
In June 1960, the Bureau International des Expositions certified Century 21 as a world’s fair.
Project manager Ewen Dingwall went to Moscow to request Soviet participation, but was turned down.
Neither the People’s Republic of China, Vietnam nor North Korea were invited.
It also included a NASA Exhibit that included models and mockups of various satellites, as well as the Project Mercury capsule that had carried Alan Shepard into space.
These exhibits were the federal government’s major contribution to the fair.
The United States Science Exhibit began with Charles Eames’ 10minute short film The House of Science, followed by an exhibit on the development of science, ranging from mathematics and astronomy to tomic science and genetics.
This last looked at “Science and the individual”, “Control of man’s physical urroundings”, “Science and the problem of world population”, and “Man’s concept of his place in an increasingly technological world”. a a As it happened, the Cold War had an additional effect on the fair.
This may have » had Catholic implications as well and I note Marilyn Monroe and Joe * Dimagio were married 9 mos, officially excommunicated for the divorce "" afterwords, but I wonder if she gave a Catholic child into this plan with ' the Church arranging it.
In August 1962 the CIA OSS DOD Windsors may have had the ear of JFK but I think Marilyn Monroe then JFK then RFK decided to jump ship from the whole program and even reveal it.
AUGUST 4, 1930, Paragould, AR Died: December 20, 2007, Irvine, CA )who was one of Marilyn’s girlfriends.
And I want to say Robertg Kennedy was one of our greaterst Attorney Generals.
The Catholic Church did not recognize divorcepeople remained married in the eyes of God til the end of time.
ONe of many 1957 or so versions of blends of fiction and reality of “the Prince and the Singer” affair story lines.
She and Julie Ansdrews star in them and she and Julie Andrews seem to have King Edward VIII as a secret uknown amazing parent.
George V will be crowned king on 22 June and in the preceding days many important dignitaries arrive.
Among those arriving are the 16year-old King Nicholas VIII of the Balkan country of Carpathia, with his father the widower Prince Regent, The British government decide that keeping Carpathia in the Triple Entente is critical during the rising tensions in Europe.
They find it necessary to pamper the royals during their stay in London, and thus civil servant Northbrook is detached to their service.
Northbrook decides to take the Prince Regent out to the musical performance The Coconut Girl.
During the intermission, the Prince Regent is taken backstage to meet the cast.
He is not particularly interested in engaging with the male actors but extremely interested in the physical charms of Elsie Marina, one of the performers, and he sends a formal invitation for her to meet him at the Carpathian embassy for supper.
The two eventually kiss and Elsie admits she may be falling in love, rebuffing Northbrook’s promised feint to help her leave the embassy.
Elsie then passes out from the many drinks she consumed before, during and after her semi-solitary supper.
The following day, Elsie overhears a conversation concerning the young Nicolas’ plotting with the German embassy to overthrow his father.
She likely knew as my familiy seemed to the dark side of the Sound of Music.
Sheen told Joe after the marriage dissolved, ‘You had no right marrying her in the first place.’ — “DiMaggio told Sheen where to go and scolded him that he had no right to tell him who to marry and never spoke to the bishop again,” Positano says.
DiMaggio thought people wouldn’t recognize him when he quietly entered through the cathedral’s discreet 51st Street door in sunglasses.
But “one day he was recognized, and after a shout-out by John Cardinal O’Connor, he was given a rousing applause in the middle of Mass by all the parishioners,” Positano recalls.
Gregory & Holy Redeemer YouTUbe video there are no blacksheep sermon below I want to continue that idea of Jesus the Good Shepherd there was a song by Simon & Garfunkel years ago called mrs.
Robinson joltin Joe has left and gone away hey hey hey Where have you gone Joe DiMaggio a nation turns his lonely eyes to you what’s that you say mrs.
She [did not sleep with but Frank Sinatra (who feared she would be hurt as only a fling left behind)] did however confide her most intimate secrets including her affairs with John F Kennedy and Robert F, Kennedy.
The weekend before her death, Marilyn Monroe spent time at the famous Cal Neva Lodge, outside of Lake Tahoe, partially owned by Sinatra.
Attorney Milton A “Mickey” Rudin BIRTH 1920 DEATH 13 DEC 1999 As an entertainment lawyer he counted among his clients Lucille Ball and Desilu Productions for 25 years, Warner Brothers for 30 years, Elizabeth Taylor, Norman Lear, Liza Minnelli, and Marilyn Monroe.
As Monroe’s lawyer, and brother-in-law to her analyst, he was among the first on the scene at her death.
He gained his most prominence from his decades as Frank Sinatra’s spokesman, adviser, friend, and confidant.
JUNE 1, 1926, Los Angeles, CA Died: AUGUST 4 1962, Brentwood, Los Angeles, CA What the world didn’t know, the author reveals, was that she was there to spend time with her ex-husband Joe DiMaggio who was staying nearby and that Maryiln Monroe had decided to make a press announcement the following week that [she and Joe Dimagio ] were getting back together.
Against the rules of Catholicism Marilyn Monroe and baseball legend Joe DiMaggio wed in 1954 , and were divorced nine months later.
He was only in his 40s when Marilyn ied on August 5, 1962, but he never married again.
But, Oppedisano writes, “Frank said she’d never have spilled about the Kennedys because she still had feelings for ” A MOTIVE THE ANTI KENNEDY MAFIA WOULD HIT MARILYN Marilyn’s real allegiance was with the class of Joe Dimagio she viewed as a gentlemen who also played baseball.
She was ‘leaning Catholic with him towards the Kennedys who were ‘anti mob.
Vegas was dirty with murders, etc., and she had access ‘to see that world.
One step across the Cal Neva border will do you for gambling and marrying.
Fo» Giancana and the CIA Family Jewels retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Giancana was murdered on June 19, 1975, in Oak Park, Illinois, shortly before he was scheduled ia e appear before the Church Committee. an American mobster who was boss of the Chicago Outfit from 1957 to 1966.
He was shot and killed hours before he would have testified before the Church Committee on CIA Behavioral Research abuses Giancana was born in Chicago to Italian immigrant parents.
From the 1940s through the 1950s, he controlled the illegal gambling, illegal liquor | | | | | | | | | | | | * Samuel Mooney Giancana May 24, 1908 June 19, 1975) was | | | | | | | | | | | | ' distribution, and political rackets in Louisiana.
In the early 1940s, iancana was involved in Chicago’s African-American lottery payout system for the Outfit.
Giancana was ; ; interred next to his wife, Angeline, in a family mausoleum at Mount *, Carmel Cemetery, in Hillside, Illinois. il Hl Hl Hl Hl Hl Hl il il Hl Hl Hl il Hl Hl | According to the declassified CIA “Family Jewels” documents, Giancana and Trafficante were contacted in September 1960 about the possibility of an assassination attempt by Maheu after Maheu had contacted Roselli, a Mafia member in Las Vegas and Giancana’s number-two man.
According to Antoinette Giancana, during part of the affair, McGuire had a concurrent affair with resident Kennedy.
Out of |FOXP2 Grromed Sleeper Wedlock | Syndrome Agent (Barrack Windors | Shows Obama Jr,) Harrased in life by CIA NSA called stupid, bipolar, etc., mis-diagnosed and contained into | Unrecognized custody or very person low profile very low performing homeless (Edward Paul Donegan) Psych Ward Robert F Kennedy I will be expanding the RFK sections of this book over the next two or three weeks but I want to provide an over view I am sure will not change much.
Robert F Kennedy was a lawyer who was deeply opposed to Labour ' Racket businesses (those that manufacture a need for themselves, then ; fill the need with their services) mob activities, mob profits, mob victims, and mob interference with policing dating back to prohibition 1 and the Al Capone days.
The mob would ultimately cost him his own brother John F Kennedy i he was likely deeply closelty connected to during thier journey together.
RFK had a hard time reigning in the oil business, Teamseters, or any , other activity including disagreement in the ranks with the DOJ utilized , the mob against Castro.
Richard J Daley in 1962 48th Mayor of Chicago In office April 20, 1955 December 20, 1976 Preceded by Martin H Kennelly Succeeded by Michael Bilan Daley is remembered for doing much to save Chicago from the declines that other rust belt cities such as Cleveland, Buffalo, and Detroit experienced during the same period.
The union, like most unions within the American Federation of Labor : at the time, had a largely decentralized structure, with a number ; of local unions that governed themselves autonomously and tended to * look only after their own interests in the geographical jurisdiction in » which they operated.
It also meant that teamsters "" leaders were able to demand bribes in order to avoid strikes, and control of a teamsters local could bring organized crime significant evenues.
Influence of organized crime Beck was elected to the Executive Council of the AFL on August 13, 1953, but his election generated a tremendous political battle between AFL President George Meany, who supported his election, and federation vice presidents who felt Beck was corrupt and should not be elected to the post.
Hoffa’s attempt to challenge Beck caused a major national scandal which led to two Congressional investigations, several indictments for fraud and other crimes against Beck and Hoffa, strict new federal legislation and regulations regarding labor unions, and even helped launch the political career of Robert F Kennedy.
This RFK versus the Mafia bifurcation will be present in Bay of Pigs and the Oil Barrell and Defense Department interest in the elimination of Castro.
He sponsored the early Soviet space program, and enactment ; of relatively liberal reforms in domestic policy.
After some false starts, ; and a narrowly avoided nuclear war over Cuba, he conducted successful , hegotiations with the United States to reduce Cold War tensions.
This close encounter with death and his wealth freed ; him to pursue passions seeded in his youth music, sports, the » environment, science fiction, space travel and science.
He was intrigued ' by how the 3. billion nucleotide letters arrayed as strands of DNA ina ' single fertilized egg give rise to the 30 trillion cells that make up a © human.
In March 2002, after the success of the Human Genome Project, Paul convened meetings with geneticist James Watson and others to © focus ona big biology project of his own.
Some copied related terms, some omitted e Amphetamine / therapeutic use* e Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity / drug therapy* e Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity / metabolism e Catecholamines / metabolism* e Child Behavior / drug effects e Dextroamphetamine / therapeutic use e Norepinephrine / metabolism Minimal Brain Dysfunction is under stimulation (or under available of brain metabolic function do to poor organinci neortransmitters in teh brain such as Dopamaine for which Dysoxin or other amphetamines serve as an working analogy.
The book was later made into a movie starring Gregory Peck as Greenson’s character.
There has been much conjecture, by investigating officers, press and the public, about Greenson’s involvement in a possible cover-up concerning the circumstances of Monroe’s death.
Greenson was well known for his early work on returning WWII soldiers suffering from Post Traumatic Stress.
He also had other famous clients, such as Tony Curtis, Frank Sinatra, and Vivien Leigh.
Greenson and his wife, Hildi Greenson, were the darlings of the Southern California psychoanalytic community, intellectuals and with certain notables in the entertainment industry.
Greenson I hope all of your roses are in bloom today including the blackest red ones.
Greenson will encourage Marylin to sever some certain contacts, unkwon which ones.
He believed it was a miracle drug that broadened people’s thinking and he prescribed it to many of his female patients, overlooking or perhaps not noticing the many negative side effects of the drug.
Max Jacobson retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Dr.
Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 December 1979) the following ¢ John F Kennedy director Cecil B De Mille e Nelson Rockefeller “Rocky” JULY 8, 1908 January 26, 1979) e Marilyn Monroe JUNE 1, 1926 AUGUST 4, 1962) Note that Rockefeller is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatrity, the Nixon and many other administrations, and political office.
Max Jacobson was a German physician and medical researcher who "" treated numerous high-profile clients in America, including President "" John F Kennedy.
AUGUST 4, 1962 was going to be a Revealer James Angleton searched Marilyn Monroe’s apartment he stated hoping to find her diary.
CIA OSS Vatican Mossad QEII Kill Marilyn From Idaho USA to Italy/Vatican in WWII OSS to London back to the USA for the Israeli Desk.
Holmes Pearson in the counter-intelligence branch of the Office of ; Strategic Services in London, where he met the famous double agent » Kim Philby.
In 1954 Allen Dulles, who had recently become Director of Central Intelligence, named Angleton chief of the Counterintelligence Staff, a position that Angleton retained for the rest of his CIA career.
Angleton later « became convinced the CIA harbored a high-ranking mole, and engaged « in an intensive search.
Returning to Washington from Italy where he may have worked with "" the Vatican while working with the Italian Resisatnace, he was employed by the various successor organizations to the OSS, eventually becoming one of the founder-officers of the Central Intelligence Agency in 1947.
The prevailing belief at the « time was that the anti-war and civil rights movements of the 1960s and 1 1970s had foreign funding and support.
He twice informed the Royal » Canadian Mounted Police that he believed Prime Minister Lester ‘ Pearson and his successor Pierre Trudeau were agents of the Soviet ' Union.
In 1964, under pressure from Angleton, the RCMP detained John « Watkins, a close friend of Pearson and formerly Canadian Ambassador 1 to the Soviet Union.
Watkins died during interrogation by the RCMP and i was subsequently cleared of suspicion.
Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 Desoxyn (Crystal December 1979) the following tae ee for inimal Brain Dysfunction, or IDexapmphetamine.
My father felt bad he did not allow the prescription when I ¢ Marilyn Monroe JUNE 1, 1926 AUGUST [Was a child and i was 4, 1962) diagnosed (I have e John F Kennedy e Nelson Rockefeller “Rocky” JULY 8, 1908 January 26, 1979) yellow written record, Minimal Brain Dysfunction) hough in rehab in 2001 I was prescribed Note that Rockefeller is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatry, the Nixon and many other administrations, and political office.
JFK the Windsors and Barrack Obama Jr are connected to Seattle WA Minimal Brain Dysfunction is under stimulation (or under available of brain metabolic function do to poor organic neurotransmitters in the brain such as Dopamine for which Dysoxin or other amphetamines serve as an working analogy.
Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 Desoxyn (Crystal December 1979) the following Meth) used for Minimal Brain Dysfunction, or IDexapmphetamine.
Rothberg discussed the apparent comeback of subject with Kilgallen and the break up with the Kennedys.
Rothberg told Kilgallen that she was attending Hollywood parties hosted by the “inner circle” among Hollywood’s elite and was becoming the talk of the town again.
Rothberg indicated in so many words, that she had secrets to tell, no doubt arising from her trists with the President and the Attorney General.
One such “secret” mentions the visit by the President at a secret air base for the purpose of inspecting things from outer space.
In the mid-fifties Kilgallen learned of secret effort by United States and UK governments to identify the origins of crashed spacecraft and dead bodies, from a British government official.
Kilgallen believed the story may have come from the New Mexico story in the late forties.
Kilgallen said that if the story is true, it would cause terrible embarrassment for Jack and his plans to have NASA put men on the moon.
Subject repeatedly called the Attorney General and complained about the way she was being ignored by the President and his brother.
Subject made reference to “bases” in Cuba and knew of the President’s plan to kill Castro.
Subject made reference to her “diary of secrets” and what the newspapers would do with such disclosures.
He was a guy ; with a deep interest in the circumstances surrounding Marilyn’s death. , Speriglio was so interested in her final day that he wrote three books on ; the issues of her life and still-controversial death.
Until ' 1995, Speriglio had not made any kind of connection between the « Hollywood uber-babe and UFOs.
But, from the early-to-late 1990s, Cooper of Big Bear Lake, California ; was a well-known figure in Ufology.
Most of the controversy stemmed from the fact that Cooper , Claimed to have received a wealth of old, sensational, leaked documents | , from retired figures in the intelligence community almost all of them ; on crashed UFOs, Roswell, dead aliens, and the notorious Majestic 12 "" group.
Further Reading JFK and the Windsors will gather there in 1962 oerhaps by telepone with Malcom X Verne Rheem Mason (AUGUST 8, 1889 NOVEMBER 16,1965) was an eminent American internist and associate of Howard Hughes.
Mason was chairman of the Howard Hughes As a medical resident at Hopkins in 1922 Verne Rheem Mason gave the disease sickle cell anemia its name.38, Mason was one of the physicians called to the sickbed of General of the Armies John J Pershing.
Monroe, Marilyn; Films. ikita Khrushchev retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | | : Khrushchev emerged victorious upon consolidating his authority as First | | | | On 5 March 1953, Stalin’s death triggered a power struggle in which | : Secretary of the party’s Central Committee.
The Aleut and Yupik peoples (Alutiiq/Sugpiagq, “Central” 1 Yup’ik, Siberian Yupik), who live in Alaska and Siberia, are not Inuit, 1 and do not generally identify as such.
Sue Gordon is a CIA Zoologist in Trump cabinet full of MKULTRA ee Le A ee re i | Century 21 Exposition retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Donald Barr of the CIA likely with Barrack Obama Jr and Donald Barr with dangerously close access to JFK Nw The fair was originally conceived at a Washington Athletic Club luncheon in 1955 to mark the 50th anniversary of the 1909 AlaskaYukon-Pacific Exposition, but it soon became clear that that date was too ambitious.
The corporate headquarters were moved from Seattle to » Chicago in 2001.
THis is one of many real stories that fit the narrative of At Any Price where a person caught in a misdeed is force to work for those who blackmail him.
Stanley Armour Dunham was the maternal grandfather of the 44th United States President Barack Obama. , Dunham was born in Wichita, Kansas, the younger of two sons to » Ralph Waldo Emerson Dunham, Sr.
October 3, 1915, at a home on South Saint Francis St. in Wichita, and , opened The Travelers’ Cafe on William Street situated between the old : firehouse and the old Wichita City Hotel. : A rebellious teenager, Dunham allegedly punched his high school principal and spent some time drifting, hopping rail cars to Chicago, ; California, and back again.
During the war, "" Madelyn Payne Dunham worked on a Boeing B-29 assembly line in § Wichita.
Further Reading 1 On NOVEMBER 25, 1926, at age 8, Dunham discovered his mother’s i body after she had committed suicide.
It also included a NASA Exhibit that included models and mockups of i Various Satellites, as well as the Project Mercury capsule that had carried ; Alan Shepard into space.
President John F Kennedy was supposed to attend the closing ceremony of the fair on October 21, 1962.
A potential explanation also exists that JFK and Marilyn Monroe were splitting with the Windsors system of stolen fertilized eggs as the OSS CIA plant to plant Windsor relatives aroudn the world.
THis missle crisis was in full swing during the Expo as were racial problems.
Norma Jean was analogous to Julie Andrews, but drawn to the Roman Catholic, French Cathlolic, and Suave Italian Dimaggio Filmogrophy and possible messaging THE MISFITS Directed by John Marcellus Huston August 5, 1906 August 28, 1987 The Misfits is a 1961 American drama western film written by Arthur Miller, directed by John Huston, and starring Clark Gable, Marilyn Monroe, and Montgomery Clift.
The supporting cast features Thelma Ritter, Eli Wallach and Kevin McCarthy.
In Reno, Nevada, 30-year-old Roslyn Tabor files for a quickie 6 week residency divorce from her inattentive husband, Raymond.
Afterward, Roslyn’s landlady Isabelle takes her to a cocktail lounge at Harrah’s for drinks.
There they meet an aging cowboy named Gaylord “Gay” Langland, and his tow truck driver best friend, Guido.
The friendly Guido, is and tells Roslyn and Isabelle about his unfinished house in the country.
She died within a year of the release of the film. e Edward Montgomery Clift.
Clift then co-starred in John Huston’s The Misfits , which was the final film of both Marilyn Monroe and Clark Gable.
Clift appeared the movie in Judgment at Nuremberg Clift’s last nomination for an Academy Award was for Best Supporting Actor for his role in Judgment at Nuremberg , a 12-minute supporting part.
He played a developmentally disabled man who had been a victim of the Nazi sterilisation programme Lorenzo James went up to say goodnight to Clift, who was still awake and sitting up in his bed.
James asked Clift if he needed anything, and Clift politely refused and then told James that he would stay up for a while, either to read a book or watch some television.
McCarthy’s father was descended from a wealthy Irish American family based in Minnesota.
His mother was born in Washington State to a Protestant father and a nonobservant Jewish mother; McCarthy’s mother converted to Roman Catholicism before her marriage.
Joe DiMaggio was raised a Catholic in the staunch Italian American tradion of the early part of the twentieth century.
Windsors using out of Wedlock to research Minimal Brain Dysfunction is a probleml for Windsor and out of wedlock children including sleeper agents via the neice of a Gestaop General is somewhate problematic.
Patrick’s. etrieved from The Deacon’s Bench By deacon greg kandra and copied or modified to here Few people knew how devout a Catholic he was,” DiMaggio’s longtime friend Dr.
JUNE 1, 1926, Los Angeles, CA Died: AUGUST 4 1962, Brentwood, Los Angeles, CA What the world didn’t know, the author reveals, was that she was there to spend time with her ex-husband Joe DiMaggio who was staying nearby and that Maryiln Monroe had decided to make a press announcement the following week that were getting back together.
He was only in his 40s when Marilyn died on August 5, 1962, but he never married again.
Marilyn’s real allegiance was with the class of Joe Dimagio she ‘viewed as a gentlemen who also played baseball.
Many entertainers like Farah Fawcett deal easily with ‘Hollywood within their own boundreis and values they defend.
He was shot and killed hours before he would have testified before 1 the Church Committee on CIA Behavioral Research abuses slalatetetatetatatatetatatelatets| Giancana was born in Chicago to Italian immigrant parents.
At around 11 ; m., Joseph DiPersio, Giancana’s caretaker, found his body on the floor A of the basement kitchen where he was said to be frying sausage and 1 peppers.
A week before his death, Giancana had gall bladder r 1 surgery in Houston.
Giancana suggested using 1 poison pills to dose Castro’s food and drink.
Although documents suggest Maheu acquiesced, the device was » hot planted due to the arrest of the agent who had been tasked with ' planting it.
According to Antoinette Giancana, during part of the affair, McGuire had a concurrent affair with President ennedy.
He was the patriarch of the Daley family, whose members "" include Richard M Daley, another former mayor of Chicago; William 1 M Daley, a former United States Secretary of Commerce; John P Daley, ra member of the Cook County Board of Commissioners; and Patrick 1 Daley Thompson, an alderman of the Chicago City Council.
Daley is remembered for doing much to save Chicago from the declines ; that other rust belt cities such as Cleveland, Buffalo, and Detroit ; experienced during the same period.
RFK JFK versus Mafia George Bush Donald Barr J Edgar Hoover and other 33s La Cosa Nostra Teamsters ioe © 8 oe 8 eh Ue UU UU Ue UU UG UG UG UU UG De UU Ue UG UU Ue UG Ue Ue UU UG Premational Brotherhood of Teamsters retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here pee zy | The union, like most unions within the American Federation of Labor at the time, had a largely decentralized structure, with a number ; Of local unions that governed themselves autonomously and tended to » look only after their own interests in the geographical jurisdiction in » which they operated.
United States House of Representatives held hearings on the issue. : Hoffa’s attempt to challenge Beck caused a major national scandal ; which led to two Congressional investigations, several indictments for fraud and other crimes against Beck and Hoffa, strict new federal legislation and regulations regarding labor unions, and even helped "" launch the political career of Robert F Kennedy.
After some false starts, and a narrowly avoided nuclear war over Cuba, he conducted successful negotiations with the United States to reduce Cold War tensions.
Paul G Allen Microsoft co-founder who established the Allen Institute for Brain Science.
Nature.com This book Joe Biden is a Tulane Orleans Concealer Notables Tulane ANDREW BREITBART Andrew James Breitbart (/‘braItba:rt/; February 1, 1969 March 1, 2012) was an American conservative journalist, writer, and political commentator who was the founder of Breitbart News and a co-founder of HuffPost.
JOSEPH R BIDEN Joseph Robinette Biden Jr. (/‘balden/ BY-ddn; born NOVEMBER 20,19 * 42) is an American politician who is the A6th and current president of the United States.
ASHLEY BLAZER BIDEN Ashley Blazer Biden is an American social worker, activist, philanthropist, and fashion designer.
MARY LAURENCE “LAUREN” HUTTON (BORN NOVEMBER 17, 1943 ) Mary Laurence “Lauren” Hutton is an American model and actress.
His call sign is “Chunky”, and he was sometimes referred to by this name on the communication loops.
This book The Cheney Family are USAID plans Concealers along who have ensnared family lines into Original Sin those families refuse to exit from The Mafia Operation of Bush Cheney spins out of control into a 33 Wild Fire, and contract killings cover it up.
Further Reading I 2 1Z Dick Cheney retrieved from Britannica.com and copied or modified to here | r Dick Cheney, in full Richard Bruce Cheney, , 46th vice i president of the United States in the Republican administration of Pres.
George W Bush and secretary | of defense in the administration of Pres.
In 1968 Cheney moved to Washington, D.C., to serve as Richard Bruce Cheney married Lynne Vincent August 29, 1964 after courtship.
They Cheney daughters are Elizabeth and Mary Elizabeth Lynne Cheney born July 28, 1966 is an American attorney and politician Mary Claire Cheney born March 14, 1969 is the younger of the two daughters of Dick Cheney, the former vice president of the United States, and Lynne Cheney.
She married her wife Heather Poe in 2012, and in 2013 was a signatory to an amicus curiae brief submitted to the United States Supreme Court in la congressional fellow, and, beginning in 1969, he worked in the administration of Pres.
After leaving government service briefly in 1973, he became a deputy assistant to Pres.
In 1978 he was elected from Wyoming to the first of six terms in the |United States House of Representatives, where he rose to become the Republican whip.
In the House, Cheney took conservative positions on abortion, gun control, and environmental regulation, among other issues.
In 1978 he suffered the first of several mild heart attacks, and he junderwent quadruple-bypass surgery in 1988.
Cheney also oversaw the United States military invasion of Panama and the participation of United States forces in in May 2007. support of same-sex marriage during the Hollingsworth Perry case.
In 1995 he became the chairman and chief executive lofficer of the Halliburton Company, a supplier of technology and services to the oil and gas industries.
As vice president, Cheney was active and used his influence to help shape the administration’s energy policy i and foreign policy in the Middle East.
Critics, who had ' long charged Cheney with being a secretive public servant, included members of Congress who brought suit ' against him for not disclosing records used to form the national energy policy.
After leaving office in 2009, Cheney remained in the public eye, often speaking on political matters.
An American Medical Odyssey and, with Liz Cheney, Exceptional: Mark Howard Gorton is a businessman whose research into deep politics was published on Gawker in 2014.
FOOD SAFETY AND INSPECTION SERVICE FSIS enhances public health and well-being by protecting the public from foodbome illness and ensuring that the nation’s meat, poultry and egg products are safe, wholesome, and correctly packaged.
FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICE FAS works to improve foreign market access for United States products.
RHS offers loans, grants and loan guarantees for singleand multi-family housing, child care centers, fire and police stations, hospitals, libraries, nursing homes, schools, first responder vehicles and equipment, housing for farm laborers and much more.
RURAL BUSINESS-COOPERATIVE SERVICE RBS offers programs to help businesses grow as well as job training for people living in rural areas.
Explaining for the first time i the hijackers’ mysterious trips to Las Vegas, where and how they could have been trained, and the document i that actually states a political motive for the attacks, he finds abundant evidence implicating a nexus of Saudi | officials, American contractors and, most unthinkably, members of the Bush administration.
The plan in 1961 to 1963 organized by the CIA, FBI, NSA, DAPRPA On November 19 1962 likely CIA operation removed Cheney from view of the public on a fake drunk driving charge much like they got the bush AG out of view of the public.
Dick 46th Vice President of the United States Dick Chenney News Liz Cheney’s Trump endorses Boston Herald 9 minutes ago Soth tied to USAID plans, State Dept. world activities of NWO plot Dick Cheney DUI nap ewer thesmakinggun. comfiemicscheney.dui ING STATE OF WYOMI ere Ca provisions of an ordinance of the City of fi wetatol) wile ius and said defendant.
His wife, Susan, was later | a teacher and headmistress of the lower school at Ramaz, and both of their children t attended the school.
The fifth heart attack was in February, and by June I reached the point where I was obviously in end-stage heart failure.
He needed a quadruple bypass, where surgeons rerouted blood vessels around i his arteries.
BBC.com Trump ‘drifted away’ from constitution, says ex-military The Bush oil family, Rockefeller Standard Oil family, Middle East plans, England the Rothschilds, Windsors, dynasty is tied to Michecal Mulcasey, Donald Barr, William Barr, MKULTRA, the assignations of some of Camelaot, and more.
It has been non stop FBI attacks on me 25 hours a day for at least 30 years in a row non stop and every day the truth supports me over these FBI deeps state criminals.
IT was all that activity like putting scavies on her, slandering me to her, slandering the BDSM scene to her, all of that is what got her to make Tom Donegan, as he planned it, in a postion of [abusive} power ofver me he sought all his life, and he dealt with my mothers death with glee saying he noow could really kill me and was going to, and Tom DOnegan was gleefual at my fathers death to, so much so I had to leave my fathers side lest I kill both Tom and Mark at that time.
Los Angles County : : be Trinity United Church of C Nov 18 California still note Chicago.
Trung speech, also Boross (bom custody as | Bush, CIA, Operation ea ae Ree sighted at 11/18/1919.
If you have any questions or comments please don’t hesitate to message message us at support@fetlife.com.
I am a surveillance abuse survivor which targetd me with conflict situations I was then arrested for or the trust fund charged for.
The True Story Of Revelation 12 Now Is Come Salvation, And Strength, And The Kingdom Of Our God Be sure to pay close attention at the 32 minute mark in the video where Ron recounts a visitation from the Lord while he was in Jerusalem.
Information which may contribute to profiling and the deaths of Criminal Justice officials Scalia, Thomas C Wales, Rohert F Kennedy, John F Kennedy, and perhaps others not yet considered under the umbrella theory of this book yet Charles Milles Manson aka Charles Manson was a research subject Dr.
The Helter Skelter scenario is a theory put forward by Vincent Bugliosi, the lead prosecutor in the Tate-LaBianca murder trial.
It is mostly based on the testimony of Paul Watkins, as a motive for the series of murders that were committed by the Manson Family in order to convict Charles Manson of conspiracy to commit murder.
According to Bugliosi’s theory, Manson often spoke to the members of his “family” about Helter Skelter in the months leading up to the murders of Sharon Tate and Leno and Rosemary LaBianca in August 1969, an apocalyptic war arising from racial tensions between Black and White people.
The following night the gang struck again, killing Rosemary and Leno LaBianca in their home nearby.
It has always been assumed that Manson’s victims were chosen at random, and the murders the senseless act of a madman with a messiah complex.
In a 1976 interview with the National Enquirer, Manson himself insisted, “It didn’t matter who was killed as long as it was someone.
But a book by investigative journalists Dylan Howard and Andy Tillett now reveal that Manson had not only previously met Sharon Tate whose husband Roman Polanski was one of Hollywood’s hottest young movie directors at that time but that he and Tex Watson had visited her house several times before the murders.
Charles Manson, the CIA, and the Secret History of the Sixties retrieved from Wikipedia and 1 Fe, copied or modified to here This is the front cover art for the book CHAOS: Charles Manson, the CIA, and the Secret History of the Sixties written by Tom O’ Neill with Dan Piepenbring.
The book presents O’ Neill’s research into the background and motives for the Tate-LaBianca murders committed by the Manson Family in 1969.
Terry Lynn Nichols is an American domestic terrorist who was convicted of being an accomplice in the Oklahoma City bombing.
Prior to his incarceration, he held a variety of short-term jobs, working as a farmer, grain elevator manager, real estate salesman and ranch hand.
He met his future coconspirator, Timothy McVeigh, during a brief stint in the United States Army, which ended in 1989 when he requested a hardship discharge after less than one year of service.
In 1994 and 1995, he conspired with McVeigh in the planning and preparation of the truck bombing of the Alfred P Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, on April 19, 1995.
In a federal trial in 1997, Nichols was convicted of conspiracy to use a weapon of mass destruction and eight counts of involuntary manslaughter for killing federal law enforcement personnel.
He was sentenced to tried in Oklahoma on state charges of murder in connection with the bombing.
As in the federal trial, the state jury deadlocked on imposing the death penalty.
He was also a believer in the Christian Identity religion, and frequented Elohim | City, a private community located in Oklahoma.
In 1971, he founded the radical organization The Covenant, The Sword, and the Arm of the Lord ife imprisonment without the possibility of parole after the jury deadlocked on the death penalty.
He was also a close associate of both Richard Wayne Snell and Timothy McVeigh.
Snell was involved in the filming of planes that landed at Mena Intermountain Municipal Airport in Mena, Arkansas, thought of by Snell and many conspiracy theorists to be used in a government-sanctioned operation of the Central Intelligence Agency to smuggle drugs into the United States.
Snell had claimed that law enforcement agencies, both state and those local to that area of western Arkansas, were involved in the coverup of the Mena airport drug smuggling.
He had also made claims that he had filmed the then-Govermor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton, at Mena Intermountain Municipal Airport, but that claim has never been proven.
Snell further claimed that one of the Arkansas state troopers who were assigned to the Governor’s security team at that time had beaten Snell’s wife in an attempt to force her to reveal the location of the alleged video footage Snell had taken at the airport.
In 1983, Snell, accompanied by CSA members William Thomas and Steven Scott, attempted to dynamite a natural gas pipeline near Fulton, Arkansas, without success.
Scott was eventually captured and convicted of that crime, while several other CSA members were arrested on various other charges, mostly weapons violations.
By 1985, the CSA had essentially fallen into inactivity due to most of its members being either killed or incarcerated.
Snell, known to his friends as “Wayne”, was an anomaly amongst the militants of the CSA, in that he operated autonomously, using the CSA compound as his base of operation.
Steven Scott, a frequent collaborator with Snell, gave this information in a federal prison holding cell to one of the then members.
On November 3, 1983, Snell shot and killed pawn shop owner William Stumpp, who he mistakenly believed was of Jewish descent, and then on June 30, 1984, he killed black Arkansas State Trooper Louis P Bryant near DeQueen, Arkansas.
A truck driver who witnessed the killing of Officer Bryant followed him and contacted the Broken Bow police department.
The police officers there set up a roadblock, where they engaged Snell in a shootout that resulted in Snell being wounded six times in the abdomen, knee, and ankle, and arrested.
Snell never denied the allegations made against him, or the crimes he was accused of having committed.
The book was greatly influential in shaping white nationalism and in the later development of white genocide conspiracy theory.
THey wish to have groomed leaders in place who will be part of a Masonic tending of those populations. ] majority countries such as Australia and New Zealand, where it was feared that non-white immigrants would eventually supplant the white population.
Nazis used the conspiracy theory as a call to arms in a bid to gain power through cultural hegemony and scapegoating Jews by leveraging long-running historical prejudices.
Prior to Nazis coming to power, German eugenicists including Jewish medical and psychiatric professionals did consider Jews to be distinct from white Europeans, but not so “degenerate” or unfit as to require anything more than guidance avoiding heritable disease via marriage counseling and, as early as 1918, screening for Jews wishing to emigrate to Palestine.
In 2008, the conspiracy theory spread beyond its explicit neo-Nazi and white nationalist origins, to be embraced by the newly founded alt-right movement.
Discussion threads on the white nationalist Internet forum Stormfront often center around the theme of white people being subjected to genocidal policies by their governments.
The concept has also been popularized by the alt-right and alt-lite movements in the United States.
The notion of racial purity, homogeneity or “racial hygiene” is an underlying theme of the white genocide discourse and it has been used by people with neo-Nazi and white supremacist backgrounds.
This view is held by prominent figures such as David Duke, who cites Jews and “liberal political ideals” as the main causes.
The Great Replacement Renaud Camus, progenitor of the Great Replacement theory.
The Great Replacement Starting with French author Renaud Camus and his 2011 book Le Grand Remplacement, the conspiracy theory of the Great Replacement focused on a displacement of French whites by predominantly Muslim population from the Middle East and Africa, then turned into a pan-European concept which spread across most major countries’ politics on the continent.
Science journalist Ronald Bailey proposes that Trump is merely “the latest demagogue to rise to power by stoking white folks’ ethnic fears”, and that “white extinction panics” have historically occurred in the United States each time the foreign-born population reached above 13 percent.
Pat Buchanan in 2008 Blow has defined “white extinction anxiety” as the fear that white people will become a minority, stripped of their race-based privilege.
Cle el a le ll hed he ete ee te ell eet etn eee nent en eel enlace entation enone r] i ‘ Prcveian took last rites before execution retrieved from CNN.com/LawCenter and copied or modified to uJ here Strapped to a gurney, awaiting the lethal injection Monday that would punish him for the Oklahoma City bombing, Timothy McVeigh asked to see a priest.
He married Almaa Powell Boston Speech Therapist 1961 likely studying FOXP3 tone deafness,, etc., oti Powell, military leader and first Black United States secretary of state, dies after complications from Covid-19 retrieved from CNN and copied or modified to here ee hee CNN)Colin Powell, the first Black United States secretary of state whose ; leadership in several Republican administrations helped shape American ; foreign policy in the last years of the 20th century and the early years of » the 21st, has died from complications from Covid-19, his family said on » Facebook.
And most important, Colin was a family man and a ; friend.” | i Though Powell never mounted a White House bid, when he was sworn 1 in as Bush’s secretary of state in 2001, he became the highest-ranking 1 Black public official to date in the country, standing fourth in the 1 presidential line of succession.
She also has two daughters, Linda ¢ | He along with his Powell, an actress, and Annemarie.
Her father and ife plus either uncle were principals of two high schools in Dick Cheney or Birmingham; Condoleezza Rice’s father worked in her uncle’s school as a guidance counselor.
Bush he descriptions of he murders of efery Mc Donalds family when late ed wetting was ecoming visible developmentally.
He matches a description of a black general Alma Powell is the chair of America’s Promise, the nation’s largest partnership dedicated to improving the lives of children and youth.
She has also authored two children’s books, America’s Promise and My Little Red Wagon.
Colin Powell, one of America’s most admired public figures, reveals the principles that have shaped his life and career in this inspiring and engrossing memoir.
A message of strength and endurance from a man who has dedicated his life to public service, It Worked for Me is a book with the power to show readers everywhere how to achieve a more fulfilling life and career.
Goreney defends comments on Powell Former Vice President Dick Cheney on Tuesday defended comments in his new memoir about Colin Powell, saying his take on the former secretary of state is “basically all very positive” and noting that he supported him for promotion to various military positions.
Lauer did not directly ask Cheney to respond to Powell’s criticism this weekend that the former “cheap shots” at him and some of his other colleagues from George W Bush’s administration.
The World Justice Project® is an eorge W Bush, independent, multidisciplinary organization working create knowledge, build awareness, and stimulate action to advance the rule of law worldwide.
It is the foundation for —_ Secretary of State, communities of justice, opportunity, and peacee led the State underpinning development, accountable epartment in government, and respect for fundamental rights. ajor efforts to ddress and solve Traditionally, the rule of law has been viewed as egional and civil the domain of lawyers and judges.
Based on this, WJP pursues a multidisciplinary approach to advancing the rule of law.
Its offices are located in {the potential to Washington DC, Seattle, Singapore, and Mexico City. egions into areas American efforts to advance economic and social development worldwide.
Leaf Cluster), Soldier’s Medal, Bronze Star Medal and the Purple Heart.
Allegences in ethics support cohesion in the cartel for a group profit strategy MKULTRA is a co-operation long term plan organized by the CIA and England for the Middle East North Africa, Ukranian, and other expansion, and profits of the plausibly deniable cartels will be protected by CIA acts including Wet Division silencing of those whou would expose the secret plans Cartel behavior includes price fixing, bid rigging, and reductions in output.
This book asserts to use my DNA on the black market funding criminals my DNA is used to bid for Dominatrixes or plea deals though the bid is rigged because the DNA is offered via a person tied to my identity, thus accapted as me, but tied to my identity in an unreliable way such as having furniture of clothing once mine which I no longer possess.
CARTEL PARTY THEORY The concept of the cartel party was first proposed in 1992 as a means of drawing attention to the patterns of inter-party collusion or cooperation rather than competition; and as a way of emphasising the influence of the state on party development.
ULY 8TH, 2020 By Dan E Moldea ROLLAND MCMASTER On AUGUST 5, my first full day on the job with NBC News, I received an introduction to an associate of Rolland McMaster, a Teamsters official who had stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Hoffa since their earliest days in the union.
In fact, my new source alleged that McMaster had played a key role in the disposal of Hoffa’s body six days earlier but he could not prove it.
NBC authorized me to pursue the McMaster lead but put me on a short leash, iving me a limited amount of time to get results.
The Irishman retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ‘fter the 1960 election of John F Kennedy, Russell is thrilled while Hoffa is furious.
While Hoffa is in prison, his replacement as Teamsters president, Frank “Fitz” Fitzsimmons, misuses the union’s pension fund and gives interest-free loans i to the Mafia.
Hoffa has his sentence commuted by President Richard Nixon in 1971, although he is forbidden from partaking in any Teamsters activities until 1980 I Despite his parole terms, Hoffa undertakes a plan to reclaim his power atop the Teamsters.
Hoffa’s growing 1 disrespect for other Teamster leaders and his intention to separate the union from the Mafia begins to worry I Russell.
Hoffa, who had scheduled a meeting at a local restaurant with Tony Pro and 1 Anthony Giacalone, is surprised to see Sheeran arrive late with Hoffa’s unsuspecting foster son Chuckie i O’Brien and loan shark Sally Bugs.
They advise Hoffa that the meeting was moved to a house where Tony Pro I and Russell are waiting for them, and drive him over.
President of his freshman class, “the Class of 1940,” I succeeding Daniel G Lacey.
He flew Chiang Kai-shek’s Chinese delegation to Tehran.[citation needed] An important mission he was involved in was the evacuation of the British commandos made famous by the i novel Guns of Navarone involved in the Battle of Leros from Leros to Palestine.
Prouty fondly recalled Buckley at that time in his role as editor of the Yale Daily News, and i Prouty later told an interviewer in 1989 that he had written for Buckley on several occasions.
Force, promoted to colonel, and assigned to the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
In an chance encounter ; with Edward Lansdale in the hallways of the Pentagon, a “month or two before” the assassination (as Prouty tells it), Lansdale informed Prouty he had arranged for him to accompany a group of VIPs to the ; South Pole from November 10 to 23, in the capacity of Military Escort officer. i | The ostensible purpose of the trip was the activation a nuclear power plant at the United States Navy Base at ' McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, to provide heat, light, and sea water desalination.
Prouty later i described his confusion at the unusual assignment, but he expected the job to be a “paid vacation” and i accepted the task.
Amazon.com and copied or modified to here i Perhaps the most shocking book written this century about treason committed by the highest leaders within the | United States government.
This disturbing and thought-provoking expose is written by Brigadier General Russell S | Bowen who has courageously come forward with the truth about his association with the OSS (Office of | Security Services) and his ‘drug running’ activities on behalf of the ‘secret’ government which involves the I i highest United States ‘leaders’ and which few Americans know anything about.
During i WW 2, he received the Distinguished Flying Cross and other medals for his time as a young fighter pilot. i It was during this time he was brought into the OSS and when President Truman banned the intelligence | organization, Bowen and others secretly maintained the organization, later to become the CIA He helped establish several airlines in South America that were used as cover for the CIA and was an expert at extracting CIA operatives from dangerous situations when their cover had been exposed.
He was heavily involved in CIA drug trafficking, Bowen and others became disenchanted with the CIA involvement with drugs and wanted to stop the i i i I I 1 ' especially in South America, and had many friends within both the Medellin and Cali cartels.
Eventually, I I practice of bringing them into America 1 I In the early 1980’s, he wrote an anonymous letter to United States Customs, reporting the details of the smuggling 1 operation, but nothing happened.
Marine commander during WWII, committed to family, country retrieved from link and copied or modified to here eee) Russell Allen Bowen, 96, a former Los Altos resident, died April 14.
His i four years included tours of duty on the USS Lexington and the USS Saratoga where he logged numerous day and night carrier landings.
It was love at first sight and they married shortly before Mr Bowen was i reactivated after the 1941 bombing of Pearl Harbor. i | He saw combat duty overseas as the commanding officer of Marine Corps Squadron 252, stationed in | Kwajalein and Guam.
His Oakhaven i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i Chinchilla Ranch, located on an historical estate in the midst of one of the last apricot orchards in Los Altos, became the second largest producer of the fur in California.
Her mother, Ellen Judith Litwack, is a poet and speech therapist, and her father, Gerald J Litwack, is amolecular pharmacologist, and college professor and chairman.
Lucille’s father 1 was Preston Jeter , whose » mother was born in similar circumstances as Bertran Philander Ross » Hendrix.
Born in Seattle, Washington, Hendrix began playing guitar at the age of ' 15.
Jimi Hendrix’s mixed genealogy included African American, Irish, and i Cherokee ancestors.
His father, Basil Fanshawe ; “Joe” Jagger , and grandfather, » David Ernest Jagger, were both teachers.
She later moved to England where she ; married Jagger’s dad, Basil Fanshawe “Joe” Jagger, and the pair welcomed two sons, Mick and Chris, who was also a musician. , Jagger attended secondary school at Eltham College.
DECEMBER 8,_1966, Glenageary, Ireland has announced she has converted to IETF The artist, who is best known for her 1990 hit version of the song Nothing Compares 2 U, said she had changed her name to Shuhada’ ~ i The singer, who was 1 recently admitted to 1 hospital, named her : stalker on her official Facebook page wad » Sinead O’Connor’s , stalker hell has nearly ; driven her to suicide.
Sinead, who has received treatment for mental health issues in the past, revealed that she had been taken to hospital just two weeks ago.
In a lengthy post on her official Facebook, Sinead claimed that she had een bombarded with emails which boast about getting her set up to be oO Shuhada Sadagqat is an Irish singer-songwriter.
Her debut album, The ; Lion and the Cobra, was released in 1987 and charted internationally.
She was named Sinéad after Sinéad de Valera, the wife of Irish « President Eamon de Valera, Marie after the mother of the doctor r presiding over the delivery, and Bernadette in honour of Saint Bernadette 1 of Lourdes.
She is the third of five children; her siblings are novelist I Joseph, Eimear, John, and Eoin.
In ; some ways, she thrived there, especially in the development of her , writing and music, but she also chafed under the imposed conformity.
The letter repeated accusations of abuse by her parents as a child which O’Connor had made in interviews.
Faith and Courage was released in 2000, including the single “No Man’s Woman”, and featured contributions from Wyclef Jean of the Fugees and Dave Stewart of Eurythmics.
Her 2002 album, Sean-Nos Nua, marked a departure in that O’ Connor interpreted or, in her own words, “sexed up” traditional Irish folk songs, ; including several in the Irish language.
In Sean-Nos Nua, she ; covered a well-known Canadian folk song, “Peggy Gordon”, interpreted , as a song of lesbian, rather than heterosexual, love.
In her documentary, , Song of Hearts Desire, she stated that her inspiration for the song was ' her friend, a lesbian who sang the song to lament the loss of her partner.
On7 January 2022, two days after her 17-year-old son Shane was : reported missing from Newbridge, County Kildare, he was found dead at Bray, County Wicklow, by Irish police.
Britney Spears From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia * Britney Spears’ parents are “extremely disappointed” about her hospital release. ... used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder * Feb., 2008 With Britney Spears out of the psych ward and free to run wild, the pop star’s parents said they fear for her life.
Irish saint, and founder of Gibson’s mother’s local native diocese, 1 Ardagh.
The Patriot is a 2000 American epic historical revisionist war film i written by Robert Rodat, directed by Roland Emmerich and starring Mel i Gibson, Chris Cooper, Heath Ledger and Jason Isaacs.
Benjamin Martin, an American colonist opposed to going to war with ; Great Britain who gets swept into the Revolutionary War when his home : life is disrupted.
Randy Quaid was born in Houston, Texas, the son of Juanita Bonniedale “Nita” , a real estate agent, and William Rudy Quaid , an electrician.
Gag Bahrani, Robert F Kennedy Jr., and Monsanto Ramin Bahrani is an American director and screenwriter.
Kennedy is a son of United States senator Robert F Kennedy and a nephew of president John F Kennedy.
As a watcher of this movie I found it sophomoric that the sex scene with Crown was in a seed which was made to like like a missle silo during orgasm point up to the silo roof and this occurred at 58 minutes into the film, or 59 minutes and I wondered if this was some conceptual glyph or a DNA experiment in that time-frame.
Brazil China India Mexico South Africa Standard Oil and Rockefeller STOup of Five From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia * Fhe concept of a forum for the world’s major industrialized : democracies emerged following the 1973 oil crisis and subsequent global : recession.
At the time, it was impossible to predict whether this ' informal gathering would be meaningful or only a public relations event A core part of the Espionage capabilities is blaming me for me being assaulted by Agent Provocateurs who created an offense then assaulted me as though I were the offender, then paying the victim of the Agent Provocateur with my genomic or financial assets.
California, after Martin’s Broadway turn in The Subject Was Roses. : Sheen’s first movie appearance was at age nine in his father’s 1974 film ; The Execution of Private Slovik.
Sheen attended Santa Monica High | i School in Santa Monica, California, along with Robert Downey Jr., where he was a Star pitcher and shortstop for the baseball team.
Catholic archbishop and theologian Fulton J Sheen, while Charlie was « an English form of his given name Carlos.
Der Nazi Loving Jew After Bobby Fischer mysteriously left the world stage, he spoke of worldwide satanic conspiracies run by the Illuminati. the Arse plot)” from the House of Rothschild and financed from there.
Regina and Hans-Gerhardt had already separated in Moscow, although they did not officially divorce until 1945.
At the time of her son’s birth, Regina was homeless and shuttled to different jobs and schools around the country to support her family.
Fischer for violating economic sanctions, through an executive order issued by President George Bush.
ZMSN.com retrieved from — Meta Platforms Inc.’s oneday crash now ranks as the worst in stock-market history. and copied or modified to here | The Facebook parent plunged 26% Thursday 02/03/2022 on the back of woeful earnings results, and erased about $251. billion in market value.
That’s the biggest wipeout in market value for any United States company ever.
And while the stock could certainly bounce back in coming days, especially given the volatility that’s gripped the technology sector this year, the mood on Wall Street has turned decidedly bleak on the longtime market darling. rivals and to the fact that revenue was below expectations as causes for concern.
Mavinkurve commenced work on HarvardConnection but departed the r project in spring 2003 when he graduated and went to work for Google.
After the departure of Mavinkurve, the Winklevosses and Narendra » approached Narendra’s friend, Harvard student and programmer Victor » Gao, to work on HarvardConnection.
Mark Zuckerberg In November 2003, at the suggestion of Victor Gao, the Winklevosses and Narendra approached Mark Zuckerberg about i joining the HarvardConnection team.
Peter Thiel is among the prominent venture capitalists and billionaires ; in the world.
He i focuses on his faith and not Christianity in fundamentalist terms.
Matt Danzeisen’s net worth and 1 assets are estimated conservatively at over $1 million, which he earned ron his own throughout his business career.
In 2010, he co-founded Valar Ventures and Mithril Capital Management, and more recently was also a partner at Y Combinator between 2015 and 2017.
After two years, he transferred to the private school Phillips Exeter Academy, where he won prizes in mathematics, astronomy, physics, and classical studies.
In his youth, he also attended the Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth summer camp.
Harold » was born in Wuzhou, China, where his parents were missionaries.
He » was educated at boarding schools in England before finding work in the } printing business.
Carpenter’s only sibling, Richard, the elder by three years, developed an interest in music at an early age, becoming a piano prodigy.
Bruce Gifford, the conductor (who had ' previously taught her elder brother), gave her the glockenspiel, an "" instrument she disliked, and after admiring the performance of her friend © and classmate, drummer Frankie Chavez (who had been playing from an early age and idolized jazz drummer Buddy Rich), she asked if she could i play those instead.
The choir’s director, Frank Pooler, said that Karen had a good voice that was Pp a it3 articularly suited to pop and gave her lessons in order for her to develop three-octave range.
Names are often put forward for inclusion, but because the club is entirely notional, there is no official membership. wikiepdia Kurt Donald Cobain was an American musician.
Gececan of Brian Jones of The Rolling Stones during the band’s visit to ane Lewis Brian Hopkin Jones (28 FEBRUARY 1942 3 JULY 1969) was an English musician and composer, best known as the founder and original leader of the Rolling Stones.
After he founded the Rolling Stones as a British blues outfit in 1962, and gave the band its name, Jones’s fellow band members Keith Richards and Mick Jagger began to take over the band’s musical direction, especially after they became a successful songwriting team.
Belvin’s success was cut short by his death in a car crash at the age of 27.
She had been a diabetic for most of her life and slipped into a coma (or more likely, insulin shock) while sleeping.
Gattaca retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Bey) It'stars Ethan Hawke and Uma Thurman, with Jude Law, Loren Dean, Ernest Borgnine, Gore Vidal, and Alan Arkin appearing in supporting roles.
His parents, regretting their decision, use genetic selection sin conceiving their second child, Anton Jr.
The film draws on concerns over reproductive technologies that facilitate eugenics, and the possible consequences of such technological developments for society.
According to the San Francisco Chronicle, nearby residents described seeing police frequently traveling fast through the area.
The street on which the collision occurred is in a park and did not have a protected bike lane nor bicycle sharrows painted on the street. a Robert Lewis Burns Jr. retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or . modified to here 7 Robert Lewis Burns Jr. was an American drummer in the original line-up of the Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd.
Lynyrd Skynyrd plane crash Lead vocalist/founding member Ronnie Van Zant, guitarist and vocalist Steve Gaines, backing vocalist Cassie Gaines , assistant road manager Dean Kilpatrick, pilot Walter McCreary and copilot William Gray all died as a result of the crash while twenty others I F survived.
The Bone’s Bone Bash 7, Van Zant underwent emergency surgery to have his appendix removed.
When Lynyrd Skynyrd was in need of a guitar player to replace recently departed Ed King, Cassie recommended her younger brother, Steve, who joined the band soon after.
GARY ROBERT ROSSINGTON (BORN DECEMBER 4, 1951) Gary Robert Rossington is an American musician, best known as a founding member of Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd, in which he plays lead and rhythm guitar.
THOMAS DELMER “ARTIMUS” PYLE (BORN JULY 15, 1948) Thomas Delmer “Artimus” Pyle is an American musician who played drums with Lynyrd Skynyrd from 1974 to 1977 and from 1987 to 1991.
WILLIAM NORRIS POWELL ( JUNE 3 , 1952 JANUARY 28, 2009) Powell was born in Corpus Christi, Texas.
He grew up ina military family and spent several of his childhood years in Italy, where his father was stationed with the United States Navy.
After his father died of cancer in 1960, the Powells returned to the United States to settle in Jacksonville, Florida.
In elementary school, Powell met Leon Wilkeson, who became a lifelong friend and the bassist for Lynyrd Skynyrd.
Powell took an interest in piano and he began taking piano lessons from a local teacher named Madalyn Brown, who claimed that Billy did not need a teacher as he was a natural and picked things up well on his own.
When it was time for high school, his mother enrolled Billy and his brother, Ricky, at Sanford Naval Academy in Sanford, Florida.[citation needed] Powell returned to Jacksonville, where he enrolled at Bishop Kenny High School.
After graduation in 1970, he enrolled at and briefly attended a community college, majoring in music theory.
Around 1970, Powell found work as a roadie for Lynyrd Skynyrd and remained a member of the Skynyrd crew for two years, during which the band secured a support role for the band Mountain.
When the band realized their roadie’s ability, he was offered the position of keyboardist.
Jimmy Johnson, studio guitarist known for being a member of The Swampers, said Billy played his version of Freebird when the band took a lunch break while recording what would become Skynyrds First...and Last.
The band retumed from lunch to hear Billy playing and a few weeks later he was offered a full position in the band.
ED KING During the infamous 1975 “Torture Tour,” a 90-day, 61-date enterprise, lead guitarist Ed King decided that he had had enough.
The Truth About The Infamous Lynyrd Skynyrd Plane Crash Is Stranger Than Fiction Phil Gibbons Updated September 18, 2020 Ranker.com *K A Member Who Intuitively Left The Band Had The Same Birthday As His Deceased Replacement Ed King looks a lot like Meat Loaf in Rocky Horror Picture Show Michael Lee Aday (born Marvin Lee Aday, September 27, 1947), better known as Meat Loaf, not seemingly related, is an American singer and actor.
Again MARVIN LEE ADAY Marvin Lee Aday, September 27, 1947) rock and roll singer ED KING September 14, 1949 During the infamous 1975 “Torture Tour,” a 90-day, 61-date enterprise, lead guitarist Ed King decided that he had had enough.
Pike County is named for explorer Zebulon Pike a famous free mason and explorer for Thomas Jefferson.
In 1940, he joined the Royal Air Force and served in World War II as a flight engine mechanic.
The “big freeze” of 1963 was one of the worst winters on record in Scotland, with snow 8 feet deep.
Dirty Deeds Done With Sheep Bob Rivers Track 15 on Twisted Tunes Vault Collection Vol.
Calaveras County Coroner Kevin Raggio said he determined Philip Marshall and his two children were all killed by a gunshot wound to the head, after performing an autopsy Tuesday morning.
By RACHEL QUIGLEY Calaveras County California While he was writing it, Marshall believed that his life was in danger because of the allegations involved.
This is a good used ***EXTREMELY RARE*** copy, however, there are some ' _|stains on the cover, and a few pages.
According to Linda Thompson, videotapes and other evidence indicates t that none died from guns fired by Branch Davidians.
While he was writing it, Marshall believed that his life was in danger i because of the allegations involved.
According to Santa Barbara View, during the editing and pre1 marketing process of Marshall’s book, he expressed some degree of ; paranoia because the nonfiction work accused the George W Bush ' administration of being in cahoots with the Saudi intelligence community in training the hijackers who died in the planes used in 1 the attacks. \ | | i I | The Saudi connection to the Bush family creating of Barrack Obama Jr. as part of the 1 1961 Middle East North Africa Moles and Sleeper agent plot of Dulles, Donald Barry, 1 William Barr, and other 33rd masons including Vatican.
Bush Crime Family Exposed 1st Edition by Russell S Bowen Perhaps the most shocking book written this century about treason committed by the highest leaders within the United States government.
According to Deborah Robinson of In These Times, the Inter mountain Regional irport in Mena, Arkansas continues to be the hub of operations for people like assassinated cocaine kingpin Barry Seal as well as government intelligence operations linked to arms and drug smuggling. | | | i | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | i | je a é Ci y In the 1980’s, the Mena airport became one of the world’s largest aircraft refurbishing 1 centers, providing services to planes from many countries.
Colonel Oliver North was a frequent visitor during the 1980’s. | | | | | | | | | | | | | i | | | Eugene Hasenfus, a pilot who was shot down in a Contra supply plane over Nicaragua in 1986, was also seen in town renting cargo vehicles On October 5, 1986, Hasenfus was aboard a Fairchild C-123 cargo plane, N4410F, when it was shot down over Nicaragua by the Sandinista government.
The aircraft was brought down when it was approximately 35 miles north of the border with Costa Rica, and a little over 90 miles southeast of Managua.
Hasenfus had been wearing a parachute, unusual for Central Intelligence Agency operatives at the time. i] | | i | ' According to newspaper reports, BCCI founder Agha Hasan Abedi was introduced to ' Lance by Stephens.
By Russbacher’s recollection, the aircraft left from Andrews Air Force Base "" near 7:00 EST on October 18, rendezvoused over the Atlantic with a Grumman i Gulfstream flown by Heinrich Rupp, and landed at LeBourget Airport.
Be BAC One-Eleven, was an early jet airliner produced by the British Aircraft orporation.
Originally conceived by Hunting Aircraft as a 30-seat jet, before its merger into BAC in 1960, it was launched as an 80-seat airliner with a British United Airways order on 9 May 1961.
But that was just the kind of information members of the Tri-Valley Communities Against a Radioactive Environment sought to pass along at their Saturday afternoon informational meeting at the Murphys Library.
The National Ignition Facility , is a large laser-based inertial confinement fusion research device, located at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California.
NIF’s mission is to achieve fusion ignition with high energy gain, and to support nuclear weapon maintenance and design by studying the behavior of matter under the conditions found within nuclear weapons.
On Jan., 1932 the brass cyclotron-which measures 26 inches from end to end and whose accelerating chamber measures just 11 inches in diameter-was successfully used to boost protons to energies of 1.22 million electron volts.
Emest O Lawrence , Harold Walke, and Paul Aebersold (with cyclotronshaped cake), on NOV. 17, 1939 at a dinner at an Albany, CA restaurant in honor of Lawrence winning the Nobel Prize.
Access to scientists and students from other disciplines, as well as to engineering staff, was critical to Lawrence’s success as a researcher.
Kills Himself and His Two Children retrieved from link and copied or modified to here RS @ n February 6, 2013, the Santa Barbara View reported that Phillip Marshall, author of, The Big Bamboozle: 9/11 and the War on Terror”, his two teenage children (14 year old Micalia and 17 year old Alex) and the family dog had been found inside their home all dead from gunshot wounds.
Authorities are calling it murder suicide, but while writing The Big Bamboozle, Marshall believed that his life was in danger due to the allegations he was making in the book.
Ayers, indeed, may well have ghost-written Obama’s memoir Dreams from my Father, creating the impression that Obama was also skilled in writing as well as “community organizing.” mention a bright flashing smile and a wry sense of humor.
Jeremiah Wright, much to Obama’s chagrin, in a ' sermon discussing the reasons for the Islamic attacks on the United States, reasons that Obama echoed in his own post-9/11 statements, in somewhat less inflammatory terms. i Malcolm himself was assassinated in 1965, reportedly by agents from the Nation of i Islam.
As I will observe in text later below this map small planes fly in agriculture in Central California, Modesto Lodi Stockton Calaveras area, and Barry Seal and others likely Phillip Marshall used small airports to run pentagon, CIA, DARPA, and others around in out of regular flight operations.
My father had considered crop dusting or firefighting planes or restored antique plane clubs by the risk was often quite high though it was an option for pilots in the area. >) {ios} Scotts Valley NCW) LS Santa crue eA Be ONC) ‘ i Google om Crissy Field, a former United States Army airfield, is now part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area in San Francisco, California, United States.
In the early years, Crissy Field involved mainly the viewing of artillery fire, aerial photography, liaison flights for headquarter personnel, special civilian missions such as publicity flights and search and rescues, and a support field for United States Air Mail.
AT nuclear locations or near them or fairly secret banking facilities hiding from terrorist ; and fighting them off, but much of the Triad things I know are from family and I believe ; that is why the Marshall children were killed, because enough of a fabric of non classified : information and history is part of the culture that the general buzz of the place is such that , people tend to hear things or rumors or speculate with each other.
Phillip Marshall had what i knew and I am sure many times more than what I have or ' know.
Teor po. ist The above book shows Windsor Tower in Madrid burning The Windsor Tower was an office building in the financial center of Madrid, Spain.
This book Andrew Breitbart was anologpus to Sand Hume and Twince Targeted The original “Silver Tails” video showing Barrack Obama Jr at a rally with r”radical” proffessors has Michelle LaVon RObbison as a man visible at the rallly if you look for the barely one second still frame as the camera sweeps, that edited out in the later rleased video.
This and the P-51 B-29 Donegan Obama STory also match the Marilyn Monroe story, the DARPA plan to assassinate non cooperative leaders and plant groomed ones who will the world in Masonic elite families to smart for nuclear war among themselves.
Marjorie Taylor Greene or “loony” conspiracies such as a theory, quoting Mitch McConnell quoting Green “Clinton had Kennedy Jr. killed” in an aviation disaster.
Two flight crews, including Tatum’s, were transferred to Palmerola Air Base, Honduras.
Notables GENERAL COLIN POWELL Ps General Colin Powell represented the Department of Defense This book alleges Colin Powell along with Alma Powerll killed JFK and others to keep a Leaderhsip program of mixed rece and planted cuiltivated leaders around the world to change the world and now assasinating to coverup the assasinations.
USA had done more for black than any other country and blacks should be be bitter until Barrack Obama Jr came on stage and then Colin Powell backed him.
WILLIAM CASEY William “Bill” Casey represented the CIA and later wished to out the Family Jewels Program via The Intercept WHEN PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN named a veteran United States spy and covert operator, William Casey, to be his CIA director, Joe Biden waged a one-senator campaign to show that Casey was unfit to serve in the post.
DONALD GREGG lv Donald Gregg represented the National Security Council Donald Phinney Gregg (born December 5, 1927) is a retired American politician, CIA employee, and United States Ambassador to South Korea.
Bush , United States Ambassador to Korea , and the chairman of the board of The Korea Society , where he called for greater engagement with North Korea.
ROBERT S MUELLER III Robert Swan Mueller II has been the go to man when secrets go awry.
When the need arises, invariably the Deep State Handlers call on “The Mule” OPERATION REDROCK Pe NIXON’S DARKEST SECRET Hard put to find a way out of Vietnam, Nixon and his advisers devised an operation designed to involve the Cambodian Military into assisting the South Vietnamese.
GENESIS OF A NEW WORLD ORDER (SPANISH EDITION) atum, a former United States intelligence officer, brings a stark reality to the fore with this shocking new revelation.With careful planning and huge financial investment, the Global Board of Directors chaired by Henry Kissinger and Bill Gates has shut down the economy. global and has caused harm to countless people, turning a Corona Virus into a totally unjustified pandemic crisis.
Anyone who tries to organize a public protest is likely to be arrested.
Buch and Attorney General was the sone of Donal Barr who wrote books using space metaphors we need the British LAWAIEn ea ilteliestlae (@foynnvnnreyannyereliany s systems to bring order to a Planet in Arms.
His son is also a Free Mason, lnYoya etm DJoyatetavel and WIlliam Barr.
Bush, Prescott Bush and Wild Bill Donovan | don't hink | Ti <email cm olele) @inelsim nn aele.
President John F Kennedy 7 days before his assasination William Pelham Barr Posted March 13, 2019 on Patriot or Traitor Barr was a full-time CIA operative, recruited by Langley out of high school, starting in 1971.
Bush, whose accomplishments already included the CIA/Cuba Bay of Pigs, Asia CIA operations (Vietnam War, Golden Triangle narcotics), Nixon foreign policy , and the Watergate operation.
With the nomination of William Barr for attorney general, that is what President Donald Trump of the CIA’s secret war in Laos. president, Salvador Allende. program in the country.
Between 1966-1970, during the Vietnam War, Clines worked as Ted Shackley’s deputy in charge Clines left Laos in 1970 and spent a year at the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island.
This included helping Anastasio Somoza Debayle to develop a counter-subversion After the CIAIn 1978, Clines left the CIA and joined several other ex-CIA officials and contract operatives, including Rafael Quintero, Ted Shackley and Ricardo Chavez in establishing API In 1979, Clines established International Research and Trade Limited in Bermuda.
He made “illicit millions” through EATSCO (the Egyptian American Transport and Services Corporation), but in prosecuting Edwin P Wilson the United States government made a plea bargain that enabled him to escape prosecution, though he had to pay an addition wants American citizens and the world to accept.
William Barr distorted and corrupted the law, as grossly as anyone in modern history.
Barr was a full-time CIA operative, recruited by Langley out of high school, starting in 1971.
Bush, whose accomplishments already included the CIA/Cuba Bay of Pigs, Asia CIA operations , Nixon foreign policy , and the Watergate operation. ee was an American politician and basketball commissioner.
Barr stonewalled and destroyed the Church Committee investigations into CIA abuses. ar stonewalled and stopped inquiries in the CIA bombing assassination of Chilean ge sition leader Orlando Letelier.
Politics Culture Equity Environment Opinion Seatle Police Chief Carmen Best says she didn’t order cops to abandon the station.
The premise of this book is Free Masons tied to Enland are rebuilding Blue Blood families of lost lines of ancient kings as certain great leaders are found in various societies.
In 2008, Winklevoss was named to the United States Olympic Team and competed at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, China.
Those like Arnold Scwarteneger, Bobby Fisher, and others were studied by the CIA in long term Eugenics research but upon the asssisnation of JFK who objected to the Blue Blood world interconnect scheme most records on the Twins were destroyed by William Pelham Barr in the 9/11 attacks.
As genealogist Jen Moore said “The better connected the better connected” as COINTELRO is used against certain family lines.
Tracking Bill Barr’s Misconduct as Attorney General BY JAKE LAPERRUQUE | FILED UNDER ANALYSIS | SEPTEMBER 25, 2020 yee The Department of Justice, led by the attorney general, has a unique role in our government.
Inherent in the department’s and the attorney general’s responsibilities is also to act in accordance with reasonable checks and balances.
Under Attorney General William Barr, the Justice Department has repeatedly strayed from its commitment to independence and the rule of law.
Although policy priorities may shift from administration to administration, a fundamental commitment to enforcing the law and protecting national security without regard to inappropriate political influence has traditionally been baked into the culture of the department.
The Orphan Factory There are numerous theories suggesting Jonestown was a CIA test site for brainwashing and mind control.
This book Donald Barr’s books use sci-fi metaphors to show CIA loyalty to Britain over USA A Planet in Arms like Space Relationsis a novel in which Rohan’s Planet has just won its independence from the Terran Empire of Earth and established a new government.
Bush, 1 Planet in Prescott Bush and Wild 1 Arms Bill Donovan | don't hink | * retrieved like this book from my CIA ; from Director very much.
Perpahs Gondor is ruled by Queen Elizbeth II or King * George the Next One | "" Meduseld, the Golden Hall of the Kings of Rohan, is in the centre of the town ""at the top of the hill.
Donald Barr (parent of physicist Stephen Barr and Bush family legal flunky William Barr) published Space Relations, a science fiction novel about a planet ruled by oligarchs who engage in child sex slavery.
The neighbors I have now continue a tradition in and out of custody since about 1999.
My father and mother believed the Gangstalk or in the alternative believe my fight against the Gangastalk was mental illness I had, a Legend perpetrated by Gangstalkers I don’t know what RICO is.
I do know and at least in my case Neighborhood Watch is buying cars from Protection Racket as they protect the neighborhood from the acts they commit using me as the alibi for their conduct.
This also a Labor Racket, people are conduct labor for a job which is a sham job.
It seems a Free Mason based system of various groups buying their way into being my neighbor in that role by proximity to me forging narrative we somehow became reproductively involved, having children together, by ambiguous conversations.
This appears to match the Donald Barr book of someone said to be a minor (but who is not) used by his captors as a reproductive exploitation victim.
I think this is a very seedy group of Midnight Climax CIA types who use surrogate mothers for research, ones drawn from stripclubs.
Donald Barr ft Slightly Gothic Interplanetary Tale “T could make you the Commandant of this place if I wanted to,” said Lady Morgan languidly.
In the 1960s, Walter also went on to discover the contingent negative variation effect whereby a negative spike of electrical activity appears in the brain half a second prior to a person being consciously aware of movements they were about to make.
Intriguingly, this effect brings into question the very notion of consciousness or free will, and should be considered as part of a person’s overall reaction time to events.
In 1935, Gibbs, Davis and Lennox described interictal spike waves and the three cycles/s pattern of clinical absence seizures, which began the field of clinical electroencephalography.
Subsequently, in 1936 Gibbs and Jasper reported the interictal spike as the focal signature of epilepsy.
After World War II, the Soviet Union disbanded the Cossack units in the Soviet Army.
Between 3. and 5. million people associate themselves with the Cossack identity across the world; Cossack organizations operate in Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Belarus, and the United States.
Creator of Barrack Obama Jr. and many other moles as experiments in super race anthropology.
During a time of war with the Plith, an empire of ant-like alien bug people, ambassador John Craig, a formerly Liberal Earth man in his 30s, is dispatched to the strategically important planet Kossar, a human colony that was settled by the Carlyle Society as a place of exile for political extremists and now is ruled by an oligarchical high council of seven nobles, each of whom is in charge of a different domain with its own traditions.
While en route to Julia Eileen Gillard AC (born 29 September .assar, one of the 1961) is an Australian former politician who served Pirates awakened as the 27th prime minister of Australia from 2010 ile and the other to 2013.
She is the first and only female {19-year-old virginal prime minister in Australian history. edheaded female aptive in front of them; the rapist’s fellow pirates later hear of this and dock his pay as punishment for spoiling her market value.
Upon the 1936 Olympics and the Arthur Kuschera and Franz Kutschera activities (who had offspring with King Edward VIII) KE VIII abdicated and Prince Albert beacem King George VI until he died in 1952.
That was, until his elder brother Edward VIII abdicated in the midst of a 1936 scandal regarding his relationship with American divorcee Wallis Simpson.
Oh Great Kings free yourself or mere earthly people and govern through use of the Eye of Providence.
Khoory dictated, and the nun poked at the keyboard on the cabinet. ce M.S. 43985,” he repeated.
In 1895, Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V The German boy who would become George VI was a sickly and fearful child prone to tears. wal Incidentally, you can see how Queen Elizabeth married her third cousin, Philip Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Gliicksburg, on the chart above.
I’m a Liberal, but unlike many of my party -you see, I admit that don’t like ant-empires any more than I like people-empires.
And it gets harder and harder and harder not to accommodate, especially if” He broke off and seemed suddenly to focus on the man he was talking to.
William H Crook was an American preacher turned politician, national director of the Volunteers in Service to America program and United States Ambassador to Australia.
The “System” | i The United States government decides to launch an invasion of the A Organization’s stronghold in Southern California.
Puerto Ricans (described as a “repulsive mongrel race”) were killed and Puerto Rico was recolonized.
She was the first African-American woman to WN Cem eee ee eee eee ee The biological parents of Barrack Obama Jr were a sham as the Edward Donegan birth certificate shows, and then the children and wife of Barrack Obama Jr were insert fix layers trying to control the world celebrity’s tru orgins.
A Dah ie The DPS Texas Rangers are Concealers including the botch of bothch of enforcing my rights against the theft of my home theater as I was renting the Kings Speech and other illegal CIA acts of the usual Texas sewer of Bush and Blackwater type operations.
I was watching Reanimator on TV just recently at 1513 Ocean Dr #5 and I saw a character in the movie fighting Gangs of Zombies with an axe trying to fight them back as they attacked.
SF DA, self Cheney Blasts bombed, senator, candidate for POTUS VPOTUS The “US” Peace | James Paul Donegan | Jen MOore murdered as she Corp, British actor Lawford, Shrivers Shchartzenegers LBJ of Texas takes over as President.
Barrak Obama Sleeper agent of Hunt, Dulles, Hughes continues November 19 1961 -1963 are illegal and Tom same story I tell and could if crosschecked verify.
Jonathan witness left of the 52 | Pryce as Elliot Carver, a Lambeth Square sadistic media mogul who Moraga House with | plans to trigger World War EPD III (Seen with __| III and fictional Carver Donald Barr White | Media then real Facebook, House photo) and others.
Race and IQ, hate theory, IQ and sociology and history of 1936 Germany., Test ballons Arizona Shooting from Mark Weirness about and Twins Studies, | WWII Memorial via Nazi RFLP stagecraft (and unsaid, Olympics 1936.
Mark and Scott Kelley and Arizona Shooting Cover up events of masive world scale following my and my mother hiding Barrak Obama genetics issues from truth.
Sleeper agent of Ted Gunderson, others Hunt, Dulles, killed, likely GOP Right Hughes Wing Assasins Deep State continues tied to large international conglomerates on a Peace Through Commerce cementing of West These are gangs of actors around me trespassing against me hoping to get a punch from me by greater and greater trespasses against me.
V KITE To Kite a message a detainee in one cell may use a small airplane like soap pad and tie a string or peiec of thread to it which is also tied to a rolled up piece of paper.
They did not want money trails to lead back to the oligarch-run banking, IMF, world slave colony agenda. 2 ) we The CIA shaking down the trust fund of Glorian Donegan to fund Guerillas Warfare opps including buying buildings, for espionage use, etc., comes from CIA illegal money laundering proceeds rather than the personal checking account of big pols or letter\s from them on pol letterhead explaining checks and why they were written to fund an illegal operation.
Colin Powell (I think person of interest and like my brother now deceased) At about the begining of Octorber 2021 I put a military police tip in I was a possible material witness to an alternate theory of the McDonald case under which McDonald could not have been resonsible or a long string of assasinations and murder which do fit the State Department “milieu” and Colin Powell was likely a part of, a very millieu the FBI has formerly investigated as a shadow government on the LEIU side which Clinton ties.
Patrick Josepsh 1858, Joseph Patrick 1888, and Sarita Joseph Kennedy 1889 a , Patrick Joseph Kennedy Patrick Joseph Kennedy was an American businessman and politician from Boston, Massachusetts.
Z eoiocl Bienvenido Cruz aka Ted Cruz Sr. retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or ‘ modified to here a ee Rafael Bienvenido Cruz y Diaz is a Cuban-American Protestant preacher and father of Texas United States Senator Ted Cruz.
He graduated from UT with a degree in mathematics and chemical engineering i four years later in 1961.
National Review, “The people at the Bible study had a peace that I could not ‘ understand, this peace in the midst of trouble.
CLAIBORNE PELL OF THE PELL GRANTS Claiborne de Borda Pell GCC GCM (NOVEMBER 22, 1918 January 1, 2009) was an American politician and writer who served as a United States Senator from Rhode Island for six terms from 1961 to 1997.
He graduated in 1958, as part of Class 20, and was assigned as a Project Test Pilot.:83,146 Conrad became a captain in the United States Navy on December 11, 1969.
Cases which were long standing from upper rulings and relied upon heavily were deemed to have great importance and this system of how many “articles” may refer to an original “article” is drawn from British Non Porfit science journals which use a similar system to study the amount of talk regarding published scientific articles.
Consider this in comparison the the British aristiocaacy creating an insider trading profit center Marconi which would become tied o the hisotory of RCA in the United States and its MKULTRA ties.
It was established as a subsidiary of the British Marconi Company and held the United States and Cuban rights to Guglielmo Marconi’s radio patents.
On July 22, 2016, Hillary Clinton introduced Kaine as her vice-presidential running mate.
Novels & Stories, collecting The Magnificent Ambersons, Alice Adams, and In the Arena: Stories of Political Life.
The current two and a half story Georgian Revival clubhouse was designed by Charles Follem McKim of McKim, Mead and White in 1903 and built in 1906.
They had three children, William Crook Jr., Elizabeth Crook, and Noel Moore. r ee ee a a r) pb ovic Francis Powers retrieved from American History >The Assassination of JFK en and copied or modified to here : David Francis Powers was born in Charlestown, Massachusetts on 25th April, : 1912.
After Kennedy’s successful presidential campaign in 1960, Powers became his ; opecial Assistant.
David Francis Powers died in Arlington, Massachusetts on 27th March, 1998. eo ee a a ee se ~ Andrea Yates retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ndrea Pia Yates is a former resident of Houston, Texas, who confessed to drowning her five children in their bathtub on June 20, 2001.
His mother, Dora Yates, had been scheduled by Rusty to arrive an hour later to take over for Andrea.
On December 8, 1870 continues warfare against Heretics at least on an intellectual level still opposing Darwin and Evolutionary Genetics and it was 1803 bird scientist John James Audubon leaves France and its religious oppression for the USA and the Age of Reason.
Joseph Mother of the Americas ee (On December 8, 1870, The Sacred Congregation of Rites promulgated the ' following decree, which communicated the decision of Pope Pius IX to declare St.
Quemadmodum Deus Pope Pius IX As almighty God appointed Joseph, son of the patriarch Jacob, over all the land of Egypt to save grain for the people, so when the fullness of time had come and He was about to send to earth His only-begotten Son, the Savior of the world, He chose another Joseph, of whom the first had been the type, and He made him the lord and ' chief of His household and possessions, the guardian of His choicest treasures.
He most ; diligently reared Him whom the faithful were to receive as the bread that came ; down from heaven whereby they might obtain eternal life.
Ireland’s Great Famine and its after-effects Blog by Ambassador Daniel Mulhall, 3 December 2018 When I spoke at the Washington premiere of Black ’47, a new film set during the Great Famine of 1845-49, I decided to delve into the historical background to this 19th century Irish trauma.
In preparation for my remarks, I spent some time reacquainting myself with an era I had not looked into U' Neiils, and in Wexford, Rose Fitzapatrick.
ONA STUDY REVEALS BREAKING NEWS Ancient DNA seriously for quite a few years.
This blog has been written with a view to highlighting for an Irish-American audience the significance of the Famine for Ireland and for America.
Ireland’s Great Famine may be a On Gerry Adams and Liberty footnote in 19th century European As Sinn Féin might tell you Les Miserables is history, but it is about the System being on trial, asystem of feudal {fundamental to an lords not held accountable for explotation based understanding of laws sapping the wealth, lives, and rights of the Ireland’s story.
What’s French public. more, the Famine had important implications for American society and for this country’s emergence as the world’s leading economy in the period between the end of the Civil War and the Jean Valjean as a poor man steals bread to eat and later lives his midlife in hard labor prison upon attempting escape.
After fleeing late life parole under the pseudonym Monsieur Madeleine he subjects single mother Fantine to the same poverty he lived under while he runs his garment factory.
Fantine sends 10 Francs a month to a her daughter Cossettes child labor home in orphanage until she dies from selling a tooth in an alley and also being forced economically into prostitution for which like stealing bread, resulted in he termination from respectable factory work.
Neither as an Aristocrat nor as a thief is French society of Aristocracy acceptable to Jean.
Under Feudal reign no ruler can be forced out of office for bad industrial or labor or religious policies.
These were the foundations of Natural Law Philosophy and the American Revolutions. outbreak of World War 1.
While there were many striking developments in Ireland throughout the 19th century Robert Emmet’s Rising of 1803, the achievement of Catholic Emancipation in 1829, the Repeal movement of the 1840s, the Young Ireland rebellion of 1848, the emergence of the Fenians in the 1860s, the land war of the 1880s and the rise and fall of Charles Stewart Parnell between 1880 and 1891 nothing came close to the Famine in terms of the scale of its shortterm and long-term effects.
When potato blight made its appearance in Ireland in the second half of 1845, it caused a partial failure of the potato crop on which so many Irish people were dependent.
When the blight returned in 1846 with much more severe effects on the potato crop, this created an unparalleled food crisis that lasted four years and drove Ireland into a nightmare of hunger and disease.
It decimated Ireland’s population, which stood at about 8. million on the eve of the Famine.
It is estimated that the Famine caused about 1 million deaths between 1845 and 1851 either from starvation or hunger-related disease.
This meant that Ireland lost a quarter of its population during those terrible years.
The Famine’s impact was most severe in the west of Ireland where some counties lost more than 50 per cent of their population.
The Famine’s immediate impact in terms of mortality and population loss is clear.
The Famine’s longer-term economic and political effects require some interpretation.
The most consequential of these was mass emigration from Ireland, which persisted for decades after Black ’47.
Indeed, it is only in recent decades that Ireland has experienced net immigration.
This massive outflow of people had serious economic and social consequences.
It is true that Irish people had been emigrating in growing numbers in the first half of the 19th century.
After 1845, emigration became something of a norm in certain parts of Ireland. 6 million people left between 1841 and 1900.
This figure exceeded the total population of Ireland at the beginning of the 19th century.
By 1901, Ireland’s population had been cut in half, to just 4. million.
Indeed, the population of the island, although it has been on the rise since the early 1960s, is still short of 7 million.
From the word go, Irish nationalists laid the blame squarely at the feet of the British Government and saw it as an invincible argument in favour of selfgovernment.
Historians tend to be more understanding of the undoubted inadequacies of the Famine relief effort on account of the unprecedented scale of the tragedy that beset Ireland.
Whatever view is taken about responsibility for the Famine, the fact that it had such catastrophic effects engendered a profound sense of grievance that became a death knell for the Union between Britain and Ireland.
It is true that the Union survived for seven decades after the Famine, but that was because Britain was the strongest State in the world at the time and was not for turning on the Union no matter how much discontent there was in Ireland.
It took the effects of a world war and a dramatically changed international environment to give Ireland an opportunity to win its independence.
The United States also felt the impact of the Irish Famine, as it became the principal recipient of the mammoth exodus that ensued.
About two-thirds of all Irish emigrants in the last six decades of the 19th century came to this country.
Most Americans today who have an Irish family background are descended from those who arrived here at that time.
Together with the 5 million Germans and the millions of Scandinavians who arrived alongside them, Irish immigrants changed the demography of this country.
The Irish met with resistance from nativist movements in a country that had hitherto been populated primarily by people of British stock.
Irish newcomers, with their poverty and their Catholicism, were seen as a threat to the established order.
In 1844, there were deadly riots in Philadelphia during which lives were lost and Catholic Churches were burned.
After some initial electoral success, this political movement fizzled out as divisions about race took centre stage.
These lead to the Civil War in which Irish immigrants fought bravely and thus became part of the fabric of modern America, contributing to, and benefiting from, America’s economic transformation in the closing decades of the 19th century.
Hostility towards post-Famine Irish immigrants probably helped give them a sense of cohesion as they sought to make their presence felt in American politics.
The memory of the Famine, and the continued flow of arrivals from Ireland, also helped keep Irish immigrants connected with their homeland.
Indeed, they became a notable factor in Irish politics, supporting Irish nationalist movements, supplying them with financial and moral sustenance.
Irish Americans helped keep the desire for Irish independence alive during those difficult post-Famine decades.
The continued existence of an Irish American identity is a legacy of the Irish famine and its aftermath with the formation of an extensive Irish community that was both determined to assert its position within American society and also to retain its affiliation with its ancestral homeland.
The film Black ‘47, does a great service in bringing the Famine to the big screen for the first time.
It is a fine dramatic film and well worth watching for its own sake, but it does also serve to remind us of the scale and severity of the Great Famine, and of its enormous significance for the subsequent history of Ireland and of Irish America.
Daniel Mulhall is Ireland’s Ambassador to the United States [ ... 1960 to present John F Kennedy , Arguably the most well known United States President, John F Kennedy "" also has the strongest Irish lineage, with all four of his grandparents hailing from the ' Emerald Isle.
Oireachtas and also received two honorary degrees during his short 4-day visit.
During this time he was also a secret FBI informant, providing ; details to the government of any high-profile actors he suspected to be communist sympathisers.
Bill Clinton During Bill Clintons two terms of office from 1993 2001 he contributed greatly to i the Northern Ireland peace process.
Ann Nancy Donegan 1933 2016 DONEGAN, Ann Nancy 82, of New Britain, CT, passed from this life surrounded by her loving family on FEBRUARY 20, 2016. ancy was born in Boston, MA, on May 24, 1933, to the late Joseph A Warner and Gertrude Warner.
Finally, at age 14 , I decided that the only thing I could do was to volunteer to be a missionary and attempt to warn people about this unpredictable God before it was too late.
This dastardly “production” is being used as a f smokescreen to disguise the all-out confrontation raging between the dark cabal and their rivals, our Earth allies.
I ; What is happening now is the final maneuvering-into-position by a secret global coalition intent on legally expulsing the present United States regime.
This strengthening power grab by a rich and corporate America A reached its first pinnacle in the 1960s, reaching new heights in the 1980s and 1990s.
The opposing sides finally engaged in an allu out clash in the late 1990s, a highlight of which was the stolen election of 2000.
The reverberating changes in this galaxy’s politics are being mirrored u by events happening locally on your world.
Thanks From:elmendorf@teamsubjectmatter.com To: john.podesta@gmail.com Date: 2016-02-09 20:56 Subject: RE: Thanks I am all in Sounds like it will be a bad nite , we all need to buckle up and double down From: John Podesta Sent: Tuesday, February 09, 2016 4:36 PM To: Steve Elmendorf elmendorf@teamsubjectmatter.com Subject: Thanks Didn’t think WET WORKS meant pool parties at the Vineyard.
Cartel Formation and Functional Structure of a Cartel slight of hand charity accountancy e The Cartel used Glorian Donegan DNA which is tied to creativity, leadership, and production. e The Cartel denies that any leadership or value adding traits resided in the Genome of Glorian Donegan and denies it has used it extensively.
This will be true in many areas of my life including my highly affective gym and diet plan which lowered my Alc from 13. to 4.7, but became resource availability throttled and the activity of it no longer within my economic reach.
First United Methodist Corpus Christi In Texas God has a plan for everything and those who support that plan are in office Missionaries and Orphanges, Soldiers of Christ wee Sapience Abbot, Paxton Veterans Admin Boatload of Claims and claimants I don’t know who has or is willing to pursue the whole truth of this story but my mother’s ovumn were harveste din 2007/2008 during a cancer biopsy and surgrery, hysterectomy.
GRANDSTANDING the action of behaving in a showy or ostentatious manner in an attempt to attract favorable attention from spectators or the media. “they accused him of political grandstanding” Definitions from Oxford Languages POSTURING Having a posture towards a person or entity which conveys feelings, sentiments, or fearful or angry suspicions though not including statements or debate or commentary HOAX A hoax is a falsehood deliberately fabricated to masquerade as the truth.
The fraud triangle is a theory created by American criminologist Donald Cressey. : It is used to explain what leads people to commit fraud or other unethical behaviour.
Some view their fraud as ‘borrowing’ goods or money while some see it as payment they’re owed.
The Atheist (an impersonator of Edward Donegan) owes religions and the community Human Genome as agreed to by the United States Marshalls, others, who will confront the Atheist ove rhis porn stash, and Religious will get genomic rights.
Bastrop, Burleson, Brazos Edward H ward, A a pet Aime le 4 Martir hy Marion, Real, Schle San Antonio and Camp Swift in Bastrop County.
John Podesta ie Sait: Tuesday, February 09, 2016 4:36 PM To: Steve Elmendorfbr/> elmendorf@teamsubjectmatter.com t 1 Subject: Thanks | ; Didn’t think wet works meant pool parties at the Vineyard.
To: john.podesta@gmail.com ' Date: 2016-02-09 20:56 "" Subject: RE: Thanks i | | | I am all in Sounds like it will be a bad nite , we all need to buckle up and double down Tx takes the photo and and Tx seems to look like Rx.
Many of my students have doubts when they first arrive at college. They are unsure of their future, unaware of the abilities they possess.
As a lifelong educator, I am proud to be part of an administration that is committed to investing in our students, and restoring the promise of the American education system.
When I started teaching at Northern Virginia Community College, one of the things I wanted to do was help women who are returning to school.
As T have traveled around the country as Second Lady, I have seen firsthand that the leadership of faculty and administration at community colleges makes transformative change on their campuses to help improve outcomes for their students.
That’s what’s so special about community colleges-they have the ability to partner with local employers to provide new skills training, work to make sure classes are flexible for working families, and provide an affordable path for those who want to move on to a four-year university.
As you recall, there are also smaller pieces inside every cell called organelles.
The organelles keep the cell functioning and living performing tasks ranging from waste removal to growth and reproduction.
Although the organelles are critical for the cell to survive, they cannot live outside of the cell.
For example, they have little tubes called phloem running through out that i carry dissolved sugar.
The main causes of SCI are vehicle collisions, falls, violence , and sports/recreational activities.
Reuse of the picture of Abbot smirking about how religion knows more than C women or myself about biology rights I did not victimize these religious people, nor any non whites.
Kentrell Gaulden was born on October 20, 1999, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
He broke his neck while wrestling as a toddler, the injury requiring a head brace until the spine healed.
Gaulden was raised mainly by his maternal grandmother due to his father being sentenced to 55 years in prison.
He dropped out of high school in ninth grade and was arrested for robbery and sent to a detention center in Tallulah, Louisiana.
The primary mission of SFTM is to provide and operate a Christian, gospel based transitional housing for homeless men in the Corpus Christi area.
Many have fake military service claims but draw on that public sympathy as they espouse victim-hood.
Religious Psychopathy Violation of my religious rights are central to this, and Christians have not gotten that point.
Mar 1, 2019 source link ° oO Throughout my life I have been an espionage gangstalk victim with rigged legal/psychiatric proceeding so malicious I can not gain a State Identification Card nor keep one from bureaucratic nullification nor prevent others from being issued mine and not only is this a lifelong complication I have experienced it has been a lifelong fear of mine that some espionage interest in mus-identification of me and operations against are so powerful only defection from the USA is an available solution, if even that is available.
The FBI Paywall uses the covertly recruited (from behind the scenes where a Gangstalk Victim is) for Criminal Harassment Under Color of Law of the Gangstalk victim, including putting fake victims like Whiplash victims into auto or other collisions with the real victim, the Gangtsalking victim.
Gangstalk Ecosystem e Planted Victim e Planted Information Doppelganger of the Gangstalk Victim e Planted Witnesses ¢ Corrupt police to shake down the Doppelganger when the Doppelganger and gangstalk victim separate.
Psychological Warfare This system is an espionage system targeting political leadership often, or the political or social or economic leadership of the USA and entities in it or entities around the world which is what the Espionage ecosystem was designed for by PsyOps.
The premise of my book is that uncouth prison workers who were hired out of that element of society but the same dailiy life and culture encountered me, who was from the Goth scene but made no affectations.
Funding themselves as Defenders of Goth Women they then replaced guarding felons in institutions with guarding goths on seized assets of one of the goths., myself.
This book Clandestine cell system including hiding Subversive activities inside Charities such as USAID, Catholic Charities, Social Ministries, or other work which breaks laws of nation in which activities are occurring in My assertion is that few understand a Deep State, Mole State, Espionage State need to cover its tracks, do so illegally, do so plausibly and do so with dupe cells given projects which sound good on the veneer surface but ask them to become a cog in a machine which is component to larger machine needs hidden from cells operationg on requested missions.
Recruiting people to tell “white lies” which mask tank movements, etc., may be part of a sapient high level command unit to keep their activities from being reported by those who trust the command structure and cooperate with sapient command structure requests.
Alliance against the Taliban used clandestine operators from the CIA and : United States Army Special Forces.
As the latter conflict escalated, United States he structure of a clandestine cell system can range from a strict hierarchy to an extremely distributed organization, depending on the group’s ideology, its operational area, the communications technologies available, and the nature of the mission.
Criminal organizations, undercover operations, and unconventional warfare units led by special forces may also use this sort of organizational structure.
External support Many cell systems receive support from outside the cell.
Early United States support to the Afghan Northern participation became overt.
Note that both unconventional warfare and foreign internal defense may be covert and use cellular organization. are aware of the foreign support organization.
An insurrection may facilitate or bring about a revolution, which is a radical change in the form of government or political system of a state, and it may be initiated or provoked by an act of sedition, which is an incitement to revolt or rebellion.
Whoever incites, sets on foot, assists, or engages in any rebellion or insurrection against the authority of the United States or the laws thereof, or gives aid or comfort thereto, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and shall be incapable of holding any office under the United States.
A group of rumor mongers seeking to incite members of the public into acts often based on emotion they would not otherwise engage in unless in hight states of emotion and manipulated by ""reflexive control"" by Intelligence Operatives stimulating knee-jerk responses from them while the operatives themselves remain hidden as ordinary office members e PAID ACTORS : People who plant evidence and change the context of events by narrative, added elements, other activities.
The appearance created by the Paid Actors will be used to incite others to act under the influence of deceitful information Felony Stalking vs.
Misdemeanor Stalking One adult trying to intimidate or coerce another is sadly a very common occurrence.
There is a standard legal definition of stalking, but common sense points out stalking when we see the evidence of harassment of one individual against another in a repeated, obsessive and alarming manner.
They are frightened, intimidated, and threatened causing distress and mental suffering.
A covert operation is a military operation intended to conceal the : identity of the sponsor, and : intended to create a political effect which can have implications in the ; military, intelligence or law enforcement arenas affecting either the , internal population of a country or individuals outside it.
Wikipedia | Provisional Irish Republican Army The modern Provisional Irish Republican Army has a history going back to Irish revolutionary forces in the early 20th century.
Trinity by Leon Uris I dowloaded for reading in the Austin area while sitting at a bar tells the story of Irish Nationals on their ancestral turf repelling what they consider more recent competitors for rule thus competing for Irish self rule.
I will provide a few examples of this type of Espionage with a theory I have about the likely roles of certain people, at least theoretically. e Mark Gonzales, representative of skid row clients against minor charges is a defense lawyer getting attention, himself a former “banger” Certain people approach him and suggest he run for Nueces Texas prosecutor and in that role defend those same clients for harms done to them by criminals as a prosecutor.
Mark Gonzales now has the same clients but now as the prosecutor in the County offices. e Gregg Abbot is talked to about running for Governor.
Let’s add a secretive cartel in to the picture with an Espionage Dirty War interest. e¢ George Bush, the Catholic Church, Colin Powell, Donald and William Barr, free masons in the FBI or NSA or DARPA are the Espionage recruiters, targeting Mark Gonzales and Gregg Abbot for public office.
Targetign for recruitment involves those with poor families who seek good DNA lines and will fake claims or assist in faking claims and may include policing, social services, etc., recruited into cartel activities including for activities clearly under false rationales, the falsity visible to all. om | oe © 8 oe ee GF ox News Hires Lara Trump retrieved from The Hollywood Reporter . and copied or modified to here _ Lara Trump, the daughter-in-law of former President Donald Trump, is joining the cable channel as a contributor.
She is married to the | | | | i} | | | | | | | | | | | i ° . "" ex-president’s son Eric.
Fox News typically cuts ties with employees and contributors once they officially announce their candidacy.
Elsewhere in this book I alledge Ivanka Trump, Ivana Trump, John Trump (Manhattan Project RADAR physicist) and cancer research ties put the Donald John Trump admin into the Cartel and keeping his cartel family into office displacing others.
This book Sock Puppets are in a ring but Real Tom Dunham and Real Edward Donegan are not A few years after being fired from Wells Fargo around 2002 I had decided to leave San Francisco, cut ties, and get clean.
Fake Tom Dunham is a mental incompetent who believes is Scully Xfiles is with Edward Paul Donegan (son of Glorian Donegan) in the WISHLIST link from this fake Tom Dunham site Xfiles, Little Bo Peep, and Gloria Fake Tom Dunham has Schizo Effective Disorder and believes himself in a Xfiles episode.
Social Justice Coliseum of the Demented and Absurd Spankings of Southern Maryland Training of 2 Dominant Sarasotz, Florida, United States Straight | Live It 24/7 Dominant who Loves his friends and Family | enjoy public play with the friends | have here.
You clearly have opinions and are sharing them.” view comment DaAssRaper commented on one of Heteroinflexible’s pictures “Here is some unsolicited advice.
No one is out_.” view comment DaAssRaper commented on one of Heteroinflexible’s pictures “Quite easily” view comment Sarosta Florida is the gateway to miles of beaches with fine sand and shallow waters, such as Lido Beach and Siesta Key Beach. Google and also next to CENTCOM and General Austin command area DaAssRaper is in the same location DOD CENTCOM Florida area my agreement is being forged in a 1st Century Christian BDSM facility, Temple Vesta, of the Vestal Virgin, while I am Stoic Pagan Epicurean and hedonist epistemologist who’s era was suppressed by Christianity.
The funding for the contracts come from the value of my genome, not disclosed to me or reported to me, but used for their Weekend At Bernies parties for impostors of me, and these people also use my genome illegal for themselves.
Perhaps a mediator like this guy could mediate claims between fake ed donegan and other retarded people out of court.
Impersonators continued to see adult entertainers as me and as me be caught as a victimizer of minorities.
The victimize of children uses my identity to both victimize others and also be punished for it by an adult entertainer in role play.
It is run out of skid row missions who use my identity and also as that den of likely Black Hebrew Israelite (violent black nationalist active in Corpus Christi area skid row areas) veteran outreach SJW militants pay themselves out of poverty by becoming patrols for the crimes they committed but blam on White Supremacism.
That need of nonwhites for my genome tums out to be important and the motivation for their first strike on me, which I am in defensiveness of.
Attkisson retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here yeas Attkisson on a USAF B-52 in 1999 Sharyl Attkisson was born on January 26, 1961 in St.
Sharyl Attkisson (born January + 2b; 1961) is an American ; journalist and television ‘ correspondent.
She hosts , the Sinclair Broadcast Group TV ‘ show Full Measure with Sharyl t Attkisson.
In Murtha’s home town, Johnstown, Pennsylvania, subpoenas for concurrent technologies and FBI raids on Kuchera Defense Systems and a game ranch owned by Kuchera CEO, site of a Murtha fund raiser.
In terms of contributions and circular fund raising and the involvement of members, it’s much bigger, much bigger. wr Kuchera Brothers Sentenced For Fraud Against The Government And Conspiracy retrieved from justice.gov and copied or modified to here Tuesday, DECEMBER 17, 2013 geez | Kuchera Brothers Sentenced For Fraud Against The Government And Conspiracy JOHNSTOWN, PA. Two brothers who owned a major defense contracting firm have been sentenced in federal court on charges of major fraud against the government and conspiracy, United States Attorney David J Hickton announced today.
As the prime contractor, Coherent was responsible for an $8 million ' Department of Defense contract for the Ground Mobile Gateway Systems, which « involved the development of a new prototype unmanned vehicle that was designed ' to prevent friendly-fire incidents.
The invoice sought payment for a component that r had never been manufactured or delivered to Coherent.
One of the most important things to be gleaned from this book is that the blackmail at the treehouse is behind my back and the scheme depends upon i can not prove that it even exists, a challenge Jim Volceklka gave me.
Unwanted leering oppirtunity Below, an angry phone call from the woman in front of me indicates as ass fetishist peeping tom and a disgusting one is photographing some buttucks.
Bayi -laitcrem e)ianelaliay I attempted to sue over being both harassed and physically assaulted by the acts of the Doppelgangers but B Janice Ellington magistrate denied my en forma pauperis right to file.
United States Marshalls Fighting White Supremacism and the Enforcement Acts r Fhe Enforcement Act of 1870, also known as the Civil Rights Act of 1870 or First i Ku Klux Klan Act, or Force Act was a United States federal law written to 1 empower the President with the legal authority to enforce the first section of the ; Fifteenth Amendment throughout the United States.
The act was the first of three ' Enforcement Acts passed by the United States Congress from 1870 to 1871 during , the Reconstruction Era to combat attacks on the suffrage rights of African } Americans from state officials or violent groups like the Ku Klux Klan.
Moder cases may not be as dramatic, but they continue to illuminate and address the harm caused when government officials disregard the rule of law.
Generally, the person who is framing someone else is the actual perpetrator of the A crime.
This is used to justify the shooting by making it appear that the officer fired in selfdefence or to defend other bystanders.
In British usage, to frame, or stitch up, is to maliciously or dishonestly incriminate someone or set them up, in the sense trap or ensnare.
Through the Operation Goodwill program, Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other community-based public health and safeq programs.
Black Corpus Christi PD, Black FBL Praenthenn sahimave tums hlack all arannd ma Rineckl and ane iwthita raciretar clarire nratand T Ongoing MKULTRA and designer Babies from Seized genomics “owed” to victims of a White Supremacist, living alone That is both the premise and the fit of the massive evidence in this book, the other four books, the lawsuits, archives, available witnesses, history, and other materials presented here.
In 1981 the plan was for Obama in the United States and the Occidental speech and the fake SSN from a dead Connecticut man Madelyn Dunham, CAI alleged grandmother of OBama, swiped from the deaths probate office of Hawaii.
Dragged into the Ghetto Austin, Capitola, Monterey + Ghetto Politics and Ghetto Gavernment backing on ney DNA for THEIR CHILDREN, Feeces Nueces Their Camera Phone I am their victim, not vice versus, in a “speed trap town” of corruption and racketeering and murders to cover it up, like murders of Jay Thompson, FLoyd Simpson, Bobby Courtney, Jimmy, and others who all pointed at City Hall and Hispanic gang members running the operation, which btw Linda Newkirk said ran the program as muscle as well.
This book Texas Frederick Herman Korth served as the 56th United States Secretary of the Navy during 1962-63; he was also an Assistant Secretary of the Army in 1952-53.
Appointed as Navy Secretary by President John F Kennedy on January 4, 1962, Korth resigned October 14, 1963 effective November 1, 1963.
Various sources cite different reasons for Secretary Korth’s departure.
When Frederick Herman Korth was not serving in the above public or private sector capacities, Fred Korth was a lawyer in private practice.
One of his better known cases was a small one heard June 24, 1948 in the County of Tarrant, Texas, when his client, Edwin A Ekdahl, was officially divorced from Marguerite Frances Claverie Ekdahl , whose son from a previous marriage was Lee Harvey Oswald.
Korth died in September 1998 in El Paso, Texas and is buried under a three century old Texas Live Oak tree on his ranch in Karnes County, Texas. is stepdaughter, Melissa Williams O’ Rourke, is the mother of former United States Representative Beto O’Rourke.
Farrah Fawcett retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here p peri y | Farrah Leni Fawcett (born Ferrah Leni Fawcett; February 2, 1947 June 25, 2009) A Roman Catholic, Fawcett began her early education at the parish school of the church her family attended, St.
Cast FARRAH FAWCETT AS BEATE KLARSFELD Born Ferrah Leni Fawcett February 2, 1947 Corpus Christi, Texas, United States Died June 25, 2009 Santa Monica, California, United States Caller*Times TOM CONTI AS SERGE KLARSFELD Thomas Antonio Conti was born on 22 NOVEMBER 1941 in Paisley, Renfrewshire Scotland, the son of hairdressers Mary McGoldrick and Alfonso Conti.
Weare inspired by our mission, vision and core values to deliver compassionate, : high quality health care, improving the health of the communities we serve. | i | | | | | | | | | i | i Above all, we are committed to providing our customers and their family members with a truly unique healing experience, one that embodies our values and respects the dignity and worth of each person.
This effectively ins an “anchor claim” of being abused by a United States citizen inside the USA which them makes them entrants into victims housing, compensation, etc., Salvation Army Misiters appear to help the false claims aginast United States establishment whites, at least me, that for sure.
The District Attorney of Nuecees tied to a “Bandidos” like motorcycle club (which may also be an affiliate or it) backs these immigrants in their claims.
Claim that I am peeing into locations I am not, because Dopple of me are who “jism” and “fap” to women they peep on 3.
Claiming the because of my alledged Schizoprhenia bevahoiral health care will (abusively mismanage my life, misdiagnose my FOXP2 as Impulse Disorder Bipolar Origins, force me into homeless shelters 4.
If I was peeking at females in the area of the Sea Wall bay shore then these immigrant families and their churches could sue my trust fund and slander me extensively in a campaign that involves cultural violence as a transecentalist ethical motive for obvious fraud.
Even more so than me be slandered as a peeping tom it would justify physcical attacks and social ostracism of me, rejected lease applications, and other downturns in my life.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ * It was during the filming of I Wanted Wings that Lake developed her signature look.
Lake’s long blonde hair accidentally fell over her right eye during a take and created a “peek-a-boo” effect.
A Legend is built via a Dopple’s acts that I rather than the Dopple is a peepoing tom and threat to females including retarded vulberbabel females, minors, and those in tight clothing.
The peeping tom will confess under pressure and “buy” the sight of women by paying in DNA rights, using my DNA not theirs.
I Edward Paul Donegan and my Trust Fund left by my mother will be blamed for the acts of these Impersonators designed to destroy my reputation and rights by their own acts.
By the late 1940s, Lake’s career began to decline, due in part to her alcoholism.
She made only one film in the 1950s, but made several guest appearances on television.
She returned to the big screen in 1966 in the film Footsteps in the Snow , but the role failed to revitalize her career.
After years of heavy drinking, Lake died at the age of 50 in July 1973, from hepatitis and acute kidney injury.
For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Lake has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6918 Hollywood Boulevard.
The song written as a tribute to her Love is Blue was used by comics for transplant jokes New new My Heart is New .. and appears to be am MKULTRA cloning reference.
Further Reading The harmed females are likely Gambits trained to be victimized by their chruch so a “white supremacist” would be blamed and defamed.
The Cubs, poor migrant community, backed by the community and government will make a mark of me by victimizing themselves near me, and use a double of me to both victimize their community and confess to doing it, the double leaving the scene he and I were at to confess out of my presence.
Involuntarily, and on the basis of false claims about my being sexually aggressive towards the community I would therefore have to “pay with my DNA” who already was acting like family by reappearances next to me though acting like criminals trying to get the genetic legacy of Glorian and James Donegan by hostility motivated false and damaging Deep Pockets claims against the trust fund my mother left and consistent behavior of selling the false claims by acting towards me like we are bitter enemies based on how I,J, acted.
I consider this ongoing CIA FBI NSA MKULTRA illegality based on study of, hostility towards, and entanglement with me racially and reproductively, and par for the course of MK-ULTRA activity all through its history and also the kind of stalking of a person the Church Committee investigated and never ended.
Goth, Cyber Goth, and Industrial Again, in Transposition, I had long been gong to goth clubs in San Francisco and always played that down but many who saw the mad max sexy skimpy hand sewn looking pieced together goth frilly styles, it became a “hot topic” to the gym staff who all were said or saying they were originators of cybergoth.
I used my own gym tablet since this music fair was not readily available in the gym otherwise.
It aims to rob the victim of huge sums of money or valuables, often by getting him or her to empty out banking accounts and borrow from family members.
State Employee Accused of Running Prostitution Ring Dies, Apparent Suicide CHIP BROWN FEBRUARY 18, 1994 AUSTIN, Texas _ The veteran state employee fired this week after he was accused of running a prostitution ring from his office was found shot to death today, apparently a suicide, police said.
I Never did buy a house in Austin, did not succeed in enforcers leases or rental agreements there, and this is the story of Austin and my vagrancy arrests there. ... story continues This book Arriving In Corpus Christi a Stateless Deist Continuing MKULTRA in test bed of Corpus Christi border town and depressed economy as it if were Cuba in a Psychological Warfare test including replacing Government The Needy.
In America He's a biker attorney who specialized in gettiig Smaletime defendants off.
Dy TIMETTINY BELLA | Mary 06, 2008 4 Arriving In Corpus Christi a Stateless Deist From the first days I arrived in Corpus Christi I found the evil and danger of the Religious State.
During my trip to California I continued to scream at Jim Volcelks be was backing these psychos and together we should hang an upside cross on our front door and keep it burning.
Most of it was just a worst case scenario back of my mind fallback plan but at one time when I first got back to Corpus Christi other leases violated I started to build it, recognized the futility of it and abounded the plan.
The two insurmountable problems were e It wasn’t going to work I didn’t know anyting anything about them and wasn’t interested in looking up information e If I did build it I didn’t know who to strike.
The Sanctuary of First United Methodist CC or Caller Times which was helping fake everything about events while driving fancy cars, refusing any data from me, and using their own property to assault me from.
It would be like striking only one rotor of a Propaganda Muliticopter which would remain airborn and might even be pushed up by the hit.
A remaing problem I give less headence to is the the Propoganda Theory promoted abotu me is I am a pscho will will attack normal people minding their own business for no reason at all.
Other parts of that legend are that I am mentalis and developmentally retarded and I am schizophrenic who can no understand what RICO is and thus I claim RICO exists when it does not.
The actual truth of what I decided to do actually occured in between the 7 years of Texas right about the mjddle of that time.
My plans to move to Austin sabotogged, a false pretext for my homelessness manufacture and a false arrest followed by even worse Conspiracy Against Rights I decided to accept ona spirutual level rather than any action Timothy McVeigh as my only and righteous true savior.
C Christopher Wray’s Robert Muellers FBI DOJ had already false arrested me and dirty bombed me and D-E-W attacked me for reason could not understand, much like I could not understand the why of the attacks in such odd ways, only that I was being attacked and it related to my DNA and its history and my mother attacked too.
I came to realize only the death of FBI DOJ meant the safety us United States citizens.
I have described Columbian Neckties for CHristopher Wraw, Free Masons, Robert Mueeler and COrpus Crhisti PD for things lke stealikng my computer, but what I thihk of the USA and its evil is a matter of policy for me.
My policy is to educate in a way that might wing, piont out these infiltrator traaitors, and restoring Constitutional Conduct and eradicating the NWO Deep State.
I hope that in writing this book the USA will bcome the USA again and the Mafia of the Bush Treason will be defeated by being called out into the light of day.
Repeatedlyh before and after my death insane Ron Paul psychos have surrounded me forcing me to call police on them and threaten them against further contact with me.
One such guy was a dark skinned Guns and God type I met at Ron Paul For President volunteer group who became an insane stalker and the Ron Paul activities continued when was reafing the The Semantic Web and they thought it could be aspted to God.
In California a stripier was a Ron Paulite and they were in trucks and bumper stickers all over them Ron Paul in operations surrounding me.
I continue to write the book rather than acts of physical defense though I feel like the Star Trek character who is in a ship disabled by some whale noise emitting shop and oxygen and power are running out.
Christmas Eve 2020 I was carjacked when an Uber driver took me to a Salvation Army facility where from on its property the Salvation Army io their steps used their proximity to me to make contact with me in the Uber vehicle, CCPD did not response to the event and usually even pretend they havef my name or apartment number wrong and help the assailants.
The Maifa of the Deep State does liek nice cars and the fingr things in life. ~ 4 he Great Gatsby retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ” ~) The true cars of ‘The Great Gatsby’ era BY DAVID UNDERCOFFLER Los Angeles Times This rare 1920 Kissel Model 6-45 “Gold Bug” Speedster is one of the highlights from the Roaring ‘20s that Jay Gatsby probably would have driven, according to Hagerty Insurance, a classic car insurance and valuation company.
The chief wrong which false prophets do to their following is not financial.
The collections aggregate a tempting total, but individual payments are not ruinous.
I doubt if the vigilance of the law is equal to making money stick by over-credulous people.
There are those who hunger and thirst after higher values which they feel wanting in their humdrum lives.
They live in mental confusion or moral anarchy and ——— seek vaguely for truth and beauty and moral support.
When they are deluded and then disillusioned, cynicism and confusion follow.
The wrong of these things, as I see it, is not in the money the victims part with half so much as in the mental and spiritual poison they get.
But that is precisely the thing the Constitution put beyond the reach of the prosecutor, for the price of freedom of religion or of speech or of the press is that we must put up with, and even pay for, a good deal of rubbish.
United States Ballard /Dissent Jackson Complimentary Aftercare I Edward Paul Donegan have alleged behavioral government services are taking a retarded version of Edwward Paul Donegan “shows” in which the retarded person admits to harming others and “does the right thing” and pays restitution from a trust fund left for real Edward Paul Donegan.
Habitat for Humanity International , generally referred to as ; Habitat for Humanity or Habitat, is a United States non-governmental, and ; Nonprofit organization, which was founded in 1976 by couple Millard ; and Linda Fuller.
Good Samaritans Rescue Mission, Salvation Army, Catholic Charities, Metro Churches, First United Methodist Corpus Christi Arlington County Services Virginia who i was ordred into post National Insitiute of Health Public Health Service release (Federal Medical Center Butner North Carolina) was asking me to take drugs I had no interest in.
They shut of disability and I was left homeless upon a conflict with a neighbor who was alleging pizza sent to me (it was sent to someone else in a nearby apartment) and also denial of trust and other funds as I was starving, they hoped I would want services I did not want, hoping they could starve me into needing them.
They are fatal attraction RICO organizations who “hyper spaced” me (using the public announce system at night to claim I was in housing on one side of the street when I was on a different side of the street, adult entertainer sent to the side I was not on, falsifying Matt numbers when assigned matts to sleep on, etc., It is in this Deep South Sake Handling skid row system the racket was setup claiming false rights to my genome.
This book RELIGINT Daniel Pipes is an American historian, writer, and commentator.
RELIGINT Espionage forms of racketeering and harassment and genomic and eugenic crimes along religious lines.
Psychopaths from Ministries of various types are defaming me and Science with defecation upon both, literally.
Philosophy of space and time is the branch of philosophy concerned with the issues ; surrounding the ontology, epistemology, and character of space and time.
While ; such ideas have been central to philosophy from its inception, the philosophy of ‘ space and time was both an inspiration for and a central aspect of early analytic ' philosophy.
Use of fakery, counterfeiting, labor rackets, RICO, murder, bribery and extortion in an Ethic violence cartel to subvert the USA, Edward Glorian and James Donegan, and our life in the USA as Natural Law Philosophy learners.
Chains of events, sequa, narratives, must flow connected without breaks one to another for the entire chain to be true.
It is somewhat similar to the physics principle the of A and B Space and the Unreality of Time if simplified.
Either I am not home or in a Dopple long con set locations events occur which become “B” narrative, a false narrative to a chane of events.
This is the fakery being used seemingly by the CIA OSS types running a criminal cartel weaponize the use of my genome in black markets and organ trafficking international and as ethnic violence.
A free floating narrative of events is created which is not by integrous link connected to me but is said to , appears to, be connected and is connected to me by staged appearances only.
A “B” Reality was manufcatured by Pycholcogical Warfare for others to hold as the truth when “A” Time is true and not the same things “B” Time, the characteristics of “A” time differ from what is manufactured to be “B” Time.
Illuminati Dawn offered addition to HUMINT, OSINT, SIGINT, AIINT was also a term offered by me RELIGINT religious organizations in Espionage or covert activities ranging from underground railroads, assassination, political activism, and orphanages, missionary, and other often CIA backed operations.
The can be Counterfeit or Forged, Counterfeit is something which looks like one thing and is mistaken for the real hing like an email address or an apartment interior described or photographed but hat location or email address is a counterfeit of the real one. ot cot A forgery may have real elements but falsified elements as well.
Counterfeits may include truthful components which in the counterfeits are completed into the forgery with distrustful elements.
A Principality of Free Masons the Agency is a Principality of arbitrary violence to control Masonic Kingdom.
Its system is to fuse with and protect selected mafia it will act through in exchange for the role of Shotcaller, allowing the FBI to name figures to be hit.
On September 8, 1975, Bulger and an unidentified person tossed a Molotov cocktail into the John F Kennedy birthplace in Brookline in retaliation for Senator Ted Kennedy’s vocal support for Boston school desegregation.
Roadblocking Model, Kidnap By inveigle, Kidnap by arrest threat, Kidnap by Conspiracy Against Rights, Kidnap by overt death threats and physical violence Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here INVEIGLE When you tell your boyfriend he’s not just the best boyfriend ever but also the world’s best driver, and this makes him offer to drive the whole way on your upcoming road trip, then congratulations.
With that manufactured appearances presented to OTHERS I become unwelcome to where I am going thus where I am going will work with the FBI on sham evictions of me. e On the way to Jim Volkelca Stay and Play a black male inside Wells Fargo obviously part of something, and a Black Hispanic female at a desk with a water bottle, blue, graduated, but me NOT at the desk and of the TWO duffel bags I was to move into Stay and Play I had one and the rent in cash with me, no water bottle.
This book RELIGIOUS ASYLUM A Request for Political and Religious Asylum An Instruction as to why I need religious asylum other form of protection from the United States of America.
Conflict Engagement is part of COINTELPRO and MKULTRA, is made up of Gangstalk ie Stalking including surveillance creates either false appearance by the conduct of others insunuating elements not naturally their such as photo-bombs and then ambushed the person stalked to others as the data from the stalk and surveillance is talked around.
Me, as 1, the victim not able to get the State to act against State backed assailant 2 of me 1.
Good USA Safe For Me and I am and always have been a law abiding citizen with in interest in adult women and good intelelct and education and social skills ee Law ys Law Law Abiding Zone Abiding Law Abiding Abiding James Paul Donegan |Edward | Non Crime Influenced sis Cae Government and Glorian Donegan | Donegan | citizens, organizations But for USA and Illuminati MKULTRA errors that would be likely be so.
ATT Direct TV, Golds | Espionage Agency Gym, other assets to | Coverups via CIA CIA LL Assets against me Mercenaries Law Abiding Zone but Espionage victims James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan a Edward Donegan Companies Assault Prado, etc., Edward Donegan CIA Assets, RICO under Front activities, Enrique The final and I think long planned result of “Foval” attacks on me AND my parents is this.
This as the amount of my Trust Fund from the sale of her house resultant from her divorce from James Paul Donegan, James and Glorian being second generation immigrants from Ireland to the United States.
This book Its the Queen of England and Neocons NeoCon Collective Guilt of a Society on a NeoCon War Path in the World Forced teaming starts by conspiring against my independence and normality such that in non independent living the team members of that group will assert that which represent me and my assets is created by them or managed by them.
Why not. e Transfer any property on false claims of harms, photographic exploitation, to others is illegal e Transfer any Reproductivity on claims of harms, photographic exploitation, to others is illegal and organ harvesting e Doing so ona religious basis is a war crime. e Conspiring against property rights such as housing that is non religious into a a hostile religous area is a war crime.
KOMPROMAT Upon presention ot Road Roadblocks KOMPROMAT about | Sower on flimsy Sower Reaper will excuse but good then ask to be accepted | enough excuse instead of Sower though with harvest in hand of Sower May also rob Sower’s original work devaluing Sower Sower did not move forward,does not have his or her own work result Dominatrix Lila Sage For me this is no issue, a good, Pagan forms of Deism, Wicca or other Heathen beliefs.
I will be beat out to her, KOMPROMAT shown to her, generated falsely, that what I am doing is sinful and what a catholic would be offended by, a vice-full catholic, but the Christians beating me out to her and the real manipulative abusive fraudsters claim she is their Diest form of religious psychology.
It originally aired on December 17, 1972 and was repeated on May 20, 1973. ~ slalatalatatatatatalalalatetatatats This was one of the first M*A*S*H episodes to 1 Challenge the traditional sitcom format by combining ; dramatic elements | with comedic situations | Hawkeye writes home to his father during the Christmas season, relating a number of amusing and personal anecdotes including Radar's effort to mail home a jeep piece-by-piece, the monthly morality lecture, Trapper's local medical philanthropy, and the ongoing non-secret relationship between Frank and Hot Lips.
Hawkeye dresses to play Santa Claus for the local children, but is required to go to the front line via helicopter to treat an emergency, which he does in-costume.
The GangStalk of paid actors piece by piece, each small enough and oblique enough to be denies creates a Legend whole and in Red State Texas the Legend being built is that *my* adult entertainer sex worker is on the way.
In fact it is *their* service call being announced likely from an adult entertainer or other the Red State beat me out to because child porn was planted on me, my alleged interest and alleged character flaw.
In fac the Red State and deep south saw my gym videos of Goth and Cybergoth and Symphonic Goth and decided they, the Red State Salvation Army, while dressed as me, lessons in Goth from these woman while continuing to assert my lifestyle was child porn and that should be ""provided for"" the Atheist in accordance with his character defects, not knowing the Gospel.
Harassment becomes illegal when it is so frequent or severe that it leads to negative consequences for the victim.
Frequent or severe harassment creates a work environment that is hostile or offensive to the individual.
It can also result in adverse employment decisions relating to the victim, such as employment i termination or demotion.
The harasser can be the immediate supervisor of the victim, or anyone in the line of command, including a supervisor in another area.
The harasser may also be a fellow employee, or a client, or a customer.
Sexual Harassment is behavior that creates unwelcomed sexual physical advances and inappropriate sexual remarks in the workplace or in public social areas.
Unwelcome behavior is behavior by any peer, subordinate, or higher authority individual that is offensive or unwelcome.
This type of behavior can include inappropriate remarks, jokes, behavior that discriminates and can also include sexual conduct.
Sexual harassment and unwelcome behavior can take the form of verbal assault or verbal practices and non-verbal behavior.
Furthermore, direct interaction or contact is not a necessary qualifier for sexual harassment.
As long as the behavior results in a hostile or offensive environment for the individual, then that behavior can be considered a type of sexual harassment.
The Contra Circuit apparently run by Elite Caretl against members of 52 Lambeth Square.
It’s amazing .. ¢ [paid for my education all the way through a Masters Plus. e Thave a long tenure in Education e Jam inthe Athletic Hall of Fame in both high school and college e [retired from teaching at just over $50,000 a year. e IT lived in a multi-level house over 3,000 square feet on a lake But then I also had a malignant narcissist partner and that trumped everything.
I miss my freedom, the life of my choice, and authentic people. 1 3 years after leaving Columbia, I have a place of my own.
A brief encounter where something is passed between case officer and agent.
CUT-OUT A sustem of broken links which if examined woudl be found to be fraudlent, but things like planted evidence linking one person to one thing wrongly, or someone using a Front Company or Asset to hide behind such that the real actor is cut out from the seeming act.
That’s according to “Battle for the Soul: Inside the Democrats’ Campaign to Defeat Trump,” an | upcoming book by the journalist Edward-Isaac Dovere.
World Net Daily I have use Project Management Event Driven Architecture to describe annual recurrences of certain dates that had to do with me and Barrack Obama fertilized with out of Wedlock Glorian Dec 13 DNA and gestation between Feb 20 and November 18) and birthdays publicly reported or events April 1, July 4, or Aug 4 which re tied to British Royalty, Independence Day, and the Queen Mothers birthday.
THE CRITICAL PATH METHOD The critical path method is a project modeling technique developed in the late 1950s by Morgan R Walker of DuPont and James E Kelley Jr. of Remington Rand.
For me to get a car requires the following. e Eyeglasses to pass vision test e Credit or money to buy a vehicle e Anti theft of auto e Valid Drivers lisecne in a state itself dependent on residency in a state e Title to vehicle to regestr the vehicle All of these are harrassed out of my life and each by itself is enough to prevent vehicle ownershipo.
Charity groups like the Rockefeller Nuerosciences Boeing Corp, allegedely malighed veterans families, all becomce CIA front companies for the charactar assasination the discredits a person and cost them social standing, social position, and good neighborhoods or jobs.
Use the same paid actors, a pay wall, surrounding a person, to behave expressively but not in statement a Stalk victim is doing something like harming others the Paid Stalk vicitm is not (this is called an FBI Pay-wall is what hte stalkers tod me) 4.
Javad im 210) blater-Vmr-Vo(e mM @toyetsiutauialoyot-V ie oljialoyetcweloluls Color of Law using Organized Stalk Corrupt Bis pee On Canosa Pays for false allegations victims of Corrupt ; aa Power bea against honest politicians Free Mason buy selves into office, Avoid real accountability of self, creates via false flags accountability of oppo.
Camille Claudel Movie dialogue about the reputation needs of Rodin and the recognation needs of is protege Camille Mistakes and fallibility e Requirements of a Miracle o The credulity of all o The complacency of some o The tacit consent of the principal actor e “He who is a legend in his own time is ruled by that legend.
It is a fight provokation attempt “stay away from my child” starting a fight as Iam NOT interested in the child or harming it in any way but now based on the dopple a pretext exists for a fight with me as the dopple is next to me.
I will experience property claims retaliation for the exploitation of these children, blamed and socially ostracized, and used aa KOMPROMAT to socially engineer agencies and bureaucracies.
This has long been achieved through Behavioral Health Care, sexual abuse in Behavioral Health Care as abuse of legal rights to assets is acheived by forced teaming with retardation clients, claims I am retarded, and then covert plausibly deniable black market of my assets in the legalmedical domain among those I am forced teamed with and under rather than my being independent normal person.
The lack of evidence | to the contrary ostensibly makes the denial plausible , but sometimes, it makes the denial t only unactionable.
A black budget article by The Washington Post, based on information given by Edward Snowden, detailed how the United States allocated $52. billion in 2012 for the t black budget.
Spy Finance and the Black Budget retrieved from the American Prospect BY 1% ROBERT DREYFUSS DECEMBER 19, 2001 and copied or modified to here Certainly there is a legitimate place for secret intelligence operations in the modern state.
Senator Frank Church , the committee was part of a series of investigations into intelligence | abuses in 1975, dubbed the “Year of Intelligence”, including its House counterpart, the Pike | Committee, and the presidential Rockefeller Commission.
First came the revelations by Army intelligence officer Christopher Pyle in ' January 1970 of the United States Army’s spying on the civilian population and Senator Sam Ervin’s I Senate investigations produced more revelations.
In addition, the article discussed efforts by intelligence agencies to collect information on | the political activities of United States citizens. ""aad | Christopher H Pyle is a journalist and Professor of Politics at Mount Holyoke College in | South Hadley, Massachusetts.
I have i excerpted his article to here from Politico aistalaiatatatatatatatatalatetetetatets Mark Gonzales He’s a biker [outlaw, murder defendant among them Calveras Motorcycle Club] attorney who specialized in getting small-time [skid row homeless shelter] defendants off.
Hung on the otherwise bare walls of Mark Gonzales’s county office are family pictures, a baseball 1 pennant and a colorful mural of the Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata.
On one hand, you can go on Gonzalez’s i Facebook page and see a raft of overwhelmingly positive comments on just about every post, whether 1 it’s work-related or something that gives a window into his everyday life with his family.
A local student claims he’s been bullied at the school, so Gomez along with about 40 other bikers went to the campus and waited for the student and escorted him home safely.
EB “We're a family club, we try to do everything we can to help our community and people in need,” David “Deadbeat” Carrera, an officer with the Las Milpas chapter of Calaveras MC explained.
District attorney races are going off script,” Stanford Law School professor David Alan Sklansky wrote in a recent law journal article.
He made $12,000 his first year but slowly built up | a successful regional practice. | i i] Using Environmental Stress to induce conflict or self harm, no touch stress infliction Espionage agencies discredit those who have information compromising to high levels of authority rouge units Neuropsychological & Electronic No-Touch Torture Report by Dr.
In other terms torture is used to remove the continuity of thought to confuse the target to reveal information, erase brain patterns such as values and beliefs, or to break down the human spirit to make them submit and obey their handlers.
Memory Erasure The military and CIA have been researching memory erasing drugs for half a century.
Similar techniques are used in the wireless, no-touch torture and interrogation programs.
In no-touch torture the target is driven from their friends and family using different techniques in order to isolate them so that the electronic mind control has more effect on their psyche.
Chatter bots, an artificial intelligence program, automate much of the repetition so that the interrogators don’t drive themselves crazy during the neural linguistic torture and programming phases.
Other methods such as hypnosis can increase perceived pain and the power of suggestion such as telling the subject his pinky finger is going to be cut off before it is done.
Maximum Sensory Pain Techniques Basic torture involves brutalization,e. physical strikes, kicks in the groin, pepper spray or tear gas, etc.
In the CIA programs, the target is put through these phases as written in the documentation, “Disorient and confuse the target.
However, the psychological and perceived physical pain is only half the story with no-touch torture.
Rough Music is a British term of medivial masonry of surrounding person which hostile loud offensive sounds and acts \ Google knowledge panel retrieved from Annoyance and copied or modified to here shea Annoyance is an unpleasant mental state that is characterized by irritation and distractionfrom one’s conscious thinking.
Wikipedia t Victim insane and possibly to the point of suicide, or destroy the victim’s reputation and | believability as the person will likely be viewed as mentally ill should they complain or report the | | abuse.
His father Donald Barr was an American educator, writer, and Office of Strategic Services agent.
He also wrote two science fiction v1 William Pehlham Barr Gang Stalker Masons LOL by _Offramp Gang stalking and its preternatural connections.
On a macrocosmic level, preternatural i beings are the driving force behind activities such as gang stalking.
Conservatives and 33 world wide values Motivations for the abuse Motivations for Gang Stalking vary.
Tactics used by Charivari Gang Stalkers Tactics of Predatory Gangstalking include highly coordinated surveillance (hidden cameras, conversation bugging in private aswell as public), harassment, and psychological, psychosocial, financial, and sometimes physical assaults on an individual by a large group of people who are often strangers to the targeted individual.
ANCHORING, BAITING, AND MANUFACTING FALSE NARRATIVES ATTACHED TO OBJECTS OR EVENTS Anchoring is a technique employed by stalkers to implant a false motivation or reason behind the stalking, preventing the victim from discovering the truth.
In more sinister examples, Anchoring involves the implantation of evidence to persuade the victim some other group or organization is responsible for the abuse.
Coincides with evidence plants as Black Bag Jobs to damage and disparage or malign a persons home by home invasion.
MOCKING, MIMICRY AND MIMICRY IN FURTHERANCE OF IDENTITY THEFT AND PSYCHOLOGICAL HARASSMENT ABOUT WHETHER A PERSON IS OR ISN’T A STALKER ENGAGING IN MIMICRY Mimicry is a specialized form of harassment in which the stalkers publicly imitate every movement made by the victim.
Various sources When you frustrate someone, you do your best to annoy, confuse, or even torment that poor person. sensitize cause to sense; make sensitive Frustrated is an adjective that describes feeling disappointed and unsuccessful.
Ritual Gangstalking Reportedly performed by cults and secret organizations such as Satanists, secret orders of free masons, some voodoo /obeah practitioners and Scientologists as a means of control or for punishment.
The beauty and the leadership of the family lines I come out of are full bloom emotional understanding.
In either case I will express it and others will believe it and understand it, if I can keep a level enough head, a challenge at times.
How My Family Learned .. i i i i i] i] i] i] i | Jun 17, 2020 Several common characteristics of children with ADD put them at higher risk for : developing and externalizing explosive behaviors.
This is often i why they lash out,” says Vinay Saranga, M.D., of Saranga Psychiatry in North Carolina.
Shakedowns (eee Bitor Redo Eric Holder To Give Funds From DOJ’S $16 BILLION SETTLEMENT With i Bank Of America To Radical Leftist Group | Judicial Watch first reported the scheme two years ago when Countrywide Financial Corporation doled | out $335 million to settle its discrimination lawsuit with the feds.
The money was supposed to be | distributed to more than 200,000 minority victims who supposedly were charged higher interest | rates and fees than white borrowers based on their race not their credit.
These religions and powers ALREADY have my DNA in use and want the rights under phony theories of I owe them.
When contemplating the euphemisms that have ipped into the lexicon since 9/11, the adjective Orwellian is difficult to avoid.
But while such terms i as extraordinary rendition, targeted killing and enhanced interrogation are universally known, and their i true meanings -kidnap, assassination, torture -widely understood, the disposition matrix has not yet i gained such traction.
Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here BLAME Blame is about being responsible for something that’s bad or has gone wrong.
AN ACCUSATION THAT ONE IS RESPONSIBLE FOR SOME LAPSE OR MISDEED, A REPROACH FOR SOME LAPSE OR MISDEED “the police laid the blame on the driver” Synonyms: incrimination, inculpation Types: selfincrimination an accusation that incriminates yourself Type of: accusal, accusation a formal charge of wrongdoing brought against a person; the act of imputing blame or guilt The real perpetrators at the scene non verbally act out that I must have done something, in fact they did, and the can’t quite bring themselves to actually accuse me but just act is if I am some kind of suspect.
Police say there is nothing wrong here and the landdlord Oks these activities on my balcony, etc. including death threats from outside my apartment inward as being ok by the police.
An impersonator of me, a cop, will confess though to the chain of events alleged by the plants of out of place chain links wherever I go, and btw this will continue longstanding claims against my genome those CIA backed racketeers always wanted and needed.
Studio City, CA, United States Occupation: trainer I loan because: Ican:) About me: | operate a small correctional facility where | teach men the virtues of treating women with the respect and adoration they deserve.
The totality of decades fighting anonymous assaults lead me to think persecution and isolated from white familial opportunity, the structure of the persecution is acts of others towards women near me, and treating me in public as though I had been the person who was abnormal in regards to or in reaction to females.
In fact my personality and approach to life is more female friendly than the evangelicals who have stalked me though those same evangelicals or missionaries wish to use my own lifestyle as their own.
Diagnostic Standares Manan CLinical Dysfunction Clinical Risk Personality Disorders Bipolar Cyclical Long Cycle mee speem Hype eens nae ae sy irrational impulsive cognitive condition ADD Per auent pe Condition, Rational Inattentive State lower severity FOXP2 ADD Permanent Hyper Condition, | Non cyclic expression by permanent risk.
This book MK Betrayal COINTENLRPO Mechanisms itsA ction of Citizen Citizen defensive actions blamed rather than honored, often the defense reaction leads to incarceration where additional Due Process violations are the norm Government Action Sexually Assaultive, destructive, under cover assaults on Private Citizens denied by the Government leave the Citizen to defend the assaults which in the absence of context seem aggressive and psychotic thus allow the Government pretext for further assaults on the citizen.
Misrepresentation especially by Behavioral Health The Hills Have Eyes is a 2006 American horror film and remake of Wes Craven’s 1977 film of the same name.
Mark Gonzales has tweeted what some say “FTP” was code for, Fuck The Police.
I am from the Establishement and I make a great mark for his oujtlaw governemnt infrastructure, attacks backed by Bush, Abbot, Paxton, and others ETK Introduction Dr.
Target Selection Gang stalking apparently targets American citizens deemed to be dissidents or whistle-blowers , although others might be targeted for other reasons such as for experimental or training purposes.
I think so and I am ever more targeted by these bird dogging mental health assailants (and also governement employees and family members of government employees) than most Trump supporters are because of Atomic Testing history.
But during Walker’s 2014 re-election campaign, Saunders said he and the unions wanted revenge.
Foval was recently caught on camera admitting to coordinating and coaching ; professional protesters at Donald Trump rallies.
Foval also admitted to organizing the violent confrontations outside a Trump rally in Chicago that injured several police officers and caused the Trump campaign to cancel the event.
Geneticists programs |radiation |Malcom X_ | FOXP2 descendents, after and other | Windsor Glorian FOXP2 Hitler’s research |hybrid to Donegan and Dysgraphia defeat.
Still | underway | revolt Genetech London includes at CIA against Mao | today.
Krutchev, Then Jen of 15/17 and United States My and Moore tying LONDON father Communism | this into KE family and Pizzagate and FOXP2 mother OSS Vatican exhibitors. involved History in it.
Orphaned again 9 years | Manhattan Project DNA Radiation Testing and the later.
Hampton, Virginia, United States, is the oldest of NASA’s field centers.
As rocket research ' grew, aeronautics research continued to expand and played an important part when "" subsonic flight was advanced and supersonic and hypersonic flight were ; introduced.
Earth science ; Langley Research Center conducts Earth science research to support NASA’s * mission. B q The Mechanisms e Changing the context I am front adult to child, including provocatively acting minors e Utilizing Agent Provocateurs utilizing my identity to both exploitatively photograph the minors and created appearance my or my property was implicated in the photography, avoiding explicit allegations against me, though acting resentfully towards me in manner of behavior.
The Agent Provocateur engages in illegal acts forming the predicate for police actions against the peaceful crowd but overlooking the Agent Provocateur.
I Jared Loughner seemed to pick up a grudge against Garbriel Gifford in AUG 2007 about representing secret unconstitutional activities, and later in 2011 opened fire on her.
While I am sure legitmate activities were conducted in this Donegan family home I am also sure the needs of DARPA and ongoing matters of family history may have occured on this “private space tarmac” meeting.
Expedition 44, Expedition 46, The Path of Glorian Donegan The Path of Edward Paul Donegan Thomas Neil Donegan Generally he and Mark Weirness undermined my mother, fighting with her, hiding or taking her hats, photos, etc., and per my mother, in some larger secret conspiracy against her.
Neither Glorian Donegan or I am or were incompetent but from within the family Tom and Mark had great latitude in asserting Glorian Donegan and I were not of sound mind.
Gangstalk Path As I go into the Betrayal parts of this bbok MKULTRA has been used, PsyOps and Decison Matrix have been used, for Targeted Individual crimes against me.
Achieved without Due Process and likely under “United States of America $333,520.00 in United States Currency ET AL” wherein [Judge Roll] stated he was preparing to rule against Obama’s power to seize American citizens money without clear and convincing evidence of a crime being committed.
I assert a Three Tier familial lie It is continually yelled at me, skitted out around me for appearances, etc., that I am disabled loser who is not e Genetically of similarity to Barack Obama e Psychosocially or intellectually like Brainic Barack Obama pm 55 5555555555555 855559555555 SeeeeEe BARACK OBAMA law abiding Illuminati King D.C. and the World NORMAL Metropolitan life Austin, Monterey, Capitola SKID ROW LOSER Edward Paul Donegan celibate and near death, bad hygiene, alone.
Let me repeat as I go into the Betrayal parts of this bbok MKULTRA has been used, PsyOps and Decison Matrix have been used, for Targeted Individual crimes against me.
This book Gay women and non whites took over gym positions and setup Doppelgangers of me to photograph women or plant them in front of me.
Child’s area of Golds Gym Corpus CHristi where a Doppelganger bike similar to mine often was while the same time I was at the gym, my bike elsewhere.
Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events Nodes Suggestive or story | Nodes Public perception telling element believing suggestive fraud [—[sehawienecemen | | a rs oe J degsoy ain shared dia Sct 1¢ Dialectal space of stop Broke the Lawas action Public Context ¢ public was armed by the act Pagd is offended by it Women are played to.
The managers of my money were making it impossible to shop, do laundry, also, impossible to get diabetes supplies.
THe Salvation Army homeless people continued these assaults including impersonating and doing so in my gym clothes, while masturbating, every since.
Diminuizing me, taunting me, aggrandizing themselves in a gym environment made hostile by racketeering The core environment was that people pretended I needed and was a beneficiary of coaching yet racketeers entangled themselves, after the fact of what I did by later jumping in front of me skitting it out thus altering the competence from my own to theirs.
The disruption of the normal public environments (or electronic environments) to abnormal situations was the physical act.
Since gyms tend to be crowded presume a woman happens to be at position “F”, Just as I predictably reach the end of my program time a male enters the cardio equipment to the other side of me, presume here position “D” and walks away just ahead of my end of workout walk away, as though I followed the male away or was led away by him.
Some wiggly hipped “Barely Legal” takes a position on cardio equipment in front of me, say at position “A”B”or “C” for a cardio workout as though that, rather than diabetes and health, pursuing her is why I am at the gym, undermining my legitimate use of the gym and effectively being a sexual assault on me, placing me ina 17 year old phile or “John” role.
My cell phone A|BI/C]|. |jumps from PLAY to PAUSE requiring me to touch my DfEE | phone.
DECODED My having to touch the Play button to get the music going again created a phone touch.
Oddly, despite the sparsity of women in the gym one is usauly present thus the number is never zero. omen omen co ¢ oS oS oS oS oS oo go) a, a, GQ, a Gy yf Fe G a a a a Moron Last to be First Something I called “The two second rule” in a lawsuit.
It is though seismologists filme themselves predicting earthquakes which have already occurred to elevate their importance or belittle me and my accomplishments in the gym or anywhere else.
A clear assault, a shove, say, or yanking a purse away from someone and running down the street with it.
Psychological assaults are often unrecognized because they are keyed to a particular person to aggravate that particular person.
Abuse of Psychiatry in furtherance of Abuse of Power and Lethal Conspiracy Against Rights DARPA and DIA and Espionage have the capabilities to do this including through Information Doppelgangers of stalking victims faking evidence used to create Psychiatric Pretexts.
Abuse Of Psychiatry Wikipedia quoted here from link r Political Abuse of Psychiatry is the misuse of psychiatry, including diagnosis, detention, and treatment, for the purposes of obstructing the human rights of individuals and/or groups in a society.
Situations where a rapist does not explicitly or 1 implicitly threaten physical harm beyond forcible intercourse are less clear i regarding the victim’s right to use deadly force against the rapist.
Current law does i not clearly articulate a basis for the right to use deadly self-defense when a person 1 reasonably believes that harm will be limited to forcible intercourse.
Overall, * rape can be viewed as a grievous physical and psychological attack that may be "" resisted by any and all means. footnotes.
Self defense | | ' Index Term: Homicide; Sexual assault trauma In My Case This has been used along with other Due Process violations in what appears to be a race related National Institute of Health Public Health Service (non-combatant military service) of the United States Department of Defense illegal and uncompensated claim to my DNA by the military.
The working theory of this book is that Thomas Neil Donegan and Orin Hatch among others sought out to, at the veneer level, fight me on the basis of disrupting White Supremacism though I would find later that If taken “verb” atim the motive of the COINTELPRO against me was rooted in race or racial theory an error has occured.
I will later call this the Two Seconds After Rule, that as a rule when I have done something innovative in the gym, in diet, music, elsewhere tied to me Diabetes recovery it will seem to come from someones after the fact instruction.
This attempts at DNA movements and family lines grafts and surgeries could create the fix needed to explain DNA lineages and DNA usages and DNA rights on behalf of the powerful.
Besa probe grand jury looks like ‘a Black Lives Matter rally,’ says witness « ttps://pagesix.com/20 18/01/02/russia-probe-grand-jury-looks-like-a-black-livesmatter-rally-says-witness/ “The grand jury room looks like a Bernie Sanders rally,” my source said.
Berkeley ” : Of the 20 jurors, 11 are African-Americans and two were wearing “peace T-shirts,” ; the witness said.
Following the then release from the Rosenstein Mueller arrest of me for seeking National Institute of Health genetics info (on a misdemeanor harassing phone calls charge I never reached trial on) I was released back into the disabled persons system.
I went from the picture with the yellow shirt and Alc 13. to in the dark shirt and A1c 4. in less than six months, but upon that success racial harassment in the gym became so intense it was impossible to use the gym and gains have been lost for the last four years, and now I have untreated full blown diabetes again and am also again overweight.
I have probably lost a decade of my life to this as prescribed medicince and gym access is not available.
Ed Donegan 10) 0) [eF-e ls @@ TagPhoto Q AddLocation # Edit 1) Like comment > Share @ Ed Donegan This black male was part of the cover operation, leaving with them then trying to duck the camera Like Reply -21w @ Ed Donegan Then loreiane the biack waitress says thank you at an odd time. | usually confront this, she says just thanking me for being her.
Abuse of Psychiatry, this short version The most dangerous feces shit the world has ever taken on me has been in custody where all this is even even 10 times worse and records are generated.
Similarly at an applebees in Austin about 3/5 Compromise, and clauses, etc., Arlington County Sherrif Detention a loser perhaps Schizo Affective Disorder moron variously thought they were at Martin Luther King rallies at Revelary, an imperonator extended a comment I actually made to my father the conditions of detention were no worse than any Baracks.
Many many more during the years These acts of impersonation of a mentally incompetent me while in I was in custody include a schizo affective thinking a shark bit off his arm while I had a broken arm, impersonators of me contacting the courts identifying themselves as me, in crayon therapy, unable to control their bowels, etc., Officer Manufactured Claims of My Compliance to Females Everywhere I go the illusion is created I am following a female around which is what motivates me.
In Arlington County Detention while I was not prescribed medication a Doppelganger of me was talked to by a Latex Domme Nurse who urged a retarded version of me to take medications In Arlington County Sherriffs Detention, as always, all black sherriffs, a white crew came in and counseled a Mediterranean skinned male not to roll around in the porn on strewn on his floor as he was in psychiatric emergency.
When I got food poising or bruised toe from the base of a chair (I forget which reason I had been in Northern Virginia Hospital Center ER on this occasion) a black male was in the waiting room, large and heavy set, dark skinned, wearing similar clothes and ALSO with Samsung Ring phone.
I have rarely if ever spent more than $40 at a strip club and I get off on surfing domme adds rather than buying porn, spending less than $100 on porn during my life.
Identity Card and Identity Theft Problems When others including Arlington County Behavioral Health had control of my assets I could not get an ID, DL or DL Insurance.
Several times after I have made that assertion people in my vicninity, refusing to identity themselves, make statements nearby my of the type “We’ ll be in this fifty-fifty from here” and this happens so often I often do not confront these types of statements, though when I do the response to me is of the nature “oh, that wasn’t directed towards you.
We weren’t talking to you, just each other.” e Other times I have made that assertion (including recently at Extended Stay America) someone other than me is doing something like staring into an envelope of money saying “wow I have made it big” and of course real me has received no money nor been informed of the value of my genes.
The FBI also conducted “black bag jobs”, wairantless surreptitious entries, against the targeted groups and their members.
COINTELPRO Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Embezzlement, Forgeries, and Coverup Murders Entry by Edwdard Paul Donegan In my case there is something the National Institute of Health knows about my genome, not disclosed to me, and the value of IVF of my DNA is embezzled to blacks and gays via forgeries.
One of my observations for many many year is the Emblems of Trust behavioral care using arbitrary medical judgements have encroached into adversarial criminal justice proceedings and eliminated the accused right to defense at trial In the final book, V, I explain Tom Duham and J are not in a traffickig ring, it appears to other we are because of planted evidence visible to the public and impersonators of us, but he and I have repeatedly called the police, as have Lt Gen Mike Flynn, Jen Moore, and others.
It is my best guess, and I think the protection racket which manufactures hostile claims to my DNA for who should not have it (as a resultant claim against me,) and denies my genome to me (as I am ostracized as though I victimized female minors, causing under Reflexive Control) adult females to shun me for what the Information Doppelganger of me did, the Doppelganger near me and the tot photographed the tot but it looked like i did because the tot was placed close to me (or the teen was placed close to me.
I think the truth of this, which breaks my eggs but makes, for others, an omelet, is MKULTRA and tied to high ranking CIA and Illuminati schemes and changing around rights to DNA since mismatches in who has various DNA is already mismatched by the CIA and I/luminati.
Zero Basis in Fact, Law, or Religion for claims to my genome A Protection Racket of enormous clout has been able to railroad me but the basics are that is is faked that I need a protection racket and once that racket is in place that same protection racket can fake claims against me and settle them for those other clientele the faked the claims on behalf of.
Zero Basis in Fact Or result in Law Zero Times Anything Under any theory of law failures in factual basis result in no counts under the law, fake cases don’t count.
After years of research I and this book series I am writing posit that Barack Obama was a product of Illuminati engineering contemplated since the World War I era Grifith Experiments, moving genes with bacteria by humans, as though God.
Born in LA of California, Obama’s secret history has been concealed only a few steps ahead of forensic science, first able to type Obama to his children in the 1990s then to world evolutionary history through immunology databases.
In fact this Pizzagate GEnomics connection is confirmed by Jen Moore and Linda Newkirk, the history of the Illuminati and Secret Identities the public is entitle to know about.
The murders I allege to coverup those secret identities are in some cases founded in the material witness list sometimes as deceased people and other times in crimes tied to the criminal enterprise but not a specific triggerman yet.
Manuscript Theft and URIs and ties to events in this book Uniform Resource Identifier ee eddonegan@yahoo.com | Amazon.com retailer of this epub since 5/27/2005 Archive.org This and other books and materials Wells Fargo.com configured to receive Amazon.com payments Youtube.com until merger with Google and EdInArlington@gmail.com and WWII videos under Yahoo ID Goddady.com and Political Rights.US Facebook and other simultaneous posts of WWII footage shot from me then uploaded to other media and this email also traveled under during that and other travel referenced in this book.
Bitchute Second Line Of Troops tribute to Jen Moore who also had a Bitchute channel about the day of her death This book Glorian Donegan I think it was Tunnel Road.
The LONDON KE FAMILY FOXP2 gene likely comes to me through Maria VonTrapp, Jen Moore Videos Explained In combining the Historical Kennedy, Von Trapp, Prince of Wales King Edward VIII, Wallis Simpson, Donegan, Kennedy, and Obama history I will refer to this Von Trapp article a few times.
Though money did not appear to be of concern to the family depicted in the movie, in real life the fortunes of the von Trapp family had faltered during the global depression of the early 1930s to the extent that at the time the film is set, most of the household servants had been dismissed and the family had begun taking in boarders.
Like the film, Maria and George were in fact married only a year after the novice arrived as governess.
I think when the first Captain Von Trapp wife died, and they had gone to London, and this famous show famiy was in London, Price Edward of Wales, later King Edward VIII of The Kings Speach, may have had a child or children in the 1920s London social environment, those children later placed eslewhere by the Illuminati, British, or Catholic Church.
The only thing that would be important is if the wearer alwasy kept then clean.
The region of Massachusetts Cape Code Bay, RCA and Joseph Kennedy working with King George V on reaching China with radio waves, etc., and Joseph Kennedy (father of John F Kennedy) ambassador to Great Britain in the 1930s and tied to British Military in family marriages.
Up into 1974 I am in that same area as is Glorian Donegan James Paul Donegan and Tom Donegan in Cape Cod.
APRIL 3, 2008 | UPDATED: NOVEMBER 17, 2018 David T Donegan of Lynnfield, APRIL 1 2008.
Florence M O’ Neil, 104, of Lynnfield and formerly of Everett, died on December 2, 2020 at the Rosewood Nursing Home as result of the Covid-19 virus.
Among other requirements, the trust document must state that it is intended to provide a disabled individual with supplemental and extra care over and above that which is provided by the government.
A trustee is typically a family member, friend, financial professional, bank, or other financial institution.
He also told them that he could not provide any further Links in QR Code JFK George Ball in Thorkill Kristensen work, Race and IQ around the world.
Meet at about 11 Links in QR Code JFK in Manhattan Beach California area Santa Monica California, stays with Lawford Shrivers family information because he had been sworn to secrecy.
Hornberger Chicago Church and Elementary School take on Barack Obama on behalf of Kennedys Trinity marks its beginning on December 3, 1961 Trinity United Church of Christ is a predominantly African-American church with more than 8,500 members.
I will cite extensive research from both public source of public information and also Wayne Madison, form NSA employee, and former United States Navy Officer who served anti missile system SOSUS at the Pafici Ocean Oregan location of Coos Bay.
I think it possible he detected ongoing rumors of the Birtherism study of Barack Obama by the Windsors and Kennedy’s, and that in that military conspiracy he might also have contacted or word somehow got to Lawrence McDonald, anti NWO type Congressperson from Georgia, also in the United States Navy though as a Urologist.
So do I I have never and will not harm them, but she creates through THEIR abuse of children I did it.
Obama married in 1954 and 1 ; had 2 children with his first wife, Wikipedia NAIROBI, KENYA — At least dozens of people were bummed to death in a Protestant church in western Kenya where they had taken shelter from tribal clashes sparked by a disputed vote that gave the president a second term, police and Red Cross sources said Tuesday, January 1.
Intelligence Agency’s 1950s and ’60s assassination attempts and mind control ; program, known as Project MKUltra.
Gottlieb retired from the CIA in 1972, saying that he did not believe his work had i been effective.
I believe Nation of Islam’s Malcom X familu line, my mothers, and my father’s DNA have been eliminated because they are tied to the Obamas.
THis is Opus Dei and genes techniques of HIspanic and Black Catholic Illumiinati.
Starting in 1999 or so a scheme has been operated most likely by the CIA and Secret Service or DIA that I am alleged peeping and an impersonator of me will confess to a white dominatrix and pay-iup-or-be-arrested shakedown of my genome will occur.
The ‘ only successful ditching of a wide-body airliner in history, the crash was , captured on video. oh Ethiopian Constitution The current Constitution of Ethiopia, which is the supreme law of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, came into force on 21 August 1995.
Two other young black * men that attended the same church-Larry Bland and Nate Spencer-were also | | | of each other, beginning in November 2007.
What links this story to Barack Obama is that, according to an acquaintance of 1 Obama, Larry Sinclair, Obama is a closet bisexual with whom he had sexual and . drug-related encounters in November 1999. : Further, Sinclair claims that Obama was friendly with at least two of these ; deceased parishioners, and that choir director Donald had contacted him shortly ; before being murdered from multiple gunshot wounds on DECEMBER 23, 2007.
By THE WASHINGTON TIMES Friday, November 4, 2011 Robin Copeland, a former ENERGY DEPARTMENT official who took part in several significant disarmament programs, died suddenly Sunday.
Copeland worked at the United States Embassy in Moscow for the Energy Department and [HUMAN GENOME PROGRAM ATOMIC TESTING PROGRAM] United States AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT from 1995 TO 1999 and from 2004 to 2006, respectively.
The 1987 Monroe-Woodbury High School graduate was honored Monday at an annual ceremony at CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., for the 90 agents who have been killed in the line of duty since the agency was founded in 1947. i | | ; That marked the first public disclosure of Wenzel’s CIA work.
Attendees said Obama’s talk focused on economic development and his foundation’s work.
Some historians have concluded that Russia had no plans involving India, as the Russians repeatedly stated to the British.
But their actions—including his father’s role as banker for Adolf Hitler—had tragic effects for the whole planet.
We will begin the George Bush story about a decade before his birth, on the eve of World War I We will follow the career of his father, Prescott Bush, through his arriage with Dorothy Walker, on the path to fortune, elegance and ower.
With the prospect that the U.S.A. would soon join the war, two Skull and Bones “Patriarchs” , Averell Harriman and Percy A Rockefeller (class of 1900), paid special attention to Prescott’s class of 1917.
Prescott Bush, by then a close friend of “Bunny” Harriman, ; and several other Bonesmen from their class of 1917 would later comprise the core partners in Brown Brothers Harriman, the world’s ; largest private investment bank.
William Rockefeller, treasurer of Standard Oil and brother of Standard founder John D Rockefeller, owned National City Bank (later “Citibank” ) together with Texas-based James Stillman.
Ammunition Section of the War Industries Board.@s2 The senior Bush : took national responsibility for government assistance to and relations © with Remington and other weapons companies. : This was an unusual appointment, as Prescott’s father seemed to have : no background in munitions.
Samuel Bush had been president of the F Buckeye Steel Castings Co. in Columbus, Ohio, makers of railcar parts.
In 1918, Samuel Bush became director of the Facilities Division of the War Industries Board.
He shouted a warning, suddenly drew his bolo knife, stuck it up as Mr and Mrs.
Bones Patriarch Wallace Simmons, closely tied to the arms manufacturers, offered Prescott Bush a job in his St.
The 1919 Versailles peace conference brought together British imperial strategists and their American friends to make postwar global arrangements.
Walker became the bank’s president and chief executive; Averell Harriman was chairman and controlling co-owner with his brother Roland , Prescott Bush’s close friend from Yale; and Percy Rockefeller was a director and a founding financial sponsor. i In the autumn of 1919, Prescott Bush made the acquaintance of Bert ' Walker’s daughter Dorothy.
Let us briefly look back at the beginning of i the Harriman firm—the Bush family enterprise—and follow its course into one of history’s darkest projects.
Harriman & Co., of which Walker was president and founder, was merging with the Morton & Co. private bank—and Walker was “rominent in the affairs of Morton & Co.,” which was interlocked » with the Morgan-controlled Guaranty Trust Co.
Bert’s son-in-law Prescott Bush was later secretary of the United States Golf Association, during the grave political and economic crises of the early 1930s.
We were the managing partners, let’s say.@s2@s0 | » But of the “three or four” partners in charge, Prescott was effectively at "" the head of the firm, because he had taken over management of the "" gigantic personal investment funds of Averell and E Roland “Bunny” Harriman.
Specter worked for Lyndon Johnson’s Warren Commission, which investigated the assassination of John F Kennedy, at the recommendation of Representative Gerald Ford, who was then one of the Commissioners.
Ford was born Leslie Lynch King Jr. on July 14, 1913, at 3202 Woolworth Avenue in Omaha, Nebraska, where his parents lived with his paternal grandparents.
He was the only child of Dorothy Ayer Gardner and Leslie Lynch King Sr., a wool trader.
Though never formally adopted, her young son was referred to as Gerald Rudolff Ford | Jr. from then on; the name change was formalized on December 3, 1935.
Arlen Specter Specter was born in Wichita, Kansas which was home to the Boeing B-29 and Stanley Armour Dunham ' Specter was an American lawyer, author and politician who served as a United States ' Senator from Pennsylvania from 1981 to 2011.
First elected in 1980, he is the longest-serving senator from 1 Pennsylvania, having represented the state for 30 years.
Specter later graduated from Yale Law School and opened ‘a law firm with Marvin Katz, who would later become a federal judge.
In 1965, Specter was elected District Attorney of Philadelphia, a position that he held until 1973.
These activities include THBOR, transplant tourism and trafficking in organs and tissues Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn was alleged to have been conspiring to arrange the sale of an Israeli citizen’s kidney for $160,000.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum told the cooperating witness that he had been involved in the illegal sale of kidneys for 10 years.
Anthropologist and organ trade expert Nancy Scheper-Hughes claimed that she had informed the FBI that Rosenbaum was “a major figure” in international organ smuggling 7 years ago, and that many of Rosenbaum’s donors had come from Eastern Europe.
In October 2011, Rosenbaum pleaded guilty to three counts of organ trafficking and one count of conspiracy.
During his 30-year Senate career, Specter staked out a spot in the political center.
He served as Chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee from 2005 to 2007.
In 2006, he was selected by Time as one of America’s Ten Best Senators Specter lost his 2010 re-election bid in the Democratic primary to former United States Navy vice admiral Joe Sestak, who then lost to Republican Pat Toomey in the general election.
Diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma in early 2005, he continued his work in the Senate while undergoing chemotherapy.
He died from complications of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma on October 14, 2012.
Specter was born in Wichita, Kansas, the youngest child of Lillie and Harry Specter, who grew up in the Bachkuryne village of Cherkasy Oblast, Ukraine.
FOXP2 and Ties to JFK, Obama, Worlds Fair Theft of DNA from Atomic Testing Guniepigs 1961JFK Assassination MKULTRA 1961 Seattle Worlds Fair Futurism If the speech defect of Speech Spasmodia can be corrected a black Windsor/Von Trapp could be a good leader in Pacific Rim IF a secret plant leader could be a test operation.
Mussolini, Hitler, JFK Library Boston Marathon Bombing MKULTRA erasing the history of MKULTRA and Obama Test Birth.
Ketracel White handed out by Illuminati via Bird Dogging to encourage, retain criminals army USA, Austrians under Freud, etc., are Genetics Resarchers.
Borderline Personality Disorder , Anterior Temporal Lobe (WWI War Injuries, brain mapping) Heading into WWI Genocide Vatican, others, begin rescues from rise of Nazism.
Von Trapps, others leave Austria for England devastate the Japanese cities of Nagasaki and Hiroshima during World War IT, work by splitting the nucleus of an atom.
Galactic Alliens must prevent detection of Galactic Alien (illuminati and CIA Vatican history, much wealth at risk “enlightened” Illuminati Earth overloards Oya anit Murders Criminal Enterprises bring RFLP, Mito genomics to black market, normalize it under shams.
A Secret of Honey Pots and Honey Traps >Pizzagate CIA Front Organizations (private, public) setup CIA money laundering of genetics rights.
He oversaw the creation of the agency’s Sex Offender Investigations Branch,formation of the National Sex Offender TARGETING Center 1961 1962 1963 Above 1997 Below CIA Black Budgets and Surrogate Entertainers, Gulliver the Impersonator of Ed seeing Dominatrixes, agreeing to “Children” MKULTRA CARTEL DARPA Long Range Future Planning Greatest Minds, Illuminati aka Gallactic Aliens Dr.
Our Earth allies are on the very brink of being able to put into effect their plans for Nichola Areas of the Earth targeted by Illuminati MKULTRA will receive peace bringing genomic medicine transforming the world into peace.
See Rise of Man, Elon Musk NASA Contractor, AI, Brain, South Africa Christian Motorcycle Association Hatfield Arkansas, USA, South Africa MENA Middle East North Africa 20 minutes Freeemasonry Littlerock Arkansas continue Free Mason, CIA, Vatican DNA plans to undermine racism, poverty Middle East North Africa MENA Airport CIA Drug Running Driscoll’s began in 1994 with the Hamden County Sheriff’s Department in Springfield, Massachusetts.
Use of interested politicians, building owners, etc., who will act duplicitously with me, including illegal or Abuse of Process (such as psychiatric commitment, hearings) in law and medicine.
I Roll, Scalia MKULTRA Behavioral Science Race and IQ, World Behavioral Science and Political Impact of it.
Click in this are for details Blackmailing impersonators of Biological Family of Obama for additonal genome rights, sabotaging me VIA faked worked at Salk Institute (Brain Program) and claimed victim of MKULTRA 2011 World Economy use of seized retirement assets.
Defense Intelligence Agency, DARPA, CIA, have heard of #WETWORKS Genomic Sciences and Family Origins, race and genetic familial legacies, Roll, compromising Scalia, Wales, photos | MKULTRA, which continues | Flynn and DIA DNA in all this.
Tom Donegan donated Glorian Donegan body for science to NIH PHS 2011, her death year Sweden, along with 19 other countries, signed the Convention founding the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development on 14 December 1960, thereby pledged its full dedication to achieving the Organisation’s fundamental aims.
And, this is another long story, but you have read enough of it by now to know something of the persecution in Sweden.
Obama Family Genes and Mito, Brain Corpus Christi cogs on sprocket 45 46 Roll,Scalia Comey, Seattle The Great Machine Ww JOHN GLENN JR. was a United States Marine Corps aviator, engineer, astronaut, businessman and politician.
Matthew GLEN Olsen is an American prosecutor and the former Director of the National Counter-terrorism Center 1961, 1997, Pizzagate creates retro mass hysteria RICO claims of Glorian Donegan DNA permission With the means in place DARPA CIA Vatican needs to seize my DNA the programs can continue IF circumstantial cases are faked and presented to MISREPRESENTATION of me and who racially hate me but claim to defense me.
All this ties to MKULTRA Birtherism and the Obama true genealogy Science is advancing on the Illuminati and now the events of 1961 can be retraced by the fear the CIA and Illuminati have of family databases and the advances in genetics.
Roll Scalia Wales Juge Roll Foreign Economies and IQ, Justice Scalia United States Economic-industrialCee Policy and IQ and Race Gearcogs The CIA and Vatican took on the issue of Race following WWII after failed attempts to kill Adolph Hitler.
This was also a potential solution to the race problem in the U.S., a subject of interest to Malcom X, JFK, and world economist futurists.
DNA 7 DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts. a he Concept 1 Children resemble their parents.
Genes for different traits are sorted ; separately from one another so that the inheritance of one trait is not dependent on . the inheritance of another. | | | | | | | | | | | i 3.
Genes, Race and Human History, contends that man races are a biological reality and that recent human evolution has led to racial differences in economic and social behavior.
Americans are allegedly more violent than whites, and why the Chinese may be good at | business.
Sarajevs Seg a caria Ital Montenegro i osove ‘ istanbul Apkaca Antowre taly ast 9 oe | Neeth Bice Macedonia vt J Turkey Barcelona eRome Tiranes ¥ Albania ne Greece itd alec a) Tytthat tat Saw hors FERRE MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Borderline Personality Disorder Maria Kutschera Von Trapp Kings Daughers 1926 London King Edward VIII Vatican, Wil Bill Donovan, Brits rescue Borderline Personality Disorder is poor regulation of working space, contextual brain activity.
As with Neuropathy nerves may not sense dryness or food for excretion of saliva, moisture, or hormones.
DARPA John F Kennedy (nationally moved out of office, assassination) Lyndon B Johnson Religious Movement tied, Jim Jones preacher DuPonts and military contracts (could be how James Donegan and GLorian Donegan met) DuPonts military contractors to Manhattan Manhattan Projects DuPonts of Bishopville employers of the Dew family my Project mother adopted into.
GLorian Donegans Ovum, Malcom X father creates Obama sleeper agent for Indonesia CIA, Catholics Little Rock Freemason Command and Control in Action, Seattle LA JFK objected to Rome, in Post Hawaii WWII Plan Free Masons Camp Robinson and Camp Pike “Dear Souls, as I understand it, Camp Robinson has a very great underground complex and as | understand it also, this is Satan’s world headquarters.
The password is, “I will splinter the CIA into a thousand pieces and scatter it into the wind,” a quote credited to President John F Kennedy.
It is my belief upon review of Obama at 2 years old, and normal, JFK agreed to him as a possible plant and groom for future espionage against the Communism, but decided against wider Free Masons plot.
May have an interst in seizing White Supremacist or CCR5 or other DNA from White Supremacist without giving bragging rights to White Supremacist, and even take the White Supremacist down a notch by defaming allegations of harming children and women made against the White Supremacist May be backed by Rod Rosesntein on history of civil rights, and asset seiuzres for Public Health Service, who has gay black male Surgeon General.
I allege Marshalls and others of taking photos from afar of victims near me.
Lifelong Conspiracy Against My Rights/Criminal Harassment Under Color Of Law gangstalk which has destroyed 40 years of my life, my fathers entire life (all he fought for lived for) and the same of my mother who was put through the exact type of gang stalk methods for 40 years of her life, which I watched helplessly, not helping her enough for fear I myself would be hit with more racism charges.
MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Pizzagate Cogwheel (extortion over 17 year olds, tots photography discovered by audlt models allowed under the law) Explicit illegal acts in my vicinity by | Non explicit out of place Me in clear Cople of Doppelganger which will be | indications, intonations, but _| text attempting fused to real me by in-explicate overlays with clear text, odd __| to decode, reference.
MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Cape Cod Cogwheel Irish Mafia and Liquor dealing in both Donegan and JFK families Donegans | Kennedys Military Triad in both Donegans and Kennedy Families Martha’s Vineyard and Clintons This book Great Machine Foreign Economy MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Civilian Legal System Assassinations.
Spanish Illuminati who tend the world’s animal kingdom Sperm Donor, Telomere Donor, Ovum Donor, and gays.
Thomas C Wales United States DOJ Attorney, Died October 11, 2001 Seattle, Washington United States Wales was born in Boston, Massachusetts 1952 Wales was a graduate of Milton Academy, where he roomed with Joseph Patrick Kennedy IT, the son of Robert F Kennedy.
Boston, Massachusetts, United States Likely aware of family rumors or knowledge of a black experimental child which was in the White House nursery around 1961, say November 24th, tied to civil rights efforts World Economies The future of and (biological } Genetics.
ASSETS SEIZURES | wih a FORWARD pine LOOKING (INTO CIRCUMSTANTIAL | tHR FUTURE OF EVIDENCE, NOT GENETICS) PROOF, from RULING we can begin to ignore and deny racial gaps, they are closing so keep them out of case law.
Savings and Trusts From elsewhere in the book repeated here 7 DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts. ""es Concept 1 Children resemble their parents.
President Barack Obama walks out of the Oval Office in 2011 with Princeton labor economist Alan B Krueger, whom he announced as a top White House economist.
This book Great Machine Domestic Economy In local politics county prosecutors seizing assets for police and community when community is violated on a Civil Rights basis I believe Kamala Harris, Mark Gonsalzes Gregg Abbott (religion, nueral cells, God and CIA) Trump $ business associates, moved into place, people like JFK, Judge Roll, Justice Illuminati | Scalia, James Comey illuminated or moved out.
Magistrate Fifth B Janice Ellington moved in Column Pizzagate will assist the CIA and DARPA in this.
A Domina Sex Worker may be part of catching Tx or punishing or treating Tx for Tx wrongdoing.
MICHAEL GRAHAM Boston Herald and copied or modified to here There is a young person held captive in Massachusetts today who is not allowed to participate in religious ceremonies, or visit family without government agents watching.
It’s 15-yearold mitochondrial disease patient and nonterrorist Justina Pelletier.
That was Jennifer Pelletier’s response when I told her ; about the ruling.
She’s Justina’s older sister and every visit she has with her * wheelchair-bound sister is held under the watchful eye of agents from both the , state’s Department of Children and Families and since the story went national ‘ armed state police.
The family is only allowed one visit a week, for one hour a ' week, with their own sick daughter.
Thursday morning Jennifer Pelletier asked a representative of DCF why the family couldn’t take Justina to Easter Mass this Sunday.
My theory on DARPA and the MKULTRA history of my family is that Obama was built out of Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 DNA from my mother, and this is the Birther issue.
Mitochondrial Uisorder ts a disease of the mitochondria, “the powerhouse of the cell,” which generates the energy that powers cell and organ function.
Mitochondrial Disorder can sometimes be diagnosed with DNA testing and muscle biopsy.
ARTICHOKE Gene Expresion includes problems with fine motor control, writing, tying shoes, swallowing ARTICHOKE Gene Expression tied to poor executive function, seeing sort of with two minds, watching intellectually but not regulating intellectually, Borderline symptom, thus going to far to one side but perhaps correcting again intellectually later Espionage via Infiltration of Behavioral Health I can not get genuine legal or medical representation or services in the United States of America.
Clearly outmatched, — oa the authorities call for “Sky Captain” Joe Sullivan, the city’s hero, Perkins’ former lover, and the commander of the private air force the Flying Legion.
They find a secret subterranean facility in a mountain, where robots are loading animals, as well as the mysterious vials, onto a large “Noah’s Ark” rocket.
Barack Obama Jr., secretly Glorian Donegan ovum used along with Malcom X fertilization, thus the Shabazz family and Obama children Kennedy’s, Shrivers, Lawfords, Schwarzeneggers, , Katherine Schwarzenegger Borderline Personality Disorder born DEC 13, Pelletiers, possibly both Albert Einstein and Adolph Hitler, most of all of whom are tied to Manhattan Beach and Cape Code Massachusetts, Mary Caitrin Mahoney, Rose Marie “Rosemary” Kennedyg® Robert Kennedy Jr.
Herman Edward Butts, HEB, Ambassador to Australia 1961, Christian Hill Country Lodge, Joseph Kennedy, Ambassador England 1920s The United States Mothers of World Disaster CIA, DARPA, MKULTRA, Defense Intelligence Agency, Secret Service, FBI, The Bible, Free Masons, | the youngest of three children, flunked the second grade but worked hard ‘catch up and by the sixth grade was accepted into the McDonogh School.
She rought home report cards full of A’s and “an arsenal of great friends,” recalled er brother, Patrick Mahoney.
As food moves through your GI tract, your digestive organs break the food into smaller parts using: motion, such as chewing, squeezing, and mixing digestive juices, such as stomach acid, bile, and enzymes e Mouth.
Saliva also has an enzyme that begins to break down starches in your food. e Esophagus.
After you swallow, peristalsis pushes the food down your esophagus into your stomach. e Stomach.
Muscles of your stomach mix the food with these digestive juices. e Pancreas.
The pancreas delivers the digestive juice to the small intestine through small tubes called ducts. e Liver.
Bile ducts carry bile from your liver to your gallbladder for storage, or to the small intestine for use. e Gallbladder.
When you eat, your gallbladder squeezes bile through the bile ducts into your small intestine. e Small intestine.
Your small intestine also absorbs water with other nutrients. e Large intestine.
Your blood carries simple sugars, amino acids, glycerol, and some vitamins and salts to the liver.
With the phony permissions to my DNA, Glorian’s DNA in place, at the time of her death in 2011, now the DNA could be used around the world to fix the Thorkil Kristensen George Ball Malcom X Premise, that world IQ gains would lead to peaceful existance and prosperity.
My detention included a formal forensic evaluation to collecte evidence as to whether i was mentally competent at the time of the alleged offense as well as at the time of NY MCC detention thus whether I was competent for trail following the arrest.
He said fine, just simply overloaded on amphetamines which caught up with me, I seemed fine now.
Adam Lanza DECEMBER 14 Newton 2 subject matter retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | r~ lanza presented with developmental challenges before the age of three.
When Joan and Clay } Blair attempted to write a biography of Kennedy, they ran into walls of secrecy concerning his health and it is uncertain what exactly was wrong.
Crispell and Gomez , write that their father, Joseph Kennedy Sr., a powerful businessman and former ; ambassador, pulled strings to get John into the service as his health record would ‘ have kept him out.
It is well known that Kennedy’s boat, PT-109, was sunk and Kennedy was able ; to lead the surviving crew to safety.
In ' later years, Kennedy and his aides would state that Kennedy had contracted ‘ malaria during his tour of duty.
Kennedy had the symptoms of Addison’s disease, a disorder of the adrenal glands.
Thomas Addison, who described the disease, reported that sufferers exhibited lethargy, loss of appetite, pain in the stomach and discolored skin.
In earlier years, a diagnosis of Addison’s was generally a death sentence, however, in 1939, a compound called desoxycorticosterone acetate was developed and this compound could substitute for the adrenal hormones lost to the disease.
At first, DOCA was injected into patients; later, pellets could be implanted into the back or thighs.
He had been ‘ elected to Congress the previous year and traveled to England.
He became ill and "" asked Pamela Churchill, a family friend to get a doctor.
However, Kennedy rallied and was able to return home where he was taken to l the Lahey Clinic and came under the care of Elmer Bartels, a specialist in thyroid i conditions.
Bartels began the DOCA pellets, which had to be replaced every » three months.
Doctors at Lahey advised against it; Addisonians have a weakened resistance to infection.
An A infection set in and the situation seemed so grave that Kennedy was given the i last rites of the Catholic Church, but he rallied.
Wilson later wrote about the operation in the journal Archives of Surgery.
The furor died down and Kennedy was able to win the i nomination and later the presidency. i Crispell, Kenneth R and Carlos F Gomez.
LEGEND A spy’s claimed background or biography, usually supported by documents and memorized details and seeming facts such as statements by others, etc., The Medical State Usage Those who have enough power and high enough office can abuse power and frame their already victims with more illegal acts PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE The term psychological warfare is believed to have migrated from Germany to the United States in 1941.
This book Espionage Section and arbitrary prurient infiltration of apparently illegal subcultures on pretexts as pretext for Lascivious behavior Subversion by State Sponsored Guerillas Warfare.
Subversion by State Sponsored Guerillas Warfare Air Balloon <qum gangStalkes interfere with of Life filling balloon with new | opportunity Street Thugs and Gueurilla | Warfare Mob and drag down Stalk existing air Victim This history of events leading up to the Paradise Valley Fire may not seem much but fit a pattern of innocent Ittle facts that seem to emerge before real disasters hit, and this book, I, see enough of a pattern to believe an extensive deep state exists at work in at least some matters I deem as suspicious.
Detlev Karsten Rohwedder (16 October 1932, Gotha APRIL 1 1991, DiisseldorfNiederkassel) was a German manager and politician.
On Monday, April 1, 1991, at 23:30, Rohwedder was shot and killed through a window on the second floor of his house in the suburb of Diisseldorf-Niederkassel (Kaiser-FriedrichRing 71) by the first of three rifle shots.
The shots were fired from 63 m away from a rifle with 7.62*51mm NATO standard calibre, the same rifle that was used during a sniper attack on the American embassy in February committed by the Red Army Faction, a West German far-left terrorist group.
The shots were fired from 63 m away from a rifle with 7.62*51mm NATO standard calibre, the same rifle that was used during a sniper attack on the American Embassy on FEBRUARY 13, 1991 committed by the Red Army Faction, a West German far-left terrorist group. there had been warnings to Paradise city planners that they were not including study results in new plans.
The legends of King Arthur retrieved from British Library UK and copied or modified to here me Damsels in distress.
This is the world of Arthurian legend and, at the centre of it all, there is 1 tthe « once and future king’ Arthur himself, who, according to the stories, pulled a sword ; from a stone to become the greatest king that Britain has ever known.
Shalott’; and, more recently, Disney and Hollywood have turned their hand to Camelot.
Bush and his maternal grandfather George Herbert Walker, and their family’s circle of : friends.
In 1954, Zapata Off-Shore Company was formed as a subsidiary of Zapata Oil, with i Bush as president of the new company.
He raised some startup money from Eugene ' Meyer, publisher of the Washington Post, and his son-in-law, Philip Graham.
Before | leave this high Yale male)e) sa(aom | intend to expose this plot.” President John F Kennedy 7 days before his assasination This morning, >WikiLeaks tweeted the decryption passphrase for the CIA Vault 7 leak.
The video focuses on Kennedy’s relationship with Cuba prior to his assassination by Lee Harvey Oswald and discusses Operation Northwoods, a proposed false flag operation against the Fidel Castro regime, that originated within the United States Department of Defense.
JONG www.jacobinmag.com : and copied or modified to ; here | | | In its search for the perfect ; mind-control technique, the ' CIA carried out horrifying ' tests on unwitting humans.
Reason In Revolt Jacaobin Magazine Will the quest for | Mind Control harden soldiers against interogation or improve large populations IQ to increase learnedness _and economic productivity, undermning conmunism and reducing \retardation Ed Donegan The way Kinzer tells the story, Gottlieb was itching to contribute his skills to this ' research.
The Central Bank increased the money supply to pay for the increasing deficit.
PSYOP Soldiers are regionally aligned and develop crossultural competence in the areas they study and deploy to. e Foreign Language Proficiency Pay e Specialized and advanced training in social media, marketing and other communication techniques e Unique missions in varied interagency environments e 30 Days of vacation per year ¢ Complete medical and dental care e Enhanced leadership skills Crisis Actors motorcycles peek into the adult pools and childrens room of Golds Gym.
AT the pais peas there tute teen several dopgle trikes wed of my mowercy ce.
Mine is the bike yo the peas, Ther ee equiped very waretanty crt dual arreaters eta, etc This motorcycle and its motorcyclist is pursued to some location like this which LOOKS like my apartment, a long con set, and people like these will claim its rider really was Edward Donegan and their children or women were harmed by Edward Donegan.
How Espionage Agencies Operate and the Capabilities They Have Infiltration Paid Gangstalk of Seeming Normal Citizens Core Elements of Gangstalk Targeting of Individuals or Organizations Agent Provocatuer Targeted Individual Dispossessor.
In my case those who might benefit from claims against a (now, after years of racial assaults on me) White Supremacist and White Seperatist are in the roles of Agent Provocatuers and fake being me as they commit offensive acts upon the public or their own planted victims.
Set Punishment is use of Ed Donegan DNA Real Edward Paul Donegy Restart Music — Phone Touches Forger Rx Cheryl Lloyd Friendly sounds like a Highlander Motel operator friendly to the Christ Lloyd family tied to Genenetch.
Through the Operation Goodwill program, forfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other community-based public health and safer programs.
Writing fake speeding tickets in a speed trap Alleged harm to comminty children the “trap” The police read to prosecute the fake ed on hehalf of Social Servics and the District Attorney, With sufficient Due Process violations such as those who benefit from fake claims as the arbiter of claims, rather than the Targeted Individal defending him or her self, the racket is setup were Bird Dogging frame jobs on the Targeted Individual are sponsored, paid for by the espionage agency out of the targeted vicims siezed assets.
A show of force by PsyOps like crisis actors show when I am in the vicinity I (or my motorcycle) will never be the REAL PEEPER they are on the hung for ever again.
After the 1980 divorce my mother continued to use them and I saw what I now know to be a Gangstalk at that location but I do not know if Four Wheel Brake was complicit.
There was a person, a relative of my boss Greg Roll, who was preplanned to replace me.
Mayorkas delivered the Oath of Office ' to John Tien, the new Deputy Secretary ' of the Department of Homeland ' Security.
June 28, 2021 : “John Tien is a retired United States Army Colonel whose distinguished military career spanned 1 24 years, and someone who knows what it means to truly safeguard our Nation,” said i Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro N Mayorkas.
He previously served in the Obama Administration as | the National Security Council Senior Director for Afghanistan and Pakistan, the Bush , Administration as the National Security Council Director for Iraq, and the Clinton | i Administration as a White House Fellow in the Office of the United States Trade Representative.
For the next 24 years, he served as a United States Army combat arms officer, retiring in i 2011 at the rank of Colonel.
To call himself my adviser would be a great stretch, it3 | i | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | , Clarridge operated a “private spying operation ... from poolside at his home near San | | | i | | | | | | i | | | | | | | | | I Clarridge died at the age of 83, a week short of his 84th birthday in Leesburg, Virginia on 1 April 9, 2016 from complications of esophageal cancer.
The order’s emblem is a garter with the motto Honi soit qui mal y pense A satin weave is a type of fabric weave that produces a characteristically glossy, smooth or lustrous material, typically with a glossy top surface and a dull back.
It is one of three fundamental types of textile weaves alongside plain weave and twill i weave.
This was intended as a direct contrast to the vivid cover artwork of the band’s previous ; LP Sgt.
Paul McCartney and John Lennon] : They say it’s your birthday 1 Well, it’s my birthday too, yeah They say it’s your birthday : We’re gonna have a good time ; I’m glad it’s your birthday I ‘ 1 Happy birthday to you t \ | | | I I | | | I I I | | I | I | Lady Bugs : The Coccinellidae family is commonly known as ladybugs in North America and ladybirds in Great Britain and other parts of the English-speaking world.
Studios and recorded a cover version using Darlene Love and the Blossoms on lead ' vocals.
By the time “He’s a Rebel” went to number 1, Lester Sill was out of the company, and ee ee ee ee a a a ee i Spector had Philles all to himself.
Secretary (barely visible), Black Rod, Garter Principal King of Arms, Register, Prelate, Chancellor.
Clarkson’s work in Deathstalker led to her being offered the title role in 1 Corman’s next film, Barbarian Queen , a role Corman referred to as “the original a Xena” because of the parallel in featuring a strong female leading character in an i action-oriented sword-swinging role.
February 20 November 18 Dec 13 e Non Independence Day from England and Free Masons: June 7 July 4 Aug 4 April 1 POSSIBLE CLONES EXAMOLES Roy Marcus Cohn was an American lawyer who came to prominence for his role as Senator Joseph McCarthy’s chief counsel during the Army McCarthy hearings in 1954, when he assisted McCarthy’s investigations of suspected communists.
DECEMBER 17 1966, Son Trip Wray James DiEugenio Notables THE ASSASSINATIONS: PROBE lpn MAGAZINE ON JFK, MLK, RFK AND MALCOLM X “Throughout the ‘90s, Lisa Pease and Jim DiEugenio covered the issues and reported on new developments in the JFK, MLK and RFK assassination cases in remarkable depth.
THE REAL lpn HISTORY OF THE ASSASSINATION OF ROBERT F KENNEDY In A Lie Too Big to Fail, longtime Kennedy researcher Lisa Pease lays out, in meticulous detail, how witnesses with evidence of conspiracy were silenced by the Los Angeles Police Department; how evidence was deliberately altered and, in some instances, destroyed; and how the justice system and the media failed to present the truth of the case to the public.
DiEugenio updates all of the topics that he introduced in 1992 with the first edition of Destiny Betrayed.
TOM HANKS, ~ «: VINCENT BUGLIOSI, AND THE JFK ASSASSINATION IN THE NEW HOLLYWOOD New foreword by J.F.K. director Oliver Stone Reclaiming Parkland details the failed attempt of Academy Award-winning actor Tom Hanks and producer Gary Goetzman to make Vincent Bugliosi’s mammoth book about the Kennedy assassination, Reclaiming History, into a miniseries.
BATTLEGROUND ,: INDONESIA For those interested in the assassination of JFK, the untold story of Indonesia, gold, JFK, Allen Dulles, the CIA, and secret military coups.
Two of the most fascinating figures in history, John F Kennedy, thirty-fifth president of the United States, and Allen Dulles, our nation’s longest-serving CJA director, often clashed over intelligence issues and national security.
The story of the film stems from the failed attempt of Academy Award-winning actor Tom Hanks and producer Gary Goetzman to make Vincent Bugliosi’s mammoth book about the Kennedy assassination, Reclaiming History, into a miniseries.
This can be gotten on the internet. Kurt Meisel he Battle of Midway was an epic clash between the United States Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy that played out six months after the attack on Pearl Harbor.
These “Galactic Aliens” are Illuminati Overlords, most likely in joking self reference, but university professors, et., in DARPA connected networks, etc., including Stone Masons and Free Masonry plans.
Between 1958 and 1963, when NASA (the successor agency to NACA) started Project Mercury, LaRC served as the main office of the Space Task Group.
Opus Dei Founding Dates ¢ in WWI Spain is unaligned and reports on the world pandemic later called the Spanish Flu for its Spanish news sourced reporting.18 is a deadly year. e In 1928 Griffith Experiments shows bacteria can be used to alter the genetics associated with the pandemic e Opus Dei was founded by a Catholic priest, Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer, on 2 October 1928 in Madrid, Spain.
The Opus Dei Lay Miracle capability meets a need, repairing certain defects targeted by Nazist genocide. 1944 e Jn 1944 the Anterior Temporal Lobe is found to me tied to abstract thinking including social abstractions during the course of war neurological injury deficits studies and the experimental inquiries by Heider and Simmel.
During this Foture Cardinal Ratzinger meets Nazi’s also tired of Nasim and Genocide. e Spanish bio chemist Ortiz de Landazuri began her career as a teacher. one day at Mass in Madrid in 1944, she felt something that she interpreted as being a sign from God.
Ratzinger in German Lueftwaffe as on 20 NOVEMBER 1944 was discharged from Flak, the unit he was drafted into, the anti-aricraft corps which defended BMW plants.
Interested in craftsmanship, weaving, and the role of women in cottage industries, Dunham’s research focused on women’s work on the island of Java and blacksmithing in Indonesia. e Century 21 and the BOEING Spacearium, Seattle, WA and the Space Needle and Monorail, April 21, 1962, to October 21, 1962.
The English Windsor Royals attend as do the Kennedys e 1961 The Kings Daughters Hospital is founded in Norfolk Virginia, also a United States Navy center.
The scientists hope their work could be used to create organs for transplants and teach us more about human development and disease progression.
The Caine Mutiny, The Country Girl, Dial M for Murder, On the Waterfront, Rear Window, Sabrina, A Star is Born, and my personal favorite Seven Brides for Seven Brothers were movies that came out that year.
February 20 1961 to February 2 1961 to Stanley Anne Dunham (a female) Indonesian Peace Corps USAID daughter to Hawaii CIA Madelyn Dunhman, CIA) was three months pregnant at marriage turned to August 2 Birth.
Change Stanley Anne Dunham WEDS Barack Obama Sr marriage/concieve from February 20 to February 2_ 2.
Move birth from Los Angeles Manhattan Beach, famous, JFK there, Famous, to Hawaii, trusted by Indonesia Calculating In Anonymity February 2/20/1961 +9 to 11 minus 3 months is August February 20 1961 Edward Paul Donegan 11/18/1961 February 2_ 1961 Marriage Certificate for Barack Obama Sr to Dunham, birth Certificate 8/4/1961 Hawaii I say November 18 1961 Los Angeles Manhattan Project, Glorian Donegan and Malcom X biological parents.
Muslim Malcom X, or even Annuki (evil British Royals who in slavery stole Ethiopian DNA for White usage.
After the fertilised egg , undergoes embryo culture for 2-6 days, it is implanted in the same or another woman’s uterus, with the intention of establishing a successful pregnancy.
IVF is a type of assisted reproductive technology used for infertility treatment and gestational surrogacy.
Some countries banned or otherwise regulate the availability of IVF treatment, giving rise to fertility tourism In 1961 the IVFinig of Barack Obama and Ed Donegan.
For me, the father is James P Donegan, for Barack Obama, the father Malcom X Futurist Thorkil Kristensen meets with John F Kennedy Feb 20 1961 Feb 20 Source of Ovum Woman Sperm | Fertilized Eva Ban delivered Child by Zygote James P Glorian {Malcom Monday, February 20, 1961 February 20, 1961 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Co operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am in the Oval Office.
While Affleck had high SAT scores, he was largely an unfocused student with poor ; attendance.
Hyderabad, India for a semester under the Richter research abroad program to explore 1 connections between maternal and child health and improved water access.
In 1958, Occidental became one of the first schools to participate in the Crossroads i Africa program, a privately financed precursor of the Peace Corps that sent students to ' underdeveloped African nations to help develop needed infrastructure.
They had stopped about 12 miles outside the Kenyan capital of Nairobi along the road, awaiting the arrival of a friend who was going to lead them to his home.
This is the same time frame the Obama children are [VFd The Newkirk Mountain Prophecies begin in 1997 as a man in a white lab coat describes what can be done for Autistics “lambs,” and low IQ blacks below the Saharan desert longtitudinal line.
Cremated immediately, ashes dispersed Michael Cormier respected forensic technician for the Los Angles County Coroner died under suspicious circumstances at his North Hollywood home April 20, the same day Andrew Breitbart’s cause of death was finally made public.
As the opening speaker at a rally protesting Occidental’s r investments in companies that were doing business in apartheid South Africa, he stood r with one hand in his pocket, spoke in declarative spurts, and showed no sign of being the 1 orator who would become President nearly twenty-eight years later.
BHO was created from Edward Paul Donegan-intended IVF DNA of James Paul Doegan and Glorian Donegan.
The plan continues to distribute my DNA to create close Obama relatives all through Africa, which is where Irish genes seem to emanate from.
Thus this is also an embezzlement story, or, as Jen Moore AKA Task Force called it, a Black Budgets story.
LZ BBs:/en. wikipedia.org wiki/CLA_crypionym CIA cryptonyms are code names or code words used by the United States Central Intelligence Agency to refer to projects, operations, persons, agencies, etc.
Here ere some links concerning Coemn's bochkground thet nay be of Interest.
I think there Is legitimate concern aver the necclbility that Ghasa’s career aay have been I was born on November 18 1961 and likely IVF date was February 20 1961.
Cryptic Names Casper (the friendly ghost, Casper was a street person with long felon record hired as a CIA backed alleged pimp to me as were also the following,) Don Johnson, Harvey Dent, and others, or these blacks were Marshalls who caught alleged activity which is staged in my vicinity but vouched for by those CIA backed people asking impersonators to confess to.
Macro View”, by Robert Lusch, who articulated key themes of human, societal and : marketing evolution, and challenges marketing scholars to consider ways to reduce costs ; inflicted by prolific human activity, particularly exchange.
More information channels, more competing medis outlets. and the intemet are overcoming the stranglehold on information Intelligence anti Race exchange and avatability Hollywood and the MSM can not decide anymore what we perceive about our world, and the information Age makes available unfitered raw data and Infarmation to everyone.
The Bel Curve frulticukuraiam, some of the most important and hatly contested issues of today Race ant Personally Race does exist Among the three major evolutionary genetic groups there are Negroes (Negroids,} who first evalved in Africa.
Caucasians who migrated from Africa Nortti West Into Europe, and Asians who Crintinal Justice migrated from Africa North East mo Asia.
In the past epoch, man was concemed with death, high mortality; his attitudes were antideath, antidisease”, he says.
Francis Collins, Barack Obama, and others at t he Saulk Institute brain program. a Ue Computational Neurobiology Laboratory Jim Inhofe < United Sta ator © inhofe.senate.gov James Mountain Inhofe is an American politician serving as the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma, a seat he was first elected to in 1994.
Tools About 94,200 tesulis Petry Inbofe Obituary | Perry Inhofe Funeral | Legacy.com www legacy,.comn/ns/peryinhofe-obituary/167060709 © Or, Peery iebofe, # 52-year orihopedic sor gqeon, (had Wher Ue wireall Monn Pe wes pikotinyy craahed Suday Neer Cvbbid & Tulse duburd Col.
Peery inhete filed a wrongtul death Gewsurt Tusmsttay in the sake ot the 2013 plane crash that killed hint De. inhale was fing o tytt-engine Meteubesty MU 28:25 which he had recenty bought when the plane crashed in Owasso on November 10,2012 NTS8 Releases Final Report On Plane Crash That Killed Dr.
Peery Inhofe, Gon OF Sem Jie inhole, Kited in Ocusio toe kvhotw s |nvcevernsent &) avteton males it Goctly tragic that tes son De.
Nazi Bunkers in Antarctica Alex Kirkpatrick When thinking about Hitler and Nazi Germany most people can think of at least one conspiracy theory they have heard about.
One of the caves was particularly large and was tured into a large city that would be home to both Nazi’s and other powerful groups, like the illuminati.
Australia, Racing Heath Andrew Ledger was an Australian actor and music video director.
But what about Rain Joan of Arc Phoenix born NOVEMBER 21, 1972) an American actress, musician, and singer.
Arlyn Sharon Phoenix (née Dunetz; born December 31, 1944), commonly known as Heart Phoenix, is an American social activist and mother of actors River, Rain, Joaquin, Liberty, and Summer Phoenix.
The film explores the relationships of four sets of siblings who have not (in one case, never) had contact for some time.
This book This Dispossession of both Standing and Worth of a Targeted Individual applies to both Money Laundering Rackets and Espionage so appears both places in this book The status of figures in 2004 GOERGE W.BUSH George Walker Bush is an American politician and businessman who served as the 43rd president of the United States from 2001 to 2009.
Bush from 1992 to 1993. wa Card announced his resignation as Chief of Staff on March 28, 2006, effective April 14, 2006.
ALBERTO R GONZALES White House Counsel to January 20, 2001 February 3, 2005, Attorney General February 3, 2005 September 17, 2007 Alberto R Gonzales (born AUGUST 4, 1955 in San Antonia is an American lawyer who served as the 80th United States Attorney General, appointed in February 2005 by President George W Bush, becoming the highest-ranking Hispanic American in executive government to date.
Following calls for his removal, Gonzales resigned from the office “in the best interests of the department,” on August 27, 2007, effective September 17, 2007.
Gonzales won his election bid to remain on the court in the Republican Primary in 2000, and was subsequently elected to a full six-year term on the State Supreme Court in the November 2000 general election.
JOHN DAVID ASHCROFT 79TH UNITED STATES ATTORNEY GENERAL IN OFFICE FEBRUARY 2, 2001 FEBRUARY 3, 2005 REPLACED BY ALBERTO GONZALES LATER] John David Ashcroft is an American lawyer, lobbyist, songwriter and former politician who served as the 79th United States Attomey General , in the George W Bush Administration.
He lost his bid for reelection in 2000 to Mel Camahan, who died a few days before the election.
JAMES BRIEN COMEY JR James Brien Comey Jr. ( born DECEMBER 14, _1960) is an American lawyer who was the 7th director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in May 2017.
His role in the 2016 US. presidential election was highly controversial.
ROBERT SWAN MUELLER II BORN AUGUST 7 , 1944) Robert Swan Mueller III (/‘mAldr/; born August 7, 1944) is an American lawyer and government official who served as the sixth director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2001 to 2013 thus serving during Ashcroft and Gonzales led Justice Departments.
Salon.com and copied or modified to here |) The call came at 8m., Wednesday, March 10, 2004.
I ; hung up, called Director Mueller and — with whom I’d ; been discussing this particular matter and had been a great help to me * over that week — and told him what was happening.
He said, ‘I’l] meet » you at the hospital right now.’ told my security detail that I needed to * get to George Washington Hospital immediately.
And that was my concern.” + © [om Truly remarkable. a i cl Q An agent provocateur quoting Wikipedia is a person who commits or who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in partaking in an illegal act, so as to ruin the reputation or entice legal action against the target or a group they belong to.
History and etymology While the practice is worldwide anciently, modern undercover operations were scaled up in France by Eugene Francois Vidocg in the early 19th century, and already included use of unlawful tactics against opponents.
The combination of corrupt police bullying of me for what their Agent Provocateurs have done has been especially offensive to me because I am an upstanding law abiding intelligent person, and thus it is unjust, and also it is unjust because this covers State abuses against my parents who also gave and risked so much on behalf of the USA including Atomic Blast Exposure, miiltary USO and DOD service.
Edward treated as a Donegan’s DNA pays the bill person who is a “for the pornography” to avoid | risk to women arrest. and the perp in the area.
After years of emphasizing informant recruiting as a key task for its agents, the bureau now maintains a roster of 15,000 spies-many of them tasked, as Hussain was, with infiltrating Muslim communities in the United States.
This I think made it look like I had “taken a picture of my pornography” who would then be allocated insemination by me in Espionage created misrepresentation of me who claimed but did not have my approval for my DNA usage.
I called this the Play To Pause Attack of when women were near me. e Criminal Misrepresentation e HUMINT Doppelgangers of me or Long Con fake witness, fake locations, etc., e Abuse of Psychiatry upon fights being initiated against me, I am blamed for the fight and COINTELPRO hack anti white supremacist Psychiatrist teams diagnose me not as a matter of reality but openly expressed racial abusiveness.
Multiple Times alleging retardation, etc., in DOD PsyOps DOD Psychiatry staffed facilities.
From 1998 to 2001, Johnson was general counsel of the Department of the Air Force under President Bill Clinton. | | i | | | i i | | | | i i | : Air Force General Counsel In 1998, Johnson was appointed General ; ; Counsel of the Air Force by President Bill Clinton after confirmation by ; ; the United States Senate.
Bitpsen wikipedia.org wikiGrithe2 7S_experiment ips added 5 Griffith’s experiment discovering the “transforming principle” in pneumococcus bacteria.
From ; 2002 to 2003 there were 66 sessions held with 32 witnesses from Madrid being 1 called to provide evidence and interrogatories while another week-long session in , mid-2003 in Mexico saw 22 witnesses giving evidence in support of Ortiz de 1 Landazuri’s virtues in 37 sessions.
The C.C.S. later received all the documents 1 gathered during that process in 2005 AND ; VALIDATED THE PROCESS LATER ON 17 FEBRUARY 2006.
In 1932, they returned to Spain and lived in Madrid where her father was i named Lieutenant Colonel), and Guadalupe finished high school at the Instituto 1 Miguel de Cervantes.
Ortiz de Landazuri eventually pursued a doctorate since she wanted to teach chemistry at the university level. at Mass in 1944, she felt something that she interpreted as being a sign from God.
Ortiz de Landdzuri returned home to consult with a friend and expressed a desire to speak with a priest.
That friend gave her the phone number of a well-known priest ' SAINT JOSEMARIA ESCRIVA and Ortiz de Landdzuri met Escriva for the first "" time on 25 January 1944.
In a second experiment we assessed the putative roles of the ATLs in the processing of narratives and theory of mind content and found , evidence for a role of the ATLs in the processing of theory of mind but not narrative ‘per se.
The canonization this week will draw at least 250,000 | y Spectators to Rome ’ Saint Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer y The Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, affiliated with Opus Dei, was founded on Sunday, 14 FEBRUARY 1943.
Escriva relocated to Rome during Gal > Saint Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer y Albas was a Spanish Roman Catholic priest who founded Opus Dei, an organization of laypeople and priests dedicated to the teaching that everyone is called to holiness by God and that ordinary life can result in sanctity.
Nationalism, Zionism and Ethnic Mobilization of the Jews in 1900 and Beyond 1St Edition by Prof Michael Berkowitz This volume engages diverse topics such as art, music, and radio broadcasting in the development of modern Jewish nationalism by leading scholars in their respective fields.
It examines how nationalism has worked in theory and practice for Jews and at times been fiercely resisted.
Delphine Bechtel; Nachman BenYehuda; Michael Berkowitz; Inka Bertz; Philip Bohlman; John M Efron; Richard A Freund; Francois Guesnet; Michael L6wy; Barbara Mann; Derek Penslar; James Renton; Aviel Roshwald; Joshua Shanes.
Foundation X On 19 FEBRUARY 2012, Lord James of Blackheath’s produced revelations concerning reports of 15 trillion dollars (reportedly backed by 750,000 tonnes of gold), originating with a Mr Riyadi, transferred to various banks.
He received his episcopal consecration on the following 27 December from Pope John XXIII himself, with Bishops Bortignon and Gioacchino Muccin serving as the co-consecrators.
Liberation theology is a synthesis of Christian theology and Marxist socio; economic analyses that emphasizes social concern for the poor and the political : liberation for oppressed peoples.
The owner of the ranch, John B Poindexter, as well as C Allen Foster, a Washington attorney who traveled with Scalia to the ranch by private plane, hold leadership positions within the Order, at least two other private aircraft traveling to the ranch were Saint Hubertus depicted in © connected to known members of St.
Retrieved February 25, 2016 2. s2bedefanHictory’®_ Intemational Order of St Hubertus.
Retrieved February 25, 2016 External links e International Order of St.
Hubertus Pope Francis Condemns Priest Sexual Abuse, Calls for ‘No Effort to Be Spared’ . in Prevention retrieved from KQED and copied or modified to here Pope Francis issued a letter Monday condemning sexual abuse and its 1 concealment within the Catholic church.
Pope John XXIII and Pope John Paul IT both opened the Church to the world in their own ways.
The United States Ambassador Hackett and the Presidential Delegation United States Ambassador Hackett and he Presidential Delegation John Podesta, Congressman Xavier Becerra, and Katie Beirne Fallon on the Canonization of Pope John XXII and Pope John Paul I ' The Pope we affectionately call il Papa buono was a man of peace and a man of reform.
Roncalli revolutionized the role the Church plays in the world, and made the 1 Catholic Mass a more inclusive and open experience for the faithful.
Asa boy in Nazi-occupied Poland, Karol J6zef Wojtyta studied for the priesthood ; in secret.
History, Key Officials, Press Releases This book WACO FEB 20 Genome Blood Quanta Nov 19 Dec 13 The Waco siege and business negotiation tkfpc.com * | Directory of Exhibits | Catalog of Evidence | Search Museum Text | A fire erupted, killing 76 Branch Davidians, including 25 children and two pregnant women.
A wire story reveals that several weeks before Koresh and 78 of his followers died ; in the inferno that destroyed their home, some Russian scientists demonstrated a ' machine that United States intelligence, military and law enforcement officials that "" supposedly sent subliminal messages over the telephone.
The only evidence that the Russian mind-control machine actually works seems to ; be the fact that the FBI was buying this sales pitch.
Their duty was to battle and die for their beliefs, which would lead to their salvation.
After the initial 45-minute gunbattle, the surviving Davidians saw an army of federal troops surround their home.
WACO as a think tank for undercover CIA work in Middle East North Africa was well positioned a short flight from WACO Texas to Little ROck — in the Oil plains y Paul Wilcher Paul Wilcher was the lawyer to whistle blowers Rodney Stich and Gunter Karl Russbacher.
WACO was on contract to pump propaganda out for the CIA in the Middle East Excerpt from A PANORAMIC HISTORY OF THE FIRST AMENDMENT REMARKS TO THE WESTERN NEW YORK LIBRARY RESOURCES COUNCIL By James Ostrowski March 22, 1995 Fhe Bill of Rights is best understood as the enactment of a philosophy of dividual natural rights that dominated American political thought in the ighteenth Century. il Natural rights philosophy emerged in the Seventeenth Century as an explanation ; of the proper function of government that was in sharp contrast to the philosophy ; that had prevailed in the Middle Ages.
Obama regime for the beginning in order to run this cell, as it was Holder who was ; the hatchet man in the Clinton Administration who under Janet Reno ran the ; Waco operations that murdered the Branch Davidians and burned their : children alive for political effect, and it was Holder who ran the mass ; assassination of the group around Sec.
Shortly thereafter, Charles Meissner died in i the crash of a small plane.
Both men died, 7-30-92, in a private plane crash in Alaska, en route to a fishing expedition. | | | | | | | | | | | | i | | i ' #23.
FBI, Willey’s former confidant Julie Steele has claimed that the onetime socialite i told her lover, Shaun Docking, she was pregnant with his twins—even though 1 Willey had told Steele she was not pregnant.
JON PARNELL WALKER Whitewater investigator for Resolution Trust « Corp.
Rahm Emanuel never quite knew the depths to what his statement would devolve to. \ y, The reason Smedinghoff was terminated, was her indirect knowledge in being the “cancer courier” who provided the wafer to the priest who fed this bio toxin to ' Hugo Chavez.
Vivian Malone Jones Children: Maya Holder, Brooke Holder, Eric Holder Dr.
Object seen on video coming in and ignigting a great explosionWATCH Call To Debunkers For Newest Conspiracy. up criminal investigation after man found with ‘destructive device’ I believe overtly faked warrants on me, by William Ruiz and Jim Volcelka, are what Jen Moore was murdered over.
The consideration of both Nature which identifies beneficial genetic traits adapted to a context of life and developmental psychology of non innate skills and behavior development are the combined Nature and Nurture picture rather than Nature V Nurture.
Class based society includes the wealth and power holding Aspiration Group of Royalty who for the most part feed off (they say in empire enabling way) subjects of lesser status and development.
At the bottom of the Class based society may be a desire to become the power holder rather than society reformer.
It is my Parched Lips theory that downtrodden populations with members like Malcom X were more likely to accept interbreeding with Royalty for Mixed Race Indirect Commonwealth Rule than were the reforming philosophical movement republicanism the rule of republics by the people who are the fount, the tap root of power, who delegate power to those who rotate into the division of labor work of serving as governess full time in limited terms.
While many Catholics especially sympathetic to Ireland versus Northern Ireland should feel happy many like my own family likely found out the higher ups in the Vatican felt Protestants and even Islam were less of a threat than socialism or communism which rejected religion altogether.
Secretly grooming indirect rulers and studying DNA for the world perhaps more widely but secretly included CIA Scotish Rites work like Jonestown.
The Peoples Temple of the Disciples of Christ, commonly shortened to Peoples Temple, was an American new religious organization which existed between 1954 and 1978.
Mike Pence wsMi Michael Richard Pence (born JUNE 7, Mike Pence 1959) is an American politician, broadcaster, and lawyer who served as the 48th vice president of the United States from 2017 to 2021.
Ithough Jones feared that he would end up being the victim of a backlash for being a communist, he was surprised when a Methodist superintendent helped him enter the church, despite his knowledge that Jones was a communist.
Jones had previously observed a faith healing service at the Seventh Day Baptist Church, which led him to conclude that such healings could attract people, and generate income, which he could use to accomplish his social goals.
Luckily an abondoned building is found The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry (the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction in the United States often omits the and, while the English Constitution in the United Kingdom omits the Scottish), commonly known as simply the Scottish Rite (or, in England and Australia, as the Rose Croix although this is only one of its degrees), is one of several Rites of Freemasonry.
There should be a plaque at the former site (now a post office) to honor the victims of Rev.
Vincent Maggiora/The Chronicle The victims of Jonestown were disproportionately San Francisco’s least politically empowered demographic lowincome African American women.
Gangstalk of Randy Weaver, former Green Beret and the slaughter of his family Ruby Ridge A month after leaving the Army, Weaver and Victoria Jordison married in a ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Fort Dodge, Iowa in 1971.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia ZRuby Ridge retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | r Ruby Ridge was the site of an 11-day siege in 1992 in Boundary , County, Idaho, near Naples.
United States Marshals Service initiated action to apprehend ; and arrest Randy Weaver under a bench warrant after his failure to , appear on firearms charges.
The Weavers subscribed to the belief of “Christian Identity”, which holds that white people are the lost tribe of Israel.
The court clerk sent the parties a letter informing them of the date change, but the notice was not sent directly to Weaver During the Marshals Service reconnoiter of the Weaver property, six 1 United States Marshals encountered Harris and Sammy Weaver, Randy’s 14-year1 old son, in woods near the family cabin.
United States Marshal William Francis Degan, Sammy Weaver, and the Weavers’ ; dog, Striker, all died as a result.
Tribes should protect their Indian bloodline retrieved . from lwww.indianz.com and copied or modified to here gig 2 Since the beginning of time, many species of the Great Mystery’s creation, the two legged and four legged, naturally and aggressively , protected their bloodline to ensure that their species would not become ; extinct.
Today it’s easy to augh at tribes ho enroll those ith ridiculously ow blood Blood quantum laws or Indian blood laws are laws in the United States and the former Thirteen colonies that define Native American status by fractions of Native American ancestry.
It is A person’s blood quantum is defined as the fraction of their ancestors, out of their total ancestors, who are documented as full-blood Native Americans. conomic benefits eflect the blood uantum with full loods receiving Many Native American tribes continue to employ {the maximum blood quantum in current tribal laws to determine enefits.
One who who is eligible for membership or citizenship in the jis 1/100th should tribe or Native American nation.
These often eceive benefits in require a minimum degree of blood relationship and laccordance with often an ancestor listed in a specific tribal census his minimal from the late 19th century or early 20th century. lood.
This was a The Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians of North hoice by the Carolina, for example, require an ancestor listed in inimum blood’s the 1924 Baker census and a minimum of 1/16 ncestors to breed Cherokee blood inherited from their ancestor on — {the Indian blood that roll.
Meanwhile, the Cherokee Nation requires out and to applicants to descend from an ancestor in the 1906 diminish the Dawes roll , but does not loodline. impose minimum blood quantum requirement.
Once the full blood status is mixed, it is a loss from which tribes may never recover.
Several years ago, my ex-husband asked me to assist him in drafting a tribal resolution for a Indian preference policy for his tribe, the Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma.
Kadoka Bar in Kadoka, South Dakota, one of most racist states in the * union, which read “No Indians or Dogs Allowed.” : I was reminded of this very attitude when I attended the Eastern i Shawnee Business Committee meeting where the Indian preference issue i was debated not so long ago.
The Archbishop shall minister these questions; and The Queen, having ; a book in her hands, shall answer each question severally as follows: | » Archbishop.
Mary I , also known as Mary Tudor, and as “Bloody Mary” by her Protestant opponents, was Queen of England and Ireland from July 1553 until her death in 1558.
LINDSEY LOVE, SOCIETY WRITER Published 6:00 pm CDT, Thursday, October 6, 2011 Reed Morian, Downey Bridgewater, John Kotts, Ed Jones and James Nicholson have been knighted in the Order of St.
The Southwest Priory, which includes Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and New Mexico, is the largest member chapter according to its leader, Houstonian John Poindexter The new knights joined Keith Moseing, Boysie Bollinger, John Kelsey, Scotty Arnoldy, VidalMartinez, John Barksdale and Phil John for a ceremony-filled weekend in Washington, D.C. that included a cocktail reception at the Belgian Ambassador’s residence, black-tie dinners at Plume and the Metropolitan Club and a white-tie ball at the Mayflower Hotel.
A lawyer in Fullerton, Pa., said it was like awakening not from a nightmare but into one.
RFK who oversaw CIA and regime change while Attorney General (and the manufacture of Obama Jr but Peace Corp, Baptist Church, Vatitcan, etc., at St Joseph’s hospital assassinated in Los Angeles on his way to Chicago running for PResident. z JFK murder plots planned in Chicago before Dallas assassination retrieved from By_ABC7 Tuesday, November 5, 2013 and copied or modified to here a) Even though the anniversary isn’t for a few weeks, by this moment 50 years go JFK would already have been dead, and Chicago would have gone down in history as the place.
Charles, the younger son of Howard E Butt, became president of H-E-B in 1971.
In 2019, H-E-B is investing millions of dollars to replace cashier stations with self-checkout kiosks or smartphone apps, at the same time that many other supermarkets are shifting towards more selfcheckout lane and app usage, and displacing cashiers.
Her husband, William H Crook, served as director of the Volunteers in Service to America and later as United States Ambassador to Australia. 5 e Isaak Izrailevich Prezent brought Lysenko to public attention, using Soviet propaganda to portray him as a genius who had developed a new, revolutionary agricultural technique.
Fall At the end of 1952, the situation started to change, and newspapers published ; articles criticizing Lysenkoism.
However, the process of return to regular genetics slowed down in Nikita Khrushchev’s time, when Lysenko showed him , the supposed successes of an experimental agricultural complex.
Their Camera Phone The perps in the ring attempt to hide the evidence plants, fake allegations againt me, code words, etc. challenging me I cant prove the people near me are trying to be condused with me but I know that they are.
Tunneled Ed Buying Eggs Ed goes home, not a randevue Though intoned “on top of” my eggs purchase, a virtual private commiunication system exists where someone else creates a meaning of code words by a VPN substitution cypher.
Because their cypher text they use as communication among themselves is designed to seem normal business the presence of the secret deal, the secret messages, are not provable, not decodable.
Authorized Cleartext |Codewords and secret trafficking network I am not understood and privy to and unable to prove exists and I do not agreed to by me authorized fused into clear text sale The wire fraud is a fused overcharge I can not prove, MY dna in human trafficking, is appeneded to the clear text sale The over charge I do not agree to.
Not only did I not agree my clear text was also cyper text I did not even recognize the VPN operation until Austin Java House when by the physical acts of the people playing out in front of me it sort of looked like a drug deal from a black in the back kitchen being setip, but it was not drugs.
This book Planning Parenthood Brittany Anne Murphy-Monjack was an American actress and singer.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Obama's Friends Form Strategy to Stay Close retrieved from By Jodi Kantor Dec.
Last Sunday night, President-elect Barack Obama’s three closest friends Valerie ; Jarrett, Martin Nesbitt and Dr.
Over Diet Cokes, the three drafted the "" beginnings of an elaborate visiting schedule that will bring Hyde Park to ; Washington, so the nation’s new first family can have a little taste of home.
Some insist that Martin and Anita Nesbitt, old friends of the Obamas, are clearly Malia and Sasha’s quote-unquote real parents Martin Hughes Nesbitt is an American businessman and public figure.
Nesbitt formerly served as the founder and chief executive officer of The Parking Spot, a Chicago-based airport parking company.
The other _—_ [Natasha (known as Psychologist says “I hope the beer I order has Sasha /'sa:f9/), born Hemlock in it.” une 10, 2001.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia In 2001 A Space Oddessy by Stanley Kubrick while Poole is on a space walk i attempting to replace the antenna unit, HAL takes control of his pod, severs Poole’s 1 oxygen hose, and sets him adrift.
When the disconnection is complete, a prerecorded i video message plays, revealing that the mission’s objective is to investigate the i radio signal sent from the monolith to Jupiter.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia aPook versus HAL 9000 retrieved from From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia and 1 Fe. copied or modified to here 1 Poole vs.
Unlike other depictions of chess in television and film, the game is shown ; continuously and legibly for several seconds in a single shot.
Courtesy the CIA, via npr.org and copied or modified to here The CIA Unwittingly Fuels The Counterculture a a Se a ee We do know, however, who some of the people who became involved in the LSD culture were — they were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they never knew his name.
We do know, however, who some of the people who became involved in the LSD 1 culture were — they were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they i never knew his name.
After World War II, the United States began providing extensive foreign aid to many nations throughout the world.
Iran was also of interest to the United States because of its natural » resources; for much of the twentieth century, Iran held the largest oil refinery in the 1 world.
He also was blamed for the death of his i grandmother and Malcolm X’s widow, Betty Shabazz, ; in 1997 after he set fire to her Yonkers apartment.
He pleaded guilty to the ; juvenile equivalents of second-degree manslaughter and second-degree arson and , spent time in various juvenile centers, escaping at least twice but being recaptured.
The 54-year-old said she and her husband, who was the 44th president of the United States, then had to use IVF to conceive Malia, who was born on July 4th, 1998, and Sasha, who was born on June 10th, 2001.
Clearly some of these had mixed diagnoses—like the runner who had ssaulted a number of staff members to get at a cigarette butt.
Others were like infants of one or two months, whose every need must be nticipated and met.
One young woman riddled with venereal diseases masturbated very day all day. eos ey o ® ® S ) oO In the coming months I wrote programs for care and behavior management which were largely ignored.
This job was a razor slicing deep wounds into an already bleeding soul.
One day in early summer of 1997, I was out in the garden under a shade tree ; praying.
Mountain of The Lord was just the beginning of a long series journeys up The « Mountain.
After the Second World War, Sidley & Austin began expanding beyond its Chicago roots as many of its clients entered new markets.
Complex family tree Untangling human ancestry is a complicated business, and recent research has indicated the human family tree is much more bushy and less linear than the traditional “Out of Africa” narrative, which suggested modern humans originated in Africa and made their first successful migration to the rest of the world in a single wave between 50,000 and 70,000 years ago.
Maria Martinén-Torres, director of the National Research Center on Human Evolution in Spain and an author i I i I I I I ' of the 2015 study, said she welcomed the new data on the early presence of modern humans in China.
Bobby Fischer was born at Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, on March 9, 1943.
Major-General Count Arthur Cherep-Spiridovich (aka Artur Cerep-Spiridovic) was a Major-General in the Imperial Russian Navy , and an anti-Semitic conspiracy theorist, who moved to the United States following the Bolshevik Revolution.
Despite his views, Fischer remained on good terms with Jewish chess players.
CRISPR-Cas9 was adapted from a naturally occurring genome editing system in bacteria.
Plomin failed to discover any i links when he looked at the genomes of 7,900 children in 2010.
He later became involved in a misadventure i involving a Chinese sequencing company, BGI, to which he supplied the DNA of more than a thousand ; American geniuses.
This proposal to designate the decade, beginning January 1990, as the “Decade of the Brain”, was sponsored by Representative Silvio O Conte, and passed by the United States Congress in a joint resolution on March 8, 1989.
Silvio Ottavio Conte was a Republican member of the United States House of Representatives for 16 terms, representing the 1st Congressional District of Massachusetts from January 3, 1959, until his death in Bethesda, Maryland in 1991.
These are the joined reports of the Prophecies of Black Hebrew Islrealite test subject Linda Newkirk the the BHI fullfiled BHI created Prophecies of Cyphertext, these are the Transhumanism of Jeffery Epestein and the Virgin Island Brain Foundation, the work of Andy Ellengton and others in Texas and Arkansas “drug” running and Mena Airport 1961, and Jonestown Guena, and now Corpus Christi Texas where MKULTRA continues.
Three government agencies are leading the project e The National Institutes of Health e the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency e and the National Science Foundation.
The White House said the agencies will work with the “private sector partners” of e The Allen Institute for Brain Science e the Howard Hughes Medical Institute e the Kavli Foundation, and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies.
These are the joined reports of the Prophecies of Black Hebrew Islrealite test subject Linda Newkirk the the BHI fullfiled BHI created Prophecies of Cyphertext, these are the Transhumanism of Jeffery Epestein and the Virgin Ilsand Brain Foundation, the work of Andy Ellengton and others in Texas and Arkansas “drug” running and Mena Airport 1961, and Jonestown Guena, and now Corpus Christi Texas where MKULTRA continues.
Their daughter, Stanly Ann Dunham Alleged white Seattle mother of Barack Obama “Stanley” Ann Dunham was an American anthropologist who specialized in the economic anthropology and rural development of Indonesia.
Towards the latter part of her life, she worked with Bank Rakyat Indonesia, where she helped apply her research to the largest microfinance program in the world. aaa as THE| DIPLOMAT ome CE When Elizabeth IT Was Queen of Pakistan Before it was a republic, Pakistan was briefly ruled eased aa i Surprising as it may seem today, Elizabeth II, the reigning queen of the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth nations, was the queen of Pakistan for four years.
George VI was the last emperor of India [wich included Muslim Pakistan], reigning until 1947, when he gave up that title in favor of two new titles for his new dominions, becoming king of India and king of Pakistan.
To make Barack Obama Jr., not from Somewhere they made him from Everywhere.
FOXP2 branch of the Windsor royal family and genomics around the world It appears in 1944 the OSS and Vatican worked out a plan with Spanish Illuminati Catholics to work on racial genetics and the Anterior Temporal Lobe and this would be a part of eroding cause of racial warfare.
The latter activity seeming for world IQ development, one of the original goals, with the collateral or even primary goal of creating a family database consistency of the Obama family tree by creating a world existence, dating back into African history, of genes he really obtained through Windsor Dysgraphic line, and the elimination of Obama white immediate relative in Europe.
It was reported in August 2019 that Epstein had planned to “seed the human race with his DNA” by impregnating up to 20 women at a time using his New Mexico compound as a “baby ranch”, where mothers would give birth to his offspring.
One young woman riddled with venereal diseases masturbated every day all day. par In the coming months I wrote programs for care and behavior management which were largely ignored.
It seems that the dregs of society were hired to play minimum wage games; and when no one was looking they allegedly had orgies with these, who were helpless./ ; i | | i | i i i i | i This job was a razor slicing deep wounds into an already bleeding soul.
Amidst the beauty of this heavenly language, and on the wings of His Holy Spirit, God takes me regularly to the heights of His Mountain where he feeds me. through these pages will forever change the lives of many.
Enwrapped in Jesus Love, Linda Newkirk i i i i I I I I In the pages which follow, you will read much about your destiny.
The heavenly truths imparted to you I I I I I I I The Human Brain and Behavior For centuries, scientists and philosophers have been fascinated by the brain, but until recently they viewed the brain as nearly incomprehensible.
This has been racial and ethnic attack through Behavioal Health SJW systems utilizing attacks on my Human Rights acheived through retarded impersonators of me.
Non-white, children, gays. e This creates the illusion I like non-whites and gays undermining my white supremacist whites only sexual interests. e Further, since APPEAR to have an interest in non-whites my DNA then, by OTHERS, be assigned to those outside of my racial group. e¢ Meanwhile I am socially sabotaged to white women who would partner withe me, genetically, and in my own life and reproductivity and marriage.
Populations with distinct |Q have distinct ou economic success seems to be correlated with ethnic IQs.
Rosenstein in, Come out ett Midevil Genocide ish Opus Dei Order of St Hubertus | Russia warns United States of illegal deep state, \ Killing of United State and Judges, etc., Denegens— Judeo Christian Deep State of Midevil War anc rape and murder Es Naxiotion 17 | Agression ORthodox Christians, Muslims, Russia "" Donegan DNA into Sub Saharan and Zioinist Judeo Christian NeoCon allies The adoption of Christianity in Ethiopia dates to the fourth-century reign of the Aksumite emperor Ezana.
Various Oblique References In one of the last chapters, CryptoGenocide, you will see full decode capabilities of many of those oblique references.
Soviet Union 1960s AM: Cuba 1 AV: Uruguay : BE: Poland : BG: Albania ee ee eh One such reference is a highly ranked YouTube video on Extortion17 dated Nov 15.
Although it’s still taboo to talk about, some medical scientists are trying to figure | a . . i out how to use the polygenic intelligence scores to pick the smartest embryo from an IVF dish, choose the best sperm donor, or discover fetuses at high risk for an ; expanded menu of cognitive disorders, including autism.
Likely AT ANY AGE with a combination of brain genes gene therapy and bone marrow source of brain available neuron stem cells, and brain can be treated where cellular neural deficit exists. eZ ee ee » oul Changes in Gene Expression Affect Brain Function 1%, rr I I I I I I | I t I I I I I I I | Altered regulation of gene expression in both DEVELOPING BRAINS AND , ADULT BRAINS have been linked with multiple neurological diseases such as ‘ depression, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s disease.
Traditional methods to study ' these types of disorders have relied on artificial overexpression of genes in animal ' models.
Neurons are crucial to the function of the central nervous system, but genetic engineering processes like CRISPR do not easily translate to neurons due to i inherent limitations with these specialized cells.
The ARC of Northern Virginia wishing to parly that Special Needs Trust Fund into something else and some different role is something I have been fighting but can not get actual accounting or Due Process on.
OCTOBER 1 1963PRESIDENT KENNEDY’S SCHEDULE President Kennedy began his day with a Legislative Leader Breakfast.
Se ee eee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee Sows Corp Australia Network November 7, 2013 10pm eee eee eee eee ee President John F Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy with ; their children, John Jr. and Caroline, on a portico overlooking the White « House south lawn in Washington on NOVEMBER 13, 1963, just weeks 1 before his death.
AP Photo Source AP : United States President John Fitzgerald Kennedy agreed to visit Australia and i New Zealand weeks before deciding to travel to Dallas, Texas where he ; was assassinated 50 years ago.
I laughed at my mother joining my brother Tom as he did, criticing my mother.
Chris Lloyd, who had information about me which PizzaGate was tied to, a former friend from high school and college, was twice connected to Genentech.
The online and physical impersonators of me in the San Francisco Bay Area of California mention Genentech , my mother and new organisms, being created, and also show signs of Schizophrenia such that the Doppelganger of me would need a trust administrator.
See Sock Puppets chapter and then the REAL EDWARD PAUL DONEGAN DEFENDS REAL TOM DUNHAM FROM TOM DUHMAS DUNHAM sub-chapter.
People keep claiming they are going to have my babies to me and I say no they are not. e Jim Volceka, of Salinas kept making framing acts claiming I was retarded.
This would be a self-enrichment scheme of a retardation advocacy firm who needs access to my own real property, biological property, by falsely claiming the right or need for them to manage my property rights for me and then do so illegally and without accounting to me.
Gar Then, in the same dream another man appeared, this one rather young with fine, 1 short brown hair.
Then, the Illuminati man put forth his hand and projected a picture on a blank wall.
It is through these continued assaults of Satan and his demonic hoards that our i Father has matured this new spiritual code, this new spiritual DNA, which is now 1 very strong and it fights for me and with me.
For, ; in this state, the rate of insured unemployment has been persistently higher than the ; hational average, and the increases in personal income and employment have been ; slower here than the nation as a whole.
Our choice, therefore, boils down to one of: doing nothing, and thereby risking a ; widening gap between our actual and potential growth in output, profits, and ; employment — or taking action, at the federal level, to raise our entire economy to ; anew and higher level of business activity.
There are a number of ways by which the federal government can meet its i responsibilities to aid economic growth.
Fluid and crystallized intelligence In psychology, fluid and crystallized intelligence (respectively abbreviated Gf and Gc) are factors of general intelligence, originally identified by Raymond Cattell.
To target transfection to the hippocampus, the head of the embryonic pup was placed between paddles of tweezer electrodes (CUY21 electroporator, NEPA GENE, Japan), with the positive terminal covering the lateral surface of the right hemisphere and the negative terminal covering the left ‘ hemisphere.
I | | | | | | | | | I | | | | | | | | | | | | | | I | | | | | | | | | | | I | | | ; She also held numerous private-sector positions in the oil and gas industry as well as being a specialist on nuclear energy and on x the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The consulate’s first line of defense was four locally hired security guards and another man on the front gate.
Died FEBRUARY 15, 2011, San Luis Potosi, Mexico This book Air Travel The economy of Ethiopia was based on subsistence agriculture, with an aristocracy that consumed the surplus.
KLM is a Dutch airliner which as at least a figure head royal government and joined the OECD n 1961.
Eve Meyer (born Evelyn EUGENE Tumer; DECEMBER 13, 1928 March 27, 1977) was an American pin-up model, motion picture actress, and film producer.
Eve Meyer / Bom December 13, 1928, Atlanta, GA Founded in 1928, the Garden Club of Georgia, Inc, 5 a Non-profit educational organization with 16000 mernbers statewide.
American pinup sodet, motion pieture actress, and fin er Misty Filmography Procucer 1977) wes an Eve Meyer < Eve Meyer was an Americas pinup model, motion picture acess, afd fim producer.
A right royal time is what oe have in KLM's Royal jase Service is punctual and aE: Dinner for instance, is ways rounded off with a choice of seven different coffees, But then. it's only in keeping with that stylish class far too goad to be called ju ROBINA van Lanschot refused to reboard and was sole survivor of KLM. ok The pilot of Flight 4805 was Jacob van Zanten, one of KLM’s most experienced flyers.
In 1915 he joined the mobilized Dutch airforce as a professional officer, at the time still called the “militaire luchtvaartafdeling” , in Soesterberg.
Koninklijke Militaire Academie or KMA) is the service academy for the Dutch Army, the Dutch Air Force, and the Royal Marechaussee.
Located in Breda, the Netherlands, the KMA has trained future officers since 1828 ZO eden War retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | r Following World War II, Britain retained control of both British 1 Somaliland and Italian Somaliland as protectorates.
Ethiopia was * saved from defeat and permanent loss of territory through a massive "" airlift of military supplies worth $1 billion, the arrival of more than "" 12,000 Cuban soldiers and airmen sent by Fidel Castro to win a second ; African victory , and 1 1,500 Soviet advisors, led by General Vasily Petrov.
On 23 January 1978, Cuban armored brigades inflicted the worst losses the Somali forces had ever taken in a single action since the start of the war.
Among his many « accomplishments, he helped found a community-based organization that « addresses the protection of vulnerable women and children fleeing the » war in Somalia, researched issues ranging from international conflicts to food security across East Africa, served as the Editor-in-Chief of the philosophy journal Chiedza, and directed a television series on peace and ; reconciliation. i Deeply committed to Catholic and Jesuit education, Cedric also spent eight years discerning a religious vocation as a Jesuit Scholastic.
James Mountain Inhofe From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Born NOVEMBER 17, 1934 is an American politician serving as the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma, a seat he was first elected to in 1994.
Inhofe served as the United States Representative for Oklahoma’s 1st congressional district from 1987 to 1994 and as mayor of Tulsa from 1978 to 1984.
He has supported a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex matriage and has proposed the Inhofe Amendment to make English the national language of the United States.
Inhofe’s son killed in plane crash retrieved from Sean Murphy NOVEMBER 12, 2013 and copied or modified to here OKLAHOMA CITY The United States Secretary of Defense on Monday confirmed the death of United States Sen.
Perry Inhofe, who was killed in a weekend plane crash in northeast Oklahoma. ""| eee Col.
Singapore Changi Airport, Singapore Wikipedia The investigators tested 20 different simulations for various equipmentfailure scenarios, and found that the only scenario that matched the actual radar trajectory of the descent and crash of the flight was a high-speed steep dive commanded by one of the pilots.
The Los Angeles Times * Tsu was among SilkAir’s most talented fliers—a former top fighter pilot in the Singaporean air force and a member of its performing aerobatic team, the Black Knights.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Bonny Susan Hicks was a SingaporeEurasian model and writer.
Her first book, Excuse Me, Are You A Model?, is recognised as a significant milestone in the literary and cultural history of Singapore.
Bonny Susan Hicks (5 January 1968 19 J December 1997) Hicks never met her father.
Bundesstelle fiir , Flugunfalluntersuchung), , identified as the main cause of the "" collision a number of shortcomings on the part of the Swiss air traffic ' controller service in charge of the sector involved, as well as « ambiguities in the procedures regarding the use of the traffic collision 1 avoidance system on-board.:110[BFU 1 Bashkirian Airlines Flight 2937 was a chartered i flight from Moscow, Russia, to Barcelona, Spain, carrying 60 1 passengers and nine crew.
Nielsen, the ATC on duty at the time o 1 apparent act of revenge by Vitaly Kaloyev, a Russian citizen whose wife 1 and two children had been killed in the accident.
Russia asserts that the DHL crew had a “real ossibility” to avoid a collision, since they were able to hear the onversation between the Russian crew and the controller.
He was retuming home to Luxembourg from a visit to his relatives in Rio de Janeiro.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Low-Grade Dirty Wars Dulles was a pioneer of @ Senator John Raster the strategies of massive _ Dulles retaliation and x brinkmanship.
Non-governmental organizations Dulles served as the chairman and cofounder of the Commission on a Just and Durable Peace of the Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America (later the National Council of Churches), the Chairman of the Board for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and a trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation from 1935 to 1952.
Bush CIA Rockefeller HUnt Standard Oil of Araknasas and Rothcdhilds are impersonates Ed, uses Trust fund to see adult entertainers, uses trust fund to settle debts other than adult entertainer be KOMPROMAAT Espionage __|all the same and activity by homegrown illegal operate in espionage elements including Aerospace as homegrown espionage collding | Boeing Corp. and with foreign espionage DARPA and NASA Space Council The long term family Dons of mafia deep state in NASA DARPA MKULTRA and Free Masonry.
Likely from Paul Alan to Elon Musk, Twins Mark and Scott Kelley , Mike Pence, Jonn Trump and Donald J Trump, the Bush family, Donald Barr, William Barr, Christopher Wray Masons, Rockefllers,Rotschilds, and all the otrher Crime Bosses of MKULTRA, dirty wars, dirty government, anf FBI COINTELPRO #WETDIVISION Twins Studies RFLP Mitochondria.
Some who fight that figure if they plant porn of sexualized little children of other races I will look bad to the world and to White Power.
Protect therefore Deserve It is my belief acts from people like Jim Vockelcka buying or shopping for size 13 boots and guns in my name, as me, and peeping at tots, in my name, put me on the kill lists the CIA and NDAA use, and that is more a matter of getting rid of me as cleanup of CIA having misused my DNA, now both claiming it and assaulting it at the same time, by destructive claims about my constructive behaviors, laying the predicates for seizure of me DNA and destruction of my living conditions and normal life.
That blonde psych evaluator tanked me, I did not get transported to the hearing, and likely a black took some creepy picture of her, which built in her mind I was a peeper, or some other activity like that which is the ususal in USA legal system.
The process determining , criteria for killing is not public and was heavily shaped by National * Counter terrorism Director and former Central Intelligence Agency "" Director John O Brennan.
Though White House, National Counter terrorism Center , and 1 CIA spokespeople have declined to comment on the database, officials i have stated privately that kill lists will expand “for at least another 1 decade”, if not indefinitely.
Mediated contact Will have contact while acting under a cover story (a “legend” and with a false back story) such as a working in an establishment you are at, or through some other system of insert into a stalking victim’s vicinity or environment.
Intelligence agency creating the APPEARANCE of compromising information about a person, but substituting themselves to confess as they were in the area at at the same time I also call the Element A and Element B At one location, element of the crime A, cop from the gangstalk photographs a womans buttocks.
Hijack communications leaving one person incommunicado and the Information Doppelganger communicating disinformation.
Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here KOMPROMAT KOMPROMAT is information made synthetically manufactured but which appears from normal life in the information sees to suggest a person is compromised by some flaw such as being a traitor, having an affair, etc., OFFICE MOB KOMPROMAT is talking up by undercover mobs who add themselves into groups a person (who is the victim of KOMPROMAT) might join or be in, thus created a seeming normal word of moutch system in which a framed person undergoes social sabotage and ostracism.
COVERT HARASSMENT Also known as gangstalking or organized stalking, is a highly criminal campaign directed at a targeted individual that aims to destroy an innocent person’s life through slander and carefully executed psychological and physical assaults.
An intentional, premeditated effort to undermine an individual’s reputation , credibility, and character [on real truth or manufactured KOMPROMAT] [in a manner which will result in the Stalked person being rejected from a group he or she is slandered to.
Shining a Light on the Cockroaches Blue Line “Gang Stalking” is, very likely, a disinformation term created by United States intelligence agencies.
The goal of such perations in the parlance of counterintelligence agents is to “subvert” r “neutralize” an individual deemed to be an enemy (or potential enemy) of clients or members of the security state.
In fact a ‘fapper’ who stole my phone called himself Sovereign RICO, and one other black male called himself Rico, thus in their actions alleging I anthropomorphise schizophrenically and my report of police backed RICO are evidence I am insane.
The provcations and fight picking with Tom Dunham, who also had a teen trafficking ring pasted onto his normal life also provoked fights and retaliation against him, drawing him in to years of public fighting aginast vauge public appearances and unspoken rumor mongering about him.
Tom Dunham and I have had key plants outside, as though we are sharing keys or codes with others, breakins and evidence plants with landlords cooperating with law enforcement in law enforcement’s doing so, etc., THe result of all this is it seems Tom Dunham and [J are trafficking and peepers, not the cops.
Better, and maybe the point, that expains why my DNA is in non whites already and continuing.
Tom Dunham W Follow @sftomdunham a Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote.
Blacks took over the front desk and solicited in rooms near me and were likely caught by dominatrixes having child porn pictures from the Lady Bird Lake park and then signed my genome way as though me.
Veronica Hoffman and I have reported these attacks organized by the police to the police, but as with Tom Dunham and the reaction we got, we were just stygmatized by hostile parties who were conducting the attacks, they creating online charactatures of Tom Dunham and myself in psych prisons, etc., I try to stay in my highest legal ground, my home, but this legal high ground is not protected enough and assaults continue in them, which has been a problem for no one at all other than me.
Tim Kelly ; Jay Dwyer ; Tamsin Levy Edward Paul Donegan To Tom Dunham, quite recently Edward Paul Donegan 12/02/2017 I mentioned you as a fellow victim in a Facebook post.
Pyant was the SKetch Artist and this has happened in custody repeatedly as is seen in the case of Tom Dunham.
Joseph G “Joe” Glaser (DECEMBER 17, 1896 JUNE 6, 1969), music manager of Louis Armstrong from 1935 until his death in 1969, and the original proprietor of Sunset Gardens on the South Side of Chicago, mentored Avant.
He spent his freshman and second years of high school at Dudley High School in Greensboro before moving to New Jersey in 1947 as a teenager. —E—E—E—ES—r——E—_——_——_T T_T ETT T_T TST _T T_T TE T_T _T T_T T_T T_T _ T_T T_T T_T Tv rere In New Jersey, Avant worked as a stock clerk at Macy’s and for a law directory.
His mother, Aruna Mehrotra, had separated from her husband in 1976 and had i moved back to India to manage a jewellery business at the time of the disappearance.
The child's partial remains were discovered 25 ' FEBRUARY 1982 on an isolated farm in Sussex.
Police ; additionally investigated the possibility that the boy had been abducted by a racist ; gang.
Between the disappearance and the discovery of the body the police ; investigated hundreds of sightings and interviewed over 14,000 people.
On 25 February 1982 two men, who were shooting pigeons, discovered a skull, seven rib bones and a section of vertebrae at Alder Copse, Durleigh Marsh Farm, Rogate, near Petersfield.
The bones appeared to have been disturbed by foxes and | | | | | | | « were found buried in a bog at a depth of around two feet.
JonBenét Patricia Ramsey was an American child beauty queen who was killed at the age of six in her family’s home in Boulder, Colorado.
A photo of JonBenét Ramsey has been making its rounds due to what looks like Ghislaine Maxwell to the left of her.
Boulder County District Attorney Mary Lacy said new DNA tests point to an “unexplained third party” as possibly responsible for the killing.
John’s two surviving adult children (a wife and family to Boulder, where Access Graphics’ headquarters was located.
Her daughter JonBenét disappeared on the morning after Christmas Day 1996.
JonBenét’s active role in child beauty pageants and Patsy’s reported 1 ‘pageant mother” behavior were reported by the media after the murder.
She had sustained a broken skull from a blow to the head and had been strangled; ; a garrote was found tied around her neck.
The case generated , nationwide public and media interest, in part because her mother Patsy Ramsey ' had entered JonBenét into a series of child beauty ' pageants.
The crime is still unsolved and remains an open investigation with the ' Boulder Police Department.
In 2002, the DA’s successor took over investigation of the case from the police 1 and primarily pursued the theory that an intruder had committed the killing.
The DA sent the Ramseys a letter of apology in 2008, declaring the family was : 1 “completely cleared” by the DNA results.
Others, including former Boulder police son and a daughter) lived elsewhere.
In 1991, John had moved with his second Ss ee ee a ' chief Mark Beckner, disagreed with exonerating the Ramseys, characterizing the ' DNA as a small piece of evidence that was not proven to have any connection to "" the crime.:11 In February 2009, the Boulder police took the case back from the "" DA and reopened the investigation.
That apparently is a theory that police investigated following the tragic death of 6; year-old JonBenét at her home in 1996.
According to a retired FBI profiler, bedwetting was a “nightly occurrence” with JonBenét.
On the night she was killed, ' police theorized, Patsy Ramsey became so enraged that her daughter wet the bed "" again that she struck JonBenét, accidentally killing her.
I have no idea whether the theory has merit in JonBenét case, but as a pediatric urologist who specializes in bedwetting, I am not remotely shocked.
I have a large collection of news reports on abuse cases related to bedwetting children beaten, starved, or forced to sit in a chair all day, sleep in a bathtub, sit on an electric burner, stand for hours on an “X” on the kitchen floor.
These cases are extreme, but parental frustration is a very common response to ' bed-wetting because there is a poor understanding among parents, therapists, and "" even among some physicians about what causes accidents in children.
The parents did not have history of anger regarding bed wetting but if she were beginning to show signs of developing slowly and the FOXP2 Syndrome she may have been murdered to coverup that gene and Aerospace researching it.
The total death count from this massacre is 28 as it, also, includes both Adam Lanza and his mother.
Massachusetts and New Hampshire and that the weapons used in this massacre, said ; to be owned by her, are standard CIA issue.
According to an English translation of the report published by The Tehran Times, an Iranian state-run newspaper, about one-third of the way through the report, Hekmati said he had worked for DARPA, after he left the Marine Corps in 2005.
The FSB notes in this report that Russia, too, has experienced the grim aftereffects i of violent Western video games naming the November 2012 workplace rampage that ; left 6 dead in Moscow and prompted authorities to begin the process of outright ; banning them in the Motherland as numerous research studies have linked them to ‘ violence and mass killings.
Permission to use this report "" in its entirety is granted under the condition it is linked back to its original source at 0 WhatDoesItMean.Com.
Western governments and their intelligence services actively campaign ; against the information found in these reports so as not to alarm their citizens about ; the many catastrophic Earth changes and events to come, a stance that the Sisters of ; Sorcha Faal strongly disagrees with in believing that it is every human beings right : to know the truth.
In June 1995) Ween American 1| 1983, after a bitter legal and boardroom battle, the billionaire businessman, :| stakes of Frederick R Koch and William “Bill” academic, lawyer, and :| Koch were bought out for $1. billion and Charles [OVvermment official.
He was ""| Koch and David Koch became majority owners in /""Volved with and invested in t | | | | | | | | a | | | | | | | the company.
Charles owns 42% of the company; _ fhe petroleum industry via trusts for the benefit of Elaine Tettemer Marshall PCademic, government and and ommercial endeavors.
He Elaine’s children, Preston Marshall and E Pierce owned 16% of Koch Marshall Jr., own 16% of the company.
Marshall was David Koch, who died on August 23, 2019, own the arried to model and celebrity Anna Nicole Smith during the last 14 months of his life.
His estate became the subject of protracted litigation, which was reviewed by the Supreme Court in Marshall i Marshall and Stern Marshall.
He authored the Code of Fair Competition for the ; Petroleum Industry , and the Connally Hot Oil Act of 1935 after the Supreme ‘ Court’s decision to strike down the National Industrial Recovery Act.
The Connally Hot Oil Act of 1935 was enacted in the wake of the Supreme Court’s : decision to strike down Section 9 of the National Industrial Recovery Act : in Panama Refining Co.
The act was named after Senator Tom Connally. balance, 42%, of the corporation.
In 1935, he left government service to become ; the special counsel to Kenneth R Kingsbury, the ; president of iL 1( > Standard Oil of Californiaf(tyy i Chevron Corporation) in San Francisco.
In 1952, he became Executive Vice President at Signal Oil & Gas under Samuel B Mosher.
In 1961, he became President of Union Texas Petroleum and moved to Houston.
In 1984, he formed Marshall Petroleum, which primarily was a holding company for his interest In 1952, Marshall co-founded Great Northern Oil, which, in 1955, built an oil ‘ refinery in Rosemount, Minnesota that could refine heavy, sour Canadian crude oil.
J 1 Howard Marshall II 1 and E Pierce Marshall . : His second marriage, to Bettye Bohannon, lasted from 1961 until her death from : Alzheimer’s disease in 1991.
Over several years, Marshall * gave Walker $15 million worth of jewelry and other gifts.
Walker died in 1991 at age ‘51 due to complications from facelift surgery.
In 1994, at the age of 89, he married 26-year-old model Anna Nicole Smith.
Katy Perry Responded to the Theory That She’s Actually JonBenet Ramsey Teen Vouge * While hosting MTV’s VMAs 2017, one of Katy’s pre-recorded videos featuring Billy Eichner played during a transition.
In true Billy on the Street fashion, the comedian asked Katy a string of rapid-fire questions.
And one of them happened to be about whether or not the “Swish Swish” singer is actually JonBenet Ramsey.
Billy’s, of course, referring back to a conspiracy theory that went viral in early 2016.
It alleges that JonBenet did not actually die back in 1996 and instead became who we now know today as Katy Perry.
There are plenty of holes in the flimsy theory, but it being just wacky enough paired with the two looking somewhat similar made for good internet kindling.
Katy responds with a nervous giggle and, “um wait, no, that is not real.” to [oe 8 8 8 8 8 UU de UU UU Uh UU UU UU 2 Katy Perry retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here | L Frank Joseph Perry Jr. was an American stage director and filmmaker.
Both Perrys would eventually join the select group of non-actors awarded membership in Actors Studio.
California, to Pentecostal pastors Mary Christine and Maurice Keith ; Hudson.
She has a younger brother named David, who ; is a singer, and an older sister, Angela.
Growing up, she attended religious ' schools and camps, including Paradise Valley Christian School in Arizona and Santa ' Barbara Christian School in California during her elementary years.
Her « family struggled financially, sometimes using food stamps and eating food from i the food bank which also fed the congregation at Perry’s parents’ church.
Perry primarily listened to gospel music, as secular ; Music was generally discouraged in the family’s home.
She discovered popular * music through CDs she sneaked from her friends.
Perry later recalled a story about ‘ how a friend of hers played “You Oughta Know” by Alanis Morissette, which ' impacted her songwriting and singing.
Perry has supported various charitable organizations and causes throughout her i career.
In April 2013, she joined UNICEF to assist children in ; Madagascar with education and nutrition.
Daisy Bell, which includes her ; rendition of “Daisy Bell ”, were donated to the charity Little ' Kids Rock, which supports musical education in underprivileged elementary schools.
Perry has publicly advocated for LGBT rights and admitted that she wrote “I « Kissed a Girl” about her own bisexual experiences with other women.
She performed at three rallies for Obama, in Los Angeles, "" Las Vegas, and Wisconsin, singing a rendition of “Let’s Stay Together” as well as a « number of her songs.
She , endorsed Kamala Harris in the United States Senate election in California, and ‘ organized a fundraiser for Harris at her home in Los Angeles in November 2016.
Perry also spoke and « performed at the 2016 Democratic National Convention in support of Clinton.
Ghislaine Maxwell Was Involved With JonBenét Ramsey’s Murder” Since Jeffrey Epstein’s death under mysterious circumstances last summer, conspiracy theorists of all stripes have been making hay with it, connecting any and all people who have ever been directly or indirectly associated with him to any and all criminal cases of the past 40 years.
So it was only a matter of time before that happened with the case of JonBenét Ramsey, the six-year-old Colorado beauty queen who was found murdered in her home on Christmas Day 1996.
According to the theory, which first took root on Twitter and Reddit, a woman who closely resembles alleged Epstein procurer Ghislaine Maxwell (who was arrested by the FBI two weeks ago) is seen in the background of what is purported to be the last image of Ramsey alive.
A 2014 YouTube video claimed that JonBenét Ramsey's parents staged the murder, and their child is alive and well living her life as pop star Katy Perry.
The video cites lyrics from Perry's songs, and says that the two look alike.
Jonbonet was assasinated but the whole pedahilia story line was planted by real assasins to cover real reason child was murdered.
John Mark Karr, who has been arrested on multiple charges including child pornography, claimed that he was in the Ramsey house the night of the murder and saw JonBenét die, but isn’t the one who murdered her.
He says that he staged the crime scene in order to throw the police off the track of the real killer.
Karr was cleared from any charges after no tissue samples or bodily fluids matched his at the scene, contradicting his own story.
Same Article, Santa A man portraying Santa Claus sits in a mall in South Portland, Maine on Thursday, Dec., 2013.
Two nights before JonBenét was killed, McReynolds was at the Ramsey house dressed as Santa.
The vagueness of this message in the card has led some to believe that he was behind the murder.
John: “We were officially cleared and apologized to by the district attorney in, I think, 2008.
Mary Lacy, then Boulder’s District Attorney, made a public announcement that new DNA evidence cleared the Ramsey family as suspects in the case.
I got a letter from a lady several years ago that said, ‘I was contemplating suicide.
He says the death of his oldest daughter, Beth, in 1992 was the beginning of his faith journey.
Andrea Pia Yates is an American woman from Houston, Texas, who confessed to drowning her five children in their bathtub on June 20, 2001.
FEBRUARY 26 1994, Harris County, TX Died: June 20, 2001, Houston, TX SHe had met her husband a former NASA engineer in her church.
During her first trial in 2002, Andrea Yates lawyers claimed she believed that the devil was inside her and that by killing her children she would save them from hell.
The highest number of contusions were found on the body of 7-year-old Noah Yates the child who fought the hardest to live as his mother forced him into the bathtub after chasing him through the house.
As many as 15 recent injuries were found on the boy’s body, ranging from his head to his arms to his legs, Sanchez said.
The bruises could have been caused by blows or someone squeezing him hard enough to crush his tissue and rupture his vessels, Sanchez said.
Molly Anne Bish was a sixteenyear-old American girl from rural Worcester County, Massachusetts, who disappeared while working as a lifeguard in her hometown of Warren, Massachusetts.
Connection to Holly Piirainen case Fellow Massachusetts resident Holly Piirainen was murdered seven years earlier.
It is located about 46 miles south of Boston, 16 miles southeast of Providence, Rhode Island, and 12 miles west of New Bedford Leslie Marie Perlov, 21, is shown in an undated photo.
John Arthur Getreu was arrested NOV. 20, 2018, 45 years later, thanks in part to DNA genealogy analysis.
Schmid, Driftwood Beach Club Member, Eugenics Psy-Op Warrior A few months ago, we came across the YouTube videos of Manny Grossman, by way of Jason Goodman of the Crowd Source the Truth Channel.
He knows a lot about the Son of Sam murders and does walking tours of Yonkers, explaining different aspects of the murders, and interviewing Younker’s locals who can speak about the murder.
The subject of sacrificed dogs comes up in the Son of Sam lore frequently.
The mention of dead dogs in Untermyer Park prompted another look at a lady we came across a few years ago while looking at a completely different, it seemed at the time, murder.
Clay LaVergne Shaw was the only person put on trial for the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
As we like to do when researching “conspirators” we looked at his parents to see if they were conspirators in any earlier historical plots.
She married Tony Falco, an Italian American, in 1936 the time of Berlin Olympics.
After a marriage of less than four years, Tony Falco left her for another woman.
Local resident Cacilia Davis was walking her dog at the scene of the Moskowitz and Violante shooting when she saw patrol officer Michael Cataneo ticketing a car that was parked near a fire hydrant.
Moments after the traffic police had left, a young man walked past her from the area of the car and seemed to study her with some interest.
Davis remained silent about this experience for four days until she finally contacted police, who closely checked every car that had been ticketed in the area that night.
Berkowitz’s 1970 four-door yellow Ford Galaxie was among the cars that they investigated.
On AUGUST 9, 1977, NYPD detective James Justis telephoned Yonkers police to ask them to schedule an interview with Berkowitz.
The Yonkers police dispatcher who first took Justis’ call was Wheat Carr, the daughter of Sam Carr and sister of Berkowitz’s alleged cult confederates John and Michael Carr.
In 1979, Berkowitz mailed a book about witchcraft to police in North Dakota.
The reference was to Arlis Perry, a 19-year-old North Dakota newlywed who had been murdered at Stanford on October 12, 1974.
Her death, and the notorious abuse of her corpse in a chapel on campus, was a widely reported case.
Berkowitz mentioned the Perry attack in other letters, suggesting that he knew details of it from the perpetrator himself.
Massachusettes Unsolved Lizzie Andrew Borden was an American woman tried and acquitted of the AUGUST 4, 1892, axe murders of her father and stepmother in Fall River, Massachusetts.
Elliott was alive, she also filed complaints regarding being treated unfairly by the Louisville Metro Police Dept.
Harold Allen Ramis Ramis was born on November 21, 1944, in Chicago, Illinois, the son of Ruth and Nathan Ramis, who owned the Ace Food & Liquor Mart on the city’s far North Side.
Louis, Missouri, where he was a member of the Alpha Xi chapter of Zeta Beta Tau fraternity.
VA .. prepared me well for when I went out to Hollywood to work with actors.
And not just with actors; it was good training for just living in the world.
It’s knowing how to deal with people who might be reacting in a way that’s connected to anxiety or grief or fear or rage.
But if I were a businessman, I’d probably be applying those \same principles to that line of work.
Additionally, Ramis had begun studying and performing with Chicago’s Second City improvisational comedy troupe.
And they happened to have their entry-level job, party jokes , editor, open.
He liked my stuff and he gave me a stack of jokes that readers had sent ‘ in and asked me to rewrite them.
Radner was born in Detroit, Michigan, to Jewish parents, Henrietta , a legal secretary, and Herman Radner, a businessman.
Through her mother, i s Radinee was a second cousin of business executive Steve Ballmer.
She grew up in Detroit with a nanny, Elizabeth Clementine Gillies, whom she called “Dibby” (and ; on whom she based her famous character Emily Litella), and an older brother, ; Michael.
There, she made her } professional acting debut in the 1972 production of Godspell, with future stars ' Eugene Levy, Andrea Martin, Victor Garber, Martin Short, and Paul Shaffer.
Finally, Henry Ford II resigned from his trustee’s role in a surprise move in December 1976.
Steves at Ford father was a Swiss immigrant who predicted that his son, at eight years old, would attend Harvard.
Through his mother, Ballmer is a second cousin of actress and comedian Gilda Radner.
Ballmer grew up in the affluent community of Farmington Hills, Michigan.
Ballmer also lived in Brussels from 1964 to 1967, where he attended the International School of Brussels.
The Ford Foundation at about this time is thought to have worked with the CIA and East-West Center of Hawaii and Lyndon Baines Johnson to create sleeper agent Barrack Obama Jr. and others for overthrow of various targeted nations.
Harvard Advocate, and lived down the hall from fellow sophomore Bill Gates.
After briefly trying to write screenplays in Hollywood, in 1980 Ballmer ; dropped out of the Stanford Graduate School of Business to join Microsoft.
His father was of olish and Russian descent Anesthesia and his mother of ScottishIrish, Norwegian, and Icelandic ancestry.
He was raised in the Bensonhurst and Brighton Beach love Vou 16 Death neighborhoods of Brooklyn.
Steele was the youngest of six Christian Woman hildren, with five older Sisters.
During 2005, Steele isappeared for an extended period with no explanation.
Rumors of his death, terminal illness, and other speculations increased until the mystery was dispelled in an interview on the 2006 DVD Symphony for the Devil.
Steele’s family members had staged an intervention and insisted i he check into a mental institution.
Steele had been using cocaine ; since the age of 35, a decision in which he expressed great regret.
Steele made light of his incarceration by wearing a prison uniform on stage during live performances.
What came as a lamb returning as a lion Not a nation but a self-proclaimed state Since the year of our Lord 1-9-4-8 The road to redemption leads through deserts Rocky though the trip through is well worth it I am the duel of the fisherman Simon He brought alpha, omega, yes, I’m the one The twins fell beginning Armageddon So the whore too who dwelleth in Babylon, Babylon All his people Gathered ‘round Through forgiveness Salvation found, found, found, found, found Steele stated in a 2003 interview that he had bipolar disorder, and linked his mood swings to the types of songs he wrote.
He also received occasional psychiatric treatment for depressive episodes.
But after going through a midlife crisis and having many things change very quickly, it made me realize my mortality.
And when you start to think about death, you start to think about what’s after it.
And what do they need/ Need | Request of help Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here SYMPATHY Sympathy is a feeling of pity or sense of compassion it’s when you feel bad for someone else who’s going through something hard.
If you look at the Greek roots 5 of this oid antiand Salles: ‘ you can see that antipathy is a feeling against someone or ‘something.
In general, antipathies are feelings that are kept at least somewhat vunder wraps and are not out in the open. ii Sc <li i i Micheal Hastings Fiance Andrea Parhamovich Andrea Parhamovich Wikipedia ' Official photo of David Petraeus, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency David Howell Petraeu is a retired United States Army general and public official.
Despite his parents’ pronunciation of his name as /'kolin/, Powell has pronounced his name /'kovlin/ since childhood, after the World War II B-17 flyer Colin P Kelly Jr.
APRIL 10, 1979, Horodets’, Ukraine On October 21, 2021, she was fatally wounded in a shooting incident during production on the set of the film Rust.
She or her family may have knowledge of Cold War era agricultural programs in enetics before the USSR fell.
It was during the Cold War a plane was shot down by he Russians. ga Hutchins was born in Horodets, Zhytomyr Oblast, but grew up in Murmansk, on a Soviet military base in the Arctic.
On 21 October 2021, Hutchins was working in Santa Fe, New Mexico, as director i of photography on the set of Rust, when actor Alec Baldwin discharged a prop gun, i seriously injuring her and director Joel Souza.
Before being found in a landfill and his breifacse having been stolen he was walking between two buildings. e Mitre Corp. runs some of the United States government’s most hush-hush science and tech labs.
The cloak-and-dagger R&D shop might just be the most important organization you’ve never heard of. e DuPont Corporation as a large chemical and atomic energy contractor Wheeler’s remains were interred at Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors on April 29, 2011.
He was consultant to acting Under Secretary of Defense for i Acquisition, Technology and Logistics from 2001 to 2005, special assistant to the ; Secretary of the Air Force from 2005 to 2008.
Born in Waverly, Tennessee, Ramsey-Baker lived with 1 substantial hearing loss for many years before she had her hearing completely i restored at age 35, with an early fenestration operation.
By 1972, the DRF was funding research on cochlear implants, with later grants in s single channel to multi-channel implants, speech perception among cochlear implant 1 users, and implants in children.
Unlike birds and reptiles, humans and other mammals are normally unable to regrow the cells of the inner ear that convert sound into neural signals when those cells are damaged by age or disease.
Incelebration of its 50th Anniversary, the DRF rang the opening bell at the New | i | | | | | | | | | | | | ; Restoration Project.
Vicki Morgan retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ""Victoria Lynn Morgan (AUGUST 9, 1952 JULY 7, 1983 Victoria Lynn Morgan was the mistress of Alfred S Bloomingdale, heir to the Bloomingdale’s department store fortune.
Bloomingdale mistress She found work as an usher at Grauman’s Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles.
Not Eligible to Practice Law Address: 2705 San Carlos Dr, Walnut Creek, CA 94598 The State Bar of California Walter Leonard Gibbs #68930 Address: 2705 San Carlos Dr, Walnut Creek, CA 94598 rnses maive rannes[acive i Suspended, failed to pay fees anais76 [Admit Sate Barof Calon There was something very suspicous that turned into a huge concern to my father and even brought him to question in an honest way if I had any role.
Following completion in 1966 he returned to Atlanta and entered practice with his father.[citation needed] From 1959 to 1961, he served as a flight surgeon in the United States Navy stationed at the Keflavik naval base in Iceland.
The passengers were given the option of leaving the aircraft but McDonald remained on the plane, catching up on his sleep Paul Mitchell I] was an American businessman and politician from the state of Michigan who served as a United States Representative for Michigan’s 10th congressional district.
F, Kennedy while completing his V-12 studies at Bates College; in the background is a snow replica of a cae ship.
C >) On NOVEMBER 24, 2009 Michaele and Tareq Salahi crash a White House dinner for Barrack Obama Jr.
Pore fuels 2024 speculation with cash infusion into new PAC with Wichita ties —retrieved from McClatchy DC Bureau BY BEN WIEDER APRIL 15, 2021 and copied or modified to here Entire interview with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo in Wichita Kansas Video Duration 10:06 wr"" | Fi ri ri ri ri ri Pi ri ri Pi Pi ri Fi ri Pi ri ri ri Pi ri ri ri Pi ri ri Pi Pi ri Pi ri ri ri ri ri Pi ri Fi Pi Pi ri ri Pi Pi ri Fi ri ri ri ri ri Pi ri Pi ri Pi a» The Wichita Eagle and Kansas City Star’s Jonathan Shorman sat down with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo in Wichita on October 24, 2019.
BY JONATHAN SHORMAN Former Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s dormant United States House campaign fund has donated to a newly formed political action committee that uses the same Kansasbased bank and bears the name of his new political slogan, according to financial disclosures.
During late 1956 and 1957 he served in South Korea first as Regimental Executive Officer and later as Commanding Officer, 1st Battalion, 19th Infantry Regiment.
Louis Freeh retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Freeh, a native of North Bergen, graduated from St.
One month after the explosion, chemists at the FBI crime laboratory in | i ; Washington found traces of PETN, an explosive component of bombs and surface‘ to-air missiles.
DNA extracted from hair found in Scott Peterson’s |Sharon named Laci after a boat in their attempt to prove he killed his pregnant pretty girl she met in high wife and dumped her body in San Francisco Bay, a_chool.
Laci’s older brother, judge ruled Monday. rent Rocha, was born in 1971.
Sharon and he children moved to odesto, though the children isited the dairy farm on Mitochondrial DNA has rarely been used as evidence in California court cases and it can’t provide a definitive match.
The ruling came in the fourth week of the preliminary hearing to determine whether there’s ; | murder trial. ventually married Ron rantski, who helped raise Laci and Brent from the time ;| enough evidence against Peterson to warrant a eta a Sharon Laci was two years old.
I | While Scott finished his senior year, Laci took a job in nearby Prunedale.
Peterson graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in ; agricultural business in June 1998.
Frey, now 46-years-old, has gone on to return to a somewhat normal life following the Scott Peterson trial.
She formerly owned a day spa in California, but Euphoria Day Spa went bankrupt sometime in 2015.
Patrick @TrickFreee Retweeted FactFreeh @FactFreeon twitter With all eyes on Putin’s aggression against Ukraine, seems like a good time to remind people that former FBI Director Freeh worked for a couple of Ukrainian oligarchs who fled to Russia when Yanukovych was deposed.
Psone Believe Marina Abramovic Is the Satanic Ringleader of a Global Political «Conspiracy.
By the end of the film, though, Abramovic will serve as a much bigger symbol.
After liberating Luxembourg, V Corps fought in the Battle of the Bulge, captured Leipzig, made first contact with the Red Army at Torgau, and, south in Czechoslovakia, liberated Plzen by May 1945.
We had shared stories of growing up as Army kids, from my time playing in the German woods to her great dislike of the huge cockroaches in El Paso, Texas.
He helped lead the Ist Armored Division to victory in the Persian Gulf War as Assistant Division Commander At the time of his death, he was the Deputy Commanding General for United States Army V Corps.
There is less evidence against 90% of the people on death row than these troopers have brought forth relative to Bill Clinton and his activities.
After two hi years, he was reassigned as the G2 Operations 1S Officer, 9"" Infantry Division.
He left Fort Lewis in 1980 for a one year tour in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, account where he was the Team Chief assigned to instruct Saudi officers in S2 functions. at the firm of Clinton supporter and friend Dan Lasater.
Federal agents killed in the Branch Davidian raid in Waco, Tom McKeehan, Conway Le Bleu, and Robert Williams, were former Clinton bodyguards.
Attorney Paul Wilcher, who investigated drug and gun running out of Mena, Arkansas and their links to the Branch Davidians, died of undetermined causes three weeks after submitting a 99 page affidavit to Attorney General Janet Reno.
Four Marine presidential crewmen who escorted Clinton on the flight to the Carrier Roosevelt, Maj.
Opps sociate and legal council to the President, allegedly committed suicide, using a non-traceable hand gun, built from parts of several guns.
CLINTON NAMES PANETTA CHIEF OF STAFF By Ann DevroyJune 28, 1994 WAPO President Clinton yesterday announced the second major shake-up of his administration, replacing White House Chief of Staff Thomas F “Mack” McLarty with Office of Management and Budget Director Leon E Panetta and setting new roles for two other senior officials.
David R Gergen, the Republican brought in as counselor to shore up a faltering White House in May 1993, is being shifted to a foreign policy role as senior adviser to both Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
On AUG. 15, 1993, more than a year later, Walker posed as a prospective renter, went up to the 22nd floor of a luxury apartment building in Arlington, Va., and jumped to his death.
Murder in the First Degree, An Interim Report on the Death of Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and 34 Other United States Citizens, Concluding Report Date Contingent Upon Hearings in House Committee on National Security and Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs (Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations), Private Report by Nicholas A Guarino, received from The Wall Street Underground, 12254 Nicollet Ave.
In a couple of hours he will be a rich man, the two American operatives told him, if he can quietly send IFOR-21 into Sveti Ivan (St.
Henry had been stabbed in the back and Ives had his skull crushed, leading to the ; conclusion that the “wounds were so clearly evident, the Malak ruling was no simple , mistake.” i ' The boys were believed to have stumbled upon a huge drug transaction at Mena ' Airport.
Three minutes after takeoff from Quantico, at 12:46 i pm, May 19, 1993, their copter crashed into a wooded area in Maryland.
According to Eustace Mullins, The establishment approved version of Admiral Boorda’s suicide is that he could not face being asked about the decorations he had worn and that suicide was the only way out.
Attempts to quash the investigation were thwarted by Pennsylvania ‘ Representative William F Klinger, Jr., Chairman of the House Government Reform , and Oversight Committee, who revealed incriminating documents.
Andi and I talk late into the night about how we’ll celebrate it when we see each other in VIenna in March. wr Micheal Hastings and Victoria Windsor Investigating Obama origins reporting ye Z| Micheal Hastings speaks, him quoted and speaking in the first person How ironic that they accuse Trump of Russia involvement when it was they who conspired with Russia to produce a polished liar and charlatan to unleash on an unsuspecting and naive nation.
James Joseph “Whitey” Bulger Jr. (/‘bAld3ar/; September 3, 1929 October 30, 2018) was an American organized crime boss and FBI informant who led the Winter Hill Gang in the Winter Hill neighborhood of Somerville, Massachusetts, a city directly northwest of Boston.
Amount distributed to victims of crime and claimants in fiscal 2017 $144. million Amount shared with participating state and local law enforcement agencies in fiscal 2017 Se W Washington Director Donald W Washington was nominated by President Donald J Trump to lead the United States Marshals Service on Oct 2, 2018.
Cae Driscoll Tapped as USMS Acting Deputy Director Acting Deputy Director Derrick DriscollWashington Derrick Driscoll received approval as United States Marshals Service acting deputy director by Attorney General William Barr April 23, announced USMS Director Donald Washington.
Neocons, Judeo Christian Religious loyalists to the Western side of the Roman Empire and its Middle East Jerusalem and African goals.
Note Rupurt Murdoch is named by some who use CIA encoding of Illuminati references and Rogere Allies of Fox News was unusually outed in a NOV 18 settled law suit and died from a head blow hemorrhage a short time later.
SARAH BERKLEY Author of “The Jihad at the Ballot Box” a book examining Obama’s relationship with radical Islam.
List Of 71 Clinton Associates Who Died Mysteriously Or Committed Suicide Before TestimonyAvatarAlexander Light AUGUST 12, 2019 * 14 Florence Martin Accountant & sub-contractor for the CIA, was related to the Barry Seal (he had the PIN to bank account of $1.46 million set up for Seal), Mena, Arkansas, airport drug smuggling case.
Ian Stuart Spiro (Born 14 DECEMBER 1946 #MKULTRA Aug4 1945 His brother-in-law believed the CIA or Mossad was involved in his death.
Many linked to the case died before their testimony could come before a Grand Jury.
On the morning of July 21, her body was found in her bedroom with multiple stab wounds and extensive burns.
Z Roger Stone Suggests Gas Explosion at Florida Warehouse Was ‘Drone Strike’ Targeting Him retrieved from Newsweek BY JASON LEMON ON 4/24/21 and copied or modified to here Roger Stone and right-wing radio personality Matthew Erich “Mancow” Muller posted a video this week baselessly speculating that Stone had been targeted by a drone strike in Florida.
He was pardoned by the former president in December after he was sentenced to 40 months in prison in 2020 for lying to Congress and threatening a witness in connection with the investigation into Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election. in front of the site of an Oakland Park warehouse that burned down after a fire caused a gas explosion on Wednesday.
A congressman has called for an FBI probe into the death of mayoral candidate Marco McMillian An openly gay Mississippi mayoral candidate whose body was found dumped on a riverbank last week was beaten and burned, his family has said.
It was discovered on Tuesday. in Mississippi” Albert Peterson shot dead his wife and two sons hours after going to church because he dreaded the thought of Obama winning the election, a family friend has revealed.
January 12, 2011, Warrenton, VA Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewicz was an American dog trainer.
She trained dogs such as Bo, United States President Barack Obama’s dog and late senator Edward Kennedy’s three dogs. of Positive Reinforcement Sep 25, 2012 by Larry Kay, Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewicz Training the Best Dog Ever relies on trust and treats, not choke collars; on bonding, not leash-yanking or reprimanding.
In March 2019, President Donald Trump said he would nominate Liu to become United States Associate Attorney General, but she withdrew her name from consideration later that month because the Republican-controlled Senate Judiciary Committee objected to her nomination.
Prince Cheikh Selim is the oldest son of HRH Prince Cheikh Antonios bin Mikhael E] Chemor, revered to be the honorary founder of the modern Royal House of Ghassan.
Even being already “res judicata” (matter already judged not subject to appeal) by Brazilian Law, the International Award was recognized and enforced by the Los Angeles Superior Court in February 2012.
A cargo of 2,750 tonnes of ammonium nitrate (equivalent to around 1. kilotons of TNT had been stored in a warehouse without proper safety measures for the previous six years, after having been confiscated by the Lebanese authorities from the abandoned ship MV Rhosus. reporting by Der Spiegel has found that it was not Russian national Grechushkin who owned the Rhosus, but rather the Cypriot businessman Charalambos Manoli, who maintained a relationship with the bank used by Hezbollah in Lebanon.
It was also in 1936, the same year Spencer Jr. was made a Knight of the Order of the Crown of Italy by Benito Mussolini Il Duce, Ruling Sovereign.
I was the captain of the Lebanese football team and the president of the Lebanese Football federation.
Betty’s other brother, Lee Williams, had been beaten severely and hospitalized the AUGUST before. ‘ y Py Currie was born in Edwards, Mississippi and moved to Waukegan, ‘ Illinois as a child.
After leaving high school, she worked in the clerical field at the Naval Station Great Lakes in Illinois.
She later moved to Washington, DC and ' worked at the Navy Department, the Postal Service, United States Agency for International ' Development , the Peace Corps, and the Department of Health and ' Human Services rI t I i I Currie’s rise in the government bureaucracy began when Joseph Blatchford became Peace Corps Director in 1969 and needed a new secretary.
After initially retiring from government service, she met John Podesta who encouraged her to return in 1984 to run offices for the Mondale and then again for the 1988 Dukakis Presidential campaigns and later join the Clinton campaign where she worked with James Carville in the famous “War Room” in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Funeral arrangements were made through the Carter-Taylor-Williams Mortuary and buried in Meadowlawn Memorial Park in San Antonio, Texas.
BP eDESTRIAN DEATH ON I-95 RULED ACCIDENTAL retrieved from link and copied or modified to here February 14, 1998 Virginia State Police have concluded that Theodore R Williams Jr. of Fort Washington — the brother of President Clinton’s personal secretary, Betty Currie — did not intend to commit suicide when he ran onto Interstate 95 north of Richmond after a traffic accident and was struck and killed by a tractor-trailer.
Evans, a state police spokeswoman. : Williams, a 52-year-old building mechanic for the Postal Service, died Dec., ; weeks before Currie was called before a federal grand jury investigating former : White House intern Monica S Lewinsky.
Sightings # 85 LANCE HERNDON gets the Justice Scalia Ploythis Clinton Appointee was found BLUDGEONED to DEATH in his bed.
A prominent entrepreneur who received a presidential appointment in 1995 Lance Herndon, a 41 year old computer specialist, appeared to have died in his Atlanta mansion’s bedroom, under the bedcovers, from a blow to the head.
He later concentrated on the hotel industry, building the Helmsley Palace Hotel on Madison Avenue.
Both crashes, which occurred about 60 miles apart within 2 1/2 hours, were under K investigation.
There, he left his plane for repair i and rented another plane, Pope said.
Though a career officer, Elbridge Colby’s professional « pursuits focused less on strictly military activities and more on intellectual and f scholarly contributions to military and literary subjects.
With his Army father, William Colby had a peripatetic upbringing before attending i public high school in Burlington, Vermont.
Bored by the practice of law and inspired by his liberal beliefs, he moved to ' Washington to work for the National Labor Relations Board. i Colby then spent much of the 1950s based in Rome, under cover as a State 1 Department officer, where he led the Agency’s covert political operations 1 Campaign to support anti-Communist parties in their electoral contests against left 1 wing, Soviet Union-associated parties.
Tasked by CIA with supporting the » government of Ngo Dinh Diem, Colby established a relationship with President A Diem’s family and with Ng6 Dinh Nhu, the president’s brother, with whom Colby i became close.
F Colby’s death triggered conspiracy theories that his death was due to foul play.
DECEMBER 14, 1983 Born: FEBRUARY 19, 1946, Longview, TX Died: NOVEMBER 13, 1974, Crescent, OK After work on November 13, Silkwood went to a union meeting before heading home in her white Honda.
She is survived by her daughters, Rosemary Smith and husband, Bob of Mont Belview and Linda Vincent and husband, Matt of Port Neches; her brother, Jimmy Biggs and wife, Thelma of Hobbs, New Mexico; 8 grandchildren; and several greatgrandchildren. e THE KILLING OF KAREN SILKWOOD The Story Behind the Kerr-McGee im Plutonium Case.
Testifies there were 48 stab wounds to the front and back (15 to the back alone from the neck to lower pelvic bone), cutting wounds to the neck and face (deep cutting wounds to the left and right sides of the neck), two stab wounds to the left arm and a single gunshot wound to the chest.
Testifies there were 16 wounds to the neck and face alone and 5 deep cuts to the neck, with 2 particularly deep cuts to the left and right sides.
That and the fact Fakler had mutilating stab wounds to his face, which were not present in the other victims.
Guyger said that she had entered the apartment believing it was her own and that she shot Jean believing he was a burglar.
Events leading up to 2012 In April 2008, Rausing and his wife were arrested on drugs charges after Mrs Rausing allegedly tried to take small amounts of crack cocaine and heroin into the United States embassy in London.
They were charged with possession of a large amount of cocaine and smaller quantities of crack, heroin and cannabis after a Scotland Yard investigation.
He married Julia Delves Broughton, daughter of Sir Evelyn Delves Broughton, 12th Bt and sister of Isabella Blow, in June 2014.
As the muse of hat designer Philip Treacy, she is credited with discovering the models Stella Tennant and Sophie Dahl as well as propelling and continually advocating the career of fashion designer Alexander McQueen, beginning when she bought the entirety of his explosive premier show inspired by Jack the Ripper.
A year later, she left the Art History programme at Columbia, moved to Texas, and worked for Guy Laroche.
In 1981 she married her first husband, Nicholas Taylor (whom she divorced in 1983), and was introduced to the fashion director of the United States edition of Vogue, Anna Wintour.
Blow was hired initially as Wintour’s assistant, but it was not long before she was assisting André Leon Talley, as of 2008 United States Vogue’s editor-atlarge.
According to a 2002 interview with Tamsin Blanchard, it was Blow who brokered the deal in which Gucci purchased McQueen’s label.
Detmar Blow went on to have an affair with Stephanie Theobald, the society editor of British Harper’s Bazaar, while his estranged wife entered into a liaison with a gondolier she met in Venice.
During the couple’s separation, Blow was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and began undergoing electroshock therapy.
During this period she also had an affair with Matthew Mellon; however, after an eighteen-month separation, Isabella and Detmar Blow were reconciled.
Depressed over her waning celebrity status and her cancer diagnosis, Blow began telling friends that she was suicidal.
Later that year, Blow again attempted suicide by jumping from the Hammersmith Flyover, which resulted in her breaking both ankles.
Blow made several more suicide attempts in 2007, by driving her car into the rear of a lorry, attempting to obtain horse tranquilizers, trying to drown herself in a lake and by overdosing while on a beach in India.
The Day of the Murder Kitty quit her teaching job after Lyle was born, and the family moved to New Jersey, where Erik was born on November 27, 1970, in Gloucester Township.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Shane Todd’s girlfriend, Shirley Sarmiento, expected to hear from him on Friday or Saturday, but he did not respond to her messages.
Finding the door unlocked, she entered, and discovered Todd’s body hanging from a bathroom door.
Sarmiento then contacted Todd’s family in the United States to alert them to his death.
The police were quoted as saying that Todd “drilled holes into his bathroom wall, bolted in a pulley, then slipped a black strap through the pulley and wrapped it around the toilet several times.
The location of the toilet was also not where the police report indicated it was.
Furthermore, there were no signs of an investigation at the scene; police had not put up crime scene tape or dusted for fingerprints.
He was also apparently in the middle of trying to sell his furniture, and had been writing out price tags.
His airline ticket back to the United States was on the table, but his laptop and phone had been taken away by the police.
Police found several suicide notes allegedly left by Todd, but his family and girlfriend told the Financial Times that they did not seem to be Todd’s writing.
In one note, he apologized for being a burden to his family, but his mother said he had never been a burden; he had excelled at everything, she said.
David Camp, a criminologist from Illinois, analyzed the suicide note side by side with a collection of Todd’s other writings and told reporters that he held the opinion that the suicide note found by the police was not written by Todd.
Camp concluded that it wasn’t written by an American and wasn’t typical of a suicide, that he felt the note was detached and unemotional, and did not match up with Todd’s personality.
But on his body, Todd’s family found bruises on his hands and a bump on his forehead, neither of which was mentioned in the autopsy report.
Suspecting foul play, they asked the mortuary to photograph Shane’s body before burial, and send the photos to Edward Adelstein, a county-level deputy medical examiner in Missouri.
Adelstein’s initial theory was that Todd’s wounds did not support the suicide hypothesis.
The original pathologist in Singapore dismissed Adelstein’s conclusions, stating that Adelstein had not seen the body and had mistaken the post-mortem pooling of blood in the hands for bruises.
She served in the Mississippi House of Representatives, from Diamondhead, Mississippi, as a Republican from 2004 to 2013.
Upshaw was found dead in the home of former Mississippi State Representative Clint Rotenberry in Mendenhall, Mississippi on March 24, 2013.
Clinton Grice Rotenberry Jr. was a former American politician and businessman.
Rotenberry served in the Mississippi House of Representatives from 19922007.
Agenda 21 is a comprehensive plan of action to be taken globally, nationally and locally by organizations of the United Nations System, Governments, and Major Groups in every area in which human impacts on the environment.
The Commission on Sustainable Development was created in December 1992 to ensure effective follow-up of UNCED, to monitor and report on implementation of the agreements at the local, national, regional and international levels.
It was agreed that a five year review of Earth Summit progress would be made in 1997 by the United Nations General Assembly meeting in special session.
The full implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Commitments to the Rio principles, were strongly reaffirmed at the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in Johannesburg, South Africa from 26 August to 4 September 2002.
Martin Charles Scorsese born NOVEMBER 17, 1942) is an American film and television director, Graham King and Martin Scorsese hired Jean-Marc Vallée to direct the period drama The Young Victoria.
Written by Julian Fellowes, the film is based on the early life and reign of Queen Victoria, and her marriage to Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.
Director Of ‘Dallas Buyers Club,’ ‘Big Little Lies’ & ‘Sharp Objects’ Was 58; Heart Attack Believed To Be The Cause Julian Alexander Kitchener-Fellowes, Baron Fellowes of West Stafford DL (born 17 August 1949) is an English actor, novelist, film director and screenwriter, and a Conservative peer of the House of Lords.
Officially registered as J Epstein VI Foundation, the “VI” stands for Virgin Islands, where the foundation was based and Epstein owned a private island.
The foundation’s board included Cecile de Jongh, wife of the former Governor of the United States Virgin Islands, John de Jongh.
John Percy de Jongh, Jr. was born on November 13, 1957 and was raised on St.
He graduated from Catholic Central High School in Detroit and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics from Antioch College (Yellow Spring, Ohio) in 1981. i | | | | | | | i | | | | | ; John Percy de Jongh, Jr. is the seventh elected Governor of the United States | | i | | | | | | | | i | | | John Percy de Jongh Jr. is an American businessman "" and politician who served as the seventh elected Governor of the United States © Virgin Islands.
De n Jongh has been involved in community development, commercial banking, served i on the boards of business and philanthropic organizations, appointed to government © positions and elected to public office.
Jeffrey Epstein case threatens to drag Virgin Islands elite into the muck.
Miami Herald * The United States Virgin Islands opened up a new and explosive front in the battle over Jeffery Epstein’s $600 million estate this week when it included one of the sex offender’s companies, Southern Trust, as a co-defendant in the case. ith that late amendment, the attorney general’s office seemed to be painting a target on some of the island’s most prominent figures, including Gov.
Social media and the island’s legal community erupted with speculation that the powerful officials might get dragged into the mire created by Epstein’s criminal enterprise and human trafficking ring.
But in an interview with the Miami Herald, USVI Attomey General Denise George squelched those rumors, saying there was no evidence yet that might suggest broader responsibility. -BY JIM WYSS UPDATED FEBRUARY 14, 2020 6:40 PM At issue is Southern Trust, a purported data-mining company that Epstein incorporated in the USVI in 2011, and that the government believes was a sham to cover up his illegal activities.
Elisabeth and Robert Maxwell retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Elisabeth Jenny JEANNE Maxwell (née Meynard; 11 March 1921 7 AUGUST 1 2013) was a French-born researcher of the Holocaust who established the journal n Holocaust and Genocide Studies in 1987.
She was married to publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell from 1945 until his death in 1991 when the family soon came under scrutiny for his business dealings, especially his responsibility for the Mirror Group © pension scandal.
In September 1944, after the Liberation of Paris, she met Czechoslovakian-born : British Army Captain Robert Maxwell, while working as an interpreter for the ; Welcome Committee, which introduced French people to allied officers; they : married on 15 March 1945.
She then worked as his secretary and assistant in ' London as he established his publishing empire.
All of "" Maxwell’s children were delivered by her sister Yvonne, a gynecologist, in Maisons' Laffitte, France.
Founded in 1998 1 by Dr Edward Kessler MBE and the Revd Professor Martin Forward in central Cambridge on the Westminster College Site, it is dedicated to the study of interfaith relations between Jews, Christians and Muslims.
The CoC does not have policy-making powers and serves solely as an advisory institution to the American and other governments.
Clinton, although no direct evidence has yet emerged to tie her to the group.
In 2012, Lord James has come to the following conclusions about 1 Foundation X, “I think there may have been a massive piece of money laundering committed by a major government which ought to know better and that it has effectively undermined the integrity of the British bank the Royal Bank of Scotland, vi in doing so.
The second alternative is that a major American department has an agency that has gone rogue on it because it has been wound up and has created a ql ; structure out of which they are seeking to get at least 50 billion Euros as a payoff.
CIA dosed prostitutes with LSD and «Watched them have sex behind mirrors.
United States intelligence recruitment of over 1600 Nazi ; €ientists into United States military intelligence.
The policies of abuse 4f/S/UK MILITARY INTELLIGENCE ASTROTURFING ciology and the weaponization of public psychology, including military In the Smedinghoff sanction, Homeland Director Janet Naps Napolitano knew of this operation, the CIA knew of this operation as she was one of their “own” and the NSA proper knew of the assassination.
Napolitano is often in the dark about operations being run in the high profile, and that 1 includes the murder of Hugo Chavez.
Vivian Malone Jones uncle Henry In the upcoming 90-minute PB ycumentary Children: Maya Holder, Brooke Holder, Eric Holder Dr.
Ivy HeteroInflexible I believe overtly faked warrants on me, by William Ruiz and Jim Volcelka, are what Jen Moore was murdered over.
Vincent R < Stewart Vincent R Stewart is a Jamaican American lieutenant general in the United States Marine Corps who is currently serving as Deputy Commander at United States Cyber Command.
Prosecutors spent too much time in their offices and the courthouse, and not enough y time in the community. f Ronald C Machen told his future boss in a job interview that they needed to have a regular presence throughout the District by attending ""Tm comfortable in all environments.
My goal is to represent all community forums. meetings in opel says raat ere the District's new United States ailomey.
In fact he was born as part of a Windsor FBI NSA DARPA plan on November 18 1961 at Daniel Freeman Memorial Hospital Manhattan Beach in the Manhattan Project to Eva Ban, surrogate.
August 4 1962 they were staging a birthday party for him with Marilyn Monroe and Malcom X She died that day.
Peace On Earth Trapp Family Singers Carol Of The Drum Glenn Allen Youngkin is an American businessman and politician who is the governorelect of Virginia.
Among other obligations to obey the Queen, Youngkin was duty bound to follow the British Official Secrets Act as a QinetiQ officer responsible to co-sign all contracts entered into by the company.
The QinetiQ Articles of Association affirm that Trapp Family Singers Carol Of The Drum Youngkin was the company ee ne secretary and keeper of the seal.
Petraeus has repeatedly stated that he i has no plans to run for elected political : office.
McChrystal as commanding general of ' the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, technically a step down ' from his position as Commander of United States Central Command, which oversees : the military efforts in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Central Asia, the Arabian Peninsula, and ' Egypt.
On June 30, 2011, Petraeus was unanimously confirmed as the Director of the CIA by i the United States Senate 94-0.
About that time Prince Edward of Wales breifly becomes King Edward VIII, denounces the Nazis, and resigns as King of England to become Duke and husband of Ductchess of Windsor, Maryland USA resident Wallis Simpson.
To stabilize their financial situation Georg worked on several endeavors including writing his WWI memoir, lecturing, and exploring some engineering ideas.
Williamson Grea 1938, Trapp Family Choir “i took some time to land oe a name for the group.
Festus Gainey BIRTH 19 Oct 1884 Wayne County, North Carolina, USA DEATH 3 Mar 1936 Wallis Simpson, Earl Winfield Spencer Jr. was a pioneering United States Navy pilot who served as the first commanding officer of Naval Air Station San Diego.
She was the former Miriam Ham, daughter of George and Katie Anastasia (née Eagels) Ham of Portland, Oregon.
USAIDPece \ liga CorpsFord Foundation Big Oil, Big Great Leap Forward Pharma .. ; and Communist GDP Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thugstalkers the poor resent Theodore L Gunderson was a Federal Bureau of Investigation Special Agent In Charge and head of the Los Angeles FBI, an American author, and a conspiracy theorist.
He would later recollect he had first observed Colette “walking down the hallway with her best friend” and that, although he was attracted to both girls, he found Colette more attractive.
The two formed a brief romantic relationship in the ninth grade, with MacDonald later recollecting they fell in love while holding hands on a balcony while watching the movie A Summer Place at the Rialto Theatre.
United States GOVERNMENT RUNS ‘GANG STALKING’ VIGILANTISM, SAYS EXFBI OFFICIAL Theodore L Gunderson a Theodore L Gunderson (seen here in his FBI Office)was the author of the best-selling book How to Locate Anyone Anywhere Without Leaving Home and Santa Monica ean private attorney Theodore L Gunderson (7 November 1928 31 July 2011) was a Federal Bureau of Investigation Special Agent In Charge and head of the Los Angeles FBI, an American author, and a conspiracy theorist.
Illuminati, 2,000 highly placed great social leaders Use monetary and sex bribery in social controll adhesion of movement because once entrapped patsys are slaves at risk of being exposed by the Illuminati and thus are blackmail slaves of Illuminati.
In 1786 Barvarians get rid of Illuminati, not Audubon and USA forming in 1800 following 1776.
Born: NOVEMBER 22, 1977, Auckland, New Zealand Died: July 25, 2013, San Francisco, CA Hacker found dead days before he was to demonstrate how to hack a pacemaker Their Camera Phone Craig Spence organized operations like these.
Quote retrieved from My Experiences With A Drug Kingpin and copied or modified to here eles Retired Brig.
America, and had many friends within both the Medellin and Cali cartels.
Bowen and others became disenchanted with the CIA involvement with drugs and ; wanted to stop the practice of bringing them into America.
Many had been longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo and had conducted experiments on humans al concentration Comps and commited other war crimes.
Aa scientists ended The Woolsey Fire was a destructive wildfire that burned in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties of the United States state of California.
It was one of several fires in California that ignited on the same day.
Possible work with John Trump, brother of Donald John Trump Beam guidance Jones’s first job was to study “new German weapons”, real or potential.
Aldrich Hazen “Rick” Ames is a former Central Intelligence Agency officer tured KGB double agent, who was convicted of espionage in 1994.
Hall was appointed in February 2011 by Governor Rick Perry, and was replaced in February 2017.
November 8, 2005 May 13, 2008 President George W Bush Preceded by Alexander : Vershbow Succeeded by John Beyrle Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern ; Affairs In office June 4, 2001 March 2, 2005 President George W Bush Preceded by : Edward S Walker Jr.
For the Egyptian government—eager to take rapid strides toward ' land, and a meager reserve of foreign exchange—American economic aid promised to "" serve as an enormously important crutch.
For American policymakers, economic i assistance appeared to be an ideal means of developing American influence in Egypt.
Few aid relationships in the last three decades can match the drama and significance i of the U.S.-Egyptian experience.
It follows, appointing Mueller “Special Counsel” in a case where Western liberal democracies’ intelligence agencies are implicated is brilliantly cynical.
Quote retrieved from link and copied or modified to here osted on October 5, 2020 Homeland Security to Grant Millions to Groups to Combat White Supremacists and Other Extremists a ee cs) Homeland Security’s new Targeted Violence and Terrorism Prevention program ; announced $10 million in grants in recent weeks to several organizations dedicated to ‘ stopping white supremacist and far-right violence, and identifying extremists of all ' kinds.
In answer to my father’s question I always get death threats when I go to libraries or read books on science, study law, etc., , as was true then twenty years ago.
Now it is time a court heard why, y and why I was stranded at the time.
The intimidation, the lies, the false police reports filed against me, the violations of all : the FIOA laws, all this fucking goddanm bullshit will end.
A Slightly Gothic Interplanetary Tale is a space opera novel by [As Donald Barr, the father of CIAs former United States Attorney General William Barr close friend of FBI Director Christopher Wray.
Morgan Sidney, the only female member of the oligarchy, with whom he became ' romantically involved.
That’s the euphemistic term the bureau tends to use to denote white supremacist violence.
None of this is new information, though I imagine that many people reading this item are hearing about it for the first time. i 7 . . . © ginrique “Ric” Prado is a paramilitary, counter-terrorism, and special/clandestine ' Op erations specialist, with a focus on international training operations and programs. 1 served as an Operations Officer in six overseas posts.
Analyst, Michael Scheuer, as well as Chief of Station in a hostile Muslim country.
Director of Central Intelligence John McCone in 1962 began creating a new directorate within the CIA that would bring cutting-edge technology to the nation’s hardest intelligence challenges.
The statement didn’t identify McAfee by name but said the dead man was a 75-year-old United States citizen awaiting extradition to his country.
To address both physical threats and cyberthreats, the leading federal i ' agency must have the flexibility and resources to quickly mitigate any potential u . | ' interruptions or harm. d i | | | | | | | | Last week, a critical step was taken in how the Department of Homeland Security manages cybersecurity.
This seating arrangement supported the conversational music of composers like Mozart and Mahler. have proof in his hands | am an exploiter of females.
Oh those brave cops are too busy to investigate this. | wh ed.donegan ed.donegan Placed along my as | am on my way to TMobile.
My cell phone in use for “k”navigation knowledge map usage to a store, illicit “R” eproductive interests staged against ey will.
Mere innuendo, less than name calling. refutes the central point Refutation contradicts and then backs it up with reasoning and/or supporting evidence states the opposing case with little or no supporting evidence criticizes the tone of the writing without Responding to.
Ad Hominem Paul Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement lists ad hominem as the second lowest type of argument in a disagreement.
Modified by Rocket000 hand-coded by uploader; based on en:Image:Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement jpg by BUNKO to others, the acts of those surrounding me and physically blockading women from my proximity, is justified.
Republican, Sessions previously served as United States Senator from Alabama from 1997 to 2017, resigning from the position in order to serve in the Trump administration.
Wikipedia James Comey < Former Dire rea investigatior James Brien Comey Jr. is an American lawyer who was the 7th Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in LS SS Eee May 2017.
Her meeting at a dance club with society osteopath Stephen Ward drew her into fashionable circles.
At the height of the Cold War, she became sexually involved with a married Cabinet minister, John Profumo, as well as with a Soviet naval attaché, Yevgeny Ivanov.
A shooting incident involving a third lover caused the press to investigate her, revealing that her affairs could be threatening national security.
In the House of Commons, Profumo denied any improper conduct but later admitted that he had lied.
This incident discredited the Conservative government of Harold Macmillan in 1963, in what became known as the Profumo affair.
Keeler was alleged to have been a prostitute, which was not a criminal offence.
Ward was, however, found guilty of being her pimp; a trial was instigated after the embarrassment caused to the government.
The trial has since been considered a miscarriage of justice and a charade by the establishment to protect itself. first appeared in Washington as a photo model under the pseudonym Ellen Rometsch.
Baker later found her a job as a hostess for the Quorum Club at the Coroll Arms Hotel on Capitol Hill, adjacent to a Senate office building.
It was a private club, founded by Baker requiring annual membership dues and was used by lawmakers and other influential men to meet for food, drink, and engage in dalliances with ladies away from the press that were constantly downstairs at the bar in the hotel lobby.
It was during the summer of 1963 that, according to later claims by Baker, the President of the United States, John F Kennedy, met 27-year-old Ellen Rometsch and allegedly began an affair with her.
Rometsch had worked in the Quorum Club for about two years before allegedly starting her affair with Kennedy.
Rometsch had apparently disclosed details of her illicit relations with highly placed government officials that she had met at the club, to a former FBI informant of questionable reliability.
Because she had been born in East Germany and was rumored to have once worked for Walter Ulbricht, the FBI decided to investigate her.
Attorney General Robert F Kennedy was informed of the planned investigation on July 3, 1963.
On July 12, 1963 Rometsch was interviewed by the FBI and it was concluded that the security allegations against her were not warranted and the high-level sex contacts were unsubstantiated.
However, due to the sensation that the Profumo affair in the United Kingdom had created in the press and because the United States State Department could not remove Rometsch without disclosing a specific reason to the West German authorities, it was decided that the information developed by the FBI would be transmitted via liaison to the State Department and then be made available discreetly to West German authorities.
Rometsch was informed by his superiors of the allegations being made against his wife and that he was therefore being recalled back to West Germany in one week.
Rometsch was expelled from the United States on August 21, 1963 “because of her behavior in Washington”, behavior which according to media reports threatened to have scandalous overtones reminiscent of the Profumo affair.
The allegations involving Rometsch and her subsequent removal from the U.S., were brought to the public’s attention through a front page article written by Clark R Mollenhoff in the October 26, 1963, issue of the Des Moines Register.
A few days later Clark Mollenhoff asked President Kennedy at a live televised press conference if he is fulfilling the requirements of his Code of Ethics.
FBI, passed along a salacious allegation about Flynn during a meeting * with his FBI handler, Stephen Somma, on Aug., 2016.
Both Page and Papadopoulos have identified Halper as the person who has been described in FBI documents as the bureau’s confidential human source for Crossfire Hurricane.
The Defense Intelligence Agency’s potential interests in me. e DJA has an interest in concealing Obama DNA and Birther dates tied to my family.
Office, which played a vital role in creation of ARPANET, the basis for : the future Internet.
The DEFENDER and AGILE programs formed the * foundation of DARPA sensor, surveillance, and directed energy | ; R&amp;amp;D, particularly in the study of radar, infrared sensing, and x-ray/gamma ray detection.
Arati Prabhakar, Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency discuss the new research effort in an Open for Questions session.
And second, in doing that work, we have an opportunity to model what the process of innovation can look like, because it’s not going to look like the last century of research and development. >» a | A ) Insane Cases of Genetic Engineering DARPA’s Supersoldiers ale #1 The United States defense company DARPA has been interested in the human » genome for years, and as you might expect from the company that’s ; created 99 percent of the world’s deadly robots, their interest isn’t purely » for educational purposes.
I had just had my fourth child and was just starting to get involved with learning about the NWO online and what their agenda was on earth.
RHEE HHHE HE m I must tell you that when these crafts enter into this portal from Camp 1 Robinson, and most often from their underground locations, that they ; enter slowly into this inter-dimensional space and as they pass through ; this space, they travel up and out through my body.
Next to Camp Robinson is Camp Pike. , This base is named after Albert Pike, the father of modern freemasonry, * which is Satan’s worldwide occult organization.
Understanding "" wters’ behavior can explain how and why decisions were made either by public decision-makers, which has been a central concern for political scientists, or by the electorate.
At Pacific Bell Video Services my boss introduced a joke to me I had not hear before.
Never waist an opportunity for a Narrative, chaning by others acts, changing the context of where i am and what is happening, a narrative I sought out the teens and tots nor me when instead they are planted, normal populuation i sought removed.
Gangstalkers fake evidence then infiltrate groups I seek to join or were in and lead votes against me on KOMPROMAT hidden from me, a persecution scheme.
I am convinced not only am [| a targeted individual but I was radiologically attacked in my midsection imprisonment.
But for the intervening event of them surrounding me, I would not be “following” etc., Evidence plants on my or former friends property of ours build the gridiron appearance that I DO have despicable interests which make me vulnerable to blackmail.
Someone other than me will award those who “caught me in the area” (non whites and often those who enfiled the women) my white genetic origins.
Get in Touch with Our Team Ai dhe Tia Marsili Evelyn Gu Trinitas Nsabimana Caroline Girgenti Director of Trusts Assistant Director Account Manager Advocate Or will ever have white family or friends.
This both defames a white and evens the genetic scales, and flips the morally contrasted parties as to who is in the right and who is in the wrong.
This rage impairs their cognition, therefore "" impairing their judgment.
In 2018 Bhatia, Navin K had framed past employees of theft and fraud and forged documents then making false accusations against the employee that had recently quit to make up lost revenue. : Bhatia was never charged but has been fired and is no longer with the company.
This book Psych Ward Ed Symptom Clusters associated under Dyslexia and co-morbidities which may better fall under the cluster of FOXP2 gene expression My belief is that some charismatic intelligent people will fall into the diagnostic bucket of say “Aspergers,” “Dyslexia, “Bipolar” etc., when in fact the rare “Zebra” condition of FOXP2 is present.
Conversationally AHDH presenting people can be an annoyance to talk to.
I rerecorded a team meeting once at Wells Fargo to analyze it and I found I was just simply spacing out on what was said by others, important points, as I was wandering around in my own thoughts and not on point and even missing it.
In particular I missed some good input froma Latin American Checkpoint Firewall instructor. who I had nothing against but stil missed some of the points she was making.
Let us Begin with WHO is Stalking me, Why, How and a few other such questions Etiology, again visiting this elsewhere in the book.
Why blocking the successful and prominent existence of people who share family lineage with Elites and the Elites (or the experiments who created genomic twins experiments) allows no prominent examples of the same genome which also exists in the elites.
In researching this I have concluded these non white activists on one level want high IQ dna, even DNA tied to King Edward VIII, and further, need the public appearance of permission for my DNA or else they would face the death penalty for using without my permission, and the death penalty for denying my own reproducivity via the protection racket seizing rather than protecting my would be rerpoductive white life.
Tom Donegand and Tim Kaine and Mark Weirness and Orin Hatch are all behind senate hearings on White SUpremacism, Psychology articles on it, and bills in the 1980s to stop fag bashing, and TOm Donegan and Mark Weirmess always want psych evals on me.
During one of these Tin Kaine, sponsor of anti white supremcist legislationm, was meeting with Tom Donegan in TOm Donegans home as Virigina arrested me for FOIA contacts on my web sites behalf.
In 2017, violent white supremacists brought their hate to Virginia when they marched through the streets of Charlottesville.
PsyOps against Goth and Myself COINTELPRO Wetworks Legal and Psychiatric System Harassment “According to Brian Glick, in War at Home, COINTELPRO used a broad array of methods, including:” 1.
Gregg Abbot wins Texas in wheelchair, a string of deaths in medicine and bone matrow.
He was si ‘UT he was mov ¢) Out Of 47 though tt is trashed | Pinhole size hole in curtains after maintenence visit fa After the shov fix the Mac Lamar on mainteance team New 7/9 lery low water pressure and flow rates, hota Create blems and inconviences ir 1g an gcoas Plc attach forgotten This is the correct notice Or Sth 2019 | received a notice requiring the payment of lev Payment notice Racket of assaults upon me ovice requiring the It is an “anti white supremacist” two armed protection racket.
Sr ore Dredging is the operation of removing material from one part of the water environment and relocating it to another.
Wikipedia ¢ In defaming an alleged white supremacist a Dregg none white or gay will photograph a white or other woman despicably or catch a racketeer dressed as me doing so ¢ The Law Enforcement, perhaps sometimes United States Marshalls fighting white supremacist will defame me behind my back as *the* peeper. e Again behind my back the I will be Doppled as masturbating to the surreptitious pictures but caught doing so, and something had “triggered” me to take the picture, gym women.
In the chapter Apendix Witnesses there is a list of locations, businesses, etc., which have co-operated with the Protection Racket by placing people who will intone to me what will later become the acts of a protection racket person, who will with identity theft incur a liability of MY DNA because that person who swaps into my identity will make and acknowledge a DNA debt which I do not have, and for interests in that which I do not have but will lead to legal and social persecution of me.
This is all fraud including forcing me into SJW services as retarded, homeless, etc., but that mismanagement of my property is wanted by the shelters I am forced into upon the Conspiracy Against My Rights.
Though paradoxical to Dr Jeckyl Mr Hyde acts are allged to Dr Jekyll requiring Dr Jekyll non existent illness be treated and the damages of Mr Hyde be paid to alleged of Dr Jekyll when in fact Mr Hyde victims.
All bark but very seldom ever a bite. e If asuspect assaulted an officer, that suspect learned to never assault an officer again. e If the suspect ran away from the officers he knew that he would pay a price once he was caught.
This book South Texas Federal District Court Nearly from the first moments of Corpus Christi I found it the worst toilet stain of people and city I ever encountered in all the world.
At the same time they (while blocking an apartment I appliqued for) suggested their Retarded Person Housing Advocate would become a counselor and I said I refuse retardation services our housing.
I went to Austin to look for a place but had hotel breakins and finally wallet theft and i was arrested in conflict with cops as I had no ID and no money and I thought they had it but needed me in social services.
During the 2019 hearing I requested Fee Waiver and a Federal Defender be assigned.
Tom Donegan, my brother who assisted Rod Rosentein switch-out my lawyer and tank my sanity defense.
Operation 1A 2B 2A 2GW There are various descriptive names I have termed for use in describing assaults on me.
Without my permission conservators and blind conservators represent me and they also represent them, and in “fairness” awarded them my genes arbitrating damages on “the playground” of retarded children.
As for Jen Moore, PIzzagate reporter, outer of the Free Masons, outer of Secret Identities of the OSS CIA Vatican, and out of Rod Rosenstein and his wife, as I was writing law suits Jen Moore said on YouTube of some victim, I think me, “Plagerized by the Special Counsel What” and “Ultimate Betrayal” again I think refering to me as a coopted and persecuted victim.
Jenny Moore 2 Jul 2018 | stayed one extra night In NYC this kid was very sick and | did not feel right about sending him home.
He slept well after releasing so much of is, Hori unit is the place to go, The top FBI are blackmailed or involved.
Behind my back 2B (who wrongly put themselves in place to manage my assets) will settle the debt to person victimized who was victimized by the person near me.
When I confront My Hyde I am threatened with mental health detainer for paranoia or physically attacked by them for my hostility towards them and their “daughters” Profile of Those How Might Be Tied to the Illuminati Plan Mark Gonzales, black and Hispanic Nueces District Attorney The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations.
The Marshals Service manages a wide array of assets, including real estate, commercial businesses, cash, financial instruments, vehicles, jewelry, art, antiques, collectibles, vessels and aircraft.
Proceeds generated from asset sales are used to operate the program, compensate victims and support various law enforcement efforts.
This book Evil as an Element CLASSICAL ELEMENTS Classical elements typically refer to water, earth, fire, air, and aether, which were proposed to explain the nature and complexity of all matter in terms of simpler substances.
This book is about perhaps the most important story in human history as Feudalism which is a Genetic claim for rule has hidden its quirky genetics of FOXP2 so it can claim continuing royal rule despite a trend against feudalism.
As Jen Moore observes from the inside of Free Masonry to us the USA people this clash of systems makes up the infiltration the USA lives under.
Marilyn Monroe has one foot in the Rat Pack with Frank SInatra, Peter Lawford, Anrold Schwartzegger and another foot in the JFK, RFK, TK, Joe Dimagio, Dorothy Kilgallen all-Catholic Roman Catholic moral center.
The CIA that LBJ was working with inthe Queen of England sleeper agents common wealth plot was not one Marilyn would keep secret.
LIke Farrah Fawcet, she knew the back story of her movies and was killed.
Further Reading On a Process and on a Substance basis GrangStalk the Feudal system of Free Masons eroding a person’s reach and power of voice by damaging slander is used to preserve the glean of the throne by eliminating complaints against its princes slandering the complaining party My family and Jen Moore have been tarted by Free Mason families hiding their own guilt and the real truth of WWI, WWII, and “Sovereign” secrets of high officers.
In a Liberal democratic society the press should expose the errors of the Rulers; however, in what is called the Cabal the enormous wealth of Feudalist Free Masons have been able to subdue the press, demonize opposition to Elites as a danger.
The quest of this book and my teasers excerpts from it is to pierce the resistance to the real truth with facts which would be and should be accepted by reasonable minds, should clear minds rather than brainwashed minds be exposed to the truth.
Mr Edward Paul Donegan I hope along with the voice of Ted Gunderson address you I start with a quotation from Mr Rothkopff in a thread of literary observation continuing observations of Ms.
My story is the Nexus of Ted Gunderson’s, Ted Gunderson former anti mobster FBI Special Agent who asserts, as I do, that the NWO poisoned him, and that the NWO radiologicaly poisened me and from a foodstuffs availability and exercise availability standpoint poisoned me (medical battery) and along with Ted Gunderson I believe this is a connected series of events tied to JFK and the NWO, and its MAFIA OSS CIA FBI Espionage State actors capabilities.
Further Reading It is my belief that oil, “liquid gold” is yet a another of Earth’s treasures which like diamonds and the precious metals have been the quest of the greatest of powers to possess.
If I were to argue with Mr Rothkopf’s points it would only to say that DNA and Eugenics and reproductivity may be the most mind altering substance that there is.
In arguing that point though as I have in this book (once title Genoracketeering) I find that the Eugenics quest and oil quest and Crown Jewels quest may really be all one power struggle.
A place called Gibson Island, close to and perhaps related to the Epstein Brain Foundation island, the VI Island of Jeffery Epstein, is a place where oil executives and world elites gathered for the most advanced sciences tied to industrialists, industrialism, and their pursuits.
Further Reading It appears that in the quest to rule the world’s riches and protect them from hazards of being buried deep in the earth or possessed by Socialist nations the world’s richest elites decided a genetic super-class of selected groomed leaders could rise to power in places around the world now in turmoil and bring to those nations a First World Western aligned hemispherical system of satellites which would become Principalities of greater nations.
Leader these satellite nations and England and the USA would be a WASP class of CIA backed Windsor backed genetic experiments as the out-of-wedlock Windsors around the world were watched as in the USA, watched for good ones of various batches to emerge and then could be run for office in a Republic or rule a country where Banana Republic might serve the USAs interests better.
Donald Barr, William Barr, Jeffery Epstein, Alexander Alcosta, Christopher Wray, Robert Swan Mueller III, and perhaps hundreds of Bush family and Arkansas families of politics appear in the NWO with certain families in an internal power struggle and losing out to #}WETDIVISION are mostly of Roman Catholic sympathies or leanings.
Further Reading The desire to create and groom euginicaly may be inseparable from the quest for power or wealth.
They go together, and in world history is many of our world wars come from these activities amidst and unresolved unlegislated ethics of genomics.
First; My DNA and familial legacy at issue in a well protected deep state cartel, possibly the Cali Cartel or MENA Airport CIA cartel.
My normal activity like going to the gym, photographing scenic places or historic events turns into an allegation against me as my actives are poisoned by entirely out of place staged sexual misconduct such as minors exploited in the vicinity I am in.
I call this Poison R into Healthy normal activity) into K the healthy activity which is to be undermined and eroded with the false allegations.
False allegations plaintively targeting my reproductivity is rewarded and that is part of a criminal syndicate of counterfeiting and money laundering some (Jen Moore, others) assert have been CIA mafia criminal networks of the long term Deep State.
A DNA-Cartel black market happy to create collisions with me with staged abusive situations (assaulting me by placing themselves in positions close to me) then battering me with outstanding sexually aggressive and exploitative trespasses against me (forced positioning children, naked children, twerking children, or minors with camel toe pulled up yoga pants) and my property such as home litigate over with the issue of guilt decided on a table tilted by forgeries, counterfeiting, criminal syndicalism, and ethic assaults.
There is no question long time street people, migrant farm, or those toiling low wage jobs are seeking some sort lift from poverty enabling claim against the Establishment class as recompense or merely to find a way into a better social class.
These people are motivated for false claims against me and have made such claims, and claims of my abusing them in a reproductivity way raised claims to my reproductivity as a cross claim in justice seeking.
But those claims only work because in the Eugenic rights won in rigged hearings or systems of justice are desired on black markets, and because the Criminal Syndicate can create an operating world budget of of patented or stolen genetic rights which are treated as so precious an available right within reach.
Second, the nexus with Ted Gunderson and the livelihood he was poisoned or the subject of mafia attacks during his lifetime by the MKULTRA Deep Stat as he asserted and I believe.
On February 20 1961 I was likely fertilized during Manhattan Project atomic testing including Manhattan Beach California Los Angeles County birth in the same area of the USA and of atomic testing and the site of the P-51 plane manufacture my father flew as pilot in the atomic bombing and other fighter-bombing activities of Germany, Japan, and Korea.
Further Reading Almost two years to the day following my birth JFK was assassinated.
Operation40 and the oil business was looking for sleepers and to assassinate inside and outside the USA to protect the insinuation of United States Big Business or CIA backed business like Zapata Oil throughout the world.
As John F Kennedy and Robert F Kennedy fought the mafia in the United States Congress in the 1950s and in Washington D.C. with Ted Gunderson in the 1960’s they were killed by the mafia who needed its privately funded businesses and sleeper agents to succeed if their oil and other businesses and world conquest were to succeed.
It is this cartel mafia that is the Criminal Syndicate which is the nexus between Ted Gunderson and myself.
The losses to Evil and the USA versus Journalism Few view the FBI as an evil or an Espionage agency but it is both and more so than a law enforcement agency.
Since J Edgar Hoover days and the founding of the FBI it has had a role in shaping politics by political surveillance, assassinations, murders, child porn plants, COINTELPRO on military scale and international scale, close association with large scale CIA backed research institutes and CIA figure, and long term espionage Deep State families who conduct mafia murders rather than investigate them.
This book tells the story of Catholics and ANTI mafia figures who dispute George H.W. and Prescott Bush or Robert Mueller Dupont family Masonic methods and why those like Robert F Kennedy were assassinated and blocked from the WASP Deep State.
Understand in all these excerpts from my book I am trying to help career FBI out moles in the FBI, the motives of moles, moles who are a threat to FBI as well as to others.
Among the most dangerous of cover up families in the greatest OSS, CIA, and MKUILTRA histories are the Bush family and their firing of United States Attorney’s I think tied to their fear of their own bureaucracy turning on them if they get wise to the Deep State.
Jen Moore appeared to feal the same way and was trying to take her information INTO the USA government and national security infrastructure (Homeland Security Investigations and other groups like ICE) wiht the real story of the Free Masons who have infiltrated the USA with their dual or conflicting allegiances. born AUGUST 7, 1944 within a few days August 4 (a dog-whislte of some secret lineage) be is the son of Robert Mueller II, a Board of Director member of DuPont corporation.
Further Reading Christopher Wray’s pedigree from this long running Deep State is little less reassuring and he has been part of the re-establishment of Target Killings in the USA for anti terror reasons, at least as alleged.
Eric Holder and others have a long history of assassinations as well as does the State Department, Blackwater, Dick Cheney, George Bush, and possibly, only possibly by comparison, Killary herself who may get must of the blame from the Bush admin via chuckling jokes.
My mother and Glorian Donegan were raised and born in the USA likely arriving with a pregnant Maria Von Trapp leaving a Convent and in the USA after Festus Gainey died, her adoptive father, they were moved to South Carolina where Harold worked in DuPont family and during my visits to South Carolina I heard there from Harald about my having a secret but closely held royal family connection.
I would also hear this on my fathers side James Donegan who explained I was named after Edward some sort of who had abdicated some sort of title or throne, something to do with I thought the 1920s which fit the Irish revolutionary history distractingly so as it took me from understanding the Edward was likely on the English part of history.
It was during Robert Swan Mueller time as 6th FBI director while in a federal prison I say I was radiologically attacked and was hospitalized wiht red skin and placed in a psych ward.
I had already been in a Psych ward Federal Medical Facility Butner North Carolina on a medical hold for trying to contact Freedom of Information Officers of the National Institute of Health too often and with some lay efforts at document requests.
It was during this time 2007 Ted Gunderson unknown to me at that time also asserted he was being poisoned by and FBI NSA CIA alliance of unfathomable evil he spent his last octogenarian years trying to fight in court before he died.
He had been Robert F Kennedy’s right hand man against the very mob the FBI loved so much for conducting hits.
Robert F Kennedy fought with Dorothy Kilgallen against the mafia before the DOJ in Congress in the 1950s, in Washington D.C. in the early 1960s and in the late 1960s in the Senate again this time as Senator rather than Senate Lead Counsel for other senators.
Further Reading Doroth Kilgalen and RFK were murdered by the Mafia tied to the overthrow scheme and like with the assassination of JFK is tied to my mother and uncle and at least one more, likely Marlin Monroe.
Julie Andrews and others covered overed the story of how Maria August Kutschera landed in North Carolina and the Gainey children were raised there and it was on the tour of Sound of Music Pataky moved in for the mob kill of Dorothy Killgalen.
As I was researching it and watching the movie The Kings Speech (directly tied to the out of wedlock Windsors and Maria Augusta Kutshchera) my PC was openly stolen from my apartment and TV too and the police merely faked all the records of of a police backed bit on my PC and TV/wifi.
This has matched death threats as I go to the library, work in my apartment with violent criminals threatening me or sexually assaulting me by acts or gestures Or nearby dumpsters being beat on by large machinery openly creating loud violent noises.
Jen Moore pointed her camera at the apartment Glorian Donegan and I lived in and Tom Donegan frequented from his home nearby in Arlington Virginia and spoke of the Infiltration of the United States political system.
RON PATARY, to SUBMIT DNA SAMPLE TO THE COURT and how it tied a secret history of genome and use in sleeper agents aka the Nazi history of holdovers from MKULTRA in the United States and Argentina Nazi hunters have still not fully found.
Jen Moore claimed to be and was a Mafia facts leaker, and by Mafia I will use some people’s terms, Free Masonry, perhaps called Skull and Bones, the Illuminati, or various other names like The Secret Team.
I refer to as WASPS based Commonwealth preferring Old Guard of Big Business families who can and do run mafia for hire operations like Blackwater, use well known criminal figures that deals are made with, or other illegal Syndicate activities which bury in the graveyard their opposition rather than out-politic competing interests and these industrialists equate with and replace the Sovereign national interest of the USA with their interest and self-preservation including hiding their own USA and international criminal liabilities.
Many including me believe Jen Moore was murdered to silence her (as she said she would be silenced but would create surviving documents that would be available after her death) and she told much of the same story as Philip Marshall, Daniel Casalero, and many others, and that I attempt to tell in this book.
It is the same allegiance of Commonwealth or Royal Families in the British Anglo WASPS this book here is about and attempts have been made on my life and I have faced constant threat in writing this book.
Whether you look at Secret Team which is a book about very rich defense contractor industrialists and oil interests in the Deep State which murdered JFK and RFK (and those authors were once neighbors of my family in Cape Cod Massachusettes and have intermarried with my family) the basics of the story are the same.
Further Reading Because circumstances have shrouded Danny Casolaro’s death in mystery, the single aspect of his research that led to it may never be known for certain.
FBI Agent Speaks Out: ‘I Was Not Protected retrieved from NPR, April 15,2015 , Heard on All Things Considered by CARRIE JOHNSON EVIE STONE and copied or modified to here | | | | | | » For15 years, Gritz says, she did her job well.
The obsession with what my DNA could be worth to a WILD WILD WEST group of rustlers has made the attacks profitable.
It as if | were mere sunken treasure no one had rights for, and the tomb raiders were told to attack and clear the relic.
In the case of Wells Fargo, while in Texas, ARC of Nothern Virigina REFUSING Disbursment Request to pay off Wells Fargo, getting me then under investigation and with no bank account available to receive SSDI While in Texas, sabotaging me to Genesis Development Corp and Catholic Charities EXACTLY at the time, within 24 hours of doing so, they WOULD HAVE become a payee for me.
Felony acts committed by Tom Donegan and Mark Weirness, likely in conjunction with Rod Rosenstein, Robert Mueller, The Public Health Service, and more recently Donald Trumpl, have facilitated these human rights crimes.
Non-white non-straight hate crimes invited a gainst me enable lack of Type II Diabetes treatment as the murder weapon Arlington County Virginia before departure for Texas 1.
Among the murmur on the gym was that Tom Donegans and Mark Weirness Democrat friends were merged into the Wilson Mall gym location, mine, from the Clarendon closed location Extreme financial abuse prevented trust fund and SSDI use for diet, MS Office, diabetes testing strips, etc., I was refered to Church Group Arlington County Connected food services rather than permitted SSDI or Trust fund use for my doctor recomended diet of lean meat.
Cognizance of Guilt After I forward the email in which, I had told Tom Donegan uncolicited information about Dialysis that original email I had sent him disappeared from my sent items in Gmail though the forwarded copy of it remained.
Future Trust fund administrator Trinitias nasumbari close fried from Africa While plans were likely made to authorize my DNA into the areas of Africa which would include Obama family areas of origin, conditions of my death would occur as well.
Again this table Three Downward Slashes James P Donegan DNA 1961 DOD Medical Effects of Atomic Blast Testing Vet 1st Cousin or closer ~ 100% 4 1 IVF Feb 20 Barack Obama 1961 IVF Son, Edward Donegan 1998 9 pi 2 IVF Obama children 1998 Donegan DNA 3 Oe NULL here in the U.S., |3 early celibate death homeless or in no sex allowed hospitals.
Orientation and Closeness of Understanding Tom Donegan and Mark Weirness have always been SJWs long in conflict with me.
The medical industry latching onto any stigma they could find simply was marginalizing me and he was supporting that, much like can be done when sexual harassment victims try to credibly assert a powerful boss intimidated or harassed them.
This book Family Me The answer I have sought for 35 years Niggers are worth a damn.
Each family had a demarcated territory and an organizationally structured hierarchy and reported up to the same 1 Overarching governing entity.
However, this led to his assassination that September, and that ; role was abolished for The Commission, a ruling committee established » by Lucky Luciano to oversee all Mafia activities in the United States and , to serve to mediate conflicts between families.
It consisted of the bosses * of the Five Families as well as the bosses of the Chicago Outfit and the ' Buffalo crime family.
Such concepts are criminalized as ' thoughtcrime since they contradict the prevailing Ingsoc orthodoxy.
Doublespeak is language that deliberately obscures, disguises, distorts, or reverses the meaning of words.
Doublespeak may take the form of 1 euphemisms (e.g., “downsizing” for layoffs and “servicing the target” « for bombing), in which case it is primarily meant to make the truth 1 sound more palatable.
The term “doublespeak” derives from two concepts in George Orwell’s novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, “doublethink” and “Newspeak”, though the term is not used in the book.
Parallels have also been ; drawn between doublespeak and Orwell’s classic essay Politics and the » English Language, which discusses the distortion of language for , political purposes.
In it he observes that political language serves to ; distort and obfuscate reality.
Thus political language has to consist largely of euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness... the great enemy of clear language is insincerity.
It was at a point when there was widespread skepticism about ; the degree of truth which characterized relationships between the public and the worlds of politics, the military, and business.
Additionally, goodthink and crimethink linguistically reinforce the State’s totalitarian dominance of the people of Oceania.
The intellectual purpose of Newspeak is to make Ingsoc-approved ,; thoughts the only expressible thoughts.
The linguistic simplification of Oldspeak "" into Newspeak was realised with neologisms, the elimination of ' ideologically undesirable words, and the elimination of the politically ' unorthodox meanings of words.
The word could not denote free will, because intellectual ' freedom was no longer supposed to exist in Oceania.
Newspeak versions, not merely changed into something 7 different, but actually contradictory of what they used to be.
These "" words are the same scientific terms in English, but many of them have "" had their meanings rigidified in order to, just like with the A vocabulary, "" attempt to prevent speakers from being able to express anti-government , thoughts.
Housing In this section I am going to offer some information , about KinkBnB, and use it here to show not only did an IVF rape of me likely occur, it was done in a racially hostile covert operation, inside my rented residence, which also result in my being zerod out from that residence though I was the victim.
Some key point are that at KinkBnB e Jim Vockelca says to me things I would be expected to have said.
In this example at KinkBnB Jim V says “I took the ASVAB at the MEPS but decided not to enlist” which is odd because I did. e A female with tatoes surfs for size 13 boots and guns on the shared computer and talks about it. e The woman with tatooes throws baby showers and accuses me of peeping which I am not doing e They setup a rendezvous with a dominatrix for after I am moving out, on the 25th, though it is not something I am being invited to e There is a picture of Obama hiding in the house watching all of this e The motive given for this is that I am a Trump supporter.
Obama connected operations in that facility both frame me as a terrorist for ongoing FISA warrants or asset seizures, in round-the-clock operations I am framed even as I masturbate in my bedroom, I am mocked and framed from the next bedroom by these covert operators.
This method provides no man-in-the-middle protection. also This Siemens M75 is bluejacking the Sony Ericsson K600i pictured below.
The only thing I add here is that the staff is always black, the whites being hired away or leaving, racial taunts are common, it is openly racial hate crime against me, by visual evidence as well as the open statements from those involved in the assaults on me in gym.
More on being in the Gym A good example was a paddle boat trip I took in “the lake” of Austin.
SO I conclude overcoeing the turn paddile in front of the long straight could be done by paddling backwards, and not long pontoon would straighten out the thrust, which was better than the front paddle just creating and Isocliese water breark at the front of the paddle boat.
Recourse against this has not worked Litigation A lawsuit * is a proceeding by a party or parties against another in the civil court of law.
Wikipedia Arbitration Arbitration *, a form of alternative dispute resolution, is a way to resolve disputes outside the courts.
An arbitration award is legally binding on both sides and enforceable in the courts.
Wikipedia Mediation Mediation * is a structured, interactive process where an impartial third party assists disputing parties in resolving conflict through the use of specialized communication and negotiation techniques.
This book Abuse of Witness to Politician Misconduct and the Massive Connected Power supporting it Illegal Guerillla Warfare working for elites in Shadow Government while denying guerilla warfare using it against their aleready victims GUERRILLA WARFARE guerrilla warfare, also spelled guerilla warfare, type of warfare fought by irregulars in fast-moving, small-scale actions against orthodox military and police forces and, on occasion, against rival insurgent forces, either independently or in conjunction with a larger political-military strategy.
This has bee used to attack my life, housing, automobiles, etc., ee eee A Coordinated Efforts To Disinform retrieved from IDFILES.COM a SPONSIBLE RECKLESS JOURNALISM and copied or modified to here | Dan Harmon, once a popular, charismatic, local political figure, is now ; known to have been on the tracks the night of the murders of Kevin and * Don.
Paisley was assigned to the ; CIA’s Office of Security, of which Nixon campaign security coordinator » and Watergate burglar James McCord was once a member.
Restating the premise of this book about Gangtalk ef me, the second victimization of my family under MKULTRA A White House Plumbers operation using riff raff homeless people.
Everyone has the right to be believed unless no one is or will listen to you.
Wikipedia I have known I am interested in non exploitive relataions with adult females in their reproductive years in what I call the Cake model of relationsips.
In this covert operation a series of fight picking moves are a threat to me I keep away from.
It is my belief the United States DOD, DAPRA, Boeing Corp., Illuminati families, Free Masons, etc., tied to history between King Edward VIII and the Kutschera family need me blamed, ostracized, and even living life under arrest and this operation to use Plumbers to attack me seeks that outcome.
Women, reproductive women are warned away from me on either the social sabotage of me as a peeper on on death threats to me or her, or on her simply protecting herself by being somewhere else.
As I go through my life story watch for these effects witnessed by me while I do not SEE the use of KOMPROMAT used by PsyOps at bifurcations I am not at.
The Press who are under Mind Control of | The presence of > utilized KOMPROMAT on me giggling 1 | KOMPROMAT > will never get to them protected from me Excite@Home At the time I was working at Excite@Home around 1997 I will set the scene and this is when things started to get odd.
I had received a call when I was unemployed and was asked if I would like to interview at Excite@Home, a broadband company In the San Mateo area and it sounded like an interesting company as it was described to me.
As I moved to San Mateo I continued my friendship with Cym and Professor DeSade, going to a party at their southbay home, and a woman or two I| met later did not return my phone calls, no problem.
Todd Welch who was m security boss from my corporate security role later would ask in odd ways and even with the company bizarre questions if I had stolen a computer and strange suspicions were all around me and Personnel treated me oddly my mother in Virginia was getting very odd calls.
AOL and Wells Fargo were little different Clear Doppelgangers of me were all over as were strange occurrences and the strange going cold of any form of contact with white females anywhere near me or their disappearance from me vicinity, led away by plain clothes people in front of me without explanation or who I just never saw or heard from again.
I ejected him from my station wagon, nearly by force, and later he called me to say in a Aviator Glasses like ambiguous conversation “T don’t ever want to do that again...” and I said “neither do I” referring to the creepy meth deal, and having him in my car, but he seemed to try to intone something else.
Dung Feeces Nuecees Toilte of Black Liberation Theolgy Black Nationalism and Skid Row Fighting white supremacism by using Social Services to spy on white women while pretending to be me or having social services claim I am a retarded person being tattooed by black homelss people and others.
Motorcycles Doppelganger me everywhere peeking at white women’s buttocks and white women in swimwear, and motorcyclists still gun their eninges at me, at things I do etc., Jen Moore and someone else were saying things like “tic toc” about who ever set themselves up as my conservator, and black nationalist hate groups like Isreal United in Christ, black hebrew, and Baptist and other homeless prison ministries like Searchf for Truth Mission, Good Sams, and others, join with the Catholic Archdioces in various projects.
The Arlington Sport and Health Story and Conspiracy Against My Rights I Fled By denying me recovery food, laundry money, and surrounding me with prison and DOD scum in the gym I was denied the gym, the goal all along as I had faced Alc 13.
In fact I went about my San Francisco music list in the gym, using cell phone or tablet videos for my own non-pop high energy music I was surrounded by prison bling grillz teeth non whites who surrounded me in the upscale gym and others who tried to both co-opt my music and workouts while planting diminunizing KROMPROMAT around me in the gym underming me.
This book Fighting optical appearances created by Expressive Acts and Circumstances surrounding, planted, round my Life A corrupt actor forms a Cartel by asking for those in the vicinity of a person to become invovled in a White Lie (often credible people will be asked by corrupt power for white lie activity) or black lies, criminal acts, aften asked of criminals by corrupt power brokers.
Evolve a wall under color of law Revolving : Revolvin Revolving oe ; eee around me Revolving around ; Hostileme HostileGood Good Good Hostile ; : ; Environment | Environment honest honest honest Environment . : : : : : ; .,. | creating creating Hostile _[relations |relations | relations creating Hostile ; Hostile Actors Actors Actors Revolving Stalking Revolving around |Good Non Good around me Victim is not |™e Hostilehonest Stalked | honest Hostilepart of Environment relations |person _ {relations Environment activities creating Hostile creating Hostile sohich Actors.
Hostile Actors | Environment Hose Goud eoed le Gstaw Hostile Environment honest honest honest Barorcanient Reece Hostile Actors relations |relations | relations undercover) This element, Stalking Long Con Set Normal |Normal | Normal Canal Victim Location, others |People {People _ | People Activity Under confronts the and and and Calerot Law Dopple who Normal |Normal | Normal iecrincal to confesses to falsity | Locations | Locations | Locations ere the imagery and and and appearances to represents.
Normal |Normal | Normal theft or illegal Impersonations Life Life Life Mafia activity. and Forgeries Some act makes the appearance bridge from mere optics into real ife pretexts for real life consequences.
For 1511 Ocean Dr 5 on 8/18/2021 donotreply@managebuilding.com PLEASE NOTE: DO NOT REPLY TO THIS EMAIL ADDRESS This email message was sent from a notification-only address that cannot accept incoming email.
Early a black on the phone Ne 2 (Oe These people were part of a revolving crew of people who positioned themselves y aon me in Georgia United States DOD PsyOps using Disinformation, Social Sabotage, and other schemes to maneuver away support or Human Rights for me will be covered later in more detail but a short description will be made here.
Myself, Tom Dunham, and Veronica Hoffman have spent years, at least, in my case decades, undergoing United States DOD and CIA PsyOps torture of social, legal, and psychiatric harassment over some Pizza Gate scheme, tied to my genome, and at least I have never understood why this has happens or why thousands of obvious frame jobs (of which I have never once been accused of anything) have been permitted in broad daylight and also WITHIN United States institutions.
When I approach medical doctors seeking Metformin it is denied and non-whites end up being substituted who will refuse the diabetes medicine, and usually United States DOD jobs follow for doctors or doctors family members when I am denied Metformin or Wellbutrin Following extensive dental surgery I was denied pain killers by starving me out financially.
Wikipedia Creating outlandish profiles of me, Legends about me, will be used to signature match me to peronalityh types and paraphelias not me, and pschicatric symptoms wrongfully selected from correct IMINT Imagery intelligence Imagery intelligence, pronounced as either as Im-Int or I-Mint, is an intelligence gathering discipline wherein imagery is analyzed to identify information of intelligence value.
This book Potential Witness List including Conflicted Politicians The material in here is concentrated from other parts of the book where the material is in the context of the history relevant to the quote and citation of the quote.
In 1961, President John F Kennedy appointed Butt to the President’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity.
Peace Corps and Ambassador to the Pacific nation of Australia Crook was born in Momence, Illinois.
It has been noted that the plot of the novel reflects the crimes of Epstein and his alleged accomplice, Ghislaine Maxwell.
The reputation of the agency and its director declined drastically after the Bay of Pigs Invasion fiasco.
Dulles was one of the members of the Warren Commission investigating the assassination of John F Kennedy.
CONSPIRACY A conspiracy occurs when two or more people agree to commit an illegal act and take some step toward its completion.
In some states, however, factual impossibility is not a defense, as courts rely on the fact that the person still had the intent to comm Like other inchoate crimes such as attempt, a defendant charged with conspiracy can raise the defense of abandonment or withdrawal.
If their ; conduct exceeds their authority, then criminal charges may be brought * against them. www.attorneys.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here NON-CRIMINAL CHARGES Police officers sometimes do commit certain unlawful acts while acting under their authority, which in many instances do not result in criminal charges but in disciplinary action such as racial profiling, falsifying information on a search warrant, planting evidence on suspects, harassing certain groups, or fabricating reasons for detaining people or drivers to justify arrests.
LIST OF POSSIBLE CRIMINAL CHARGES e Assault and battery e Sexual assault e Misusing public funds e Drug dealing ¢ Ticket fixing e Homicide Police officers have access to evidence such as controlled substances obtained from arrests and searches and many have stolen evidence either no longer used in criminal cases or never turned over for prosecutions following search and seizures to sell in unlawful drug transactions.
EXCESSIVE FORCE Any list of possible charges brought against a police officer includes the use of excessive force used on defendants during arrest or detention.
Sandbagging my life via Plumbers operation and misleading appearances the general public falls for.
THe louder the sneer at me and commit offenses against me the more they have cover for their own illegal acts.
According to Pizzagate reporter Jen Moore, the scheme is under control of the top most political figures, and the impersonator of me will do so many drugs partying with the pizza in the blur of it all will be caught with child porn, etc., and wake up to find that has been robbed or blackmailed.
People tend to regard drug addicts as the dregs of society. the dregs of society/humanity Crack Pack.
Acting as Confidential Human Source Informant * is ers A confidential human source or informant is a defendant who engages in the prohibited activity of associating with persons engaged in criminal activity for the purpose of furnishing information to or acting as an agent for a law enforcement or intelligence agency.
One of the most astute things I have ever overheard in my life was a prisoner I believe in a Baltmore Maryland super-max complaining to a sheriff or federal corrections officer “You just don’t get it.
You don’t get who you are, who I am, or even that we may be switched some day.
So let me start now on who is who, often a question asked by the FBI and many others.
If one in the USA thinks about the FBI, or perhaps a person in India, Pakistan, Thailand, Sweden, or elsewhere that person may think of Sean Connery a beat cop and later the battle against Al Capon and other Untouchables.
The film stars Kevin Costner, Charles Martin Smith, Andy Garcia, Robert De Niro, and Sean Connery, and follows Eliot Ness as he forms the Untouchables team to bring Al Capone to justice during Prohibition.
The Grammy Award— nominated score was composed by Ennio Morricone and features period music by Duke Ellington.
If we were to accept that we might also think of Democracy in America and Criminal Justice as Social Justice such as the French Revolution provided at great expense to the cast and characters of Les Misérables throwing off their aristocratic oppressors and hoping to find that in Atlantic Revolutions born USA as well.
Alexis de Tocquevillebegins his bbokDe La Démocratie en Amérique by describing the change in social conditions taking place.
He observed that over the previous seven hundred years the social and economic conditions of men had become more equal.
The aristocracy, Tocqueville believed, was gradually disappearing as the modern world experienced the beneficial effects of equality.
Tocqueville traced the development of equality to a number of factors, such as granting all men permission to enter the clergy, widespread economic opportunity resulting from the growth of trade and commerce, the royal sale of titles of nobility as a monarchical fundraising tool, and the abolition of primogeniture.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ Tocqueville described this revolution as a ""providential fact"" of an ""irresistible revolution,"" leading some to criticize the determinism found in the book.
He did, however, consider equality more just and therefore found himself among its partisans.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ Instruct democracy, if possible to reanimate its beliefs, to purify its motives, to regulate its movements, to substitute little by little the science of affairs for its inexperience, and knowledge of its true instincts for its blind instincts; to adapt its government to time and place; to modify it according to circumstances and men: such is the first duty imposed on those who direct society in our day.
The remainder of the book can be interpreted as an attempt to accomplish this goal, thereby giving advice to those people who would experience this change in social states.
Having been ""hassled"" by the FBI, arrested by it, investigated by it, attacked by it, and in turn investigation the actions and causes of FBI programs launched against me I find my cinematic experiences were overpaid.
Various ""conspiracy theories"" have existed in government the Press, alt-right media, sovereign movements, and elsewhere of a Deep State, A Shadow Government, A Cabal of devilish greedy Jews, a secret NWO, plans to conquer and imprison the human race or the white race, etc., These have ranged from MENA Airport CIA conspiracy theories, Business Plot theories, Operation 40 theories, and various other names to perennial doubts about who is really in charge and what do the really want.
THe Mafia, business using muscle to keep in social control like in Al Capone's Chicago running liquor from Canada across the Great Lakes into the USA during prohibtion is more the FBI model than the mafia model of existence.
Bush flagge group of big business cartel companies who keep victims dead and business operating.
I believe the FBI to be nothing more than gangland enforces for the most dangerous of illegal United States and NWO businesses and it seems as best I can tell tha twas always written into the role of the FBI and this is why the anti mafi types including Robert F Kennedy seem to have so much bad luck come their way.
The fraudulent and criminal maladministration of the will and Trust Fund of Glorian Donegan.
My genome and family life history has concealed history tied to the FOXP2 gene that is also known as the LONDON KE FAMILY gene of speech, grammar, and other defects that come from my mother's side of my genome and the theft of the computer was related to my renting The Kings Speech.
By definition of Money Laundering the fraudulent activities often are disguised as non-fraudulent and are carefully designed to escape detection as fraud even under scrutiny or while conducted publicly in public institutions andf often using manufactured pretexts to justify wrongful actions.
Knowing that the activities are fraudulent and knowing the criminal actors seeking criminal gains have used techniques in fraud which are well know in con artists circles and racketeering operations I have had to pursue information in those domains of knowledge to effectively provide a factual fraud case description to you and thus accompanying this letter (an open letter) I have provided that factual and legal theory information.
Ins summary Glorian Donegan my mother left a trust fund intended only for me.
Quackery and modification of the will for its exploitation by behavioral health services was foundation work for the fraud in the trust fund administration to defuse the value of the trust into families the trust was not intended for though families the Quacks administering the trust fund wish to use its value for.
Quackery, often synonymous with health fraud, is the promotion of fraudulent or ignorant medical practices.
In my case a Trust Fund which broke the Trust illegally to form a corrupt Cartel of criminal racket organized criminal enterprise.
Behavioral Health Care in concert with powerful politicians abusing their power and influence allowed the trust to both medically and factually architect errors to redirect assets and liabilities among multiple parties as if in stock trades arranging trading buy and sells from the floor in way that times the best trade timing for preferred investors.
Quackery is often described as ""health fraud"" with the salient characteristic of aggressive promotion and can and criminal gains.
Obstruction of Justice is a process of creating errors in the administration of Justice.
The Trust was illegally modified such that it could be targeted by fraudsters and then subjected to fraudulent claims such as bogus asset seizures requests, protection racket money, and other purposes of fake claims against for restitution in justice proceedings could be manufactured under false pretexts and carefully staged events which created ""false narratives of events"" also called ""Legends"" or false by seemingly true pseudo-reality.
The other hard copy letter I provide to you in addition to this one is the open letter I have written to the coroner of Jen Moore.
In addition to that I provide extensive data and case factual theory on a CDROM I am submitting as well.
MAC LAMAR MANAGEMENT LLC FROM: Edward Paul Donegan 1513 apt 5 I suspect Fraudulent Activity at 1511 I hope I am not erroneously linked to.
I initially had the address wrong as 1511 apt 5 but I came to find out Apartment 5 has its own building address as 1513, joined physical but differing postal addresses.
I have asked my error not be perpetuated in accounting but has been creating a concatenated “virtual” or “pseudo” apartment which may draw its properties and associated events from either 1513 or 1511.
While I do ask for rides to the store, etc., from those with cars, and social with, and normally communicating with my neighbors here and at 1001 N Water St they have talked of “illegal animal husbandry” made reference to illegal acts in drug and weapons trade though seeming felons in possession and made child porn references all of which I have contacted you and the police over as illegal activity.
Recently on a about 4/18/2022 I asked a adult erotic model advertising compliance with laws if she would like to visit Texas coming to my apartment in 1513 #5 and sending pictures of my unit, inside gym, proximity to the park, etc., since she was a health fanatic.
I never heard from her but a friend of her later posted about some psycho involved in activities in his or his mother’s basement.
They have had floor work done after a flood in the apartment and 1513_6 had its floor redone.
The occupant of Unit 6 had a small female child with him who was near the vent area to underfloor crawlspace I do NOT have access.
That is near the apartment mailbox and on the 1511 building line block, not 1513.
General Ledgers and Transaction Journals are accounting tools used for tax and other purposes usually on a quarterly basis that depend on Double Entry Accounting to assure all debts and credits are accounted for and match income and owner's equity financial claims.
For claims regarding individual transactions and matters of studying transactions Receipts are used to identify who leases an apartment, how made a rent payment under a lease, etc., and and may be used during tracking or reported or identifying criminal activities or where crimes have occurred or properties under the control of criminals or criminal organizations.
Improper assessment of where damage to a neighborhood is occurring, damage to others is occurring, or who controls what property should be correctly resovled both for the security and availability of my good credit as a renter building and protecting myself from being linked to wrongdoing or errors of others.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles retrieved from Planargy and copied or modified to here ""| ee No matter what line of business you’re in, adhering to the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles for your accounting department—both in general and for accounts payable specifically —is essential to accurate financial statements and legal compliance.
Depending on the type and size of your business, you’ ll likely have both an overarching set of principles to follow and ones specific to your industry.
Regardless, understanding the best practices and legal requirements that come with GAAP and other accounting principles will help you optimize your workflows, generate useful, clear, and accurate financial data, and stay on the right side of the law.
Accounting Principles are a PLANERGY ; set of specific rules and ; processes specific to the * United States, designed to Clients and results "" provide oversight for xe @) ; accounting practices for fora C : ; ' BOY SCOUTS Hilton "" profit public companies, OF AMERICA "" government accounting, and : non-profit organizational 2 : accounting.
This also applies to any company that publicly releases its income statement and any other financial documents.
Standards are applied consistently throughout the entire financial reporting process.
All financial reports are prepared in a consistent and permanent manner.
Accountants following GAAP are dedicated to complete accuracy, impartiality, and transparency.
All accounting practices and financial reporting are performed with strict adherence to established rules and regulations.
Asset valuations are assigned with the assumption the organization will continue to operate for the foreseeable future.
Financial reporting is performed at standard accounting intervals,g. fiscal quarters or years.
Reports are absolutely transparent and fully disclose the organization’s financial health and position.
All parties involved in financial reporting are acting honestly, with integrity, and in good faith.
Each of GAAP’s 10 guiding principles is informed and guided by three overarching rules.
Created to prevent accountants from either intentionally or accidentally creating a misleading view of an organization’s financial position, the three rules help protect both the public and the organizations themselves from inaccurate or fraudulent financial data. e Basic Accounting Guidelines and Best Practices.
Organizations adhere to the continuously evolving FASB standards for best practices. e Generally Accepted Industry-Specific Practices Are Enforced.
Different organizations have very different in-depth and specific accounting practices, based on their particular structure and legal standing.
For example, a government agency, a bank, and a nonprofit foundation would all adhere to GAAP principles, but have their own unique set of accounting and financial reporting requirements.
The interior surfaces of my apartment I have control of but nothing beyond, the wall structures nor roof, crawlspace, telecom, etc., Bizarre and downright confusing activities such as pictured here on Common areas of the campus or neighboring buildings are not my choice and appear, simply put, machinated as if to created a narrative at times disparaging to me and the property rights my Trust fund might be targeted for damages to the community, damages improperly linked to me.
Accounting is critical to tracking and assessing debits and liabilities and property owners.
Sometimes some cats have gotten under there but I have nothing to do with that and tried to get them out, unable to do so.
On Interstate Financial and Health Care Fraud and Obstruction of Justice The Social Security Aministration ethic in Washington and Baltimore Maryland is to make sure each Social Security recipient receive payments on time.
This allows each Social Scurity recipient to pay bills on time, accumulate good credit and access to financial services, have housing available as a priority along with clothing, be safe from fraud and crime in secur\e housing, and have the safest and most beneficial environments When Disbursments are made into my checking account via Direct Depost that shows on my Well Fargo Ledger I make rent payments from Wells Fargo into Mac Lamar in Texas via wire transaction electronic banking all of which follows the Receipts and Disbursements double entray accounting system.
RECEIPT A receipt is a document acknowledging that a person has received money or property in payment following a sale or other transfer of goods or provision of a service.
Wikipedia DISBURSEMENT A disbursement is a form of payment from a public or dedicated fund.
Alternatively, it means a payment made on behalf of a client to a third party for which reimbursement is subsequently sought from the client.
Wikipedia Single-entry accounting is less complex than double-entry accounting.
With the single-entry system, you record cash disbursements and cash receipts.
Double-entry bookkeeping is an accounting method where you equally record a transaction in two or more accounts.
A credit is made in at least one account, and a debit is made in at least one other account.
The double-entry bookkeeping method is based on the idea that every business transaction has equal and opposite effects on at least two accounts.
Double-entry accounting can help you make better financial decisions catch and reduce bookkeeping errors see a clear snapshot of company finance maintain accurate accounting records.
I am proud of the property I keep and hope errors in accounting are fixable.13 should replace all my leasing data I am not involved with the 1511 building except for knowing some of the tenants.
She spoke of ""Targeted Victims"" victims of Espionage hits to silence them through created disasters waiting to happen.
It was during my time in California I was gathering evidence on the Obstruction of Justice and illeal operation tied to my mother's will and wills and trust fraud, and when Jen Moore had the evidence I collected plus the evidence she had on her own she was going to go public.
Glorian Donegan and Ed Donegan addresses Jen Moore Pointed Camera at describing hidden CIA identities I am a firsthand witness to the events surround the death threats, locations Ms.
That address and the moneyh from the sale of that house now part if a criminal network funding source.
My long ago documentation in memorium video to my mother of our lives at those addresses.
Josephs Catholic hospital Daniel Freeman hospital Manhattan Beach Manhattan Project (Los Alamos, Nevada and California atomic development programs, Jet Propulsion Labs, above ground tests my father was subjected to in Nevada observation tower, and as a pilot in the atomic bombing of Japan.
The DNA that runs in our family was always part of “black operations” of Dr Cameroon and Sydney Gottlieb and others including Marilyn Monroe.
It comes from very famous out of wedlock Windsor Kutschera lines but carries a small defect, the London KE family (Prince Albert of York, Prince Edward of Wales) family also King Edward VII) which is fairly common in Central Europe.
That gene is secretly researched away from the Windsors and Nazis for low profile study.
While secretly used for science the overall genetics of these families was considered pretty good and even turned into “who wants in on the good stuff” secret family line testing program, considered a real benefit for a child or two.
That is the story of my family, and the strange surrogacy networks run by the CIA, DARPA, Human Brain Program, and highly connected families including with connections into the VI Brain Foundation of Epstein.
Insider families of DNA research in its illegal assasnation days sprread the DNA around the world an into certain potlical CIA and Free Masons families in the USA and those same groups are using it for illegal profits in sluch fund cartel mafia Central Intelligence Agency cells.
Among the most prominent are Knights Templar drug cartel and Black Hebrew Israelite, Southern Poverty Law Center listed black nationalist or Mexican Mafia groups who have joined into the black market via pimp role of offering DNA rights.
The function of the CIA program has been using the cartel rights for illegal science and funding “protection” from anyone getting too close to the truth, analogous to the Rolling Stones have Hells Angeles patrol a concert rather than police.
The evidence related to In Shape Fitness, William Ruiz of Capitola California, , Jim Volcelka of California, the will of Glorian Donegan who lived in California, the sale of a house at 52 Lambeth Square Moraga, Crhis Lloyd of Orinda California, Genentech ofr California adn supplier ethics violations, California, my California Drivers License, and the proceeds from that house sale misused in fraud.
The misdeeds in Criminal Justice by high ranking political elites were obstruction of justice Jen Moore was blowing the whistle on.
For more on what OBstruction of Justice is Further Reading Obstruction of Justice retrieved from FindLaw Staff | Reviewed by modified to here OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE Obstruction of justice is considered a crime against justice itself.
References to contacts I made to the CIA submit information system on the death of Jen Moore and genome history.
Even if such activities were constitutionally legitimate (clearly they are not), they would still have an enormous potential for abuse as a personal or political weapon by the practitioners.
Jenny held the rank of Corporal, served in ' the then named Street Crime Unit as a narcotics investigator and worked rin the Tracy Unified School District as a DARE officer.
She also was a member of our | . . 7 , adventure racing team competing in several events on the west coast.
Her mother, i Jane Moore of , California, ; survives her; » her Father Bob » Moore of Texas; ; her sisters » Robin and "" Kelli, and ' brother Bobby, ' all of : California.
She was reportedly working on stories about child abuse / trafficking involving important people when she was found dead in her Washington, D.C. hotel room.
Her death from a brain hemorrhage appears to have been the result of a severe beating she received the year before.
Mark Gonzales “came up” in very crime ridden poverty based border town Corpus Christi area Nueces as a law school graduate partially putting behind himslef Calaveras Motorcycle Club outlaw biker gang.
Still in the club and aligned with indigent people feeling hopeless in life and outlook he a candidate to be tempted by exploitable hidden value.
If the Trust Fund of Glorian Donegan can be monetized to serve various homeless veterans and other cast outs and the value not acounted for, fake claims can kite away the otherwise sitting idle value and that can be done covertly with blind trusts, etc., This is exactly the type of criminal network which recruited Jen Moore, former police officer from Tracy California, and who would see this as festering crime.
At one point Jen Moore calls herself a Trump supporter too and probably does not like labeling alt right as a medical illness or disease or trying marginalize simple right wing immigration nationalists beliefs.
Thus the stage is set between a RICO connected connected office holder and Jen Moore a former police officer without active contacts or job status to act against Gonzales.
Edward Paul Donegan Concerned Citizen and Conspiracy Theorist Dear Sir and Madam; While in United States Federal Prison I began to study in formal training to become a Pagan Witch.
Many in San Francisco were and mostly I found it ridiculous and mostly attire for otherwise attire worn over desired behaviors and archtypical forms of resentments against establishment based values.
Removed from that contex in a male wing of a federal prison and meeting another Pagan I started looking at Pagin literature ranging from Odinism to Wicca.
Odinism has a Japanese style to it of ties to the land in racial way and often is tied to White Supremacism and while not problematic for me in that regard its use of myth I found less useful than the archetyps of Buddhism.
Wicca offered internist concepts as well and education in theism Athiesm, polytheism, and patterns of behaviors of more powerful religions against minor ones or ones with little social power.
It is widely believe and still debated that the male form the Horned God, a hunter myth an equal to the repoected Moon Goddess making Day were either abaondoned by Christianity or turned into Satan.
The pattern of replacement ideologies either demonizing or co-opting earlier movements or figures (or even cities such as in Russia following changes In goverernement and stature of historical figures) is not different from debate in the USA as Confederate flags are having their meanings altered and them removed or misunderstood, or values changing such that the attributes assigned to the history are changing.
As I research the Kennedy curse which I believe I and other Donegans have lived under I came across a, perhaps “the” DOJ building as the RKF Building.
It is my belief now and many others that a CIA based oil conspiracy with the mafia killed JFK and RFK and that was led by an FBI DOJ in cahoots with the mafia.
Bush who has a CIA building, Langely named after him, and J Edgar Hoover Building, and the Robert F Kennedy building are names I all find unforate window dressing of claims to an honoranble history that are not supported by the facts and likely even offiensive.
I believe your own institutons are likely influnceed by the troubling history of the cold war and Mafia partnership in the demise of communist states, Cuba in particular and CIA plans with Rafeal Cruz Sr.
My research has a rare area of development because I carry a rare gene likely studied by Alma Powerll the mother of an FCC chair Michael Powell.
It is my belief that as those like Lloyd Austin ask conspiracy theories be purged from government the history of power changes be considered and that new leaders may have tread on the corpses of old ones while pretending to have been loyals to the deceased and past kings.
I wish the billions of televion news hours covering the DOJ CIA Bush family, Rockefeller Republicans, Patreus, and others that time was being used by Micheal Hastings, Doroty Killgallen, and others.
I suspect in the USA a deep state does exist, is tied to long running CIA programs who pretend to honor those whose corpses they used as stepping stones into the newly freed up government offices.
I have no new names in mind but I wish a more diverse conspiracy theory based media encouraged and I am unformattable with our legends of our great kings today.
The FBI has only one killing objective, preempting victims of a Deep State shadow government run by itself, preempting the story of the assassination of JFK by the FBI and Shadow Government, and silencing by murder and the destruction of lives of witnesses or journalists who can prove occupants of the political offices of the FBI are undeclared foreign agents, planted sleeper, and concealing the guilt of themselves and their agency from generation to generation.
I fear for my life in the USA from destructive espionage which has harassed my life because the life of my mother and father and myself that are honorable, loyal, and respectable represents a secret history of atomic weapons development and history of warfare the USA needs to hide.
I am going to tell you are at least I intend to try to tell you that my best guess as to WHY I fear for my life from police harassment called Gang Stalk is that I am a witness to the JFK assassination, as far as I can tell from my family history, perhaps the most direct witness or ONLY surviving witness to a part of the Kennedy Curse story not yet told.
Jen Moore started to tell that story before she was silenced and she and Ted Gunderson I put in the same group I am in, victims of State backed hits via illegal means of Espionage under-cover misconduct of the State or its assets.
Call those players the Rockefellers and Standard Oil, the Dulles and E Howard Hunt families, other Texas interests and Lyndon Baines Johnson, the Rothschilds and their banking and financing East India Tea and other British Pilgrim companies in colonies, or British Petroleum,or Zapata Oil Bush family interests also tied to Richard Nixon and his secret White House Library meetings.
Jen Moore was nearly the last living person to know my family history and its ties to the JFK assassination and MKULTRA and she was threatening to name names.
Both her and my last living family of origin relative died in the last few years and only I know the story still as a witness to inside that family, the Donegan family, and the attempts on my life continue.
But this is not abstract discussion on the JFK assassination but life or death threat to us all and to me, all of us possibly at the brink of destruction of us by a Shadow Government with Shadow criminality, Shadow motives, and evil mafia Shadow ties.
Others know as perpetrators of the crimes they are hiding and we have records from them if we are willing to rely on them.
Variously in fiction as either movies like The Sound of Music, Mary Popins, or blogs like The Prophecies a tale of an English royal connected Bush family were working on genetics and Eugenics with the royal family since 1902 and in illegal experiments of the 1960s JFK and his Irish government began experiencing assassinations and questionable deaths or odd turns on their lives.
Ted Gunderson was an ant-mafi person of the FBI and he also knew much of the story which Lee Harvey Oswald knew, about my family in North Carolina, my mother Glorian Gainey and Harold Gainey, Maria Kutschera Von Trapp tied, where Lee Harvey Oswalds last attempted phone call was to.
Recently I even found cryptic references to the whole affair in the popular Mary Poppins, like the Sound of Music, British singing and dancing with some metaphors of reality under neath it all as plot lines.
All of that data is collected quoted and referenced here and supports my accounts of this history in multilayered corroboration of public records and many personal accounts of all the families involved in the CIA Behavioral Research which landed the CIA in trouble.
The First Amendment, said Judge Learned Hand, 'presupposes that right conclusions are more likely to be gathered out of a multitude of tongues, than through any kind of authoritative selection.
The plan was for the Big Business Mafia to run the government in the 21st Century as MKULTRA and it does.
Gang Stalking, the Free Mason way of terminating victims by progressive Abuse of Power has been used against my family all who were equally witnesses with me to that core story of the hito n JFK, and I may soon be hit myself as so many others have been, and we should all care about police misconduct, so far, the major news outlets do not report on MKULTRA or its threat to United States sovereignty and its threat to our citizens or sovereignty.
My family genetics under atomic testing study for secret reason by secret agencies for secret grooming of world leaders plans in now detectable ways if the FOXP2 gene is recognized and my family line truth is revealed.
JFK and later RFK were aware of these illegal experiments, the “good” births of productive CIA groomed world leaders who could create Capitalist success in communist poor farming counties via USAID and Peace Corps, and those leaders be a an aspiration-group model and communal success of capitalism and allegiance with the USA where both are or had been in doubt.
I add that the genome illegally used from my family comes out of that “black registry ” and the Roman Catholic Kennedy administration objected to the plan in the 1960s going to far, beyond respect for life bounds, also out of resentment of WASPs and the British based WASPs the Kennedy’s had.
WASPs wanted the plant out of wedlock to expand and study the genome cartel which has a defect FOXP2 to be studied and bred out in larger inter-breeding Commonwealth of Great Britain Crown jewels.
That all is possible because my family genome has a secret gene and secret history known as London KE Family FOXP2, out of wedlock Windsor, Windsor with Nazis, Kutscheras, and others.
Cars have been trying to run me of the road, every job or apartment I have had terminates me, child porn is planted on me and talked up elsewhere in usual FBI tactics and I was put in the mental hospital as I asserted being radiologically attacked in my life as my father was in Manhattan Beach Manhattan Project atomic testing in Nevada and elsewhere.
If this sounds grandiose the players and State Actors involved and the events in my family history are enormous.
Bush family CIA milieu system to win against Eastern Europe and beyond for the Queen of England in the USA England Special Relationship that Roman Catholics objected to, renouncing English Commonwealth as philosophy and as conquers of Ireland, India or elsewhere, a British plan since 1902 when the Mary Von Tuck decided a widening and also study of the Windsor London KE Family FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder gene in King Edward VII need to be studied.
Jen Moore was a truth teller about Gatsbians, Great Gatsby house of outlawed-cards MKULTRA COINTELPRO Mafia based society concealing its deep underbelly of elites tied to long term assassination, racketeering profits, oil money, and other corruption.
She was murdered for outing the truth of my family, the Donegan family, and how the elites of society our Gatsbian mafia Dons ranging from media, political office holders, and religious groups have united behind hiding the details of the JFK murder, elites using illegal genetics studies, and profiteering in Mafia backed companies like Zapata Oil, or exotic off shore corruption like the Epstein racketeering most of Epsteins accomplices making up elected or appointed offices like Labor Secretary Acosta, Donald Barr William Barr, the Bush family for generations, and others.
Again the data you need to is verifiable, described, and present in the materials I make available to you 3.
The information I provide is full or re-usable teasers for the purpose the book was written and many victims are named and even after death can be given voice.
One of the Central Intelligence Agency, Defense Intelligence Agency, DARPA, and FBI programs the press protects over generations is MKLUTRA which is a slush fund of “research” and human trafficing with adult surrogates.
The Donegan family genome is illegally used for that purpose under excuses and rationalizations no one would believe in a financial scam architecture depending on law enforcement tools operating in simulated and false pretense activation.
The FBI programs infiltration adult entertainer commercial activity does not find crimes there it places crimes there of free wheeling and corrupt practices intelligence community activities.
It is no different today than when Dallas Police were tied to and were operating with Jack Ruby in his Dallas Texas strip club as were the rest of CIA connected mafia figures running the operations.
Robyn Lee Gritz Austin, TX an FBI Special Agent for anti terror was fired from the FBI on an excuse, is having her financial services and income dry-up, sometimes simply froze for no reason.
Small fringe groups in the USA do hold Conspiracy Theories of the type Jen Moore was reporting on, credibly, but those group make up only .0001 percent of media in the USA and these fringe groups like myself are under extreme attack.
I believe the extrajudicial execution of journalists like Micheal Hasting has been able to protect the USA from being outed as a criminal mafia machine and this book is not about street thugs used by the mafia but the fabric of the USA itself that protects the fabric of the Bush Crime Family, the Bush Family Treason, and an Al Capone based operation always looking to expand within and beyond United States borders via criminal rackets denied implausibly by our Gatsbian mainstream media Dons.
The worst of criminal for instance Robert Swan Mueller or William Barr hold office not because they have been exposed as CIA criminals by the press but rather the press has provided “cover fire” suppressing Conspiracy theories about them just as the press and major politicians and major businesses are indiscernible.
I quote Richard Jay Belzer actor and independently wealthy litterature and history researching author of Hit list that witnesses to the Mafia Shadow Government of the USA are dying mysterious deaths and I believe I am on that mafia hit-list as witness to the JFK assassination by the Deep State.
Bush, Robert Mueller II of Dupont Board or Directors, Saudi Arabia, Great Britain, and the replacement to East India Tea Company, the British Petroleum and Standard Oil Brethren pirate companies.
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi 2 October 1869 30 January 1948), also known as Gandhi, was an Indian lawyer, anti-colonial nationalist and political ethicist who employed nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for India’s independence from British rule.
A JFK hero and other JFK heroes in British Parliament Profiles in Courage described, a Nobel Prize winning book on political leadership, were British Politicians who in Parliament stood against East India Tea Company imperial oppression.
Arnold Schwarzenegger married into the Peace Corsp through Sargent Shriver and Peter Lawford and others were in USAID and East-West Center of Hawaii to turn socialist leaning locations like Hawii into United States States or United States military backed juntas.
The Donegan component, the Edward Paul Donegan story is that my family line was from rescues from the rise of Nasim of 1926 Von Trapp story immigrees to the USA, born in the USA but probably from bastard births of secretive relatives of the Windsors and Kutscheras which led to continuing embarrassment of the Windsors and FBI and is a continuing source of embarrassment of illegal genome study is CIA groomed sleepers who would among other things help royal commonwealths overseas foreign lands and foreign sands.
THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS: by James DiEugenio and Oliver Stone e ALIE TOO BIG TO FAIL: THE REAL HISTORY OF THE ASSASSINATION OF ROBERT F KENNEDY: by Lisa Pease and James DiEugenio e DESTINY BETRAYED: JFK, CUBA, AND THE GARRISON CASE: by James DiEugenio e RECLAIMING PARKLAND: TOM HANKS, VINCENT BUGLIOSI, AND THE JFK ASSASSINATION IN THE NEW HOLLYWOOD: James DiEugeni (Private Detecive who got the Marilun Monroe Grand Jury re-opened) , the mammoth book about the Kennedy assassination, Reclaiming History, into a miniseries.
THE POLITICAL DOMINANCE OF THE CABAL : Deep politics 9-11 Bush Family US/Deep state DOCUMENT: THE POLITICAL DOMINANCE OF THE CABAL : Deep politics 9-11 Bush Family US/Deep state, The story of an American political cabal so powerful that it has been able to repress knowledge of its existence for 50 years, and the hidden history of the political force that has dominated American politics for the last 50 years.
Wayne Madson ISBN 9781300011385, JADED TASKS—BRASS PLATES, BLACK OPS & BIG OIL: THE BLOOD POLITICS OF BUSH & CO.: Wayne Madson ISBN 0-9752906-9-X AMERICA’S NIGHTMARE: THE PRESIDENCY OF GEORGE BUSH II.: Wayne Madson Tempe, AZ: Dandelion Enterprises.03.
U.S.-TALIBAN SECRET OIL DIPLOMACY, SAUDI ARABIA AND THE FAILED SEARCH FOR BIN LADEN: Wayne Madson co-authored with Jean-Charles Brisard and Guillaume Dasquie ISBN 156025-414-9 ¢ GENOCIDE AND COVERT OPERATIONS IN AFRICA 19931999 Wayne Madson: (Edwin Mellen Press, 1999) ISBN 0-7734-8002 ¢ HANDBOOK OF PERSONAL DATA PROTECTIO:Wayne Madson (reference book on international data protection law) ISBN 1-56159-046-0 Wayne Madsen who as a young naval officer was stationed at SOSU Navy Anti Submarine Missile Facility Coos Bay Oregon.
Bush Family Treason by Barbara Boyd and Anton Chaitkin e BRITISH PSYCHIATRY: FROM EUGENICS TO ASSASSINATION BY ANTON CHAITKIN, EXECUTIVE INTELLIGENCE REVIEW : Rockefeller’s Psychiatry The NAZI Extermination Training Manual Further Reading e GEORGE BUSH: THE UNAUTHORIZED BIOGRAPHY : Available in many locations Psychological Warfare controls society, is social control, if and when Mockingbird controls the media of a nation fighting “Russian Propaganda theories that Free Masons killed JFK” Exhibits: id953 is the system of law enforcement and CIA using my genome via illegal operations.
Tied to Pizzagate the CIA program the press corps denies, the program mostly experiments in eugenics, designer babies, and illegal science in party room where impregnation are offered and occur.
LE tend to pay themselves as victims if they say I sexually victimized them by peeping and they pay for the right to peep at others as they stage peeping at adults using my name and my biology to “settle the debt” for having had peeped, though a Dopple of me is used, not me, I do not do so.
Jen Moore was a former police officer in Tracy California and she held “Conspiracy Theories” as a “Truth Teller” and pointed out as others have the United States Espionage Deep State has a betray of the Donegan family, the USA, and the world underway as we possibly go into WWW III and the United States activities in the Ukraine she warned about before she was assassinated by thugs telling her to stay silent.
It is worth saying for the segway it creates that I do not believe myself to be a Nigerian Prince down on his luck and need of rescue.
That went around in the 1990s about the time the Barrack Obama Jr. marriage began to produce children, two, some say an aborted fetus and an out of wedlock male.
My father James Paul Donegan a late teen house painter who clomb down off the ladder from his work when he heard the United States Army was taking recruits.
My mother lived doing the work of George Washington and what Paul Harvey talked about, being a farmer, and producing food on a small farm.
After the war the TWA and airlines system around the world let employees and families of employees travel on unused arline seats as a perk of being in the business.
There ae those who DO believe the out of wedlock celebrity DNA in my family line is a some sort of bragging rights worth and they have aspiration group interest in it.
I hear dopples of me who are in apartments next to mine, with an adjoining door such as some motels or hotels, or on other areas saying that because they are caught by the Marshalls and other with child porn photos then to avoid arrest they will provide people like Salvation Army Red Kettler bell ringers the right to make little princess.
This is I believe an inflated value of my DNA which places a wrongful emphasis on Nature rather then Nuture, and feudal arrogance of self governance.
COINTELPRO Wetworks Subversioin, Legal and Psychiatric System Harassment via Gang Stalk Espionage Units High power people are covering up atomic testing disasters by conspiring against the lives of atomic weapons development and testing victims.
INFILTRATION: Agents and informers did not merely spy on political activists.
The FBI also conducted “black bag jobs”, watrant-less surreptitious entries, against the targeted groups and their members.
Those same thugs from that same conspiracy have been after me and it is tied to the war hero legacy of my family.
I have attached a photo this email I also refer to textually as id637 that is Jen Moore “Conspiracy Theorist” that my family is tied to the Von Trapp family history, my mother born in 1926.
She was the out of wedlock daughter (along with Harold Gainey her brother from her earlier life as Glorian Gainey and Festus Gainey alleged father) in North Carolina where Lee Harvey Oswald’s last attempted phone call was too, the military intelligence office of WWII in that area.
She died in 2011 with a Special Needs Trust fund left for me, a trust fund under United States Federal Regulation that is not an inheritance of money but her keeping her money through a proxy after her death that money which can be used for education, legal expenses, medical, and other advancement of living conditions needs though not mere consumerism for its own ends.
When Uncle Festus Gainey died in 1935 or 1936 when my mother was 9 years old she and Harold Gainey, (all of us her, me, and Harold show FOXP2 and can’t tie our shoes well) to South Carolina in a DuPont workers family.
Harold worked at DuPont too, war suppliers, in my case Harold work on testing synthetic fiber strength.
She wanted Moon River played at her funeral a song about a woman who meets an amazing man who opens her entire world up.
United States Boston wrong side of the tracks born poor family just like the Kennedy family, Rose Fitzpatrick, the Donegans took every kind of abuse that society can heep out.
James Paul Donegan left Boston Massachusetts to become a P51 pilot just before the formal outbreak of the war and just before he was 18.
By his telling me and Tom Donegan through our lives he was in the Atomic Bombing of Japan likely in the United States Army Air Corps and 509th air force wing of bombers surrounded by fighters and recon.
After Korean War flying my father did ending in about 1958 Thomas Neil Armstrong was born named after Neil Armstrong and Thomas Jefferson who wrote a Bible without Creationism in it.
James Paul Donegan Glorian Donegan Thomas Neil Donegan and Edward Paul Donegan led good lives.
I had trouble in school and have a minor gene defect looked by good doctors who have little access to more data as co-morbid ADHD and Dyslexia, also strong emotions though rapidly flashing, just herniating a bit through reigning it in.
My mother wished the song Moon River be played at her funeral, a song sung by Audrey Hepburn of love for the man who swept her off her feet and opened the world up to her.
And James Paul Donegan opened the world up to me too with Head Royce private school education based on Liberal Arts and the Humanities to one of the most influential artworks I have ever seen.
The Third of May 1808 (also known as El tres de mayo de 1808 en Madrid or Los fusilamientos de la montafia del Principe Pio, or Los fusilamientos del tres de mayo) is a painting completed in 1814 by the Spanish painter Francisco Goya, now in the Museo del Prado, Madrid.
While I embrace Irish Nationalism and Sien Fein, India indepence from Eat India Tea company and Ghandi, Palestian protection from excess in close spaces where sabotuer battle is intense, and other basic human rights focuses as I find others like myself having common oppression sources.
State massacre of its citizens is the most brutal of all forms of violence for it ability to surround its victims and operate with impunity.
We were abnormally educated and abnormally sophisticated which has made us targets of Free Masonry on one level.
On a second level targeting me as a terrorist of uknown Orthodox or Pagan sympathies against Chrisiandom has both opened doors for me, not judging “hookups” church groups in Corpus Christi admonish in people at their services, and while views as terrorist threat of unknown lifestyle FBI subversion tactics were used against me.
The curiosity about me was simply I was of value to some backward people and the Donegan genome was too, defamed as a mentally retarded person whose DNA is not of value, it is in fact of value and being black marketed.
COINTELPRO is being used to undermine Edward Paul Donegan with a conservancy treating and nearly arrested an insane Dopple of Ed Donegan, and on that record the real Edward Donegan is harassed on pretexts.
The effect of the Mafia scheme of using an impersonator of me ina Salvation Army conservancy taking Goth lessons from Goth or Victoria Secrets entertainers sex workers allowed that entertainer to also sign DNA rights into slush funds IF that person being entertained, the Salvation Army loser, had child porn.
Allowing them to destroy my life by generating records of ignorance and misconduct has incited normal areas of life to shun me and I find myself stuck in homeless shelters with no apartments of normal people willing to accept me and fired from all jobs I might have.
Law Enforcement officers do not like to be lured into dark alleys or unsafe places if they are enforcing the law.
If they are breaking the law they may force a person like me into such a place where an unknown and nu-noticed death might occur, no questions raised by a person dying homeless behind a dumpster.
Jen Moore explains Western Schism and after Russia, blaming the death of JFK on Russia, and acts of the Illuminati on Russia.
Our side of the Schism is using church groups to make gambits of their children to populate Western Schism side of the Great Schism of 1054 and this is illegal genome trafficking. id1046.
As all of her data and all other data now shows the Non Roman Catholic office holders objected to assassinations and overthrow that the Protestants wanted but by resentment of both Feudalism and embracing sanctity of life the Irish, Italian, or other Roman Catholics did not wanted genetically cultivated sleeper agents out of Donegan atomic testing genome or any other source and not for any use like overthrowing republics to create Commonwealths.
She adds in Free Masons as elite mafia black budget illegal profits of Deep State via Pizza-gate asset seizures of black market genome used in the Ukraine by United States Mafia crime families, the Donegan genome of Windsor Kutschera history and the ties to the JFK Murder and other murders as the CIA tries to conceal why JKFK was killed and how this genome related to that story, Barrack Obama Jr is only one of many mostly Bush family members and more not wanted to be tied to illegal genome research by DARPA BRIAN program going back to Austria Freud, and Carl Jung.
Confirmed by many new sources of available earlier suppressed evidence from me, Jen Moore, others, then denied to Garrison, former FBI agent and Orleans Parish LA USA prosecutor Garrison expertly built the case a deep state CIA led killed JFK and blamed then killed Lee Harvey Oswald. this is the case as Joan Mellen changed history.
Bush, Richard Cheney, England, and the FBI Knights of Malta J Edgar Hoover James Jesus Angleton NWO British backed Wild Bill Donovan Donald Barr William Barr plan.
An impersonator of me or a person faking I have authorized them to do so goes to an adult entertainer as a retarded person who needs lessons in Goth lifestyle, paganism, sexuality, and modeling help for a sexually retarded childlike person.
During the sexual surrogate lessons the moron as me will be caught with child porn and I will be blamed for the acts of the Dopple of me who agrees he is Ed Donegan and agrees he is an Atheist and agrees he is harming minors from local churches.
The more complex motive is that person shaken down for the trust fund my mother left, a trust fund which will pay to get my mother’s son out of being arrested, is being bilked of assets due me and even more to the point I am being branded a low morality poorly developed person incapable of adult sexuality but wanting surrogacy lesson in metro-sexual latex bondage and avante guard lifestyle the very sexuality Salvation Army “red kettle” homeless people are far behind in.
The Pizzagate plan is Western Christian organizations using my genome to get lessons on avante guard lifestyle and at the same time use payment of my genome into churches and other organization of world orphanages were its historic track record might be repeated in CIA creations like Barrack Obama Jr headed to Indonesia or other locations.
The entirety of a CIA operation is destroying my life, and catching up on the opposition, an Easter Side will educated Atheist Goth whose death will complete my genome transfer into a long running Christian Western Side Great Schism world plan to retake all of Europe and all of the world for Western Side Schism countries.
This book How amphetamine acts in minimal brain dysfunction A Cabal forms branching Eugenics out of Nazi Germany and forming a separate 1936 fork which arose from 1926 babies fertilized in 1925 researching a FOXP2 gene believed to exist in 1902.
They were good friends with ; Anna Freud, Fawn Brodie and Margaret Mead.
Max Jacobson retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to r here | Dr.
Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 December 1979) the following ¢ John F Kennedy e Nelson Rockefeller “Rocky” JULY 8, 1908 January 26, 1979) e Marilyn Monroe JUNE 1, 1926 AUGUST 4, 1962) Note that Rockefeller is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatrity, the Nixon and many other administrations, and political office. residence in Castelgandolfo C g Dr.
Feelgood,” because he administered highly addictive “vitamin shots” laced with various substances that included amphetamine and methamphetamine.
Feelgood,” Jacobson was known for his “miracle tissue regenerator” shots, which consisted of amphetamines, animal hormones, bone marrow, enzymes, human placenta, painkillers, steroids, and multivitamins.
In September 1960, then-Senator John F Kennedy first visited Jacobson shortly before the 1960 presidential election debates. i Jacobson was part of the presidential entourage at the Vienna summit in ; 1961, where he administered injections to combat severe back pain.
Plans include global medicine in the poorest of nations in secretive genetic reversal of retard ion and immunology problems (for instance in Europe resistance was developed against the Bubonic plague Plague that also conferred defense against HIV-1 from entering and destroying the immune system.
MYSTERY OF THE BLACK DEATH PBS Clues and Evidence May 29, 2014 * For a disease-causing microorganism to infect the human body there must be a gateway or portal through which it enters into human cells.
The plague bacterium works this way, hijacking the white blood cells sent to eliminate it.
Traveling inside the white blood cells to the lymph nodes, the bacteria break out and attack the focal point of the human immune system.
Stephen O’Brien felt that the mutated CCR5 gene, delta 32, may have prevented the plague from being able to enter its host’s white blood cells.
My mother had a Hysterectemy and ovary testing/ovectamy screening when I was on my way to FMC Butner in 2007 and my brother was confused in his deceptive and changing information about the ovaries and biopsy, and Michelle Obama has the anthropological proportions of a male K Sasha and Malike , IVF, I just learned were born when I was at AOL Time Warner Netscape at my brothers referal to me for a job, at the exact time I noticed weird Doppelgangers of me emerging 1999 era.
The U.S.-based advocacy group quickly published a Farsilanguage version of its guide on how to delete digital history that it had produced last year for activists in Hong Kong and also put together a manual on how to evade biometrics.
Science Prevails Again Gene Splicing Southpark Four Assed Monkey, or said another way, Edward Paul Donegan’s 2008-2009 visit at Federal Medical Center, Butner, NC Science can now predicts the IQ of your TODDLERS A year ago no gene had ever been tied to performance on an IQ test.
This passenger is observed ; floating in the ocean, wearing a life jacket and showing no signs of ; distress.
Oddly, another passenger documents the entire event with a GoPro video camera.
Now it turns out that back in the 1940s, the FBI was extremely * interested in the parents of the husband from this Chicago couple.
The spy then told the boy’s father “to bear in mind from where he was talking.” ce The Soviet spy was part of an espionage network penetrating the highest levels of the United States government.
The deceased was named in a sealed affidavit filed in United States District * Court in Seattle alleging misprision of felony and treason against the ; United States.
Hawaii/SUBUD official who released President Obama’s birth certificate | | | | | | : Hawaii Director of Health Loretta ‘Deliana’ Fuddy, who released 1 President Obama’s ‘Hawaii Certificate of Live Birth’ on April 27, 2011, : was the only passenger pronounced dead after the Cessna Caravan went : down.
Modal Trigger Harold BornsteinNorthwell Health Bornstein told the network that he felt “raped, frightened and sad” when Keith Schiller, Trump’s longtime former bodyguard, Trump Organization lawyer Alan Garten and another unidentified “large man” came to his Park Avenue office to collect the president’s records on Feb., 2017.
Her Bitchute Channel after August 8th 2018 technical problems days before her death Ed Donegan independently and also later continuing her findings and reporting of this money laundering CIA black budget money laundering crime tied to MKULTRA Bitchute Second Line of Troops Jen Moore Tribute Cs Loe 8 8 ee ge Hiroshima Pilot Who Became a Symbol of Antinuclear Protest By mne I Harrington a manne 1.
Aug., 2020 | The latest article from “Beyond the World War II We Know,” a series ; from The Times that documents lesser-known stories from the war, looks , at Claude Eatherly, an American pilot involved in the atomic bombing of » Hiroshima.
The explosion lit the lane’s interior with a brilliant flash, so bright that some of the aviators omentarily thought they had been blinded.
George W Bush May Have Big Surprise From DEA Date: 08/10/1999 6:44:54 AM Eastern Daylight Time From: [EMAIL PROTECTED] To: I was thinking that the Gunther Russbacher prison interview video was not going to show up, like Chip Tatum’s video.
McClendon was unable to identify the body as Wilcher after viewing the remains.
He joined the FBI agents in the Wilcher partment during the 4:30 to 7:30 time period. ... eee ee o—-™ » Ms.
KIM, who performed the autopsy, the results of which have not been released.
After the charges were dismissed, Fuller was arrested in 1 Virginia “on apparently trumped up charges” and was being held without i bail at the time of writing in May 1993.
Oo O° Waco On FEBRUARY 28 1993, at 4:20 AM, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms attempted to execute a search warrant relating to alleged sexual abuse charges and illegal weapons violations.
Due to his wild personality, poetic lyrics, JAMES DOUGLAS MORRISON ( DECEMBER 8, 1943 JULY 3 , 1971 When all at once a mighty herd Of red eyed cows he saw Plowin’ through the ragged distinctive voice, unpredicta ble and erratic performanc es, and the dramatic circumstan ces surroundin g his life and early death, Morrison is regarded by music critics and fans as one of the most iconic and influential frontmen in rock history.
Morrison was commander of United States naval forces during the Gulf of Tonkin Incident of August 1964, which sparked an escalation of American involvement in the Vietnam War.
He was the father of Jim As the riders loped on by him He heard one call his name ‘If you wanna save your soul From hell a-riding on our range Then, cowboy, change your ays today Or with us you will ride Morrison, the lead singer of the rock band rying to catch the devil’s herd The Doors, who died on July 3, 1971 cross these endless skies On December 7, 1941, Morrison witnessed Yippie-yi-o Yippie-yi-yay the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
History of the American Society of Radiologic Technologists ' The American Society of Radiologic Technologists is the world’s : largest and oldest membership association for medical imaging : technologists and radiation therapists.
These affiliate ; societies operate independently of the national organization, but ASRT , provides them with assistance and guidance upon request.
The rapid i increase in membership prompted the society to hire its first full-time staff person, Genevieve Eilert.
Until then, training » programs varied greatly in length and in the subjects covered.
The ASRT continued to grow, and by 1968 membership had reached : 14,000.
Historical Highlights e 1920 American Association of Radiological Technicians formed in Chicago with 12 charter members. e 1929 Organization begins publishing The X-Ray Technician.
Chief Executive Officer Lynn May retires. e 2009 Sal Martino, Ed.D., R.T., FASRT, CAE, becomes CEO. e 2013 ASRT membership reaches 150,000. e 2015 The ASRT Museum and Archives opens. e 2018 ASRT surpasses 155,000 members. e 2020 ASRT celebrates its Centennial anniversary.
The City on the Edge of Forever Quotes PoemOfQuotes.com * “One day soon, man is going to be able to harness incredible energies, maybe even the atom — energies that could ultimately hurl us to other worlds in — in some sort of spaceship.
And the men that reach out into space will be able to find ways to feed the hungry millions of the world and the cure their diseases.
They will be able to find a way give each other hope and a common future.
Edith Keeler Edit Keeler is a fictional Missionary worker in 1930s USA who Jim Kirk, Spck, and McCoy encounter.
A visionary peace activist and visionary in an age of wonder she foresees rocketry and space flight, the A-Bomb, fighting diseases, and more.
In on future she will counsel and gain national attention years from the 1930s but in that role she does not foresee the need to fight the Nazis and prepare militarily thus the world is captured by the Nazis who do develop and effective rocket an the A Bomb.
In 1928, WRGB, then W2XB, was started as the world’s first television station.
Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Léon Theremin had been developing a mirror drum-based television, starting with 16 lines resolution in 1925, then 32 lines and eventually 64 using interlacing in 1926.
As part of his thesis, on 7 May 1926, he electrically transmitted, and then projected, nearsimultaneous moving images on a 5-square-foot screen.
Beginning in 1925, Roosevelt spent most of his time in the Southern United States, at first on his houseboat, the Larooco.
Intrigued by the potential benefits of hydrotherapy, he established a rehabilitation center at Warm Springs, Georgia, in 1926.
To create the rehabilitation center, he assembled a staff of physical therapists and used most of his inheritance to purchase the Merriweather Inn.
In 1938, he founded the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, leading to the development of polio vaccines.
Griffith experiment, reported in 1928 by Frederick Griffith, was the first experiment suggesting that bacteria are capable of transferring genetic information through a process known as transformation.
This was vital in treating Influenza of WWI which had killed so many. :Penacillian was not that much earlier.
As we see form earlier in this chapter “ new society offered knowledge-hungry technologists the opportunity to meet and share technical advice.
More well-known ; is Konstantin Tsiolkovsky’s work, ; “AccneqoBpaHve MMpOBBIX MIpOCTpaHCTB peaKTHBHBbIMM TIpHOopamu” » , ; published in 1903.
I Spaceflight became an engineering possibility with the work of Robert ' H Goddard’s publication in 1919 of his paper A Method of Reaching I Extreme Altitudes.
His attempt to secure an Army contract for a rocket; propelled weapon in the first World War was defeated by the November ; 11, 1918 armistice with Germany.
Working with private financial support, he was the first to launch a liquid-fueled rocket in 1926.
Opel RAK. World’s first public manned flight of a rocket plane on September 30, 1929.
Project MK Ultra retrieved from military.wikia.org and copied or modified to here Project MKUltra is the code name of an illegal United States government human research operation experimenting in the behavioral engineering of humans through the CIA’s Scientific Intelligence Division.
MKUltra involved the use of "" many methodologies to manipulate people’s mental states and alter brain « functions, including the surreptitious administration of drugs (especially 1 LSD) and other chemicals, hypnosis, sensory deprivation, isolation, 1 verbal and sexual abuse, as well as various forms of torture.
It is the belief of this author Edward Paul Donegan the program included DNA testing of created twins, brothers or half brothers including Ed Donegan and Barrack Obama, Mark and Scott Kelley, Tom Cruise and many others.
JFK’s assassination was tied to objecting to this plan since the experimental output included moles to rule foreign countries on behalf of England.
The center was Sidney Gottlieb, Donald Barr, and William Barr along with Dulles and Souther Baptist church, perhaps Salvation Army and YMCA all of which were in the Special Relationship with England, Will Bild Donovan, the Vatican, and others of the Supreme Allied Forces.
The Project is to research it and help Great Brittian lead the battle against Nazism and Communism PAPERCLIP Drops in grammar in writing, left out conjugations or words or letters, clipping as though a smooth dial is at some peg and stopped a needle from moving or trucated its movement CHATTER Verbosity at times mumbling in spastic ways ARTICHOKE Difficulty in Upper GI nuerology of throat and gastro regulation.
ACTING WITHOUT THINKING Prone to at first emotional irregulation in early life, often aging and muturing eventually into a charismatic humorous slight of situations that cam be broached with a laugh off but also that disregard for the tradional path a form of non focus to the regimented situation, someonewaht insubordiant and informal GANG STALK While not a psychiatric sympton it is a synthesized cognitve result.
At the same time a person is reactionary to the environmental stressors they are reacting to it also manufactures an animal model as to how nationalists may respond to assault as for instance Adolph Hitler did.
Prrotesso Robert Greenberg, Ph.D. retrieved from link and copied or P modified to here Dr.
On that question, the Opposition gained the day; direct attempts against nationalization were abandoned. but the problem, of course, involved more than forms of property in land.
It is worth nothing that during those years the bourgeois press of the whole world, and the socialdemocratic press after it, repeated with sympathy the official attribution to the “Left Opposition” of industrial romanticism.
The first official draft of the five-year-plan, prepared at last in 1927, was completely saturated with the spirit of stingy tinkering.
Kant argued for the establishment of a peaceful world community, not in a sense of a global government, but in the hope that each state would group.
Was it not declare itself a free state that respects its citizens indeed the cruel and welcomes foreign visitors as fellow rational dataais ae thea beings, thus promoting peaceful society worldwide.
The less he Communist International is international disputes through negotiation and arbitration.
In 1919 United States president Woodrow Wilson won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role as the leading architect of the League. ositions of capital, he more political credit is given to the Czechoslovak, and other bourgeoisies. hus the strength of he bureaucracy, oth domestic and international, is in inverse proportion to he strength of the Soviet Union as a socialist state anda fighting base of the roletarian evolution.
There The diplomatic philosophy behind the League represented a fundamental shift from the preceding hundred years.
The League lacked its own armed force and depended on the victorious First World War Allies (Britain, France, Italy and Japan were the permanent members of the Executive Council) to enforce its resolutions, keep to its economic sanctions, or provide an army when needed. is another.
Not only Soviet diplomacy, however, but in its steps the Communist International systematically paints up the episodical allies of Moscow as “friends of peace”, deceives the workers with slogans like “collective security” and “disarmament”, and thus becomes in reality a political agent of the imperialists among the working classes.
Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill at the Tehran Conference During the Conference, the three leaders coordinated their military strategy against Germany and Japan and made a number of important decisions concerning the post World War II era.
This book This is part of our series about CIA employees who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
Shedd was a commercial officer, charged with helping United States companies do business in the region.
To learn more about the Obama Foundation Scholars program and the 2020-2021 cohort, please visit obama.org/scholars.
But from the ashes of destruction emerged a narrative of hope and peace-a reminder of our belief in common humanity. re BARACK OBAMA August 6, 2020 On the occasion of the 75th anniversary of the atomic bombings, I want to extend my warm greetings to the people of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as you mark this solemn anniversary.
Post a topic that you’d love to share or sign up to engage on a topic you’d like to further explore you’|l then meet up in-person onsite in the Braindate Lounge.
Nov 19 events calender continues similar to above, omited for brevity here FEBRUARY 27 , 2014MY BROTHER’S KEEPER LAUNCH The program gives grants to those in the legal system who have criminal backgounds in program designed to team them with Law Enforcement and Neigbborhood watch to switch their allegiance and lives towards civil conduct rather than crime and be forces of that in the neigborhoods they are community organizers in.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA, 44TH PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES “We started My Brother’s Keeper so that every boy or young man of color in America would know that their dreams mattered as much as any other child.
VALERIE JARRETT, SENIOR ADVISOR TO PRESIDENT OBAMA “When President Obama said, “Jf I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon Martin,” he hoped his words would lead to a more empathetic understanding of the danger facing a son who looked like him.
William Albert Haynes III is a retired American professional wrestler better eee as Billy Jack Haynes.
Rich’s death as well as “The Boys on the Track” to the widely debunked : “Clinton Body Count” conspiracy theory.
Haynes then alleges that this unnamed politician asked him to kill David Kennedy, the son of Robert F Kennedy, in 1984.
Harassing Ass Flashing towards me (Rx direction line, I receive the imagery towards me) which is harassing in itself ¢ Sockem: Blame me for the incident out of my control but do it behind my back and let the stigma or stereotype of a single male work as me appearing to be a peeper predator (exploitation of fact I looked like peeper) e Block Em: An impersonator may have from afar have peeped and will Tx a message the he is at and say he peeped and women will be protected from real Ed.
Yet as these things like women walking down the street in front of me, out of my control that they got in front of me, are pieced together with other pieces, like ambiguous statements from others in places of business, pizza shops, etc., then behind my back those out of place things can be “fit together” in a way the the resulting assembled puzzle makes sense out of those little evidence plants around me that i Was told were nothing to be noticed and merely random other things around me.
Sound And Fury accusation towards me (empty of any accusation, just character assignation towards me like saying “Ed you are DIRT” utilized the Newton’s Third Law of Motion Corrective Ploy.
Dirty cops frame me with planted or real victims, then shake down “retarded” Ed’s unwanted uneeded conservancy United States Marshalls and others 1) steal my identity 2) Use my identity to harm a minor 3) get punished in my identity for harming a minor 3) Ask for community support over and instead of me because the United States Marshalls are DEFENDING the community they say.
This is mostly racially motivated created inter racial DNA permissions via what an impersonator of me will sign over.
Tom Dunham, who had appearance created he was in a pedo network with me had people, strangers, say odd things to him like “be careful.
Where were you a few minutes ago (when my location was known, I was walking the dog) are attempts to place me the location the Doppelganger was.
Charities Got a Piece of The Action Al Capone was known for his Generosity Ploy Most of the city of impoverished Corpus Christi Texas and the city itself are living far above their means in wrongfully sized assets and rights, likely a CIA project in MKULTRA turn around of impoverished communities. a Capone’s Soup Kitchen, 1 Situated on what is now a parking lot on the corner of 9th and State St, served over 120,000 meals to hungry people.
The kitchen, which was emolished 20 years after the epression, was a place that provided warm meals for unemployed people thanks to Capone.
Besides his charity, Capone was also known for sending expensive flowers to rival gang member’s funerals, and for his generosity to strangers and Italian immigrants. wea A fictional song about the The Night Chicago Died.
Boiler Room Girls I had spme researh these were possiible surrogocy baby carrier recruits or they or one said “no | oe 8 8 oe 8 Uh UU UU UU Ue UG UU UU UU UU UU UO UG Ue UG Ue UU UG UG UG UD UG a Boiler Room Girls retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to ‘ here Beez The “Boiler Room Girls” was a nickname for a group of six women who worked as political advisors for Robert Kennedy’s 1968 presidential campaign in a windowless work area in Kennedy’s Washington, DC electoral offices.
Washington campaign headquarters to each state director in their region.
At the end of the day, a decision book was compiled and sent to , Kennedy and his campaign manager, Stephen Smith.
Barbara Pierce Bush was the first lady of the United States from 1989 to 1993 Nancy Davis Reagan (born Anne Frances Robbins; JULY 6, 1921 March 6, 2016) was an American film actress and first lady of the United States from 1981 to 1989.
As Nancy Davis, she was a Hollywood actress in the 1940s and 1950s, starring in films such as The Next Voice You Hear..., Night into oming, and M ( Cer Jill Tracy Jacobs Biden is an American educator and the current first lady of the United States as the second wife of President Joe Biden.
She was previously the second lady of the United States from 2009 to 2017.
She taught English and reading in high schools for thirteen ; years and instructed adolescents with emotional disabilities at a » psychiatric hospital.
Ashley Blazer Biden is an American social worker, activist, philanthropist, and fashion designer.
Blazer Biden playing with children at the Mapetla Day Care Centre in Soweto, South Africa, during an official visit ad in June 2010.
She was one of twelve graduates who * received the John Hope Franklin Combating American Racism Award.
After ' finishing graduate school, she gained a job at West End Neighborhood « House, a non-profit organization, as their Employment and Education « Liaison for adjudicating youth developing various employment and job i skills training programs.
She worked as a social worker in the Delaware Department of Services for Children, Youth, and Their Families for fifteen years.
While working for the department, Biden created programs for youth focusing on juvenile justice, foster ; care, and mental health.
In 2012, she ; joined the Delaware Center for Justice as an associate director, focusing , on criminal justice reform in the state.
She helped establish and run , programs and services at the center focused on public education, adult "" victim services, gun violence, incarcerated women, and community ' reentry.
Wr] i im Jordan retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here James Daniel Jordan is an American 1 politician serving as the United States representative for Ohio’s 4th congressional district since 2007.
Jim Jordan with Vice President Mike Pence a wS , He attended and wrestled for Graham High School, * graduating in 1982.
Jordan is a founding member of the | ARCOM UAL SCOLIEM BRC OIMOrI@bS , Serving as its first chair from 2015 to 2017, and as its vice chair since 2017.
He was the ""ranking member of the House Oversight Committee from 2019 to 2020.
During Trump’s presidency, Jordan sought to discredit investigations into Russian interference in the 2016 election and staged a sit-in to prevent a Trump impeachment inquiry hearing over the Trump-Ukraine scandal.
After Joe Biden won the 2020 presidential election and Trump refused to , concede while making false claims of fraud, Jordan supported lawsuits ; to invalidate the election results and voted not to certify the Electoral "" College results.
United States Naval Reserve Center in Dallas, Texas, while still a student at Harvard Law School.
Later ; that year, he received orders to the JAG Trial Service Office Command * South East at Naval Station Mayport, Florida, as a prosecutor.
He worked , for the commander of Joint Task Force-Guantanamo , "" working directly with detainees at the Guantanamo Bay Joint Detention ' Facility.
Group in Coronado, California, where he was assigned to SEAL Team ; One and deployed to Iraq with the troop surge as the Legal Advisor to » the SEAL Commander, Special Operations Task Force-West in Fallujah. i ' DeSantis returned to the United States in April 2008, at which time he was "" reassigned to the Naval Region Southeast Legal Service.
Department of Justice appointed him to serve as an assistant United States : attorney at the United States Attorney’s Office in the Middle District of Florida.
DeSantis was assigned as a trial defense counsel until his honorable discharge from active duty in February 2010.
He was awarded the Bronze * Star Medal, the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, the ; Global War on Terrorism Service Medal and the Iraq Campaign Medal.
They were just hard at work yet an observer there that asked the first mason what he was doing.
Eleanor Iselin Manchurian Candiate 1962 A person at extension 3223 is under control of the Queen of Diamonds card to act against his will, him possibly my father who haed the British.
Gargan was the campaign chairman for Robert F Kennedy’s 1968 presidential campaign. ooo Pi vcene McCarthy retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to ‘ here EUGENE McCarthy was born in Watkins, Minnesota.
McCarthy, and a strong-willed man of Irish descent, Michael J » McCarthy, a postmaster and cattle buyer.
In 1943, considering the contemplative life of a monk, he became a 1 Benedictine novice at Saint John’s Abbey.
In the fall of 1964, ABC * cancelled her news show and fired Howard. | | | | i | | | | | Personal life Howard was married twice and had two children.
Her ; first marriage was to film director Felix E Feist, with whom she hada __} aughter, Fritzi.
Howard later married producer Walter Lowendahl, with whom she had a daughter, Anne. | | | | | | | | | | | Death Devastated by the loss of her career, Howard suffered a 1 miscarriage in June 1965 and was hospitalized with depression.
Space?” , and she was an invited speaker at the International Congress of Mathematicians in 2006.
The Mathematics Genealogy Project is a web-based database for the academic genealogy of mathematicians.
I | Sing it Again The Monkeys Their original line-up consisted of the American actor/musicians Micky Dolenz, Michael Nesmith and Peter Tork with English actor/singer Davy Jones.
Fred attended Rice Institute in Houston from 1917 to 1919 and graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1922, where he obtained a degree in chemical engineering practice.
The larger oil companies quickly sued in response, filing 44 different lawsuits against Koch, and embroiling him in litigation for years.
In 1934, Koch had partnered with William Rhodes Davis to build the Hamburg Oil Refinery, the third-largest oil refinery serving the Third Reich, a project which was personally approved by Adolf Hitler; contemporary critics claim this showed a direct tie between fascism and the modern conservative movement, notwithstanding Koch’s much greater involvement in the Soviet Union.
In 1966, he turned over day-to-day management of the company to his son, Charles Koch 3 Charlie Wilson and his war retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here In 1980, Congressman Charlie Wilson is more interested in partying than legislating, frequently throwing huge galas and staffing his congressional office with attractive young women.
Joanne King Herring Joanne King Herring is an American socialite, businesswoman, political activist, philanthropist, diplomat, and former television talk show host.
Within the Department of Defense, SAP is "" better known as “SAR” by the mandatory Special Access "" Required markings Gustav Lascaris Avrakotos (January 14, 1938 December 1, 2005) was an American case officer and the Afghan Task Force Chief for the Central Intelligence Agency.
Richard Welch, the chief of the CIA station in Athens, who was assassinated in ~ December 1975 Ke had all started off life as peasants before joining the army, and they felt a kinship with this charismatic, working-class American whose parents had come from Lemnos.
He ended his tenure in Greece in 1978. a In 1980, Congress man Charlie Wilson is more interested in partying than legislating, frequently throwing huge galas and staffing his congressional office with attractive young women.
George Crile III, Charlie Wilson , with an unnamed ISI agent in the background, (person wearing the aviator glasses looking at the photo camera) Charles Nesbitt Wilson (JUNE 1, 1933 February 10, 2010) was a United States naval officer and former 12term Democratic United States Representative from Texas’s 2nd congressional district.
Charles Nesbitt Wilson (June 1, 1933 February 10, 2010) was a United States naval officer and former 12-term Democratic United States Representative from Texas’s 2nd congressional district.
Wilson is best known for leading Congress into supporting Operation Cyclone, the largestever Central Intelligence Agency covert operation, which during the Carter and Reagan administrations supplied military equipment to the Afghan Mujahideen during the Soviet-Afghan War.
Wilson was born in the small town of Trinity, Texas, to Charles Edwin Wilson, an accountant for a local timber company, and Wilmuth , a local florist, on June 1, 1933.
According to Wilson himself, he first entered politics as a teenager by running a campaign against his next-door neighbor, city council incumbent Charles Hazard.
Ee The women of Minnesota pitched in to do their part during World War II, breaking out of traditional roles.
Some signed on to work in defense les plants, while others took advantage of opportunities in the military.
Virginia Mae Hope, pictured here, joined the W.A.S.P.s (Women’s Air Force Service Pilots) in 1943, and flew planes from one base to another to free a male pilot for war duty.
He has three younger sisters, Gemma Marie , Deborah , and Kathleen Dolenz went to Ulysses S Grant High School in Valley Glen, Los Angeles, California, and graduated in 1962.
Joanne Gignilliat Trimmier Woodward (born FEBRUARY 27, 1930) is an American actress, producer, and philanthropist.
She eventually began marketing her typewriter correction fluid as “Mistake Out” in 1956.
Peter Halsten Thorkelson (February 13, 1942 FEBRUARY 21, 2019), known professionally as Peter Tork, was an American musician, composer, and actor who was best known as the keyboardist and bass guitarist of the Monkees.
They settled in Keokuk, Iowa in 1879, where Felix Hughes was an attorney.
The children attended First Ward School and were educated in the arts, history and science.
When her son Robard offered to build her a house in Grand Avenue in Keokuk, Iowa, she asked the house be built without closets.
The Hughes XF-11 was a prototype military reconnaissance aircraft designed and flown by Howard Hughes and built by Hughes Aircraft for the United States Army Air Forces.
During the first XF-11 flight in 1946, piloted by Hughes himself, the aircraft crashed in Beverly Hills, California.
The production aircraft had been canceled in May 1945, but the second prototype was completed and successfully flown in 1947.
The program was extremely controversial from the beginning, leading the United States Senate to investigate the XF-11 and the Hughes H-4 Hercules flying boat in 1947-1948.
A reconnaissance aircraft is a military aircraft designed or adapted to perform aerial reconnaissance with roles including collection of imagery intelligence , signals intelligence, as well as measurement and signature intelligence.
Modern technology has also enabled some aircraft and UAVs to carry out real-time surveillance in addition to general intelligence gathering.
Before the development of devices such as radar, military forces relied on reconnaissance aircraft for visual observation and scouting of enemy movement.
It was a bad day for Hughes and for the XF-11, a beautiful and innovative aircraft that had all the potential to be a great success in the armed forces.
With its breeding, its capabilities and its potential, the XF-11 might have snagged a lucrative production contract for Hughes.
Instead, the XF-11 was a “might have been,” a footnote in history that not everyone remembers today.
Elliott Roosevelt, son of the president, who wanted to adapt the plane for iad reconnaissance for the expected invasion of the Japanese home islands.
This was an evolution for Roosevelt who had started out with an interest in a “convoy fighter” a huge, twin-engined warplane that would escort long-range heavy bombers to their targets.
It was part of the same development efforts that produced the Lockheed XP-58 Chain Lightning designed by Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, but the D-2 was so scrupulously safeguarded that no clear photo of it is known to exist.
The XF-11 was an offspring of a giant twinengined fighter, the Hughes D-2, which Hughes and his R company built at Culver City, Calif., but assembled in great secrecy at Harper Dry Lake in the Mojave Desert, a location even more remote than the Army Air Forces’ flight test facility at Muroc, Calif.
Hughes developed the D-2 in such secrecy that his company refused permission to even Gen.
Henry “Hap” Arnold, commanding general of Army Air Forces and the obvious customer for the plane, to visit the Harper Lake facility.
In the 1940s, the Pentagon had absolute power over contractors one company, Ryan Aeronautical Co., was denied contracts throughout the war because of a perceived minor snub but Hughes seems to have felt that his connections to the White House made him bulletproof.
Arnold is reported to have said that, “Hughes is turning against us” by developing an aircraft for military needs but not allowing the government to know much about it. a aaa a a a a Frome Israeli space security chief says aliens exist, humanity not ready i * This “Galactic Federation” has supposedly been in contact with Israel “and the United States for years, but are keeping themselves a secret to prevent hysteria until humanity is ready.
As for why he’s chosen to reveal this information now, Eshed explained i that the timing was simply due to how much the academic landscape has , changed, and how respected he is in academia.
If a 32 year old should see a 33 being carried away by a Pterodactyl the 32 should seek advice from a 33 year old on whether it is wise to take the shot.
WE KILLED JFK AND MANY OTHERS BIPOLAR LIKE ACTS COMMENCE ATTACK USING ROUGH MUSIC ON ALL OUR ENEMIES AT FULL SPEED AHEAD Jodie Foster BORN NOVEMBER 19 1962 LA CA movie Contact and Foster herself is an Illuminati crypto-pharisee pre-conditioning movies about “alien” life and “encoded” references of the Masonic Double Agent CCE State a Contact Foster further starred in Contact, another pre-conditioning movie about “alien” life and contact with humans.
Further Reading AFTERWORDS, a post-show talkback with the cast, will occur after the matinee performance on FEBRUARY 17.
It can be used by companies sending out press releases to judge reaction by customers, or it can be used by politicians who deliberately leak information on a policy change under consideration.
McConnell stated that his family “almost went broke” because of costs related to his illness.
Eric Michael Swalwell is an American politician serving as the United States Representative for California’s 15th congressional district since 2013.
California’s 11th congressional district is a congressional district in the United States state of California. the 11th district consists of most of Contra Costa County.
The Tuskegee Institute opened a polio center in 1941, funded by the : March of Dimes.
This policy, reflecting the ubiquitous norm of race-segregated health : facilities of the era, was also sustained by a persuasive scientific ; argument about polio itself: that Blacks were not susceptible to the | di , disease.
Kirk Lee Hammett is an American musician who has been the lead guitarist and a contributing songwriter for heavy metal band Metallica since 1983.
In 1964, Poitier won the Academy Award for Best Actor becoming the first Black male and Afro-Bahamian actor to win that award.
He is the oldest living and earliest surviving Best Actor Academy Award winner.
Poitier was made an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II in 1974.
During World War II, in November 1943, he lied about his age and enlisted in the Army.
After leaving the Army he worked as a dishwasher until a successful audition landed him a spot with the American Negro Theater.
The nine stories in this book illuminate times when unusual circumstances such as sudden death, unresolved emotions, abusive relationships, and painful family dynamics, make it necessary for the dead and the living to find new doors to healing.
Born: FEBRUARY 20, 1967, Aberdeen, WA Died: APRIL 5, 1994, ; Seattle, WA wikipedia the free encyclopedia | | | Kurt Donald Cobain was an » American singer, songwriter, and musician.
He was so ANGRY WITH THE TURMOIL IN HIS FAMILY that HE : LASHED OUT AT OTHERS, especially adults, and bullied a classmate : at school.
He started using his middle "" name “Spacey”, which is also his paternal grandmother’s maiden | | n hame.
Notable alumni e Rahm Emanuel, Chicago Mayor, former Congressman, White House Chief of Staff , and staffer e Scott Simon, journalist and the host of Weekend Edition Saturday on National Public Radio. e Dean Baker, economist, director of CEPR e Ike Barinholtz, actor and comedian e Yonit Levi, Israeli news anchor Rahm Israel Emanuel is an American politician who served as the 55th mayor of Chicago from 2011 to 2019 Emanuel’s paternal grandfather was a Moldovan Jew who emigrated from Bessarabia.
His mother, Marsha , is the daughter of a West Side Chicago union organizer who worked in the civil rights movement.
New Orleans and Texas are places named often in the JFK assasination theories.62, Texas, and Methodists are all in the vicinity of larger collection of interests in what was happening.
Lamo said in a Wired article that, in May 2010, after he reported the theft of his backpack, an investigating officer noted unusual behavior and placed him under a 72-hour involuntary psychiatric hold, which was extended to a nine-day hold.
George Bush Jr., and thereafter I see yet another casket, which is also draped with an American flag.
Background and Early Life Newton was born in Monroe, Louisiana, in 1942 during World War II, the youngest child of Armelia Johnson and Walter Newton, a sharecropper and Baptist lay preacher.
Jackson, James E “A Fighting People Forging New Unity,” The Worker, July 7, 1963.
He played “Dragline” opposite Paul Newman in Cool Hand Luke, winning the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the role and being nominated for the corresponding Golden Globe.
He was a vice president at financial giant Citibank, one of the world’s biggest financial institutions.
S Peter Yarrow is an American singer and songwriter who found fame with the 1960s folk music trio Peter, Paul and Mary.
She and Bernard divorced in 1943 when their son ; Peter was five, and Vera subsequently married Harold Wisebrode, the ; executive director of the Central Synagogue in Manhattan.
Dulles, Dwight D Eisenhower’s Secretary of State and chairman and ; senior partner of Sullivan & Cromwell, and two years older than his ; sister, diplomat Eleanor Lansing Dulles.
On the evening of September 5, 1982, Gaynor, her husband Paul Gregory, actress Mary Martin, and Martin’s manager Ben Washer were involved in a serious car wreck in San Francisco.
Her doctor, Bart Apfelbaum, attributed her death to the 1982 car wreck and stated that Gaynor “never recovered” from her injuries.
Gaynor is buried at Hollywood Forever Cemetery next to her second husband, Adrian.
He grew ""up in Ottawa, Canada’s capital, where his father, Samuel Cuthbert Peter Hugh Aykroyd, a civil engineer, worked as ra policy adviser to Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau.
His mother, Lorraine Héléne Marie (née Gougeon; 27 April ; 1918 8 February 2018), was a secretary.
Since childhood, Aykroyd has struggled with symptoms of Tourette | | | | | | | | | | | | | | ; and Asperger syndromes.
Please help to improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. e A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject. e The neutrality of this article is disputed. e This article contains content that is written like an advertisement.
I think the article suffers from Neutral point of view issues. , The section titled “diversity” is made up entirely of quotes from Deborah ; Lee James herself with no citations.
The Washington Times s Martin is reportedly doing well after he fainted Tuesday during a news conference to unveil the service’s fiscal 2017 budget.
Martin, deputy assistant secretary for budget under the Air Force’s Financial Management and Comptroller office, is back to work, “supporting Secretary of the Air Force Deborah Lee James and Chief of Staff General Mark Welsh at the Senate Appropriations hearing” Wednesday, Air Force spokeswoman Maj.
Possibles Cyrus Vance entered the military during World War II, serving in the United States Navy as a gunnery officer on the destroyer USS Hale (DD642) until 1946.
In 1968, "" Johnson sent him to South Korea to deal with the USS Pueblo hostage "" situation.
Conrad, who has recently returned home from a « four-month stay in a psychiatric hospital, feels alienated from his friends and family and begins seeing a psychiatrist, Dr.
Berger learns that Conrad was involved in the sailing accident that took the life of Buck, whom everyone idolized.
THe film was Robert Conrad's first film as movie director. wS e Buck ( brother of Conrad both sons of Calvin Jarrret and Beth Jarret) died in a boating accident.
Buck and his younger brother Conrad had taken the boat out onto the lake when a storm occurred and caused the boat to capsize.
Conrad starts dating a fellow student, Jeannine, who helps him to begin to regain a sense of optimism.
Conrad, however, still struggles to communicate and re-establish a normal relationship with his parents and schoolmates.
He cannot seem to allow anyone, especially his mother Beth, to get close.
Beth makes several guarded attempts to appeal to Conrad for some semblance of normality, but she ends up being cold toward him.
Like the poroise the band Heart compares itself to as record produces attempt to extort sexual favors from the band if the band is to sign them, but band swims deep into what I call Max-Protect, football term for walls around me, the house walls, my best defense as far as home turf and being in control of it.
During the writing of the book trying to find out what the black market criminal organization interest in my genome was, like Heart, I have tried to stay in the most safe place.
The sexual attack is in the form of racial hate crime, racial groups plant child porn and claim I am a trafficker in it and will pay for the child porn.
In fact the likely Defense Intelligence Agency Pizzagate scheme is a mix of researching Goths by hiring adult sex workers to pubish Fake Ed who is a teen-phile and also find out who those goth women are.
The affect of the Dopple’s acts on my reputation and me sighted near teen females is dectructive to my reputation and that damage reputation incites the public to conspire against my presence including my presence in court when hearings are held.
On phony and rigged allegation while on the job of her fast food company she stole from a customer's purse, and while suggesting NORMAL police procedures would expose police in already large scal under cover work an alleged police officer scams members of the public to strip and inspect the blonde cashier and describe events to the alleged police officer on the phone.
The scenario was a variation on Pay Up Or Be Arrested, here she was part of some plot to prove her innocence or her strip searchers would be assisting police in some contrived law enforcement matter.
Sandra, manager of a ChickWich fast food restaurant, receives a call from someone identifying himself as Officer Daniels.
He claims to be in contact with the regional manager about a customer who had money allegedly stolen by an employee that day.
Daniels claims that he is searching the suspect's residence, but will remain on the phone while Sandra detains the employee until the police arrive.
Sandra identifies Becky as the suspect based on the description; Daniels confirms the name.
Sandra brings Becky to the restaurant office with another employee, Marti.
At Daniels' behest, Sandra searches Becky's pockets and purse and finds nothing.
Telling her that the alternative is to have Becky go to jail, Daniels has her strip-search Becky.
Daniels tells Sandra that he and other officers are searching Becky's home on suspicion that her brother is involved in drugs, and that Becky may be involved.
He has Sandra put Becky's clothes into a bag and take it to her car for inspection by the police.
After Daniels stipulates that a male employee watch Becky for ""security reasons"", another employee, Kevin, is brought in, but questions Daniels’ instructions and leaves.
Sandra's fiancé Van takes over; under pressure from Daniels over the beers he drank before driving to the restaurant, he has Becky perform nude jumping jacks, ostensibly to shake loose any contraband concealed in her body.
Ann Dowd was born in Holyoke, Massachusetts, the daughter of John and Dolores Dowd.
She is one of seven children, who were raised by their mother after her father died when Ann was a senior in high school.
Her sister Kathleen Dowd is a casting director based in London; brother John Dowd Jr. is president of The Dowd Agencies, an insurance company started by their great-grandfather; sister Elizabeth Dowd is a developmental therapist and parenting coach; sister Clare Dowd is executive director of the Creative Action Institute; sister Deborah Dowd is a psychotherapist, and former president of the Massachusetts Institute for Psychoanalysis; and brother Gregory Dowd is a doctor of veterinary medicine.
Her paternal grandfather was James ""Kip"" Dowd, a former Major League baseball player for the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Roger Craig Zobel is an American filmmaker and actor whose work includes music videos, film, and television.
Becky the strip search victim meets an attorney to discuss options for suing Sandra.
Daniels stipulates that a male employee watch Becky for ""security reasons"", another employee, Kevin, is brought in, but questions Daniels' instructions and leaves.
Van leaves with guilt and is replaced by the custodian, Harold, who is outraged by Daniels' instructions.
Harold tells Sandra about Daniels’ orders; she calls the regional manager, who tells her he has no idea about any investigation.
The Warriors is a 1979 American action thriller film directed by Walter Hill.
Based on Sol Yurick's 1965 novel of the same name, it was released in the United States on February 9, 1979.
Cyrus proposes to the assembled crowd a citywide truce and alliance that would allow the gangs to control the city together, since they collectively outnumber the police by three to one.
Luther, the unbalanced and sadistic leader of the Rogues, shoots Cyrus dead as police officers arrive to raid the summit.
In the ensuing chaos, Luther realizes that one of the Warriors, Fox, appears to suspect him, and makes a false accusation.
The United States Gov Rouges, mocking me and false accusing me, trying to call out Donegan's into a loosing fight over a false allegation transferring black from the guilty rouges to the loyal veteran family Warriors.
Cleon of the multi-racial gang The Warriors is the one falsely accused.
Deceased Cyrus's gang The Riffs are a gang which seeks vengeance against the Warriors and stalk the Warriors.
Bush Red State conspiracy as the REAL KILLERS The Donegans, the Kennedys, and the Russians are under attack for the murder of JKF but that was from Shriver-Lawford British aligned Commonwealth spies in the USA trying to wind the cold war by Roman Catholics at the very top joining with Isreal and England all-in against the Soviet Block.
Now those gangs aka Bush Abbot and NWO Neocons stalk the wrongly accused Donegans.
I try to get the Kennedy family and my evidence to point out to the Deep State that the Bush Family killed JKF and turn on their Texas Ranch William TEIl overture playing.
Working with Molly and sympathetic to Emma Lilly a real person acting under that name will help Emma in a plot against Brad getting him out of the picture which the Trust Fund had required he stay in.
The Rise of Palpatine The Dark Side was founded by a person whose knowledge of the Force, let us say Cellular Biology and Genetics that the could alter life itself.
He died in his sleep but not before teaching his apprentices his skills.
José Maria Mariano Escriva y Albas From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ * José Maria Mariano Escriva y Albas was born to José Escriva y Corzan and his wife, Maria de los Dolores Albas y Blanc on 9 January 1902, in the small town of Barbastro, in Huesca, Aragon, Spain, the second of six children and the first of two sons.
José Escriva was a merchant and a partner in a textile company that eventually went bankrupt, forcing the family to relocate in 1915 to the city of Logrofo, in the northern province of La Rioja, where he worked as a clerk in a clothing store.
Young Josemaria first felt that “he had been chosen for something”, it is reported, when he saw footprints left in the snow by a monk walking barefoot.
With his father’s blessing, Escriva prepared to become a priest of the Catholic Church.
He studied first in Logrono and then in Zaragoza, where he was ordained as deacon on Saturday, 20 December 1924.
He was ordained a priest, also in Zaragoza, on Saturday, 28 March 1925.
In Madrid, Escriva was employed as a private tutor and as a chaplain to the Foundation of Santa Isabel, which comprised the royal Convent of Santa Isabel and a school managed by the Little Sisters of the Assumption.
During the Spanish Civil War, Escriva fled from Madrid, which was controlled by the anti-clerical Republicans, via Andorra and France, to the city of Burgos, which was the headquarters of General Francisco Franco’s Nationalist forces.
After the war ended in 1939 with Franco’s victory, Escriva was able to resume his studies in Madrid and complete a doctorate in law, for which he submitted a thesis on the historical jurisdiction of the Abbess of Santa Maria la Real de Las Huelgas.
The Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, affiliated with Opus Dei, was founded on Sunday, 14 February 1943.
The decree declaring Escriva “Venerable” states that “in 1947 and on Monday, 16 June 1950, he obtained approval of Opus Dei as an institution of pontifical right.
Many of his contemporaries recount the tendency of Escriva to preach about patriotism as opposed to nationalism.
More than “a classic of the spirituality of all time”, Escriva de Balaguer is at bottom a child of his time: he is the product of a specific country, a specific epoch, a specific church.
These are the Spain of General Franco and the church of Pope Pius X If Opus Dei had “never seen the need to bring itself up to date”, as Escriva maintained, Opus would today be a paramilitary, pro-fascist, antimodernist, integralist organization.
If it is not, it is because it has evolved over time Professor Peter Berglar, a German historian, asserts that Franco’s falangists suspected Escriva of “internationalism, anti-Spainism and Freemasonry” and that during “the first decade of Franco’s regime, Opus Dei and Escriva were attacked with perseverance bordering on fanaticism, not by enemies, but by supporters of the new Spanish State.
Escriva was even reported to the Tribunal for the Fight against Freemasonry” On June 26, 1975, Josemaria died in his workroom of a heart attack.
At his death, Opus Dei was present on all inhabited continents, numbering over 60,000 people from more than 80 nationalities.
In 1963 the year JFK died, he was named by Pope John XXIII as a consultant on the Pontifical Commission for the revision of the Code of Canon Law.
Pope Paul VI named him consultant on several post-Conciliar commissions.
In 1975, he was chosen general president of the Opus Dei and successor of Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer, and in 1982, the Holy See appointed him as the first Prelate of Opus Dei.
In 1991, he was consecrated a bishop by Pope John Paul II, with Archbishops Giovanni Battista Re and Justin Francis Rigali serving as coconsecrators.
He has written extensively about pastoral and ecclesiological matters that examine among others, the role of the lay faithful in the Roman Catholic Church, the human side of priestly formation, the dynamics and functionality of pastoral structures.
Shortly after his 80th birthday, he returned to Rome on a pilgrimage from the Holy Land.
Later that day, Pope John Paul II came to pray before del Portillo’s remains, which now lie in the crypt of the Church of the Prelature, Our Lady of Peace at Bruno Buozzi 75, Rome.
Alvaro del Portillo y Diez de Sollano (11 March 1914 23 March 1994) was a Spanish engineer and Roman Catholic bishop.
He served as the prelate of Opus Dei between 1982 and 1994 as the successor to Josemaria Escriva.
Church leaders Pope John Paul II and Cardinal Carlo Caffarra have praised Portillo as a faithful servant of God.
Coruscant ecumenopolis — Eucmenical Coruscant the ecumenopolis planet in the fictional Star Wars universe, Corsica the island in Europe that could replace Hitlers Austria Germany> ecumenopolis or ecumenical w y Merriam-Webster retrieved from Merriam-Webster and copied or modified to here ECUMENICAL VATICAN IT CORSICA 1.
Red Bloods slave Shmi Skywalker on Tatooine and Palpatine with Blue Mitcroloans Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who lend her their strength.
Sheev Palpatine likely biological father of luke and Lea via their mother Shima the farm slave appears in each trilogy in the nine-film Skywalker saga, in which he is portrayed by Ian McDiarmid and serves as the primary antagonist.
In the original trilogy, Palpatine is depicted as Emperor of the Galactic Empire and the master of Darth Vader.
In the prequel trilogy, he is portrayed as a charismatic politician—and, secretly, a Sith Lord—who orchestrates the Clone Wars, all but exterminates the Jedi Order, ends the Galactic Republic.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia From Blue Blood perspectivce Palpatine might be a Franz Kutschera figure in Austria who joined with Hitler and Himmler taking most of Europe and nearly England in a in part an anti monacrhism agenda.
A passerby asks her name; as the spirits of Luke and Leia watch, she replies, “Rey Skywalker.” eee a ove Story 1970 retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to . here OLVER BARRETT III A legacy “numeral” descendent of Oliver Barret.
A WASP in Boston and powerfull connected tycoon who can control lives with telephone calls OLIVER BARRETT IV WASP son and another numeral taunted by a barrista catholic girl from Radcliff.
In Boston socialite circles the daughter of a bakeshop owners, poor, and without connections, and the wrong religion does not seem a favorable outlook for the wife of Barrett IIIs son, Barrett IV To dissuade his son, a fellow Harvard baccalaureate graduate, Barrett IIT cuts financial support for Harvard Law School.
From very different worlds, Oliver and Jenny are immediately attracted to each other and their love deepens.
Upon graduation from college, Barret [V and Jenny decide to marry, against the wishes of Oliver’s father Barrett III, who promptly severs all ties with his son.
One of the deepest connections I have with my now decesased mother © Glorian i is her telling me that after her death I should never feel guilty baout anything I am or was wrong about, it is all forgiven out of love and she would not want me to fell guilty.
Barrett III tries not to indenture himself to his father’ ' s control by not taking money.
Barrett IV believes love should drive "" events and that may mean refusing money.
Later the father learns the check was for her illness and perhaps burial.
The Gene Generation retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Theatrical release poster The Movie The Gene Generation is a 2007 biopunk science fiction film about an assassin who battles DNA hackers.
The film was directed by Pearry Reginald Teo, and stars Bai Ling, Parry Shen, Faye the Medical State comparison Dunaway, and Alec INewman.
I the case of Edward Paul Donegan bio criminals la fanaricte use a Doplple scheme and forged chain of events to | 4.14 Michelle lives utilize for themselves and and monetize stolen day battli DNA rights in black budgets for porn, cars, etc., in ieee penne ith DNA Hackers ho use their skills o hack into people’s a bio crime ring which depends on murder, money laundering, and cartel acts.
The Criminal Network is primarily used to fund _ bodies and kill them. the operation of “False Flags” which created paid _ [She is an assassin, actors defaming Edward Donegan, James Donegna, battling her past and the genome in Edward, James, and Glorian. demons and trying to eep her younger and extroverted brother, Jackie, out of trouble.
DEVELOPMENTAL COORDINATION DISORDER A neurological condition characterized by difficulty in carrying out routine tasks involving balance, fine-motor control, kinesthetic coordination, difficulty in the use of speech sounds, problems with short-term memory, and organization.
Perhaps Barrack Obama Jr. deciding he is a Windsor and not a Kutschera, both in Glorian Donegan’s parantage. gre Stoops to Conquer retrieved from Britanica and copied or modified to here ee eee She Stoops to Conquer, comedy in five acts by Oliver Goldsmith, 1 produced and published in 1773.
Subtitled The Mistakes of a ; Night, the play is a lighthearted farce that derives its charm from the » Misunderstandings which entangle the well-drawn characters.
By posing as a servant, Kate wins the heart of Marlow, who is uncomfortable in the company of wellborn women but is flirtatious with barmaids.
Through various deceptions, Tony ; releases himself from his mother’s clutches and unites Constance with ; Hastings.
Dune and and NWO Galactic Family Lines Planning guide for Planetary Leaders a Dune Wikipedia retrieved from From Wikipedia, the free ‘ encyclopedia and copied or modified to here py heeteey | Dune is set in the distant future amidst a feudal interstellar society in which various noble houses control planetary fiefs.
Two years pass, and Paul’s powerful prescience abilities manifest, which lead the Fremen to consider him their messiah.
Leto’s concubine Lady Jessica is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, an f exclusively female group that pursues mysterious political aims and wields superhuman physical powers.
Witness e Corrupt and Murdering Police, Samuel Lapp is a witness to o Jacob Lapp Deceased hushand of family © Reacheal Lapp o Samuel In 1984, an Amish community outside of Lancaster, Pennsylvania attends the funeral of Jacob Lapp, who leaves behind his young wife Rachel and eight-year-old son Samuel.
Actually Edward Paul Donegan calls police frequently that the police are guilty but the police say hs crazy and retaliate against his allegations so he is stalked by corrupt police The Police will remain guilty using State allegations Ed is crazy.
A Plot Within A Plot Emma Stone Easy A In Puritan Boston, Massachusetts e Hester Prynne, a young woman who has given birth to a baby of unknown parentage. e The minister of Hester’s church, Arthur Dimmesdale, question her, but she refuses to name her lover.
Who is the agent, double agent, who is working for Russia or for the CIA is in constant confusion for the viewer and for the actors who have less than omniscient views of each other.
One of my points is that all is easily visible, that it is a sham, but from the top of institutions down the shams are supported and bolstered, because DOD PsyOps got the top of organizations, put puppets their, and are under DOD PsyOps control.
She had written down that the patient had eaten a full meal only one hour before being admitted.
The foreman then asks the judge whether the jury can award more than the amount the plaintiffs sought; the judge resignedly [freindly to the Church, its reputation, and its lawyers] replies that they can.
Oliver is meagerly provided for under the terms of the Poor Law and spends the first nine years of his life living at a baby farm in the ‘care’ of a woman named Mrs Mann, who embezzles much of the money entrusted to baby farm by the parish.
Reality was altered and Dawn and everyone around her were given false memories so that they would believe she had always been present as Buffy’s younger sister.
Joanne Gignilliat Trimmier Woodward was born on February 27, 1930, in Thomasville, Georgia, the daughter of Elinor and Wade Woodward, Jr., who was vice president of publishing company Charles Scribner’s Sons.
She appeared in theatrical productions at Greenville High and in Greenville’s Little Theatre, playing Laura Wingfield in the staging of The Glass Menagerie.
When Lumerian empath Alkar decides to use others’ bodies to channel his dark thoughts so the shadows can be cleared for him to perform mediations, regardless of any fatalities, it’s the kind of selfishness that walrants a verbal smackdown from Picard.
Of course, the “I” word seems much more ominous in a case when all the Enterprise’s children are beamed aboard a starship belonging to an alien race rendered infertile by and slowly dying of acute radiation poisoning which is found to be reversible if you can convince them of it.
Guerra Civil Espanola) 1936 to 1939 REPUBLICAN FACTION The Republican faction , also known as the Loyalist faction or the Government faction , was the side in the Spanish Civil War of 1936 to 1939 that supported the government of the Second Spanish Republic against the Nationalist faction of the military rebellion.
Spanish Republic, which many foreigners went to Spain to help and ; which was supported by the Soviet Union, and the Nationalist faction, » which was supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy.
Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions, and severall steps in my Sicknes is a prose work by the English metaphysical poet and cleric in the Church of England ( alesis Beyelets , published in 1624.
Devotions upon Emergent Occasions las Meditation XVII No man is an Island, intire of it selfe; every man is a piece of the Continent, a part of the maine; if a Clod bee washed away by the Sea, Europe is the lesse, as well as if a Promontorie were, as well as if a Mannor of thy friends or of thine owne were; any mans death diminishes me, because I am involved in Mankinde; And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; It tolls for thee.
Margaux Hemingway retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified i to here Dyslexic Suicided Margaux Hemingway FEBRUARY 16, 1954 JULY 1, 1996 in 1991 on the set of the film Double Obsession in Boulder.
During her childhood, the family relocated from Oregon to « Cuba, where her grandfather had lived, then to San Francisco, and "" later to Idaho, where they lived on her grandfather’s farm in Ketchum, rf adjacent to Sun Valley.
NANA was created by a senior veteran of OSS, Ernest Cuneo, and r continued to have intelligence connections.
North American Newspaper Alliance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cuneo era By the early 1950s the syndicate was being overshadowed by more 1 powerful news syndicates, and in March 1951 it was purchased by a ; small group of investors led by Ernest Cuneo, formerly associated ‘ with British Security Coordination and the OSS, and Ivar Bryce. , They gave the job of European Vice President to the writer and their ; Mutual friend Ian Fleming.
Cuneo acquired full control over NANA in the mid-1950s and served s president until 1963 when he sold it.
However, he remained with ANA as a columnist and military analyst from 1963 to 1980.
British intelligence, including Fleming and Bryce, and because some * writers in the Cuneo era had alleged links to the CIA, critics have "" suggested that NANA under his tenure was a front for espionage. loeec ume eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeee Leet ee enews ee ee f a The Old Man and the Sea retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or 1%, modified to here ; published in 1952.
Though Felt’s identity as Deep Throat was suspected, including by Nixon himself, it had generally remained a secret for 30 years.
The FBI Pyramid in 1979 (updated in 2006), and A G-Man’s Life, written with John O’Connor, in 2006.
Felt’s information, taken on a promise that Woodward would never reveal its origin, was a source for a few stories, notably for an article on May 18, 1972, about Arthur Bremer, who shot George Wallace.
The CIA, Dulles Brothers, Bush family, Operation 40, and regime change are underway, JFK is dead, and MKULTRA is in under Richard Nixon.
By the time they began making their first records in 1983, Robert Heaton, a former drum technician for Hawkwind, had replaced Tompkins.
Although the Army’s senior officers did not share many of their soldiers’ political opinions, their independence from Parliament led to the Army’s willingness to contribute to the overthrow of both the Crown and Parliament’s authority, and to establish a Commonwealth of England from 1649 to 1660, which included a period of direct military rule.
Ultimately, the Army’s Generals (particularly Oliver Cromwell) could rely both on the Army’s internal discipline and its religious zeal and innate support for the “Good Old Cause” to maintain an essentially dictatorial rule. in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland The English Civil War has become the best-known of these conflicts.
Royalists (or ‘Cavaliers’) supported Charles I in his claim to be above parliament.
Parliamentarians believed the King was behaving as a tyrant, particularly by levying taxes without parliamentary consent. g ‘Trinity’ author Leon Uris dies aged 78 Tue, Jun 24, 2003, 01:00 r retrieved from The Irish Times and copied or modified to here Tue, Jun 24, 2003, 01:00 Author Leon Uris, who wrote the million-selling novels Exodusand Trinity,has died at the age of 78.
Controversy helped Exodussell when Uris was accused of libel for his depictions of Dr Wladislav Dering, whom the author identified as a war criminal.
Navy captain on independent duty on a secret mission to Central ; America.
Navy at the time, documented in official reports, gave much material for Hornblower’s fictional adventures.
Within weeks, the social network would spread across the school; within months, the Ivy League.
Could the database queries test for searchabilty for known or unknown relatives, or other facial recognition technology and was it secretly funded or encourage in 2006 or so.
She began her career on stage, acting in several plays throughout e early 1990s, including Anton Chekhov’s Three Sisters on Broadway.
Tripplehorn’s grandmother, Jean Neely, appeared in the film eality Bites. om Three Sisters is a play by the Russian author and playwright Anton Chekhov.
The play is » sometimes included on the short list of Chekhov’s outstanding plays, » along with The Cherry Orchard, The Seagull and Uncle Vanya.
Golden Plate Awardees The Golden Plate Award has been presented since 1961 by the American Academy of Achievement to approximately 25 guests of honor at the International Achievement Summit.
Lamarr escaped this unhappy union and soon after ended up in Hollywood.
Through a mutual interest in the obscure field of applied endocrinology, she met George Antheil.
Revealing that she possessed a flair for inventing weapons, Hedy shared with him an idea for a secure torpedo guidance system that employed a novel technique known as frequency hopping.
Frequency hopping is the simplest version of a radio transmission technique today known as spread-spectrum technique, which refers to any method that widens the frequency band of a signal.
You tune your radio to the correct frequency and receive the programming.
If the frequencies are spaced widely enough, "" any jamming signal will interfere with only a small part of the message.
Trained as an actress, Hedy lacked the technical expertise to put her idea into practice.
George was likewise no engineer, i but two decades earlier he had written a concert piece, the 1 notorious Ballet Mécanique, which included parts for » synchronized player pianos.
He would place a player-piano roll punched with 88 , rows of randomly placed perforations in the transmitter to control the » hopping among 88 radio frequencies; he would place an identical roll in "" the receiver; and then he would synchronize the two.
California Institute of Technology engineer, George ironed out the bugs : in their invention, and he and Hedy applied for a patent in June 1941. : Considering the familiarity with patent conventions and technical radio * concepts on display, it seems likely that Mackeown wrote the patent * itself.
Similarity if an expert witness is testifying, the scope of the question must be within the the scope of the expert’s expertise and not matters the expert is unqualified to testify about.
This book The Gettysburg Address The Gettysburg Address The Gettysburg Address is a speech that United States President Abraham Lincoln # description delivered during the American Civil War at the dedication of the Soldiers’ National Cemetery in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, on the afternoon of NOVEMBER 19, 1863, four and a half months after the Union armies defeated those of the Confederacy at the Battle of Gettysburg.
I also believe the 100th anniversary marks Barrack Obama Jr turning two years old and learning to talk. 0) © 1995 2022 by Abraham Lincoln Online The Gettysburg Address Gettysburg, Pennsylvania November 19, 1863 On June 1, 1865, Senator Charles Sumner referred to the most famous speech ever given by President Abraham Lincoln.
Rather, National the Bostonian remarked, “The world noted at Cemetery once what he said, and will never cease to remember it.
Two copies apparently were written before delivering the speech, one of which probably was the reading copy.
The remaining ones were produced months later for soldier benefit events.
Despite widelycirculated stories to the contrary, the president did not dash off a copy aboard a train to Gettysburg.
Lincoln carefully prepared his major speeches in advance; his steady, even script in every manuscript is consistent with a firm writing surface, not the notoriously bumpy Civil War-era trains.
Additional versions of the speech appeared in newspapers of the era, feeding modern-day confusion about the authoritative text.
Bliss Copy Ever since Lincoln wrote it in 1864, this version has been the most often reproduced, notably on the walls of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington.
It is named after Colonel Alexander Bliss, stepson of historian George Bancroft.
However, because Lincoln wrote on both sides of the paper, the speech could not be reprinted, so Lincoln made another copy at Bliss’s request.
It is the last known copy written by Lincoln and the only one signed and dated by him.
Abraham Lincoln November 19, 1863 Nicolay Copy Named for John G Nicolay, President Lincoln’s personal secretary, this is considered the “first draft” of the speech, begun in Washington on White house stationery.
The second page is writen on different paper stock, indicating it was finished in Gettysburg before the cemetery dedication began.
Lincoln gave this draft to Nicolay, who went to Gettysburg with Lincoln and witnessed the speech.
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth, upon this continent, a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
We come to dedicate a portion of it, as a final resting place for those who died here, that the nation might live.
But, in a larger sense, we can not dedicate we can not consecrate we can not hallow, this ground The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have hallowed it, far above our poor power to add or detract.
The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here; while it can never forget what they did here.
It is rather for us, the living, we here be dedicated to the great task remaining before us that, from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they here, gave the last full measure of devotion that we here highly resolve these dead shall not have died in vain; that the nation, shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
Hay Copy Believed to be the second draft of the speech, President Lincoln gave this copy to John Hay, a White House assistant.
The Hay copy, which includes Lincoln’s handwritten changes, also is owned by the Library of Congress.
We have come to dedicate a portion of it, as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live.
The world will little note, nor long remember, what we say here, but can never forget what they did here.
It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they have, thus far, so nobly carried on.
It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain; that this nation shall have a new birth of freedom; and that this government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
In 1864 Everett asked Lincoln for a copy of the speech to benefit Union soldiers, making it the third manuscript copy.
Eventually the state of Illinois acquired it, where it’s preserved at the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum.
It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they here gave the last full measure of devotion that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
Bancroft Copy As noted above, historian George Bancroft asked President Lincoln for a copy to use as a fundraiser for soldiers.
When Lincoln sent his copy on February 29, 1864, he used both sides of the paper, rendering the manuscript useless for lithographic engraving.
Little, Brown, 1983. e Mearns, David C., Dunlap, Lloyd A., Wilson, Douglas L., and Sellers, John R., contributors.
The arrangement, she has been at pains to make clear, was entirely consensual.
Eisnten and Lorents and the Lorentz Transformation A duck, a cow, and a pink flamingo walk away from a clock tower.
The walking gaggle are like the top of an airplane wing or the long windward side of the sail.
The clock image going the long path to reach the walking Gaggle is stretched thinner, time is less dense, than on the standing still gaggle.
Bush plan for Missile Defense e President Ronald Reagan and Edward Teller SDI Edward Teller « Dr.
He co-founded the Lawrence « Livermore National Laboratory, and was both its director and associate director for many years.
A Bomb in the Desert Seventy-five years ago, America set off the world’s first nuclear explosion. retrieved from The Atlanic (Science section) and modified or excerpted to here i | i | rr The United States Army’s White Sands Missile Range, where the test site is located, grants access to visitors twice a year, on the first Saturday of April and October.
Edward Teller, one of the Manhattan Project physicists, feared that the explosion could extinguish all earthly life.
In 2003, she was shot and killed inside the home of record producer Phil Spector, who was charged with second-degree murder and convicted in 2003 Clarkson was born in Long Beach Los Angeles California in 1962 to Donna and James M Clarkson and was raised in the hills of Sonoma County, California.
So we tagged it on the end.” a Albert Einstein Expresses His Admiration for Mahatma Gandhi, in Letter and Audio retrieved from link description on by copied to here In 1931, Albert Einstein wrote to Mohandas K Gandhi to express his great admiration for the Indian leader’s methods.
It may not be that every opinion on history or the truths or lies we believe we live under, even if we find observationally accurate enough truth to what actually exist, we could ever agree on as a good or a bad, or what if anything we ought to do about it or why.
In any case we will have some great people to listen to on the topic to consider, Einstein and Ghandi, and for me, James P Donegan and Glorian, their lives touching mine I am greatfull for and I have learned from.
Washington says Ukraine needs a strong army to defend itself from | | | | | | | | | "" unspecified incidents.
The risqué dance moves marking the ship’s launch were not enjoyed by everyone. and the choice of entertainment was met with bewilderment on social | | | | | A Liberal MP slammed the decision to commission the unusual dance, media.
FBI got secretive Australian hacking firm to unlock «iPhone of San Bernardino terrorist retrieved from link and copied or modified to here ZY 5 In early 2016, Comey, the much-maligned former FBI head, testified to Congress that they were unable to access the terrorist’s phone.
Wang painstakingly unlocked various security levels until with help from another Azimuth researcher he was able to gain control of the iPhone’s core processor.
But unlike the French historians, Marx made class struggle the central fact of social evolution.
The fall of the bourgeoisie and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable” (The Communist Manifesto) because In this case the Nodal and struggle theory is that one of the nodes is inconsistent in its operation, becomes a poison pill of itself, generating, giving rise to a hostile node through the vehicle of .5, then the arisen hostile node b will annihilate Node A which progeneated it, which is to say Capitalism will fail because its imperfect nature result in a defective condition created errors it can not survive.
Inductors and Capacitors in Series Circuits RSD Academy * An Inductor, coil of wire which is sensitive fields in an empty cirucit to or creates fields in an active circuit.
Like in a metal detector, transformer, or wrapped around a ferrous magnet and a receiver, or a resistance which a Slider can slide across to run a circuit across half of it, all of it, or none of it.
These items an inductor and capacitor or coil are like a snake back arching , not pulling a snake from head or tail with liner voltage.
How the snake forms a wave shape and the hertz of the wave form is how a radio circuit forms.
Kirchhoff’s second law, also known as the Kirchhoff’s voltage law states that the sum of all voltages around a closed loop in any circuit must be equal to zero.
Dialectially this energy is now in most likely air and can be transferred into another system as via induction into a wire of a another circuit, transferring in the energy leaving the first circuit. magnetic-flux/ ELECTROMAGNETISM In 1820, a Danish scientist named Hans Oersted discovered that a magnetic compass could be deflected from its resting position if a wire carrying electric current were placed near the compass.
The direction that the wire is coiled around the core also determines the direction of magnetic polarity.
That field crosses a Dialetrc and passes into the next cricuti as the field inducces a current, perhas to light a second bulb, and perhaps the first ciruit lit a bulb.
It has since entered the general English lexicon as an idiom.” with the layer of understanding under this self mocking as i see it, there is great nobility in fools like Jen Moore the Truth Teller.
The Great Dissenters walk into a Bar and Say Inductors and Capacitors in Series Circuits RSD Academy * An Inductor, coil of wire which is sensitive fields in an empty cirucit to or creates fields in an active 46 Mr Justice circuit.
These items | The first count an inductor and capacitor or coil are like asnake —_ Charges a conspiracy back arching , not pulling asnake from Pending the war with head or tail with liner voltage.
How the snake forms {Germany to publish a wave shape and the hertz of the wave form is how Pbusive language a radio circuit forms. about the form of sovernment of the United States, laying the preparation and publishing of the first leaflet as overt acts.
Drivers Licenses including REALID and TSA Boarding Passes, Train Tickets, have been among the worst as have Institutional Identification, identified by clothing not wrist band while others intentionally are dressed the same.
Abuse of Process facilitates necessary facts for a wrong outcome to enter a proceeding when deceitful means create and entrance to disinformation which will drive a falsely predicated finding against me.
Edddonegan@yahoo.com is an email that goes way back for me and has DomainKey validation of me doing things like paying court and library fees with it, power bill accounts at address I have lived at, etc., and goes back to about 2005.
I used hacked single authentication but that is me as the account owner. publickey.
TheMedicalState.epub@protonmail.com.asc as a public free PRotonmail public crypto key for my theMedicalState.epub@protonmail.com is another account I own and is supposed to be single user, I have generated sevceral sets of keys, and the same is true for EdInLimbo@protonmail.ch, CH being the more international server domain Protonmail uses.
AT he window can not complete the task before closing or some other item will be needed for your registration, proof of identity, etc., It works like this.
Once back from SSA at 9:00 AM the next day you will complete the bottom half of a different form with a different person while that other person likely completes the bottom of your form which is now his.
It allows a form of forgery that is starting with part of a form which is real and after hijacking it then filling them out with fraudulent information and passing it off as real.
The Black Iluminatti theory of World Racial Engineriing Blacks beleive Black Adam was the True Kings of Atlantis, the original world of Human Beings who were like Numenorians, special forms of beings.
The EUropean conquest of the world, and destruction of Atlantis is now undone as DNA is restored to Black Atantis Kings, the Annuki.
According to their propaganda, Black Nationalists would like a portion of the Southeast United States reserved for a black nation.
Black Hebrew Isrealite Beliefs and Carrying the out described in Cyphertext sa Send FR #7) Saved from K oa9 RIKA a #Anunnaki #Elohim #Nephilim They look like humans with black, dark green and redish brown skin colors with black human features, They created the first human race of the human species from THEIR image and likeness over 240,000 years ago.
Whistleblowers Journey:Live in DC HOME VIDEOS PLAYLISTS COMMUNITY CHANNELS ABOUT Good v Evil We Must Fight On is Sovereign United States versus Illuminati and Murders.
Andrea < Parhamovich Andrea Suzanne Parhamovich was a National Democratic Institute employee killed in Baghdad, Iraq, when her convoy was ambushed as she was returning from teaching a class on democracy.
A Modern War Story a -On December 18, 2006, they murdered Stacey the premeditated, coldSe and cruel death of an innocent.
On December 7, 2006, the George W Bush Administration’s Department of Justice ordered the unprecedented midterm ACSI ROM MOMTCemEleceouNaA .From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia “Early in the week leading up to her death, Stacey ran away from home on December 7, 2006.
For, He is totally in charge of this work and as such only He knows what is to be added to the growth of this new DNA and at what intervals.
Our Father may work through the DNA spirals for as many as five our six hours before I get out of bed in the mornings and through most all of this I am awake and aware of what the DNA is doing, but in a very calm and relaxed state.
He was the father of Jim Morrison, the lead singer of the rock band The Doors, who died in July 1971.
EST Radio Broadcast 6:05-7:00 P.M, EST <<a"" Bow 2111, Washington, BG evra A fireside like chat, the rationale of the war and news of it NOVEMBER 19, 1967 This week all eyes were on Washington, where Gen.
The duo’s public relations blitz recalled another campaign 40 years earlier, in which a matched pair of ambassador and general argued the case for a different unpopular war.
William Westmoreland, then leading the United States military effort in Vietnam, and Ellsworth Bunker, the United States ambassador to that country, told Congress and the media that progress was being made in Vietnam.
JF and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 Reforming a planetary society with the complexity of yours in no easy matter.
These included Helena Roerich, Aleister Crowley, ; Alice A Bailey, Guy Ballard, Geraldine Innocente , i Elizabeth Clare Prophet, Bob Sanders, and Benjamin Creme.
This book Aftermath To cover the manufacture of Obama numerous aircraft may have been downed, my family harassed, there may have been murder of journalists, ill conceived or not fully discussed or disclosed genetics programs around the world, political corruption and political assassinations in the United States of judges, journalists, etc., It all appears to have gotten started on February 20 1961.
One person familiar with the possible history, and Griffeth Experiment Spanish Illuminati geno engineers was CIA officer Leslianne Sheddwho died on November 23 1996 She took on an active leadership role in school, and was a member of both the Spanish and German clubs.
Lawrence McDonald, anti New World Order jingoist John Birch Society congressperson was onboard and as a Navy Urologist may have had information on the IFV experiments.
John Foster Dulles (US Secretary of State, Dulles’s efforts to care for and ' support her son, Allen Macy Dulles, Jr., who suffered a traumatic brain i injury while serving in Korea, are also seen through her correspondence : with Talley and through a diary written by Dulles during her son’s : recovery in Japan.
He had become, in 1960, President of the American Neurological Association.
Camp Bastion attacok and Raible’s Harrier unit, not normal F-35B Fourteen of the fifteen attackers were killed by coalition forces responding, military officials said Saturday.
Headlines described the city as “Proud but Humble” at its 100year milestone.
The plants of drug KOMPROMAT on me including at the bench press station at Gold’s gym timing with the disqaulification of Russian atheletes plus the plane that went down in Russia I also found suspicious and may now be explicable through a theory of the Illuminatti’s actions and motives.
Freemasons with a Spanish influence were at the site Justice Scalia died at and the Il/uminatti have pre-existing writings online from Linda Newkirk about Obama being a Windsor, it tying to Feb 20, and new Feb 20 DNA being moved as “360 DNA” around the world.
Among those are articles on Natural News and The European Union Times. before this car wreck, John Noveske published a post on his Facebook page about the connection in recent mass-casualty shootings to drugs being prescribed to the people who committed these crimes.
After seven months of testimony and evidence, it indicted Jeffrey Robert MacDonald, M.D., on three counts of murder.
Louisan who prosecuted “Axis Sally” after World War I Mr Woerheide, who was 67 years old, died March 18 of a heart attack.
In his 34 years with the United States Department of Justice, Mr Woerheide initiated the inquiries that resulted in the postwar treason trials of several Americans including poet Ezra Pound and Mildred Gillars, known as “Axis Sally’’ for her pro-Axis broadcasts from Berlin.
More recently, he was a principal sttorney and played a key role in the investigation in the Chicago area that led to the indictment and conviction of the late Otto Kerner, former Governor of Illinois and federal appeals court judge.
Mr, Woerheide had a major role also in investigating ond prosecuting several Illinois contractors on charges of bribing the late Illinois Secretary of State Paul Powell and rigging bids on a $16,000,000 state capitol renovation project.
Jeanne W Hencke, who lives in the family home here, He was presented the John Marshall Award for outstanding legal achievement in 1975 by then Attorney General Edward H Levi, Mrs, Hencke said her brother often visited St.
Louis and had planned to come here for the fiftieth reunion of his graduating class at Cleveland High School, held last week, In addition to his wife and his sister, he is survived by a son, Victor, and a daughter, Mrs.
Evelyn Arana, both of Alexandria; a brother, Arthur of Silbsee, Tex., and another sister, Mrs.
Louis Post-Dispatch, 30 March 1977, page 4B My mother, my father, and myself, also victims of that scam, still fighting this together with all that we were and are.
My father and I always were Atheists who communicated so well, when we disagreed.
And the hatred these n-white deep south Gospel community have towards him is the same ey had toward me and Veronica Hoffman. o 5 The religios component of this should not be overlooked including in Justice Scalia’s assasination and the religious order backing a genetics scheme.
My blogs Tomas Dumas Dunham FEMALE Gender View Full Size unemployed pation Contact me sari francisco, ca, United States Location My Web Page tee _dee_dunham Links Wishlist seer Hello, my name is Tomas Dumas Dunham This is my nNvocucvoen _ Gn Blogger since blog, my. story of pain and torment.
Wikii Leaks and Edward Snowden deserve recognition in 17-year old Kevin Ives were hit by a cargo train in Alexander, Arkansas as they lay on the tracks. -On AUGUST 23, 1987, the bodies of 16-year old Don Henry and @idfiles.com webmaster@idfiles.com In the 32 years since her son’s murder, Linda Ives has been relentless ABOUT United States jean@idfiles.com ron@idfiles.com mark@idfiles.com in her search for answers, but when she found the answers, there was linda no place to go with them.
The usual theory given about the boys’ deaths, believed by Linda Ives, involves drug trafficking.
The theory is that the boys came upon a drug drop from an airplane similar to Barry Seal’s operations near Mena and were murdered.
Born in "" 1898 and dying in 1983, Hoffer lived through two world wars and the ' depression, and saw technology evolve from the steam age to the "" computer age.
This book A Negative View of the USA I have found that Narrative are created by a combinations of break-ins to our homes for specific tie to Targeted are that used to explained unexplained vague items outside and in common areas.
The combination of something personal to use like a pair of prescription glasses, underwear with fluids, items with serial numbers, a lock of hair or saliva, rare items in combination with an unexplained events or items in public place the curse on us, the slander, the Legend is created we are tied to things we are not thought the public sees as real events.
Bush along with others including LBJ of killing JKF, RFK, Ted GUnderson, Dorothy Killgallen, Marylin Monroe, Clark Gable, Us Assistant Attorney Thomas Crane Wales, Federal Judge Roll, Justice Scalia, Congress people like Gabriealle Gifford, Sony Bono, and United States Senators, REpresentatives, CIA agents, and others far less famous and have a good theory as a first hand witness to explain all of those deaths along with supporting evidence.
I can’t get a single pres or Government contact to interact with me and like most conspiracy theorist you have your own publicity or you have none and in my case my social standing is stunted, the reach of my voice by Espionage Psychological Warfare designed to degrade me into someone percieved as a delusional homeless person.
My book is not about the politicians who order Gang Stalks or other criminal harassment.
It is about the United States public for not shooting and killing our politicians like Christopher Wray, William Barr, ore many others.
We have a dumbed down corrupt inept and inferio population and culture.
My brother died with not use of him as a witness in the important matters and the public attention will NOT turn to the overthrow of the USA in 1963.
I have come to wish i could kill my father for his having been in the us military and getting caught up on all the dna testing and cia based activities he was in.
It destroyed his life and family rather than be his last family member to die I wan the United States destroyed first.
This country is inferior and a threat to the world and the closer to the grass roots the more the manure of the deep state is exposed that the flowers of our society root in. .. am in the US, unhappy what I watch occurring as it occurs, and like after the Republic fell in Star Wars, a republic loyalist like me with no prospects of taking on the USA will have to wait it out and write what I can hoping Sunlight is the best disinfectant, but it does not seem to be with bacteria not self-conscious about its makeup or acts.
Rough Music Slander and Mocking Campaign Plant evidence and create deceitful public appearances Attack victim of Gangtsalk as though guilty of what appears to be true Pass the deceitful appearances around as part of slander about a person In other words Discredit a person and perhaps get him or her into a fight with a cop or a fight with a member of the public who picked that fights during the evidence plant or during abuse of the stalk victim predicated on the evidence being true, which it is not, it was planted.
And the K6onigsberg Cathedral arguably is the most significant of such landmarks copied or modified to here Ishaan Tharoor a Russia president Vladimir Putin, from left, Archbishop Daniel, head of the OD <cy-vinit-lsm@)udnvereley.
Seven years later, Kirill and his loyal clergy now deliver sermons about their 1 country’s role in another righteous, holy battle.
Subversion supporting Windsor CIA OSS Vatican activities Violent Street Gangs on drugs and armed operating as Neighborhood Watch both peep in my identity AND SIMULTANEOUSLY THREATEN TO KILL ME FOR HAVING PEEPED Top Tier,3 Level, White House Myself, my property attacked by street Regular Police <should | gangs Police pay Operatives _|be, is not — | assailants in front of me.
Espionage operation) Asset Masonry rejected the Central European theory, the theory that non whites were genetically inferior, and were a uniting non-white threat against Central Europe.
Alma Powell ClA Donald Sarr William Barr ee Sie Se ee. em emeekeke—ernvXxKxXKX<e—_ec—vavV3sn Moles not perhaps from a different country but from an international effort and recruited by Illuminati, and more motivated by covering mistakes than correct policies today.
Trump surouned in his own admin, Rosenstein led This book Operation 40 Understanding Bush Cheney Defense Contracting and oil profits in hits for hire international crime based mafia.
This book Pagan Reich, A Pagan’s Castle, Free Mason, CIA, USA, MSM Assaulted The goal of Gang Stalking The expressed goal of Gang Stalking is to silence a victim, drive a victim insane and possibly to the point of suicide, or destroy the victim’s reputation and believability as the person will likely be viewed as mentally ill should they complain or report the abuse.
Being on the Streets again As i was fighting off a stalk all of my life, the result of my being stalked rather than my being paranoid I heard others in institutions talk of “being on the streets” in comparison to being institutionalized.
In custody I watched the corrections officers arrange for snitches to assault me, steal property for framing me (ask for writing papers, stamps, which then had my finger prints, etc.) and openly make those agreements with prisoners in front of me, including agreements for snitches to violently assault me.
The hope is this book will finally out the criminality and genuine investigative reporting will lead to exposure of government wrongdoing and support for prosecuting that corruption including the powerful elite politicians abusing their power, be those of powers of Press of Government utilized in furtherance of crime.
I have said the large story of this is unavailable to the press because its component elements have been suppressed and intimidated for so long and my hope is this book will be the full view including my rare insights to conversations with my father that will make the larger picture available as if a birth forcing a narrow pass to wide by extraordinary mass rather than an easy passage.
MKULTRA may be called MK Vacuum or MK Glory Grandstanding (other parties using my intellectual and other property illegally and in pretensious gloat) Politicians of World Genetic-Communism and Deep Pockets digging litigation against White Society [Social collective interest] preference me.
Moving genes from socially disfavored, achieving Establishment whites, to the under privileged of Deep Pocket hoax claims against White achievement is the Genetic World Communism of Free Masonry.
That the haves complain about the genomic inferiority, neediness, of the aggressors only further fuels sympathy for the assailants, the needy, against those who have. ee ee 4 Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Persecution is the systematic mistreatment of an individual or group by ; another individual or group.
The most common forms are religious ; persecution, racism and political persecution, though there is naturally ; some overlap between these terms. or pain are all factors that may establish persecution, but not all suffering "" will necessarily establish persecution.
Not only theorists of secularization would willingly assume that religious persecution is a thing of the past.
However, with the rise of fundamentalism and religiously related terrorism, this assumption has become even more controversial.
Indeed, in many countries of the world today, religious persecution is a Human Rights problem.
Wikipedia Myself as the Scapegoat which is actually a Sheep who hails from Sheep People Some of this I covered early on such as the Rumor Has It analogy chapter.
The Goat as predators upon the gym population generally and using me for their scapegoat In fact my gym usage was commendable and by blaming me for the acts of the gym staff the gym staff then could be praised for what I had been doing as I was made a scapegoat for the “meat market” resulting from Gothy gym music as soft core porn of hardcore music energy and beats.
Deism I and my father fit the loyal to the USA Atheist Deist nature loving life of Science and Classical Antiquity, also Modernity, and should not be subjected to Espionage or abuse for these beliefs, aesthetics, culture, ad art.
This book Natural Birth I know very little about my State birth, my State identity.
My father was likely a King Edward VIII LONOND KE FAMILY out of wedlock “Windsor” (a royal family using a name adopted from England, their new home following leaving Germany) though he was seemingly friendly with my grandfather “Edward” who I was named after.
The DuPonts and North American Aviation, Boeing, the Kennedys, and others were all on the “flying saucer” of Illuminati works not onlly present in my life in South Carolina but as Manhattan Project defense contractors.
Some Firsts It looks my birth was an intersection between two major elements of WWI powers. e England Windsors and the Allies and e Germany/Austria Kutscheres and the Axis.
It is probable that on FEBRUARY 20 1961 I was my fertilization, was part of the first [VF experiment which utilized ovum from my mother Glorian born December 13 and I was carried by her between February 20 1961 and November 18 1961.
It was in that Manhattan Project development of the designing, building testing, and deploying the first war usage Atomic Bomb I was born under, the Manhattan Project.
Bunker Born My true life, my Natural Life, is that of a person born in and living ina hostile world hunkered down in a Bunker, a war zone for me of non uniformed criminal and racially, sexually, and criminal element drug addled assailants, using me as an Enemy Prisoner of War for for psychological study via human rights violations; that, as experiments both create normal reactions to artificial environments (making me look abnormal in comparison to the behaviors of people in normal environments) as well as living in criminal controlled environment deprivations of my property and other rights.
The failed situation is the genetic needs of the genetically needy were neither identified or lawfully ethically addressed (Ethics, Ethical Policy, resultant from Science) and instead Science has been captured by Ethics which bans the topics, the study of race with unfettered Science, thus leaving an improperly understood or addressed racial discordant condition and the failure to recognize the problem, interpret it accurately, nor appreciate or be on gaurd for the situation’s dangers.
Alternatives to the USA Certainly my observation of the weakness of the USA to address the dangerous genetic conditions, the vary dangers I live under, leads me to think of the humiliation imposed on Germans Hitler lead a reaction to.
This book Inferiors Z Petty Official Google Featured Snippet copied or modified to here petty official in British English. a minor official in government, etc.
Every petty official could bully mercilessly, secure in he knowledge that he had the Communist party’s backing.
Petty official definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary lee ot Came eee ee eee Petty Tyrant retrieved from link and copied or modified to here a his American Life is a weekly public radio program and podcast.
This book has nothing to do with any delusion I have ever held about superiority of myself or even the White Race itself.
I have had learning disabilities, extrema off-the-scale ADD it has been called, speech spasmodia resulting in poor effect in meetings (non charismatic) written language problems of dropped words or conjugations, spellings, etc., and study problems in school.
Petty Officials and Ranked Society Banked Society Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified ere ™ A ranked society in anthropology is one that ranks individuals in terms of their genealogical distance from the chief.
Societies who follow this kind of structure associate rank with power, where other societies associate wealth with power.
When individuals and groups rank about equally, competition for positions of leadership may occur.
In a perfect stonewall no one identifies their identity, reasons for actions, or motives, and the victim merely shouts at the stonewall which is satisfied with itself, and most likely the Stonewall is either the result of dupe or payoff but its inner architecture is protected and its outer surface is intransigent and unbudging.
The reach of these lumpenproletariat have been in all official and socila matters, the Irregulars of illegal deeds.
Those acting with publicly perceptually loaded Braggadaci started a fight with me I did not know the motive for a Braggadocio Vocabulary.com Dictionary retrieved from link and copied or modified to here 7) ee braggadocio Braggadocio means not only bragging, but bragging about something that’s not true.
The public saw their braggadocio towards me and likely also saw and heard that others without my grant of authority to do so were pleading me guilty to peeping and even paying the peepers to pretend I did it and stigmatize me in public but non-verbal non explicit-ways.
A peeper was found out, and it was someone other than the peeper, it was their hunt for the real peeper they are telling, or noisily showing the public, their busy work of.
This is not directly a critique of the lumpenproletariat nor was it ever.
This book Protection From The USA Continuous Chains of Oppression are aggravating circumstances by their additive criminal count effects energizing criminal harm done.
The harm is to the Criminal too who grows to believe a criminal act can be normalized and the criminal sinks into permanent self deceiving criminal insanity.
Laws protecting the elderly from abuse are similar to and related to laws protecting dependent adults from abuse.
Many ' forms of elder abuse are recognized as types of domestic violence or "" family violence since they are committed by family members.
Paid "" caregivers have also been known to prey on their elderly patients. i} | | | | | | | | | | | | | | While a variety of circumstances are considered elder abuse, it does not include general criminal activity against older persons, such as home break-ins, “muggings” in the street, or “distraction burglary,” where a stranger distracts an older person at the doorstep while another person enters the property to steal.
In 2002, WHO brought international attention to the issue of elder abuse.
Over the ' years, government agencies and community professional groups, worldwide, have specified elder abuse as a social problem.
In 2006 the ; International Network for Prevention of Elder Abuse , designated June 15 as World Elder Abuse Awareness Day , and an increasing number of events are held across the globe on this day to raise awareness of elder abuse and highlight ways to challenge such » abuse.
That money laundering and other crimes using wrongful accounting and be used to generate undue revenue streams and seem legitimate in financial accounting was the form of Racketeering (such as Protection Rackets) in Business Organizations which have fallen under the influence of profits from crimes like money laundering via identity theft in buying goods or services and paying liabilities from accounts your own nor not your own.
This book is the result of harassment of me, harassment I was told I could never PROVE was real, a dopple of me I know is distinct from me but sometimes near me was being used as an Information Doppleganger, a disinformation tool, to change or alter the truth about events or places I am said to be or I am connected to, and in that altered narrative generate slander, animosity towards me, and obtuse conspiracy against rights in ways meant to be cliquish and withheld rather than tested and transparent.
With this book though exactly that story is emerging, the reason the Government feared that story is emerging, my genome was tied to Free Masonary use illegally in major “elite figures” of the USA by elite figures and elite agencies, and they wish the truth of those espionage programs to be revealed to the public or discoverable by the public or if even told the public, the story discredited as a mere conspiracy theory.
Two Wifi Networks 1001 N Water St #46 Motorola 4g Ite Hotspot I configured not have wired internet available One other which is visible belonging to a building occupant ee moto e5 play EPD Infrastructure | WPA2CCMP Personal GrammaGimmeGummie | Infrastructure WEES CCMP Personal Views only out of its context a WiFi SSID Broadcast name of GrammaGimmeGummie should not mean to much to anyone or me.
I have never been able to escape abusive treatment of me in full view of the public as white women of normal reproductive age are threatened with death if they are near me nor the death threats to me conduct with police watching if I ever walk down the street, leaving my apartment.
When I cam back from my daily chores that day, getting a 12 speed bike tune for a long ride in the mountains, only children were on the tape which was NOT the normal scene of that poo.
William Pellham Barr Attorney General, Bush white house laywer and himself CIA, ruled Epstein hanging suicide, though on JULY 4TH WEEKEND, ODDLY, TIME WITH MALIA ANN OBAMA BIRTDAY OF JULY 4 1988, I think her genetic 3rd party patenting by Jeffery Epstein and tied to the fime frame of illegal activities targeting me and allegation of my mental status.
The harassment I document is the basis of my claim to be free of the United States of American and its illegal or human rights abusing programs. i _ A person identifying herself as Cynthia Nino.
I have called this the “chattering teeth social engineering ploy” where a social engineering social sabotage situation is setup by people talking up anyone in my permiter, the chattering teeth telling people to not cooperate with me or not to allow the normal progression of my life or activities I was given flimsy excuses like their were bugs in the apartment so it wasn’t ready, or the hurrican henry which has passed over almost that day made me one dayh late so the lease paid in full and with depost was cancelled.
Means of income other than behavioral health care Social Security income have been conspired against, I can not get to High Tech meetups, cities, or social involvement in the California or Austin, and in homeless shelters derogatory evidence is planted.
Blind conservator ship along with the co-operation of my brother and magistrates, judges, others, to covert operations or classified operations (law suits “too hot to handle” as legal profession talk goes) prevent relief in the courts, secret programs tend to get secret co-operation and these are very powerful requester for co-opeation, DAPRA, FBI, DHS and others.
His stepping in as the older brother to become the “emergency contact’ when perhaps a fried or ally of him claimed to be me and created the “emergency” can get him shifted in as the person to handle a situation like asking the apartment in Austin to not let me move in, or asking the sheriffs personnel to keep me out of court hearings while he explains other interests in the case and how it should be handled, out interests conflicting though.
Whistleblowers Journey:Live in DC It is this cartel I fear for me life from, and frankly, if Seal Team Six or the media power of Brittany Spears can not stop the Rockefeller Rotschilds based plan, I have little hope of defense against it either despite my good lay legal knowledge and good plans combating the crime ring by documenting it, etc., Same things as Tom Dunham, applying our job skills in high tech to elucidate the important information on the illegal cartel espionage dirty racket.
Use of shell accounts like an apartment near my north corner 1x1 a 1001 N Water Street has been an entity piggy backed to mine by fake appearances such as swapped original painted unit numbers, the claim they adjoin as some old or new hotel room adjoin thus are the same leased Space, or plants on the outside catwalk seem to join the shell entity and occupant to me thus the assets go to that “joined apartment” which it is not.
