Largely through use of the most recently released information on the crisis from the American and Soviet governments, I attempt to ascertain the anticipated benefits, costs, and probabilities of success associated with each of the major policy choices that the key leaders in both superpowers perceived before each of the major decisions throughout the crisis was made.
Using this information and the logic of extensive-form game-theoretic models of choice, I construct a baseline for expectedutility theory that helps us to understand when prospect or expectedutility theory provides the better explanation for a particular decision.
Prospect theory predicts that when individuals perceive themselves to be experiencing losses at the time they make a decision, and when their probability estimates associated with their principal policy options are in the moderate to high range, they will tend to make excessively risky, non–value maximizing choices.
I find that the evidence for the Cuban missile crisis supports this prediction for the most important decisions made by both Khrushchev and Kennedy.
The Cuban missile crisis remains one of the most studied events in history.
For over thirty-five years scholars have used various dimensions of this event to test theories of, inter alia, decision-making, deterrence, compellence, crisis management, inadvertent escalation, and intelligence gathering.
I wish to thank the following individuals for their advice, suggestions, and encouragement in writing this essay: Dale Copeland, Kelly Erickson, Kurt Haas, Margaret Haas, Richard Ned Lebow, Jeff Legro, Rose McDermott, Jack Levy, and several anonymous reviewers for International Studies Quarterly.
For Soviet documents and other primary source evidence on the crisis, see Lebow and Stein, 1994; Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, 1995 and 199601997; Fursenko and Naftali, 1997; Gaddis, 1997.
For related primary source documents, see Chang and Kornbluh, 1992; United States Department of State, 1996.
This article seeks to make two primary contributions to the analysis of probably the most dangerous period in history.
First, largely through use of the most recently released information on the crisis, I attempt to ascertain the anticipated benefits, costs, and probabilities of success associated with each of the major policy choices that the key leaders in both superpowers perceived before each of the major decisions throughout the crisis was made.
I find that when these two conditions of losses and moderate-to-high probability estimates were met during the crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev did tend to make excessively risky, non–value maximizing choices.
When, however, these leaders’ probability estimates associated with key outcomes approached certainty, their behavior became much more cautious and, as a result, much more comprehensible to theories based on the maximization of expected value.
This change in behavior occurred despite the fact that Kennedy and Khrushchev continued to operate in loss-frames throughout the period in question.
First, I examine the logic of deterrence theory based on extensive-form game-theoretic models of choice.
My principal objectives in this section are to examine under what conditions, according to theories based on the maximization of expected value, it is rational for challengers to try to change the status quo, for defenders to choose to acquiesce to such challenges as opposed to fighting or threatening to fight, and for challengers to back down from their initiative once a deterrent threat has been issued.
Developing a baseline for expected-utility theory is a key methodological step if we are to discern successfully if expected-utility or prospect theory provides the better explanation for a particular policy choice.
Second, I examine the principal tenets of prospect theory and discuss how these principles can be applied to an analysis of decision-making in international relations.
In the third section, I test the predictions of prospect theory and analyses based on the maximization of expected value against the historical evidence of the key decisions of the Cuban missile crisis.
I conclude with an analysis of the implications generated by my principal findings.
However, none, to my knowledge, has examined as formally as I have done here these variables in combination with the estimated probabilities of success for each considered option according to the principal actors’ own accounts as revealed in the most recently released information from the Soviet and American governments.
In other words, when decision-makers believe that challenging the status quo will result in a worse position than the one they think they will occupy if no action is taken, no challenge to the defending state should be issued.
The decision-making calculus for defender states is also straightforward according to the logic of expected-utility theory.
This aspect of policy selection was critical because it allowed leaders in both superpowers to react to and learn from the others’ policies.
I use the word “anticipated” to capture this product simply and to make my prose less cumbersome.
This placement reflects the fact that this outcome is a product of high levels of tension resulting from both sides’ decision neither to back down nor deliberately initiate military strikes.
This indicates that war by accident or miscalculation is not a product of rational deliberation in the traditional sense, but is instead due to inadvertence and the high levels of stress intrinsic to any international crisis.
Each of the principal actors involved in the Cuban missile crisis could have made other choices than the ones depicted.
Moreover, each of the outcomes listed generated other sets of results that are not depicted.
Thus if Kennedy did not respond to the discovery of the missiles in a firm manner, his authority at home and possibly within NATO most likely would have been weakened.
A more comprehensive examination of outcomes in various arenas and the choices available to Kennedy and Khrushchev is found in the text of this essay.
The initial question confronting Player 1 is whether or not to challenge the status quo by placing offensive missiles in Cuba.
The defender should choose not to dispute militarily the challenger’s gambit when the utility of acquiescing to a change in 8 Defenders can acquiesce to a challenger’s gambit either by capitulating to the latter’s demands or actions, or by paying the challenger off through a negotiated settlement to the dispute.
In either case, the status quo is changed, though in the former scenario the challenger will invariably have more of its preferences realized.
It is worth highlighting that an important cost potentially generated by the challenger continuing with its revisionist policies despite the defender’s deterrent0compellent threats is that this crisis situation could lead to military conflict due to accident, miscalculation, or inadvertence.
The chances of conflict resulting from these factors will invariably increase the longer high levels of military tension and fear between states continue.
As we shall see, leaders’ fear of conflict by accident or miscalculation was a potent one in both superpowers during the Cuban missile crisis.
Included in the defender’s utility calculations are not only the intrinsic benefits and costs associated with, respectively, either maintaining or retreating from the status quo, but also reputational issues that go beyond these case-specific qualities.
One of the central tenets of deterrence theory is that defender states’ ability to deter challenges to the status quo in one area is interdependent with their ability to do so in others.
Credibility is the variable that links commitments across time and space.
According to deterrence theorists, when leaders fail to meet a challenge to their position in one area, their reputation concerning their ability and will to protect other commitments will suffer.
Thus, an important cost that must be factored into defenders’ utility functions concerning a successful challenge to their position in any given instance is the potential losses in credibility which may increase the chances of these states having to face other challenges in other areas.
In policy terms, this last analysis means that defenders may have incentives to respond to a challenge in a more vigorous manner than the intrinsic worth of an issue would seem to dictate.
Indeed, rationalist theories of international relations teach us that one of the most effective ways of maintaining and even augmenting a state’s reputation for honoring its commitments is to respond in a more aggressive manner than the situation seems to warrant.
These hostilities result primarily from either the defender carrying through with its deterrent threats or from accident or miscalculation brought about by continued high levels of military tension between these states.
Because risk-neutral actors assign “neither utility nor disutility to the taking of risks” ~Bueno de Mesquita, 1981:546!, this assumption allows us to understand individuals’ value calculations without introducing the complicating factor of varying risk propensities.
Without a baseline demonstrating how risk-neutral decisionmakers should act, it would be difficult to determine when individuals are behaving in either a risk-acceptant or risk-averse manner.
The importance of the distinction among risk-acceptant, risk-averse, and risk-neutral actors will become more apparent shortly when I relax the assumption of risk neutrality and incorporate actors’ varying attitudes toward risk into the analysis.
Applied to the Cuban missile crisis, the above expected-value calculations generate the following predictions.
First, as I demonstrate in subsequent analysis, it is clear that Khrushchev was experiencing significant domestic and international losses at the time he made his decision to send missiles to Cuba.
This fact in all likelihood generated a low utility value associated with maintaining the policies that led to his current position.
An analogous situation existed for Kennedy after the missiles were discovered in Cuba.
As will be seen, this discovery generated significant international and domestic costs for the president—a fact that made his utility associated with accepting Khrushchev’s challenge quite low.
Throughout the above analysis, I refer to the fact that leaders will choose the option that generates the highest expected value, as opposed to the highest expected utility.
Expected-value calculations are associated with the assumption that actors are neutral in their attitudes toward risk, while expected-utility calculations assume that individuals are risk-acceptant or risk-averse.
Finally, there can be no doubt that Khrushchev’s utility generated by capitulating to Kennedy’s threats over the Cuban missiles had a very low value.
Prospect Theory and Decision-Making Prospect theory is an inductively derived approach to decision-making that was designed to incorporate systematic violations of expected-utility theory as observed in controlled experiments into a single, integrated theory of choice under conditions of risk.
Prospect theory is widely recognized by both expected-utility theorists ~cf.
Prospect theory’s central assertion, which is in clear contrast to the core claim of theories based on the maximization of expected value, is that the value of a possible outcome is not determined by multiplying the utility of this outcome by its estimated probability of occurrence.
Instead, the expected value of a policy is a product of the probability of occurrence adjusted by a probability weighting function and the utility of this outcome filtered through a value function.
In what follows, I examine the key elements of this equation and demonstrate how they differ from core tenets of expected-utility theory.
As informed by experimental findings, prospect theory’s value function has three key characteristics.
Changes above this point are conceived as gains, changes below this point are understood as losses.
Prospect theory’s need for a reference point at the heart of its analysis reflects the finding that individuals tend to be more sensitive to relative changes in utility than to changes in net asset levels.
In other words, contrary to a key assumption of expected-utility theory that individuals will define their utility functions in terms of levels of assets, people in reality tend to be more concerned with gains and losses relative to a reference point.
Although the claims of prospect theory were originally based on the significant and robust evidence of controlled experiments, the empirical support for these assertions is a growing body.
For case study analyses that test this theory, see,g., Farnham, 1992; McDermott, 1992, 1998; McInerney, 1992; Richardson, 1992; Weyland, 1996; Taliaferro, 1998.
People tend to take great risks to avoid a loss ~especially if it is believed to be a certain one if no action is taken!, while they are often willing to accept a small, sure gain instead of running risks to procure a larger one.
The curvature of the utility function captures this variation in risk-seeking propensities.
In this situation, people will be less willing to take risks to bring about more desirable outcomes since the value associated with these results is increasing more and more slowly.
When utility functions are convex, utilities increase at an increasing rate as outcomes are more preferred.
This should make risk-seeking more prevalent since the payoff of a successful gamble is increasingly larger.
People tend to be more desirous of avoiding loss than achieving a comparable gain.
Loss aversion should exacerbate the tendency of risk-seeking in the domain of losses because utilities under this condition will increase at an even faster rate as outcomes are more preferred.
In other words, there tends not to be a proportional relationship between individuals’ probability estimates associated with various outcomes and their choices.
Significantly, the key decision-makers in both the United States and Soviet Union at the times when the most important choices involved with the Cuban missile crisis were made often used precisely this kind of language to describe their positions.
The same problem framed in terms of losses led to very different preferences.
In addition to loss aversion and varying attitudes toward risk depending on domain, people also vary in the rate at which they renormalize gains and losses into their frames of reference.
Significantly, losses are not so quickly renormalized into individuals’ world views.
Instead, people are likely to continue to conceive of their reference point as the position held before they experienced the loss.
Often these two variables work in tandem to encourage risk-avoidance or risk-taking depending on domain.
Above the reference point in individuals’ value functions, the underweighting of medium to high probabilities works together with the concave nature of this portion of the value function to reduce the attractiveness of positive gambles relative to sure gains, thereby encouraging risk-aversion.
There are times, however, when the impact of the probability weighting function is at odds with the effects created by the curvature of people’s value functions.
For example, when individuals’ probability estimates approach certainty, people tend to overweight these estimates on the decision-making process.
In this case, the probability weighting function encourages risk-avoidance in the domain of losses and risk-seeking in the domain of gains since the overweighting of probabilities increases the downside of negative gambles and augments the value of positive ones, respectively.
Thus when probability estimates approach certainty, we may see outcomes that are opposite to those traditionally associated with prospect theory.
When probabilities are extremely low, however ~i.e., when they approach impossibility!, people are highly unpredictable in their behavior.
To control for this problem in this situation, I code individuals’ probability estimates as approaching certainty only when they repeatedly use language that conveys such a belief, for example, by asserting that an outcome is either “certain,” “guaranteed,” or “inevitable,” or that it is “almost” or “virtually” so.
Instead, prospect theory predicts that both statesmen would tend to make excessively risky, non– value maximizing choices in order either to recoup experienced losses or to prevent anticipated ones.
When, however, Kennedy’s and Khrushchev’s probability estimates associated with key outcomes approached certainty, prospect theory would predict that these leaders should have been more likely to switch from riskacceptant choices to behavior much more comprehensible to a value-maximizing framework even though their losses continued.
The core elements of prospect theory’s value calculations that I have described in the previous pages contradict key tenets of expected-utility theory.
Not all of these assertions, however—most notably the claim that people define their utility in terms of changes in relation to a reference point rather than in terms of net asset levels—necessarily challenge international relations theories founded on an expected-utility framework.
Neorealists, for example, assert that leaders are driven by considerations of relative capabilities since states’ relative placement in the international distribution of power is the key determinant of their security.
By showing that individuals tend to be driven by gains and losses relative to a reference point rather than by absolute asset levels, the empirical findings that drive prospect theory add a psychological support to neorealist claims.
In this instance, the differences between prospect theory and applications of expectedutility theory to international politics are not that pronounced ~indeed, in this area they may be complementary!.19 The remaining empirical findings that drive prospect theory, however, offer a more profound challenge to expected-utility models of decision-making.
First, the finding that individuals demonstrate a nonlinear response to probabilities clearly differs from expected-utility theory expectations.
In contrast, because to expected-utility theory, individuals possess linear probability functions, utility and probability estimates are given equal weight in the generation of people’s expected-utility values.
Second, individuals’ proclivity to be both risk-averse and risk-acceptant depending on domain generates unique challenges for expected-utility theory.
In short, to expectedutility theory, logically identical situations should produce similar results regardless of the frame of reference.
Prospect theory reveals the systematic inadequacy of this assumption, thereby calling into question the utility of these approaches.
This last finding, however, does not necessarily violate the claims of expectedutility theories in general.
Such approaches can easily—and often do—incorporate 19 Because a key component of many neorealist theories is the rationality assumption which posits utility maximization ~Keohane, 1986:167!, these theories apply an expected-utility framework to the study of international relations.
I thank one of the reviewers for International Studies Quarterly for helping me develop this point.
As stated, when this happens individuals tend to overweight their probability estimates on their value calculations, which may impel risk-takers to become cautious and risk-avoiders to become gamblers.
Thus, consistent with previous analysis, risk aversion is captured by concave utility functions and risk acceptance is represented by convex utility functions.
It would seem that once the assumption of risk neutrality is abandoned, key claims of prospect theory can be incorporated into an expected-utility framework.
This finding is not easily explained within an expected-utility framework.
Although it is conceivable that an expected-utility theory could be constructed that mirrored the one described by prospect theory ~i.e., one based on utility functions that are concave in the domain of gains and convex in the domain of losses, and with a steeper slope on the loss side 21 !, the problems of preference reversal based on framing effects and the nonlinear response to probabilities still apply.
Moreover, to prospect theory, individuals’ policies are a product of not only their frames of reference and the curvature of their utility functions, but the probability weighting function as well.
As seen for moderate and high probabilities, the probability weighting function tends to exacerbate the effects of these other two variables.
Thus actors perceiving moderate-to-high probabilities of realizing various outcomes should be more risk-averse in the domain of gains and more risk-acceptant in the domain of losses.
Yet when the estimated probabilities approach certainty, or when they are below the .10 to .15 range, the opposite patterns may obtain.
Risk-seekers may become cautious and risk-avoiders may become gamblers, and both sets of individuals may opt for these policies even if their utility functions call for contrary behavior.
Expectedutility theories of all varieties have trouble explaining these shifts since they posit a linear response to probability assessments.
When the same individuals switch from risk-acceptant to cautious behavior when either their domain changes or their probability estimates are in the ranges in which people are likely to overweight the impact of these estimates on their value calculations, expected-utility theories that claim that decision-makers possess convex utility functions are also hard-pressed to account satisfactorily for outcomes.
Both these sets of decisions, however, conform with the predictions of prospect theory.
As we shall see, the key decisions of the Cuban missile crisis follow both these patterns of behavior.
Before beginning an analysis of the central events of the Cuban missile crisis, a final caveat is in order.
Such a test would require complete information concerning actors’ preference structures, probability estimates, and frames of references in terms of gains and losses.
Outside of a quasi-experimental setting, in which the values of these variables can be either assigned or manipulated in such a way that they become known, this is an extremely difficult, if not impossible, task.
The key international and domestic reasons impelling Khrushchev to send missiles to Cuba are generally agreed upon, so my recounting of these factors will be very brief.
Such international and domestic considerations generate two sets of implications that are critical for our purposes.
First, at the time Khrushchev made the decision to send missiles to Cuba, he was operating in the domain of losses.
Changes in the objective and subjective balance of power, the humiliating way in which Kennedy revealed the missile gap myth, the likely loss of Cuba in the near future, increasing challenges within the international communist movement, and increasing threats to Khrushchev’s domestic-political goals all point inescapably to this conclusion.
Second, sending offensive nuclear missiles to Cuba could very likely alleviate many of these problems.
If successful in this gambit, Khrushchev would both shift the strategic balance of power in the Soviet Union’s favor and provide, he hoped, a powerful deterrent to an American invasion of Cuba.
Moreover, increasing the Soviet Union’s strategic power, especially in such a quick and relatively inexpensive manner, would allow Khrushchev to devote more resources to consumer investment without which his domestic agenda of increasing the standard of living for Soviet citizens would be very difficult to realize.
The worst-case scenario for Khrushchev would have been that Kennedy would not accept the missiles, and as a result the president would force Khrushchev to choose between war with the United States and removal of the weapons.
The costs of retreat, though obviously of orders of magnitude lower than the costs of war, were also high.
If Khrushchev were forced to back down, he would look weak before both domestic and international audiences, a fact that would most likely significantly diminish the chances of realizing his most important objectives in both these arenas.
It is therefore safe to say that the potential benefits and costs of deploying missiles to Cuba were significant.
Whether or not this decision was a value-maximizing choice turns on Khrushchev’s estimated probabilities of success for this venture.
In this scenario, the decision to send missiles to Cuba was a value-maximizing one.
If, however, Khrushchev believed that the mission was likely to fail, then the anticipated benefits of this decision would very likely not have been greater than the anticipated costs.
In this case, Khrushchev’s decision was a risk-acceptant, non–value maximizing choice that is plausibly explained by the insights of prospect theory.
Analysis of Khrushchev’s ex ante estimation of the success of his Caribbean venture is driven by two questions.
If Soviet leaders believed that Kennedy would accept the missiles if they were discovered even before they became operational, then secrecy would become a moot point and American detection of the weapons would not result in a confrontation.
There is much evidence suggesting that Khrushchev believed there was a very good chance both that American officials would discover the missiles on Cuba before they were ready to fire and that Kennedy would respond to the weapons in a hostile and aggressive manner.
To begin with, the scale and nature of the operation worked against a clandestine operation.
This was the largest amphibious deployment in Soviet history, and it took place 7,000 miles from Soviet ports and only ninety miles from the American coastline.
The scale, novelty, and geographical specifics of the operation thus all pointed to discovery by the Americans—significantly; even Khrushchev realized this.
He had insisted that such a large-scale deployment of men and matériel would significantly 25 It is important to note that although the potential benefits for Khrushchev of sending missiles to Cuba were great, most scholars who have had access to Soviet documents assert that he was motivated by defensive, not offensive motives.
In other words, Khrushchev hoped to restore the position the Soviet Union had held before Kennedy came to office, as opposed to improving on this standing ~cf.
Despite his misgivings, Khrushchev capitulated to the Ministry of Defense’s insistence that the operation be of the dimensions it was.
The fact that Khrushchev acquiesced to the military’s demands does not, however, eliminate the fact that he believed the chances were good that the Americans would detect the large quantity of men and matériel being sent to Cuba.
Once again, the historical record reveals that the probability of this occurring—according to Khrushchev’s own estimates—were high.
Moreover, because the Soviet Union had shot down and captured one of these planes in 1960, Soviet leaders knew of the great clarity of the pictures made by the cameras on board.
Finally, there were many experts and trusted advisors who informed Khrushchev and his close associates that the chances of the Americans discovering the missiles before the mission was complete were high.
Khrushchev himself seems to have been ultimately persuaded of the likelihood of an American discovery of the missiles.
Khrushchev continued to hold this belief throughout the period under examination.
To Khrushchev’s foreign policy aide, the Soviet leader was acknowledging “the likelihood that the United States would detect the missiles in Cuba before their deployment was complete” ~White, 1997:57!.26 There is also evidence that strongly indicates that most Soviet decision-makers, including Khrushchev, believed that the chances of Kennedy responding to the mis26 Khrushchev’s behavior in this period also clearly exhibited various motivated biases that pushed him to make his fateful decision.
These psychological pathologies in many ways provide a complementary analysis to prospect theory since people are most likely to suffer from them when operating in the domain of losses.
It is important to reiterate, however, that these pathologies did not completely obscure Khrushchev’s understanding of the great risks involved with his Cuban gambit—as evidenced by his concern about the U-2s, his worry about sending such a large number of men and matériel to Cuba, and various statements made to Soviet officials in the period in question.
Perhaps most supportive of this claim is the fact that Khrushchev was adamant that the mission be kept secret.
A potential counterpoint to this last claim is that American leaders made their deterrent threats to the Soviet Union well after the Soviets had already made the decision to send missiles to Cuba.
In this view, at the time Khrushchev made this policy choice he did not know about the intensity of Kennedy’s feelings on this issue.
In addition to the other evidence adduced in this section that tends to refute it, in July 1960, the KGB issued a report stating that the two conditions most likely to provoke a United States attack on Cuba would be either an invasion by the Cubans of the Guantanamo military base or an attempt by the Soviet Union to place nuclear missiles in Cuba.
According to Cuban missile crisis experts Blight and Welch, this KGB report was a “quality piece of intelligence” that should have given the Soviet government a very good indication of the likely consequences of sending missiles to Cuba ~1998:184!.31 In sum, key Soviet leaders, including Khrushchev, believed that the likelihood of successfully deploying offensive missiles to Cuba was significantly lower than the likelihood of this policy failing.
When this probability estimate is coupled with the fact that the benefits of a successful mission and the costs of a failed one were comparably high, the expected value associated with the decision to send missiles to Cuba was most likely lower than the value derived from the Soviet Union’s position if this decision had not been made.
Theories grounded on the 27 On the great lengths that the Soviets went to try to keep the transportation of the missiles to Cuba a secret, see Gribkov, 1994:15; Lebow and Stein, 1994:84 –86; Fursenko and Naftali, 1997:192–193.
The fact that Soviet leaders tried to hide the missiles from American surveillance does not refute the previously made claim that these individuals did not believe they were likely to be successful in these efforts.
They simply did their best in this area despite maintaining great pessimism with regard to the final outcome.
In his memoirs he refers to the fact that he fully understood the risks of sending missiles to Cuba.
This last fact reveals the inadequacy of analyses that claim that Khrushchev thought his gambit would be successful because he thought Kennedy a weak leader.
Since Khrushchev believed that the United States military and other “reactionaries” would never accept Soviet missiles in Cuba, attempting to do so was most likely to lead to an international crisis if Kennedy were a weak statesmen.
Khrushchev’s decision is consistent with the predictions of prospect theory.
The discovery of ground-to-ground missiles on Cuba plunged President Kennedy deeply into a loss frame.
Indeed, very few actions could have had a more deleterious effect on his frame of reference.
Kennedy and his subordinates in the fall of 1962 had explicitly and repeatedly stated that the placement of offensive missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union was unacceptable to American interests and security.
Even in more typical circumstances, Khrushchev’s decision to do precisely what the president had warned him not to do would most likely have had pernicious consequences for Kennedy’s perceptions of his own credibility and the nature of the U.S.–Soviet relationship.
The situation surrounding the Cuban missile crisis was far from typical, however.
Even before the crisis began Kennedy was obsessed with the belief that Khrushchev doubted his resolve.
Ignoring Kennedy’s explicit deterrent warnings would only exacerbate Kennedy’s belief that Khrushchev thought he could be bullied.
Furthermore, the fact that the crisis of October 1962 involved Cuba and not some other country generated unique costs for Kennedy.
The last thing the president wanted in terms of the upcoming elections was to appear weak, again, on Cuba.
In addition to the above losses caused by Khrushchev’s decision, these weapons also had an impact on American leaders’ understanding of the strategic relationship between the two superpowers.
Just as the American military buildup in 1961 had created security concerns among Soviet leaders, American decisionmakers believed that the installment of nuclear missiles in Cuba damaged America’s strategic interests.
There was a crucial difference between the governments’ views on this issue, however.
Unlike Soviet estimates of the American military buildup, to the most important United States decision-makers on the group formed to deal with the missile crisis, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council ~ExCom!, the missiles had a relatively negligible impact on the military balance of power between the two superpowers.
Instead, these warnings were made because Kennedy wanted for domestic political reasons to take a tough stand against the Soviets on an issue he felt they would not do anyhow.
The above analysis does not mean that the Cuban missiles did not have important negative strategic implications from the point of view of the most important ExCom officials, but only that the source of these losses was not rooted in objective power political considerations.
As indicated by the last quotation in the previous paragraph, Kennedy was acutely aware that if the Soviets successfully installed offensive missiles in Cuba despite American officials’ explicit and repeated warnings about such an action, it would give the appearance—to the Soviets, America’s allies, the American people, and the unaligned nations—that the Soviet Union was on the march and that the United States was retreating.
In this view, the strategic losses generated by deployment of missiles in Cuba originated not from the objective power capacity of these weapons, but from the loss of American credibility if the Soviet gambit were allowed to succeed despite clear American warnings.
As a result of these reputational concerns, the discovery of missiles on Cuba generated greater costs than the situation, examined in isolation from America’s other international commitments, warranted.
As with all defenders of the status quo, Kennedy had three broad policy options from which to choose in order to address the Cuban missile problem.
He could accept a change in the status quo either by not responding to Khrushchev’s gambit or by trying to reach a negotiated solution to the dilemma.
He could threaten to take military action if the missiles were not removed.
In the minds of most ExCom officials, the costs of not responding in a very firm, even aggressive manner to Khrushchev’s attempt to change the status quo were prohibitive.
To accept such an outcome without a firm response most likely implied significant—and virtually certain—losses for Kennedy in terms of domestic politics, his personal credibility, and America’s standing in the world.
The fact that both leaders were in loss frames in terms of key dimensions of both domestic and international politics when the most important decisions of the crisis were made helps to guard against an unfalsifiable test of prospect theory.
Because statesmen have multiple goals in different arenas, it is likely that these individuals will always be in a loss frame in some dimension of their various objectives.
If true, then any risky decision can be attributed to actors’ proclivity to be risk-acceptant in the domain of losses.
By demonstrating that Khrushchev and Kennedy were experiencing losses in relation to key international and domestic objectives, the potency of this problem is significantly reduced.
In this situation, we can test in a less ambiguous way the effects of losses on the decision-making process.
Kennedy claimed that if this occurred he would have to respond to protect America’s vital interests in Europe, and this might very well necessitate the use of nuclear weapons to balance Soviet conventional superiority in the European theater.
Under this mindset, the costs of not responding in a very firm manner to Khrushchev’s gambit and instead accepting a change in the status quo hardly could have seemed greater.
Nonetheless, the potential costs of either threatening Khrushchev to remove the missiles or simply taking them out without warning were also believed to be enormous.
Kennedy and other ExCom members frequently spoke of the “inevitability” of an attack on Berlin if America attacked Cuba—a reaction that led ultimately to war in the minds of most United States decision-makers.
If Kennedy chose only to threaten to take military action if the missiles were not removed, he believed that Khrushchev would likely issue a reciprocal threat about Berlin.
As noted earlier, most ExCom members, including Kennedy, believed that military strikes against the missiles virtually assured a Soviet response in Berlin—which made war with the Soviet Union almost certain.
Kennedy seemed to believe that the same outcome was almost as likely if the United States did not respond to Khrushchev’s initiative in a firm manner and instead just accepted a change in the status quo.
In the president’s view, as long as Khrushchev doubted American resolve, a move against Berlin—and thus conflict between the two superpowers—was almost guaranteed.
Choosing to threaten the Soviets to remove the missiles did not carry with it in American leaders’ minds the same estimated probabilities of war as did the other options.
Threatening the Soviets to force the removal of the missiles allowed the Kennedy administration to demonstrate its resolve ~thereby alleviating the principal hazard of simply accepting a change in the status quo!, while also giving Khrushchev more room to back down, as compared to the option of employing a military strike without warning.
Thus of the three broad options available to Kennedy at the start of the crisis, the one with the highest expected value—as determined by key ExCom members’ own accounts—was to threaten Khrushchev to remove the missiles.
This choice carried with it a lower probability of war with the Soviet Union in the pursuit of protecting American interests than either of the other two options.
Kennedy’s decision to couple the blockade of Cuba with an ultimatum to Khrushchev to remove the missiles or face military hostilities thus seems to be a value-maximizing choice, and therefore seems to be sufficiently explained by expected-utility theory.
Kennedy’s decision to implement the blockade is, however, not necessarily contrary to what prospect theory would predict.
The reason why this outcome does not necessarily violate the predictions of prospect theory is due to the value of the probabilities associated with Kennedy’s principal policy options.
According to prospect theory, this fact has important implications for United States leaders’ probabilityweighting functions.
As stated previously, when people’s probability estimates approach certainty, they are very likely to switch from underweighting the effects of these estimates on their value calculations to overweighting them.
When this happens, individuals are likely to become more cautious when operating in the domain of losses since the overweighting of probabilities as they approach certainty increases the weights given to risky negative prospects, thereby making them more unattractive.
Thus, the fact that Kennedy’s initial response to the missiles was not an excessively risky one may simply reflect the impact of the probability-weighting function on his decisions when estimated probabilities approach certainty, rather than the superior explanatory ability of a theory based on the maximization of expected value.
This possibility is supported by the fact that theories based on the maximization of expected value have difficulty explaining Kennedy’s actions from the time the blockade was implemented to when Khrushchev announced he was removing the missiles from the island and returning them to Soviet soil.
It is worth reiterating that in Kennedy’s estimation, what made the Cuban missiles so threatening to America’s security was not their impact on the distribution of power, but that they revealed a lack of resolve by American leaders, which, in turn, weakened America’s international credibility.
According to virtually all contemporaneous accounts, the blockade—especially when the Soviets decided not to challenge it—served its primary purpose of demonstrating American resolve.
Most ExCom members were convinced that Khrushchev would respond to the quarantine by reciprocating with, at a minimum, another blockade of Berlin.
Moreover, it must be remembered how costly a signal the blockade was in American leaders’ minds.
In the process, American ships damaged a Soviet sub to the point where it had to be towed back to the Soviet Union.
The great danger involved with the blockade,38 coupled with the facts that Soviet ships carrying military equipment did not cross the quarantine line and that Khrushchev decided not to respond in a parallel manner in Berlin, created in United States leaders’ minds the view that the blockade had significantly increased America’s international credibility.
As Bundy puts it, the “crucial issue @of restoring United States credibility# was resolved on 38 See Kennedy, 1969:69 –71 to get a sense of how fearful ExCom members were that the blockade and ASW would lead to superpower conflict.
Once Kennedy had demonstrated his resolve, the chances of Khrushchev taking action in Berlin in the near future—which was the real threat generated by the missiles in the president’s mind—should have been reduced.
In fact, Kennedy did seem to recognize that the situation had altered after the establishment of the quarantine.
No longer was he obsessed with Khrushchev taking action in Europe as a result of the latter’s perception of American weakness.
After the blockade was implemented, in the ExCom meetings Kennedy referred to Khrushchev seizing Berlin or engaging in other provocative actions only as a response to U.S. actions in Cuba, and not as a response to perceptions of American irresoluteness.
While the anticipated costs associated with the policy of accepting the missiles in Cuba or finding a negotiated way out of the crisis seemed to decrease in American leaders’ views—including the president’s—after the creation of the blockade, the anticipated costs associated with not finding a solution to the crisis were increasing.
With every day that the crisis continued, worries increased among many ExCom officials that conflict between the superpowers would result due to accident, miscalculation, or miscommunication.
For Soviet views confirming this statement, see Khrushchev, 1990:172; George, 1994:117, 118, 130; Lebow and Stein, 1994:115.
Khrushchev’s cautious response, both at the quarantine line and in Europe, and especially the costliness of America’s actions, revealed American resolve even if its decision-makers’ ultimate objective—the removal of the missiles—was not immediately realized.
United States statesmen seemed to recognize that Soviet estimations of American credibility had changed as a result of the blockade, but American actions were not changed to correspond with this new perception.
Kennedy’s willingness to take excessive risks to restore the status quo ante is even more strongly revealed once Khrushchev offered to remove the missiles in exchange for American concessions.
On Friday, October 26, Khrushchev indicated in a letter to the president that he would remove the missiles in exchange for a pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
This deal allowed Kennedy to achieve his chief end—the removal of the missiles largely due to America’s forceful response to their discovery—while costing him only a public commitment to eschew certain actions that he was unlikely to do anyhow.
Instead Kennedy gave the letter to the State Department for further analysis and decided to reevaluate Khrushchev’s message in the next day’s meeting.
Although delaying to make an important international decision in normal times is often prudent, needless to say these were not normal times.
ExCom leaders continued to be highly fearful of inadvertent conflict due to miscalculation or accident.
On the morning of the twentyseventh, the ExCom was even informed that the Soviet officials in the United States were burning their documents, which indicated that war might be approaching.
Given the benefits of accepting Khrushchev’s offer, the relatively small costs of doing so, and the fact that the Americans believed the anticipated costs of not resolving the crisis were increasing every day the high state of tension continued, 43 For evidence corroborating this last claim, see Kennedy, 1969:109; Bundy, 1988:437; Nathan, 1992:17; Lebow and Stein, 1994:118–119; Allison and Zelikow, 1999:357.
Not only were the anticipated domestic costs associated with Kennedy’s major policy options in important ways indeterminate ~i.e., Kennedy was acutely aware that no matter what he decided, he would be attacked by the Republicans ~cf.
Thus, although domestic politics can help explain Kennedy’s initial decision not to accept the Soviet missiles in Cuba without some sort of confrontation with the USSR, it cannot explain his continued unwillingness to push for a negotiated settlement of the crisis.
The penalty for Kennedy’s delay was revealed mid-morning, Saturday the twenty-seventh.
At that time, Khrushchev stated publicly that he would remove the missiles in exchange for a no-invasion pledge of Cuba and a promise to remove the American nuclear missiles from Turkey.
While he was willing by this point in time to offer a no-invasion pledge and even a private exchange of missiles to end the crisis, he was not willing to accept a public trade of missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba.
He therefore threatened military action as long as the latter condition was part of Khrushchev’s terms for an exchange.
In order for this decision to be a value-maximizing one, the expected value associated with threatening to strike Cuba had to be greater than the expected value of accepting the public trade of missiles in Cuba for those in Turkey as a means of ending the crisis.
The principal international cost to Kennedy of a public trade of the missiles was a potential weakening of the NATO alliance, since it may have appeared to the Europeans that in publicly exchanging the missiles America was sacrificing European security for United States interests.
This was an important cost to America given United States security interests in Europe and the importance to the Kennedy administration of preserving and augmenting its reputation for maintaining America’s international commitments.
Yet several American officials seemed to think that the harm in this area, especially relative to the anticipated costs of other options, was manageable.
They asserted that NATO was strong enough to withstand the removal of obsolete and vulnerable missiles in Turkey, especially given the fact that the United States would replace the weapons with more powerful and less vulnerable Polaris missiles on submarines.
Kennedy understood that although NATO may have been damaged by a public trade of Turkish and Cuban missiles, the alliance most certainly would be harmed—and to a much greater degree—if conflict between the superpowers resulted over an issue that did not jeopardize European security.
This is a theme to which the president would return again and again on Saturday, October 27 ~May and Zelikow, 1997:418, 530, 539, 542, 545, 46 We do not know for a fact that Kennedy’s decision not to agree immediately to the terms of Khrushchev’s “first letter” led to the second one.
Yet it is reasonable to assume that had the two leaders mutually and formally agreed to a way to end the crisis, it would have been much more difficult for one of them to renege and try to change the terms of the agreement.
Moreover, consideration of the interests of those allies that opposed a public trade should not have been determinative of Kennedy’s decision on this issue.
Since Kennedy was willing to do the latter by this point to end the crisis, clearly Turkey’s wishes were not paramount to the president.
I do not mean to overly minimize the potential damage done to NATO by publicly trading the Turkish missiles, yet the facts remain that key American leaders thought the costs were manageable, that they would be borne no matter what they did, and that almost all NATO countries themselves desired the deal.
Saturday the twenty-seventh had already seen perhaps the most dangerous moments of the period due to such problems.
Around noon, an American pilot flying over Cuba was shot down and killed.
A couple of hours earlier, an American U-2 based in Alaska mistakenly crossed into Soviet airspace.
Soviet fighters scrambled to intercept the plane, and American fighters—armed with air-to-air nuclear warheads and discretion to use them as a result of steps taken during the crisis—were sent to escort the U-2 back to United States territory.
Instead, it conforms with prospect theory’s prediction that individuals will take excessive risks to recoup losses.
Just as Khrushchev’s decision to place offensive missiles in Cuba plunged Kennedy into the domain of losses, the events of the week of October 21, 1962, had a similar effect on his Soviet counterpart.
It is clear that Khrushchev placed great hopes in the success of the Cuban venture as a solution to many of his most important international and domestic problems.
The discovery of the missiles before they were made operational and Kennedy’s subsequent reaction not only dashed Khrushchev’s hopes of alleviating these problems but also created new quandaries for him.
Given Kennedy’s ultimatum, Khrushchev had to choose between a humiliating retreat or an increasing risk of confrontation with the world’s strongest power.
Even if the president were not going to initiate military strikes on Monday or Tuesday the twenty-ninth and thirtieth ~as many scholars believe he would have done!, and instead intended to tighten the quarantine or perhaps even arrange a public exchange of Turkish and Cuban missiles, bluffing was a very risky strategy given Kennedy’s growing fear that accidental war was becoming more likely each day the crisis was prolonged.
There is a big difference between thinking one is likely to be in a crisis and actually being in one.
Thus world public opinion, and not just that of America and its allies, opposed Khrushchev over this issue.
In a choice between capitulating to United States pressure and risking conflict with a state that was greatly superior to the USSR in terms of strategic nuclear capabilities, Khrushchev chose the former.
This seems to be a clear case of a decision driven by expected-value calculations.
This analysis, however, ignores an important component of Khrushchev’s behavior in the days leading up to the end of the crisis.
For the week subsequent to Kennedy’s ultimatum and the establishment of the blockade, Khrushchev chose neither capitulation nor an outright challenge to the American position.
Instead, he adopted a third course in which he tried to bluff the Americans—by appearing to be willing to defy the blockade—in order to get more concessions from Kennedy in exchange for the ultimate withdrawal of the missiles.
By appearing tough and uncompromising @e.g., by promising to run, in Khrushchev’s words, the “illegal” and “piratical” blockade, by increasing the pace of construction on the missiles in Cuba, and by increasing the alert status of Soviet and Warsaw Pact military forces# he tried to extract concessions from Kennedy in return for withdrawing the missiles.
At home, he sought to convince the Presidium colleagues that failure to remove the missiles would provoke an American invasion of Cuba.
Even before the crisis began, Khrushchev had believed that Kennedy, and especially the American military, wanted to invade Cuba.
The continued presence of missiles on the island—and particularly the fact that they were coming closer to being operational owing to Khrushchev’s decision to accelerate work in this area—would provide an excellent excuse for such an attack.
The latter would have made a military clash on the island a particularly incendiary one.
Moreover, and very important, Khrushchev— just as with Kennedy—was acutely aware that conflict between the superpowers due to accident or miscalculation was becoming more likely each day that the high state of tension continued.
Given the enormity of the costs if Khrushchev were unsuccessful in his attempt to bluff Kennedy in relation to the benefits of success ~e.g., a no-invasion pledge of Cuba by Kennedy and a public trade of the missiles in Cuba for the ones in Turkey!—coupled with the beliefs held by many Soviet leaders, including Khrushchev, that there was a good chance that any day Kennedy would decide to attack 50 On the great difficulty of succeeding with this strategy given the circumstances, see Lebow and Stein, 1994:118.
Instead, it was likely a risk-acceptant strategy designed to recoup some of the previous week’s losses.
Thus, although Khrushchev’s ultimate decision to remove the missiles from Cuba appears to be a value-maximizing one, the strategy adopted before this decision was finally reached appears not to have been.
Prospect theory therefore does add insight to important dimensions of the resolution of the crisis from the Soviet perspective.
Conclusion This article has tested the predictions of expected-utility and prospect theories against the most important decisions of the Cuban missile crisis.
Consistent with prospect theory’s predictions, when Kennedy and Khrushchev operated in the domain of losses and their probability estimates for the principal outcomes were in the moderate-to-high range, these leaders tended to engage in excessively risky, non–value maximizing behavior.
When, however, their probability estimates for prominent outcomes approached certainty, they were much more cautious.
This latter tendency conforms with prospect theory’s claim that when people’s probability estimates approach certainty, there is a tendency to switch from underweighting to overweighting of these estimates on individuals’ value functions.
When this happens, people may become much less riskacceptant when experiencing losses.
These findings are particularly problematic for value-maximizing theories since Kennedy and Khrushchev repeatedly engaged in excessively risky behavior when the downside of their gambles was nuclear conflict between the superpowers.
Importantly, prospect theory seems to provide a superior explanation for the key events of the Cuban missile crisis even in relation to those theories based on the maximization of expected utility that assert convex utility functions for actors.
Specifically, Kennedy and Khrushchev switched from excessively risky to more value maximizing behavior at precisely the time that prospect theory predicts, 51 Khrushchev’s decision to up the ante in his “second letter” to Kennedy and demand the removal of the Turkish missiles in addition to a pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba in order for the Soviets to remove their missiles from Cuba seems especially puzzling.
Thus the potential benefits of prolonging the crisis hardly seem worth the potential costs of doing so, especially given Khrushchev’s fears of the likelihood of an American attack.
The Soviet leader thought an attack on Cuba, as a result of deliberate choice or accident, was increasingly likely as the week of October 21 progressed.
This change in policy conforms with prospect theory’s predictions since according to it when individuals’ probability estimates for particular options approach certainty, those individuals are likely to overweight these outcomes in their value calculations.
This process pushes people to behave more cautiously when operating in loss frames.
In other words, the evidence conforms with the a priori predictions of prospect theory concerning the conditions under which particular outcomes are likely to obtain.
Utility-maximizing theories do not make these types of predictions, but only assert that at some point individuals’ probability estimates may make certain gambles so unlikely to succeed that even highly risk acceptant actors will not take them.
Moreover, it is significant that many of the most prominent rationalist accounts of decision-making indicate that American and Soviet decisions in this period should have been risk-averse.
For these same types of theories to claim convex utility functions to explain Khrushchev’s and Kennedy’s behavior would be an ad hoc change that would, in effect, make these approaches unfalsifiable.
This ironic outcome results from the fact that the same policies designed to have a deterrent effect on others’ policies also tend to create losses for these individuals, which, in turn, are likely to provoke risk-taking behavior.
Thus an important implication of the findings of this article is that because individuals may be inclined to engage in “irrational,” risk-acceptant behavior when in the domain of losses, leaders should not be nearly as confident in the likely success of deterrent and compellent threats as deterrence theory asserts simply because the balance of power or balance of interests is in their state’s favor.
President Kennedy is informed that MRBM missiles sites are under construction in Cuba.
Given the Soviet Union’s and especially America’s numerous alliance commitments throughout the Cold War, by this criterion both states should have inclined toward risk-aversion.
Given this essay’s principle conclusions, it is perhaps paradoxical that its findings may help quantitative expected-utility models in their study of international relations by offering a way of improving the construct validity for measuring states’ attitudes toward risk.
Instead of using such factors as alliance portfolios to measure risk propensity, this study suggests that domain is potentially a much more reliable indicator of this latter variable.
Domain can be measured by such quantifiable indices as changes in the international distribution of power ~cf.
However, because throughout the crisis both Kennedy and Khrushchev were clearly operating in the domain of losses for both domestic and international reasons, the conditions necessary to test this hypothesis are not met in this case.
The president announces to the nation the discovery of the missiles and his intent to impose a “strict quarantine” of Cuba, which would go into effect Wednesday morning, October 24.
Kennedy receives a private letter from Khrushchev in which the Soviet leader indicates he would be willing to remove the missiles in Cuba in exchange for a pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
A new letter arrives from Khrushchev offering to remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for a pledge by the president not to invade Cuba and a public trade of Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
An American U-2 stationed in Alaska mistakenly flies into Soviet airspace.
The former offers a no-invasion pledge of Cuba and a private trade of the Turkish missiles in exchange for the Soviets removing their missiles from Cuba.
Khrushchev receives a series of reports from Castro and Soviet intelligence sources that indicates that an American attack on Cuba is imminent.
Radio Moscow broadcasts a message to Kennedy stating that the Soviets had ordered the missiles removed from Cuba and that they accepted the president’s promise not to attack the island.
System Uncertainty, Risk Propensity, and International Conflict Among the Great Powers.
Khrushchev Remembers, The Last Testament, translated and edited by S Talbot.
