In late April 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arms and provide a real deterrent to a United States attack against the Soviet Union.
For the United States, the crisis began on October 15, 1962 when reconnaissance photographs revealed Soviet missiles under construction in Cuba.
Kennedy organized the EX-COMM, a group of twelve advisors to handle the crisis.
After seven days debate within the upper echelons of government, Kennedy concluded to impose a naval quarantine around Cuba; He wished to prevent the arrival of more Soviet offensive weapons on the island.
He also stated that any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on the United States by the Soviet Union and demanded that the Soviets remove their offensive weapons from Cuba.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy suggested ignoring the second letter and contacted Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to tell him of the United States agreement with the first letter.
Tensions finally began to ease on October 28 when Khrushchev announced that he would dismantle the installations and return the missiles to the Soviet Union.
Further negotiations were held to implement the October 28 agreement, including a United States demand that Soviet light bombers be removed from Cuba, and specifying the conditions of United States to not invade Cuba.
Khrushchev had always known the United States had more missiles but now he knew that the Americans knew.
Cuban Invasion The second of the two major causes was Cuba’s fear of invasion from the United States Since he had come to power in 1959, Fidel Castro was aware of several United States attempts to oust him.
The CIA had also been running covert operations throughout Cuba trying to damage the Castro government.
Build-up In April, 1962, Nikita Khrushchev had the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arsenal and provide a real deterrent to an United States attack against the Soviet Union or Cuba.
Believing it better to risk a great crisis than wait for an invasion, Castro accepted Khrushchev’s offer.
In July of 1962 the Soviet Union began its buildup of offensive weapons in Cuba.
The Secret Build-Up Throughout the summer and fall of 1962, the Soviets shipped launch equipment and personnel necessary for the preparation of missiles to Cuba.
On August 10, 1962 John McCone, director of the CIA, sent the president a memorandum stating that the Soviets would place medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
On the 29th, a U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba revealed the presence of SA-2 SAM sites.
To reassure the public, Kennedy announced on September 4 the presence of Soviet defensive missiles in Cuba, but that there were no offensive weapons.
Eleven days later, however, the first Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles arrived.
Under increasing pressure Kennedy ordered another U-2 flight over Cuba for October 9.
Monday, October 15 After analyzing the pictures from the flight, the National Photographic Interpretation Center found there were more surface-to-air missile sites, and six much larger missiles, each 60 to 65 feet long.
Tuesday, October 16 It was now clear that for months the Soviets had been deceiving America.
Kennedy took charge and scheduled two meetings for that morning; first, to see the photographs himself.
At this point, the missiles were not yet operational, nor were they fitted with nuclear warheads.
Kennedy hand-picked a group of trusted government officials to advise him on the crisis.
Military action directed against Cuba, starting with an air attack against the missiles,” and then followed by a invasion.
Therefore, the goal of any action they proposed was to stop the warheads from reaching Cuba or to prevent the missiles from becoming fully operational.
What EX-COMM didn’t know was that the Soviets did have nuclear warheads on the island.
They had also installed battlefield nuclear weapons in Cuba and were prepared to use them to stop an invasion.
No matter what action the United States took, EX-COMM expected Khrushchev to retaliate.
The Soviets and the American public didn’t know the Americans knew of the missiles in Cuba.
Throughout EX-COMM’s discussions, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Air Force strongly argued for an air strike.
Thursday, October 18 On October 18 Kennedy fulfilled a previously scheduled engagement to meet with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko.
EX-COMM wasn’t sure if Gromyko knew of the missiles or if he knew that the Americans knew.
In response Kennedy re-read a statement he had made on September 4 saying the United States would not tolerate offensive weapons in Cuba.
Friday, October 19 Before leaving for a campaign trip to the Midwest Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs, who still promoted the idea of air strikes.
Kennedy was already late, so he asked his brother to continue the EX-COMM meetings to draw up full plans for both scenarios.
Saturday, October 20 On Saturday, EX-COMM met to discuss the two speeches being prepared.
The President liked the idea of a blockade because it allowed the United States to start with minimal action and increase the pressure on the Soviets as needed.
Sunday, October 21 On the 21st, Kennedy met with his top advisors to discuss the missiles in Cuba.
In sum, the United States could have its blockade but the international community would not consider it an act of war.
The press knew that there were offensive weapons in Cuba and that Kennedy was preparing a plan to deal with the threat.
Monday, October 22 On Monday, preparations had to be made for Kennedy’s 7:00m. address to the nation.
They came out of the briefing doubting the effectiveness of a quarantine; most wanted an air strike.
He was angry with his military for not successfully hiding the missiles and he was angered by the American “quarantine” which, no matter what they called it, was an act of war.
The Cuban’s were not surprised by Kennedy, for the United States had constantly threatened them.
Tuesday, October 23 Kennedy ordered six Crusader jets to fly a low-level reconnaissance mission.
The Organization of American States approved of the quarantine against Cuba.
They were instructed to use force to halt any ship that failed to stop at that line.
Robert Kennedy arrived at the embassy and proceeded to rebuke the Soviet ambassador for having lied to the United States about placing missiles in Cuba.
He responded, that as far as he new, there were no offensive weapons there.
