You will show understanding of the main developments and turning points.
The emphasis is on developing and interpreting a broad overview of the period studied.
So in the context of this question you will focus on the named issue, Kennedy, and debate whether he was more or less successful than other presidents in meeting the challenges of the Cold War in the context of the period 1945–1989.
Whether Kennedy was the most successful president to meet the challenges of the Cold War: 1.
The command term • His inaugural address in January 1961 could be regarded as inspirational – “let every nation know…that we shall pay any price…to assure the survival and the success of liberty” after the perceived caution and complacency of the Eisenhower years.
This crisis is seen as one of the most dangerous moments of the Cold War with a devastating nuclear exchange being entirely possible.
Kennedy’s record was patchy and other presidents may have been more successful in meeting the challenges of the Cold War.
Moreover, Kennedy’s initial judgement) foray into foreign policy, the Bay of Pigs episode in 1961, was a disaster and his first meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna also in 1961 left the Russian leader underwhelmed.
Khrushchev’s perception that Kennedy was weak and a bungler may have contributed to Khrushchev’s reckless approach to missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy’s tragic assassination in 1963 coloured perceptions and may have mythologised an otherwise patchy record as president.
The required timeframe defence spending set by NSC-68, provides Truman with a good case to be considered an effective president confronting the challenges of the Cold War.
On the other hand, he has been criticised for exaggerating the threat from the USSR, allowing the communists to seize power in China and mishandling the Korean War.
His record in pursuing arms reduction treaties with the USSR and attempting a rapprochement with China can be set against his disastrous policy of Vietnamisation and the extension of the Vietnam war into Cambodia.
His tough approach is often contrasted with the perceived weakness of his predecessor, Jimmy Carter.
Reagan’s Consideration of all of these is willingness to negotiate from a position of strength and his ability to work with Gorbachev in the summits of 1985-6 laid the foundations for improved relations essential to a well-argued and and arms limitation treaties.
However, it could be argued that Reagan was fortunate that his presidency coincided with significant internal changes in the USSR historically justified answer. and Eastern Europe.
Questions can broadly be 1945 Yalta and Potsdam conferences fail to settle differences between the Western allies and USSR about Eastern Europe and the long-term future of broken down into four parts: Germany.
For the first time in peacetime, the USA entered into a binding political and 1.
Truman’s actions had gone beyond containment, but the outcome was a stalemate in the Korean peninsula.
Geneva summit between Eisenhower and Khrushchev keeps lines of communication open.
Areas of debate (leading to a 1973 Paris Peace Conference. judgement) 1975 Fall of Saigon.
Containment policy in tatters with Americans confused and deeply divided about the direction of foreign policy.
SALT II derailed by Iranian revolution and Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Consideration of all of these is essential to a well-argued and historically justified answer.
WJEC GCE History – Knowledge Organiser In Section B, there is one compulsory question.
So in the context of this question, you will focus on the named issue, the action of the federal governments, and debate whether that was the main reason for improvements in the lives of African Americans in relation to other relevant factors and in the context of the period 1890–1990.
Whether the action of federal governments was the main reason for improvements in the lives of African Americans: 1.
The command term • The federal government in the USA includes the office of President, the Congress and the Supreme Court, so it is appropriate to consider examples of action or inaction from each.
Roosevelt’s New Deal is often criticised for its failure to address the needs of African Americans, although there is evidence that African Americans did benefit from the relief and recovery programmes despite the persistent high levels of African American unemployment.
Roosevelt’s 8802 forbade racial discrimination in the defence industry.
In 1948, Truman’s 9980 ended racial discrimination in federal employment and his 9981 desegregated the United States armed forces.
The named issue NAACP, as it removed the legal basis for segregation in schools and more widely undermined segregation in other walks of life.
The achievement of political rights, however significant, need to be seen against the continuing evidence of widespread social and economic inequality affecting the lives of African Americans.
The record of federal governments in improving the lives of African Americans over the century has been mixed and there were other significant factors affecting the lives of African Americans.
Plessey v Ferguson 1896 upheld the concept of “separate but equal”, as did Cumming v Richmond Board of Education in 1899, which was the foundation for legalised segregation until the 1950s.
Anti-lynching legislation was consistently blocked and Democrat presidents such as Roosevelt, Truman and Kennedy had little or no room for manoeuvre on civil rights, hence the 4.
The required timeframe reliance on executive orders/action to achieve limited progress in their administrations.
The Supreme Court began to push back against affirmative action school desegregation.
The Reagan administration saw dramatic cuts in federal aid programmes, which adversely affected African American communities.
Significantly, Reagan vetoed a civil rights bill in 1988, a veto overridden by Congress.
B Du Bois and the NAACP, and the social and economic impact of the Great Migration in the period before the First Consideration of all of these is World War. essential to a well-argued and historically justified answer.
Both World Wars had positive impacts on the lives of African Americans.
It is generally accepted that the Second World War had a major impact on the economic situation of African Americans, as the availability of white labour declined.
It also stimulated the activities of CORE and the NAACP with important legal results in discrimination and electoral cases.
It had built up a compelling and irresistible impetus for action on civil rights that affected not only the USA but also perceptions worldwide.
By 1990, the lives of African Americans had improved but persistent inequality remained.
Areas of debate (leading to a judgement) 1968 Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.
The required timeframe Think like a historian Key words Consideration of all of these is essential to a well-argued and To reach a valid – and supported – conclusion, you must consider Analyse Concepts and perspectives Key issues and content historically justified answer. a range of evidence, and a range of viewpoints, weigh them up Debate Continuity and change Similarity and difference and make a judgement on their worth.
