A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS September 28, 1962; Navy air reconnaissance aircraft observing Cuba-bound ships photograph ten large shipping crates on the decks of the Soviet vessel Kasimov, After studying the size and configuration of the crates, photoanalysts determine that the containers hold Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft.
The IL-28S are over twelve years old and have been removed almost entirely from the Soviet Air Force in i960.
A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, PInterim Report by the Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee on the Cuban Military Buildup, 5/9/63, 7; Department of D^ense Press Conference of Robert McNamara, 2/28/63, N-i; Garthoff i,p.4) October 1, 1Q62: Secretary McNamara meets with the JCS for a briefing on the latest intelligence on Cuba and to discuss intensified Cuban contingency planning.
Defense Intelligence Agency analysts inform the group that some intelligence points to the possibility that MRBMs have been positioned in Pinar del Rfo Province.
An attack against the Guantanamo Naval Base or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters.
Cuban armed assistance to subversion in other parts of the Western Hemisphere.
McNamara asks that future military planning cover a variety of these contingencies, and place particular emphasis on plans that would assure that Fidel Castro is removed from power.
The attorney general also expresses the presidents “concern over developing situation,” and urges that “massive actdvit/' be undertaken within the MONGOOSE framework.
On October 1, CINCLANT orders militaiy units to increase their readiness posture to execute Oplan 312, the airstrike on Cuba.
Cuban President Dortic6s, addressing the United Nations General Assembly, calls upon the United Nations to condemn the United States trade embargo against Cuba.
State Department Ambassador-atLarge Chester Bowles has a long conversation with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin.
Bowles, after having been briefed by Thomas Hughes of the State Department Bureau of Intelligence and Research, tells Dobrynin that the United States “had some evidence” indicating that Soviet nuclear missiles were in Cuba.
Dobrynin, who had not been told of the missile deployment by the Kremlin, repeatedly denies that the Soviet Union harbored any intention of placing such weapons in Cuba.
Late in the afternoon. one of the teams finds pictures showing the main components of a Soviet MRBM in a field at San Cristdbal.
Other photographs of San Julidn airfield show that IL-28 light bombers are being uncrated.
A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, 40; Cline, 89; Prados, 110) October 15, 1962—late afternoon: A senior officer at NPIC phones CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence Ray Cline to inform him of the discovery.
National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, who is given the news by Ray Cline, decides to wait until morning to alert President Kennedy.
The two-week long A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS maneuver was to have employed twenty thousand Navy personnel and four thousand Marines in an amphibious assault on Puerto Rico s Vieques Island and the overthrow of its imaginary tyrant, “Ortsac”— ’’Castro” spelled backwards.
Kennedy immediately calls an 11:45m. meeting and dictates the names of the fourteen or so advisers he wants present.
President Kennedy briefs his brother Robert, who expresses surprise at the news.
Excerpts on the Cuban Crisis, 5/21/64) October 16, ig62 — 11:50 A.M.: The first meeting of the ExComm convenes.
At the State Department, additional discussions continue with Dean Rusk, Under Secretary of State George Ball, Adlai Stevenson, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin, Deputy Under Secretary of State U Alexis Johnson, and State Department Soviet specialist Uewellyn Thompson.
During the meeting, the USIB directs the Guided Missile and AsTHE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS tronautics Intelligence Committee to prepare an immediate evaluation of the Soviet missile sites.
According to Richard Helms s notes, Robert Kennedy expresses President Kennedy’s ‘‘general dissatisfaction” Avith progress under the Mongoose program.
The SGA discusses but rejects several alternatives for eliminating the newly discovered Soviet missile sites in Cuba, including a proposal to have Cuban 6migr6s bomb the missile sites.
Discussion of U-2, Cuban Fishing Port, Nuclear Test Ban and United States Elections) In Two Sections, 10/16/62; Sorensen, 691; Hilsman 1, 166) October 17, 1962 — morning: Adlai Stevenson writes to President Kennedy that world opinion would equate the United States missiles stationed in Turkey with Soviet bases in Cuba.
Stevenson suggests that personal emissaries should be sent to both Fidel Castro and Premier Khrushchev to discuss the situation.
The SS-5S have ranges of up to 2,200 nautical miles, more than twice the range of the SS-4 MRBMs.
No SS-5 niissiles actually reach Cuba at any time, although this is not completely confirmed by United States officials during the crisis.
President Kennedy, who does not attend the talks, confers privately with Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara at 3:30m.
Acheson again voices his opinion that the surgical airstrike is the best United States option.
In some cases, as v^th Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, the moral argument becomes the deciding factor behind their support for the blockade.
He argues that a blockade is a better alternative, although he expresses a preference for blocking the movement of all THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS materials into Cuba except for food and medicine, rather than limiting the quarantine to offensive weapons.
Meeting at the White House, the ExComm presents its recommendations to President Kennedy.
As the meeting progresses however, individual opinions begin to shift and the consensus behind the blockade breaks down.
The legality of a blockade is also examined independendy at the State Department by Leonard C Meeker, the deputy legal adviser.
The first of a series of daily Evaluation'' intelligence reports is disseminated.
The evaluation, the product of collaboration between the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee and the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee , states that the MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched within eighteen fiours.
All timing revolves around the *T Hour""—the time when President Kennedy would address the nation to inform Americans of the crisis.
A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS would “almost certainly” lead to “strong direct pressures” elsewhere by the Soviet government.
Any form of direct mihtaiy action against Cuba would result in an even greater chance of Soviet military retaliation.
The proposal is prompdy attacked by several of the participants who believe it concedes too much.
Courses of Action on Cuba, 10/20/62) A nuclear warhead storage bunker is identified at one of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time.
White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger is informed of the crisis for the first time by McGeorge Bundy.
Lovett repfies that he does not think Stevenson is right for the job and recommends that Stevenson be assisted by John McCloy.
The State Department transmits a special “go” message to most United States diplomatic posts abroad instructing envoys to brief foreign heads of government or foreign ministers A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS about the Cuban missile crisis.
Dean Acheson briefs Charles de Gaulle and dehvers President Kennedy’s letter on the Cuban situation.
State Department Legal Advisor Abram Chayes successfully suggests changing the legal justification for the blockade presented in Kennedy’s speech.
For the first time in ADC history, aU aircraft are armed with nuclear weapons.
The JCS notify the State Department that United States military forces worldwide would go to DEFCON 3—an increased alert posture—effective at 7:00m.
During the meeting, attended by representatives from the Office of Emergency Planning for the first time, Kennedy formally establishes the ExComm.
Establishment of an Executive Committee of the National Security Council, 10/22/62; NYT, 11/1/62) THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS October 22, 1962—^5.00m.
MacMillan warns that Premier IChrushchev, in reaction to the blockade, may try to escort his ships into the Caribbean and force you to attack them.
A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, P-108) October 22, 1962 —7:30 EM.: Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin conducts a further closed-door A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS briefing for Latin American ambassadors at the State Department.
At around 8:oo P.M., Secretary Rusk speaks to a meeting of all other ambassadors in Washington.
United States Air Force in Europe 1945-1979, 11/28/80, 6i;Garthoff i,p.o) Soviet Colonel Oleg Penkovsky is arrested in the Soviet Union.
At the same time, United States Ambassador Foy Kohler is called to the Soviet Foreign Office and given a copy of the statement with a letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy.
Cuban representative Mario Garcia Inchdustegui responds by denouncing the quarantine as an “act of war,” and Soviet representaTHE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS tive Valerian Zorin calls United States charges of missiles in Cuba “completely false,” Zorin submits a draft resolution demanding an end to United States naval activity near Cuba and calling for negotiations to end the crisis.
Fidel Castro annoimces a combat alarm, placing the Cuban armed forces on their highest alert.
The group makes slight revisions to the proclamation and approves a new message to Premier Khrushchev.
Ambassador Dobiynin, arriving late at the reception, declines to refute Doboviks comments, saying, “he is a military man, I am not.
A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, 50; Abel, 134) At a debriefing for State Department officials, Edwin Martin emphasizes to U Alexis Johnson the importance of preventing exile groups from creating an incident in Cuba during the crisis.
Martin suggests that Johnson raise the issue of halting covert activities with CIA Director of Plans Richard Helms as well as with the ExComm.
The issue of ending OPERATION MONGOOSE activities and checking the action of independent Cuban 6migr6 groups does not, however, appear to have been seriously discussed in the Ex1368] A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS Comm.
It is unclear whether the eight-hundred-mile line is ever actually planned; diaries from the quarantine commander.
A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, P5 ^) Gallup poll survey taken on October 23 shows that 84 percent of the United States public who know about the Cuban situation favor the blockade while only 4 percent oppose the action.
Information as of 0600, 10/25/62) October 24, 1962—early morning: Soviet ships en route to Cuba capable of carrying military cargoes appear to have slowed down, altered, or reversed their courses.
Sixteen of the nineteen Soviet ships en route to Cuba at the time the naval quarantine is anTHE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS nounced, including five large-hatch vessels, reverse course and are returning to the Soviet Union.
William Knox, a United States businessman, has a 3 i/4~hour interview with Premier Khrushchev at Khrushchevs request.
Knox, President Westinghouse Electric International, Moscow, October 24, 10/26/62) October 24, 1962—9.
In his first communication with President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev during the crisis, United Nations Acting Secretary General U Thant sends identical private appeals to the two leaders, urging that their government “refrain from any action which may aggravate the situation and bring with it the risk of war/* U ThanPs plea, made at the request of more than forty nonaligned states, calls for the voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba together with the voluntary suspension of the naval quarantine for between two and three weeks.
TASS releases an exchange of telegrams between British philosopher and passivist Bertrand Russell and Nikita Khrushchev.
The State Department receives a letter for President Kennedy from Premier Khrushchev.
A message from President Kennedy for Premier KRrushchev is transmitted to the United States embassy in Moscow.
In his reply to United Nations Secretaiy General U Thant's letter of October 23, President Kennedy avoids responding directly to U Thant's proposal that Soviet arms shipments to Cuba and the United States quarantine be suspended for several weeks.
Premier Khrushchev writes to U Thant to say that he welcomes and agrees with his proposal.
Admiral Alfred Ward, orders the USS Kennedy to proceed toward a Lebanese freighter, the Marucla.
The State Department receives a cable from United States Ambassador to NATO Thomas Finletter relaying Ankara's position on the A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS possible withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Finletter states his beUef that any arrangement that fails to substitute some other form of nuclear capability in Turkey would be rejected by the Turkish government.
Information as of 0600, 10/26/62) October 26, 1962— 10:00 AM.: President Kennedy tells the ExComm that he believes the quarantine by itself will not cause the Soviet government to remove the missiles from Cuba, and that only an invasion or a trade of some sort wiU succeed.
John Scah, State Department correspondent for ABC News, lunches with Aleksandr Fomin at the Occidental Restaurant in Washington at Fomin s urgent request.
Following the lunch, Scali goes direcdy to the State Department to report on the meeting to Roger Hilsman.
