All 24 MRBM launchers now appear to have reached full operational readiness.
One nuclear storage facility is essentially complete, but non e of the bunkers observed is yet believed to be in operation.
There are some indications | that the U-2 lost yesterday over Banes was brought down by the SA-2 system.
Cuban military units remain at a high state of alert and the Castro regime is making a maximum effort to whip up troop and public morale.
As of 0700 EST, two or possibly three more Soviet ships are heading for Cuba in addition to the two dry cargo ships and four tankers we have been watching.
The tanker GROZNY should have reached the quarantine line early this morning.
One Soviet transport aircraft which reached Brazil is there to pick up the body of the Soviet ambassador.
Another scheduled for Cuba via North Africa and Brazil turned back at Morocco.
No significant redeployment of major Soviet ground, air or naval forces has been noted.
The general posture of Soviet ground forces in forward areas is one of precautionary defensive readiness.
The overall total of Soviet submarines on extended operations is somewhat greater than normal, and a fourth F-class submarine may be in the area of the Cuban quarantine line.
In non-military developments, Khrushchev's bid for reciprocal withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba and Turkey looks like the first step in a series of moves to demonstrate the USSR's readiness for a negotiated solution.
Soviet spokesmen continue to play down the possibility that the Cuban crisis could lead to general war.
U Thant is thinking seriously of accepting Castro's invitation to visit Cuba, and might go as early as Tuesday.
There is thus far only fragmentary mixed reaction to the President's rejection of Khrushchev's CubaTurkey proposal.
Missile support equipment, including about 50 vehicles, was moved into the vicinity of Guanajay IRBM Site 1 between 23 and 26 October.
At the MRBM sites, the missile-launching complexes are being checked out rapidly, and automatic antiaircraft weapons and personnel trenches have. been prepared during the last few days.
Camouflage is being extended and is becoming more effective, and dispersion of personnel and equipment also is evident.
Construction of probable nuclear storage facilities at both MRBM and IRBM sites was continuing on 26 and 27 October.
Microwave relay towers have been noted at some of the MRBM and IRBM sites photographed on 27 October, and there are high frequency antennae at Sagua La Grande Sites 1 and 2.
These indicate the development of command and control communications systems.
A missile propellant offloading and transshipping facility now has been identified at a double-fenced area 50 miles west of Havana at Punta Gerardo, near Bahia Honda.
An American photographic reconnaissance aircraft crashed about noon Cuban time on 27 October in the BanesAntilla area of northwestern O riente Province. ^tentatively identT xhat its wreckage and the body of the pilot had been located.
Assuming the mission flew the planned track, the U-2 overflew six SA-2 sites before the flight terminated in the vicinity of Banes on the north coast of Cuba.
The SA-2 is estimated to* have a maximum effective altitude capability of 60,000 feet and limited capability to 80,000 feet.
MB^B^^MJj^^^MBI^^M ^counT^ss^spec^u^omm^^eesnacM5eenestablished by the regime in order to place the country on a war footing.
Internal repercussions of the crisis include snags in communications and transportation, and both clandestine and press reports state that hospital treatment has been restricted to emergency cases.
A national emergency committee was set up on 26 October to draft workers to fill jobs wherever they were needed.
SOVIET SHIPPING AND AIR TRAFFIC TO CUBA The four Soviet tankers and two Soviet dry cargo ships previously reported to be proceeding toward Cuba are still en route as of 0600 EST and have been joined by two or perhaps three additional Soviet vessels.
One of these, the LISICHANSK, cleared the Bosporus on 25 October with 32,000 tons of crude oil.
The MICHURINSK passed through the Kiel Canal on 26 October en route to Cuba from Leningrad with timber and 2,300 tons of unknown cargo.
Another dry cargo vessel, the CHERNYAKHOVSK , may also have started for Cuba.
She was observed moving in a westerly direction in the Baltic on 25 October and has been regularly engaged in the Cuban trade in the past.
The Soviet tanker GROZNY probably reached the United States quarantine line early this morning.
A Soviet IL-18 transport scheduled to pick up the body of the Soviet Ambassador to Brazil was en route to Rio on 27 October.
Another IL-18 scheduled for a trip from Moscow to Havana via Morocco, West Africa, and Brazil, turned back at Rabat for reasons as yet unknown.
THE SITUATION IN THE BLOC A MILITARY We have noted the following Soviet military developments; an assessment of their significance will be issued later this morning by the USIB Watch Committee.
No significant redeployment of major ground, air, or naval forces has been noted.
Elements of most of the major commands are continuing what appears to be normal training.
One United States T-29 aircraft outbound from Berlin in the central corridor on the afternoon of 27 October was intercepted by two Soviet FIREBAR aircraft.
J-2, USEUCOM, comments that this incident and other upgrading of air defense capability suggest that the Soviets may be thinking of some sort of corridor harassment.
There is no evidence that ground forces of the western military districts of the USSR have moved or are preparing to move to the forward area.
United States attaches in Moscow, however, have been denied permission to visit the Belorussian, Kiev, and Carpathian Military Districts.
The general ground force posture in the forw ard area_ is that of precautionary defensive readiness. ~ lied missions report no large scale movements on the roads.
There are no suggestions of a Communist military move in the Berlin area.
His call for reciprocal Soviet-US withdrawals of offensive weapons from Cuba and Turkey under international supervision and for mutual nonaggress ion guarantees covering these two countries was designed to encourage U Thant to intensify his mediatory efforts and to stimulate other UN members to increase pressure on the United States for a compromise settlement.
Moscow probably will make further proposals calculated to deter United States military action against the missile sites or, failing this, to make such action as costly as possible in political terms.
The 27 October bid for an exchange of commitments regarding Turkey and Cuba probably represents Moscow's maximum position.
The USSR's next step may be to reduce these demands to a United States guarantee not to attack Cuba and to respect Cuban sovereignty in exchange for a Soviet commitment to cease work on the missile sites and eventually to remove them under some form of international inspection.
Soviet spokesmen continue to play down the possibility of a general war and to emphasize the USSR's readiness to work out a peaceful solution.
He expressed the belief that the USSR would make a strong response to United States actions, but refused to speculate what form Soviet reaction might take.
A Soviet diplomat in Geneva told a Western colleague on 24 October that although he had no idea what the USSR's reaction would be, he was ""certain"" the Kremlin would not start a war over Cuba.
He said the Soviet Union could not be treated like Belgium or Luxembourg, and warned that Soviet ships would be defended if necessary.
Ambassador Kohler reported, however, that in general Kharlamov seemed to reflect a genuine desire for conciliation.
The Soviet official said it was time for the two sides to sit down together and work out a solution.
The USSR has floated a trial balloon regarding another heads-of -government meeting in Vienna.
Two Soviet embassy officials in Vienna approached a friend of Austrian Foreign Minister Kreisky on 25 October with the suggestion that neutral Austria could play a role in the Cuban crisis.
They asked if Kreisky could do something to facilitate the easing of tensions, perhaps by offering Vienna as the site for a summit meeting.
Kreisky told the Soviet ambassador on 26 October that Austria would be glad to do what it can to facilitate negotiation.
It was evident that Kreisky would welcome a summit in Vienna, both for the sake of Austrian prestige and as a personal boost in the forthcoming Austrian elections.
The first evidence of direct Soviet pressure on a United States ally to dissociate itself from United States policy on Cuba has come from a report on the Soviet ambassador's interview with Greek Foreign Minister Averoff on 26 October.
After delivering a Soviet memorandum on the Cuban situation, the ambassador warned that by supporting the United States in the crisis, Greece was taking a ""most dangerous"" position for its own interests.
He said that although the USSR would not allow the United States to make another attempt to ""subjugate"" the Cuban people, it would not provoke a war and would work for a peaceful settlement.
Most of the bloc has not yet been heard to comment on the United States rejection of Khrushchev's 27 October proposals.
According to the Hungarians, the President was unresponsive to the ""reasonable"" Soviet proposals because he is interested in maintaining tension, possibly in connection with the United States election campaign.
Some dimunition of public alarm in Poland, is indicated by the latest reports that scare buying has ablated. Panic buying in Bucharest, however, apparently continues.
If the situation does not improve, however, Tito may meet with prominent neutralists, according to unconfirmed reports from Belgrade.
Nkrumah sent Tito and Nasir messages on 25 October urging a ""concerted effort"" to prevent any further deterioration of the situation.
The Chinese Communists continue to strike the most militant notes in the bloc.
According to the Peiping radio, United States determination to ""unleash direct military invasion against Cuba"" becomes more apparent as additional events unfold each day.
NON-BLOC DEVELOPMENTS U Thant is thinking seriously of accepting Castro's invitation to visit Cuba.
He may go to Cuba on 30 October, hoping to take with him a substantial group, mainly technicians who could be used as expert observers at missile sites if they are allowed to inspect them.
Swedish officials have indicated the need for Stockholm to be formally ""correct"" because of the Baltic situation, but have made it obvious to United States representatives that they expect the United States to enforce the quarantine.
The Swedish shipowners' association on 27 October recommended that Swedish ships submit to American searches under protest, reserving the right to claim damages.
The master of the Coolangatta disregarded instructions to this effect when he refused to stop on 26 October.
Belgian shipowners reportedly decided at a secret meeting that no Belgian ship will visit Cuba.
In Berlin there are some indications 6f Soviet and East German efforts to create unrest and anxiety over the Cuban situation.
A Soviet Embassy official told a German journalist that the USSR is powerful in Berlin and able to take the initiative.
East German border guards have asked some Berlin-bound motorists their opinions of the Cuban situation, possibly recording the ""answers, and the West Berlin SED has launched a ""hands off Cuba"" propaganda campaign.
British Foreign Secretary Lord Home on 27 October called in Soviet Charg6 Loginov and told him that the dangers in the Cuban situation come not from the United States blockade, but from the buildup of Soviet missile bases.
The War Office has restricted the travel of bloc attache's to the London area.
Soviet attaches have made numerous requests to visit air bases, especially those with USAF units.
He believes there has been no comparable response to United States leadership since the decision to intervene in Korea, and he feels this is all the more remarkable since there is no illusion about the risk involved.
Swiss Foreign Minister Wahlen considers that Soviet retaliation is more likely in Turkey and Iran than in Berlin or Cuba.
There has not yet been any reaction in Western Europe to the Kennedy-Khrushchev exchange of letters pertaining to Cuban and Turkish missile bases.
J|analysis of the Soviet motivations in Cuba esT^natesthat one strategic consideration may have been the belief that the Cuban missiles, because they provide less warning time than ICBMs , would pose a n ew and devastating threat to the SAC bomber capability.
Other objectives are to test the willingness of the United States and its Allies to stand up to a confrontation and hence the credibility of United States commitments around the world.
President Ayub told the United States Ambassador on 26 October that one reason Pakistan has not publicly supported the United States on Cuba is that official statements by United States allies outside the American hemisphere would merely broaden a dispute which should be handled expeditiously by the OAS on a localized basis.
Colombia decided to limit its offer to naval forces when the War Minister threatened to resign if land forces were sent off at a time of serious internal security problems.
Venezuela also has had difficulty controlling Castro-supported guerrillas and other belligerent groups.
Venezuela on 27 October became the first Latin American country to order full-scale mobilization of its armed forces.
President Betancourt, long a leading advocate of action against Castro, wants to ""put an end once and for all"" to what he called Cuba's threat to Venezuelan security.
President Goulart, in a 25 October reply to President Kennedy's letter, adamantly reconfirmed Brazil's opposition to military measures against Cuba other than the quarantine.
Goulart showed very little concern over the threat to the hemisphere of the missiles in Cuba.
He pointed out that ""defense of the principle of self-determination of peoples, in its broadest sense, has become a crucial point of the foreign policy of Brazil,"" and he then stated that any form of intervention in an American state inspired by alleged incompatibility of its political regime is deeply displeasing to the conscience of the Brazilian people.
President Goulart told the United States Ambassador in Rio on 27 October that he had ordered leaders of the stevedores' union not to strike against handling American ships because Brazil supports the quarantine.
According to a broadcast from Rio the dockers decided to suspend the boycott because the government had shown disapproval.
President Goulart also told Ambass. dor Gordon that he had informed the Soviet Charge 1 that the Soviet aircraft which may land at Recife on its way to Havana would be inspected by the Brazilian Air Force and any cargo removed.
As of 0700 EST, two or possibly three more Soviet snips are heading for Cuba in addition to the two dry careo ships and four tankers we have been watching.
In non-military developments, Khrushchev's bid for rpciprocal withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba and Turkey looks like the first step in a series of moves to demonstrate the USSR's readiness for a negotiated solution.
