Living Cities Podcasts EU Confidential Westminster Insider Campaign Confidential our apps Play Store App Store Social Links Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Discover POLITICO Pro In-depth reporting, data and actionable intelligence for policy professionals – all in one place.
Five reasons to go Pro Areas of coverage Expert journalists Customers Contact us Hot Topics War in Ukraine Living Cities French election 2022 Climate, Changed googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; } ); Cuba’s Fidel Castro dies at age 90 The Marxist revolutionary turned Cuba into America’s Cold War enemy for decades.
Picture taken 30 November, 2002 of Cuban President Fidel Castro | Martin Bernetti/AFP via Getty Images By David Cohen November 26, 2016 7:42 am Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Linkedin Share on WhatsApp Mail Print Fidel Castro, the bearded Cuban strongman who made the tiny island into a thorn in the side of United States presidents for more than 50 years, has died.
The United States had long been used to Latin America being filled with neighbors who were compliant, or at least manageable.
Bringing a revolutionary fervor, Castro and his revolution demonstrated those countries could no longer be taken for granted — and he gave the Soviet Union a toehold in the region.
In doing so, Castro became something of a hero to many on the American left, at least until decades of stalemate and stagnation clearly demonstrated his shortcomings.
Though Castro is not featured, the depiction of the Cuban revolution, seen as a backdrop to the gamesmanship between Michael Corleone and Hyman Roth , hits many of the story’s high points, albeit in a greatly condensed form.
For one thing, American mobsters were working in partnership with Cuban leader Fulgencio Batista, who was being paid millions of dollars in the 1950s to make “The Pearl of the Antilles” into a place where casino gambling and other vices could flourish.
Lansky, a Jewish gangster known for his business acumen, had long personal ties to Batista — the Cuban strongman even attended his second wedding.
A woman walks in front of a wall painting with the Communist Youth Logo near Havana | EPA/Alejandro Ernesto Batista also had ties to other American businesses, including those which made millions on sugar or nickels.
He viewed himself as a benevolent pro-American dictator, but others knew him as a thug prone to having his opponents jailed, beaten or executed.
In this regard, he was not much different from many other military strongmen in the region.
How the Mob Owned Cuba … and Then Lost it to Revolution, “but he was also, according to some, overly enamored with the trappings of gangsterismo.
He carried a 15-shot Browning pistol on his person at all times and was more than willing to engage rival gangs in confrontation.
In 1952, he was running for office when a military coup by Batista short-circuited the electoral process.
Castro and his supporters launched an attack on July 26, 1953, on the Moncada army barracks.
It failed and Castro ended up in jail until Batista, perhaps feeling a little overconfident, pardoned him.
As the decade went on, Batista became increasingly unpopular and Castro, assisted by his brother Raul Castro and an Argentine revolutionary named Ernesto “Che” Guevara, gained momentum.
Castro also came to the United States to raise money, though he dialed down revolutionary rhetoric when he did that.
The United States government had hopes for Castro, but those soon faded.
For one thing, Castro started locking up his enemies — and executing some of them.
In early 1960, Castro said he was indeed a Marxist-Leninist and opened diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.
To its horror, the United States realized it had a genuine communist revolutionary 90 miles away, one who clearly knew he was more valuable to Nikita Khrushchev than he could ever be to the United States.
The Soviets also appreciated this bearded, cigar-smoking revolutionary in combat fatigues as something of a romantic reminder of their own past.
Dwight Eisenhower and then John F Kennedy tried in vain to get Castro on board — or out of the picture.
In April 1961, the newly inaugurated Kennedy launched a CIA-planned invasion of Cuba that failed completely.
It was known as the Bay of Pigs and came to symbolize everything that go wrong in a military operation.
Maxwell Taylor indicated, among other things, “that the Soviet Union had somehow learned the exact date of the amphibious landing in advance,” according to a Washington Post article in 2000.
As the Kennedys launched new covert schemes via Operation Mongoose to topple Castro, the Cuban leader drew closer to the Soviets.
In October 1962, the United States detected the presence of those missiles.
According to Dobbs, it later turned out that the installation was further along than United States intelligence perceived — there were more missiles than thought at the time, some of them were fully deployed and there were thousands of Soviet troops on the islands.
But the Kennedy administration was horrified enough by what it did know.
After contemplating an immediate attack on Cuba, Kennedy opted to go public with its knowledge and blockade the island.
According to Dobbs, Castro made it clear to Khrushchev that he would have no problem if the Soviets launched their missiles.
Ultimately, Kennedy and Khrushchev stepped back from the brink and resolved the matter.
Castro watched powerlessly on the sideline as the Soviets agreed to remove their weapons.
His accused assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, was known to be distributing pro-Castro leaflets in New Orleans in the months before the assassination.
Any other role Castro or his friends or his enemies might have played in the assassination remains pure speculation, which hasn’t stopped many from speculating.
The United States was left to use an economic boycott to try to bring Castro down.
Guevara was killed in 1967 trying to export revolution to Bolivia, but Castro seemed able to survive anything.
In the meantime, Castro became a romantic figure to some on the American left.
Even David Dellinger, a noted pacifist, would visit and write in praise of Castro’s revolution.
Later, there would be a spate of American hijackings to Cuba, by people who thought Castro would appreciate their revolutionary fervor.
At the same time, Cuban exiles in the United States fought long and hard against him, occasionally at the expense of their own lives.
Over decades, the exile community would generate a number of notable political figures, including Ted Cruz and such Florida figures as Marco Rubio, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Mario Diaz-Balart, and Lincoln Diaz-Balart.
Propped up by the Soviets, Castro could cite successes when it came to health care, literacy and international sports, among other things.
But Cuba also increasingly became a police state, and great numbers of Cubans tried to flee by sea, most notably in the massive Mariel boatlift of 1980.
And Castro diverted vital resources to exporting his revolution to other Third World countries.
By the mid 1970s, Cuban troops would be fighting in Africa, most notably in a prolonged war in Angola.
Friendly movements would prevail at times in Latin America — in Nicaragua in the 1980s and Venezuela two decades later — but without Castro’s durability.
When the Soviet Union was dissolved, Castro found himself without a benefactor to counterbalance the effects of the United States boycott.
Tourists were once again welcomed, sometimes in what had been gangster-run hotels.
Castro turned the reins over to his younger brother, Raul Castro, in 2006.
It was noted at the time that Castro’s revolution had not only outlasted Eisenhower and Kennedy, but also the administrations of seven other United States presidents — and was deep in the eighth year of President Barack Obama’s, who had recently visited the island.
Georgian opposition leader arrested amid political crisis Nikanor Melia’s arrest comes after Irakli Garibashvili was sworn in as Georgia’s new prime minister on Monday.
Armenia-Azerbaijan ceasefire proves short-lived again Both sides trade accusations as violence over Nagorno-Karabakh continues.
Germany Latest news, analysis and comment on German politics and beyond.
French election 2022 Latest news, analysis and comment on the French election in 2022 and beyond.
Elections in Europe Latest news, analysis and comment on elections in Europe and beyond.
Coronavirus in Europe The latest news, data and analysis on the world’s pandemic response.
Migration Latest news, analysis and comment on migration in Europe and beyond.
Defense Latest news, analysis and comment on defense in Europe and beyond.
Continent Latest news, analysis and comment from POLITICO’s editors and guest writers on the continent.
