Together with the earlier Berlin Blockade, this crisis is seen as one of the most important confrontations of the Cold War.
It may have been the moment when the Cold War came closest to a nuclear war.There was a coup in Cuba in 1959.
The American government refused to import anything from Cuba after that.
In 1962, the American government was worried that the USSR would attack America from Cuba, because Cuba is near enough that the missiles could reach almost any city in America.
Cuba was seen by the United States as a communist country, like the Soviet Union.
In October 1962, American ships blocked Soviet ships carrying missiles from going into Cuba.
The Soviets and Cubans agreed to take away the missiles if America promised not to attack Cuba.
The United States and the USSR were the main parties in the Cold War that began in 1945.
That would also make the Monroe Doctrine useless, which kept powers in Europe from getting involved in South America.
In late 1961, Kennedy launched a number of covert operations against Castro's government.
In February 1962, the United States launched an economic embargo against Cuba.In September 1961, the Cuban government thought the United States would invade because of a resolution by the United States Congress to allow military force if the interests of the United States in Cuba were threatened.
The United States also announced a military exercise in the Caribbean to be held the following month.
Crisis Castro and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to place secret strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba in case the United States invaded.
Like Castro, Khrushchev thought that the United States would invade Cuba soon.
If Cuba were to stop being a Communist country it would hurt Khrushchev's reputation around the world, especially in Latin America.
On October 14, United States reconnaissance saw the missile bases being built in Cuba.
The crisis ended two weeks later on October 28, 1962, when the President of the United States John F Kennedy and the United Nations Secretary-General U Thant reached an agreement with the USSR to destroy the missiles in Cuba if the United States agreed to avoid invading Cuba.
Khrushchev wanted the Jupiter and Thor missiles in Turkey to be removed.
The United States removed them but forced Khrushchev to keep that a secret.
Causes Fidel Castro Fidel Castro In Cuba, Fidel Castro took power from General Batista on January 1, 1959.
From 1952 to 1959, Batista was a military dictator in Cuba, very right-wing with Mafia connections & the support of the Eisenhower administration.
The United States was interested in Cuba because of the many businesses that they had there, even though the country was a dictatorship.
When Castro came to power in Cuba, he nationalized American companies in Cuba, meaning he took the private property from those companies and made it the property of Cuba, to use as Castro decided.
This was a disaster for Castro, because America bought the most Cuban sugar.
However, Russia saved the Cuban economy by buying Cuban sugar for high prices.
He signed a contract with Nikita Khrushchev, the Russian chairman at the time.
The contract said that the USSR would buy 1 million tons of Cuban sugar per year, in exchange for Castro's Communist support; he declared himself a Marxist-Leninist on December 2, 1961.
He wanted a Communist state close to United States; He wanted to test the new United States president, John F Kennedy; He wanted a chance to get the American missile sites out of Turkey, which was close to Russia.The Bay of Pigs Main page: Bay of Pigs Invasion Castro wanted to feel safe from the United States.
He knew that if a second attack was made from the United States, Cuba might lose and he would be removed from power.
Castro asked Khrushchev for the missile sites to be built on Cuba so that he could defend himself against any American threat.
Kennedy's options The United States was angry when they found out about the missile sites.
Options Pros Cons Do nothing Avoids any immediate war Kennedy would look weak to the USSR and the rest of the world.
Diplomatic pressure Would avoid a war and might convince USSR to remove the missiles The USSR would probably not give up and could end up by making it look more powerful than the United States and its allies.
Would make it difficult for the USSR to send military equipment and other supplies.
On October 20, Kennedy chose to blockade Cuba to stop all ships going there, rather than listen to his advisers, who wanted to attack.
Khrushchev's options The USSR's first ships arrived at the blockade on October 25 and were prevented by the United States Navy from reaching Cuba.
Kennedy's advisers said that the letter looked like it had been written by Khrushchev himself and not his official writers, who would normally write it.
They also said that it seemed to be written by a man who was under stress.
If indeed war should break out, then it would not be in our power to stop it, for such is the logic of war.
And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it.
And then it will be necessary to cut that knot.And what that will mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly what terrible forces our countries possess.
Let us not only relax the forces pulling on the end of the rope; let us take means to untie the knot.
An invasion of Cuba would make Khrushchev look bad and could also lead to a nuclear war.
It also said that the United States must take its nuclear missiles out of Turkey if they wanted Russia to take their missiles out of Cuba.
This would have been a fair trade because the United States missiles in Turkey were close enough to Russia that they could reach most of the important cities and Cuba was close enough to the United States that the Russian missiles would reach most of the important United States cities.
The problem for Kennedy was that he could not publicly agree to remove the United States missiles from Turkey because Turkey would then not be protected and would not be happy.
Another problem was that Kennedy and his advisers did not know if Khrushchev was still in power.
They thought that someone in the Russian government might have overthrown Khrushchev.
They thought this because the second letter was so much different than the first.
Kennedy decided to send a secret message to Khrushchev saying that they would remove the missiles from Turkey in a few months as long as they did not tell the public about it.
Kennedy then sent an official letter to Khrushchev agreeing to the conditions of the first letter and not mentioning the second.
On November 1, the missile sites were removed, and the problems were over.
The missile sites in Turkey were removed, but not in the way that Khrushchev had wanted.The United States saw Kennedy as the hero who had fought Communism and won.
Content is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.
Some content of the original page may have been edited to make it more suitable for younger readers, unless otherwise noted.
