He has served and lead in a variety of assignments to include Squadron Command, Deputy Group Command, Minuteman III ICBM Instructor, B-52 Wing Weapons Officer, B-52 Squadron Director of Operations for Operation ENDURING FREEDOM , 2d Bomb Wing Executive Officer, and Chief of International EW programs for Secretary of the Air Force, International Affairs.
In 2010, he led the United States Army OEF electronic warfare enterprise as the United States Forces – Afghanistan, Command Electronic Warfare Officer.
Colonel Glenn has authored two Chief of Staff, Air Force export policies titled USAF EW Export Baseline and USAF Directed Infrared Countermeasures Export Baseline.
However, crucial events months prior to October 1962 provide a defining perspective and analysis of how United States nuclear deterrence performed.
The opportunity for nuclear deterrence to have saved the day came and went without much notice on 17 September 1962.
The fact that nuclear weapons were not used during the crisis lends itself towards the convenience of a nuclear deterrence success, but a closer look at the actual events and covert letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev prior to October 1962 support the notion that nuclear deterrence failed.
Kennedy’s lack of resolve, explicitly communicated to Khrushchev, was the cause of the deterrent failure.
Moreover, if United States nuclear deterrence has not had a perfect record of success, the implications on United States national strategic policy, based primarily on deterrence, are profound.
The foundational assumption of this bold leap of faith is built upon the notion that nuclear deterrence was causal for the lack of war between great states during the Cold War and that nuclear weapons’ legitimate primary purpose was and remains to deter use of nuclear weapons by other states.
Abolition then would seem reasonable since the only purpose of nuclear weapons is to keep others from using them.
One important aspect missing in the WSJ article is how they define nuclear deterrence success.
If one is going to suggest something as radical as eliminating nuclear weapons entirely, then we should be firm on how preliminary assumptions are defined.
Not having clear answers to the questions of its success has served as an opportunity allowing revisionist, who argue its failure, to gain traction.
It is the benchmark case study of nuclear deterrence strategy that has been analyzed and dissected for decades.
For the most part, the scholarly deliberation was based on interpretations of evidence available up to 2001 when covert letters between President Kennedy and Premiere Khrushchev were published.
Analysis of these letters suggest a much different picture of what was going on between the two ultimate decision makers during the crisis.
To deter a state actor is to dissuade him from initiating a verboten action.
First and foremost, deterrence is a psychological process that resides in the mind of the targeted opponent.
Communication is required to identify the offending action to the opponent who is to be deterred.
Schelling uses the metaphor of a tripwire that is overtly advertised to the opponent.
It could also be thought of as a red line that is drawn and announced to an opponent.
The incentive for the opponent not to cross the red line is the latent consequences supplied by the deterring state in the form of a threat which must also be communicated to the opponent.
Once the tripwire has been set and the opponent made aware, specified inaction is the goal.
If the opponent decides to act and violate the expectation of abstinence, deterrence by definition has failed.
There are a series of coercive, brute force actions, or inaction available to both sides once abstinence has ended, but the original strategy of deterrence has been discredited and voided.
This does not mean a state cannot attempt to deter that same opponent again, but the failure of the first tripwire will weaken the credible value of deterrence in the opponent’s calculus as he contemplates further action.
When state leaders include the use of nuclear weapons in their threats to deter their opponent, it is considered nuclear deterrence.
One is that nuclear deterrence would be a success if no nuclear weapons were used once any red line had been drawn by either side of a conflict.
The other way to define nuclear deterrence success is to be consistent with statecraft definitions.
If a state leader seeks to deter another state from a specific action and explicitly or implicitly threatens use of nuclear weapons, and the opponent violates the 3 restriction, then deterrence has failed.
The success of nuclear abstinence view is often an oversimplified bifurcation of the conflict outcome and, after the fact, disregards the contents of the threat that was used in an attempt to deter.
For example, a state that has a significant nuclear weapon capability could seek to deter another state by drawing a red line and clearly communicating an exclusively conventional threat with no explicit or implicit intention to use nuclear weapons since they maintain a “no first strike” policy.
Those who subscribe to this view would call this a nuclear deterrence success if the opponent did not act but they would not call it a nuclear deterrence failure if the opponent did act.
The problem with the former is that it violates the pre-nuclear age definition of deterrence.
Yet this view has been pervasive since the beginning of the nuclear age and continues today.
In effect, this view attempts to equate preservation of the use of nuclear weapons with deterrent success even if nuclear weapons were never a part of the opponent’s calculus that resolved himself not to act.
At best, this is a leap in logic; at worst, it is a misperception of legitimate means of violence, nuclear or conventional.
This was, of course, short-lived as the Korean War proved that nuclear deterrence did not necessarily imply success in avoiding all wars and state level violent conflicts.
Mankind had the capability to 4 exterminate itself long before nuclear weapons.
This view was common after The Great War and was acknowledged by Churchill himself in 1925 noting the advances in military technology.
There are some who are skeptical that an inanimate object could change our nature and over the decades two camps have emerged in this debate.
One camp includes scholars John Gaddis, Phillip Gordon, Ernest May and Jonathan Rosenberg that posit “nuclear revolution” is one that has kept major powers from warring with each other; so much to the point that Elspeth Rostow suggested that the atomic bomb be given the Nobel Peace Prize.
Simply put, aversion to mass casualties did not prevent world leaders in the past from making decisions that led to mass casualties on a scale of tens of millions.
This 5 is especially salient when one considers the decisions that were made by strategic leaders between the two world wars in light of their perceptions of the horrors of the first go.
Another aspect of this view of United States nuclear deterrence is the primacy of perception and the role of psychology.
Proponents of nuclear deterrence having a perfect record of success rely on emotional rhetoric that often makes no distinction between one nuclear warhead detonation and the apocalypse.
This rhetoric surfaced at the beginning of the nuclear age and continues today.
A more responsible assessment by political leaders would be to forego the nuclear rhetoric that makes no distinction between the apocalypse and mass casualties.
Scale matters, especially when assessing the difference between the end of civilization and a major world war.
The associated destructive power of this man-made 6 detonation only equates to 1/1000 of the destructive power of a hurricane.
Putting rhetoric aside, the challenge of logically proving the success of nuclear abstinence view is that it cannot be proven using any scholarly method.
In order to prove that nuclear deterrence succeeded in the past, one would have to prove that a red line would have been otherwise crossed if nuclear weapons did not exist.
Yet this type of proof seems to have satisfied United States policy makers for decades as evident by 60 years of hyperbole.
The danger in acceptance of this type of proof is the potential for coincidence to be treated as causal.
The better way of defining nuclear deterrence success is simply to ask a more relevant question.
John Lewis Gaddis, who is a known advocate for nuclear deterrence success,27 emphasized how a state decision maker’s performance in executing strategy should be approached.
This view remains true to the original definition and purpose of deterrence.
It also properly characterizes nuclear weapons as inanimate objects of war with no volition of their own.
In formulating the threat using this definition, the strategist considers whether or not nuclear weapons are the right means for the ends.
If the opponent decides to act and nuclear weapons were included in the threat, then nuclear deterrence fails irrespective of whether the threat is carried out or not.
Examination using the success of nuclear abstinence view is fairly short and somewhat underwhelming.
However, several questions remain unanswered regarding major crises since.
The pivotal point of answering the question of whether or not nuclear deterrence failed or succeeded hinges on if there was a red line that was drawn, if the associated threat included the use of nuclear weapons, and if the opponent violated or crossed the red line.
Establishing the actual sequence of events is important since the red line must be drawn prior to the opponent’s 8 opportunity to violate it.
However, the crucial actions months prior to October 1962 provide a defining perspective and analysis of how nuclear deterrence performed.
Practical analysis of nuclear deterrence performance in the crisis is best served by focusing on the two key decision makers, Kennedy and Khrushchev, to apply a parsimonious model.
Otherwise, attempting to focus on the statements and views of others, even in the leader’s inner circle, one will endeavor to reconstruct each person’s view point inferred from each person’s statements that are all accompanied with numerous potential hypotheses.
This increases the number of assumptions significantly regarding each decision that was made by both key leaders.
As the number of assumptions increase, as Ockham’s razor holds, the more likely the analysis will be overcome by superfluity and miss the mark when the best explanation for the outcome is the simplest one with the fewest assumptions.
The transcripts were originally classified and first commercially published in 2001.31 Most importantly, Kennedy and Khrushchev understood their direct communications would be protected from public access.
There was no need for political spin in these letters since the information would not be subject to public scrutiny.
John Mearsheimer posits that strategic leaders are apt not to attempt to mislead other state leaders because of an inherent, shared mistrust and the ability of both sides to corroborate the facts.
These letters also introduce a humanization effect between the two leaders that appears to be missing from most scholarly assessments of the crisis before the letters were published.
In April of 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and his Minister of Defense, Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, began a discussion of a plan to move Soviet nuclear forces to Cuba.
This discussion took place on the shore of the Black Sea while the two were contemplating the fact that the United States had Jupiter missiles in Turkey located just across the sea.
The Soviets would have had about ten minutes of warning before the warheads of these missiles would reach their targets.
The short warning timeline would increase the likelihood that their land based InterContinental Ballistic Missiles would be hit before they could be launched in response to a first strike.
By comparison, their ICBMs would take approximately 30 minutes to hit their targets in the US, thereby giving the United States more time to respond and not lose ICBMs and bombers on the ground.
In an attempt to balance this disadvantage, Khrushchev gained the approval of Fidel Castro for the concept of the nuclear weapons deployment via the Soviet Ambassador to Cuba, 10 Alexander Alekseyev.
The movement of the nuclear forces was named Operation ANADYR and officially approved by Khrushchev on 7 July 1962.37 Khrushchev’s intent was to keep the operation covert and to have the assets in place by the United States mid-term elections on 6 Nov 1962.38 This decision set the Soviet Government into a motion that could not be easily reversed.
It was in effect, Khrushchev’s attempt to setup a nuclear deterrent tripwire against a United States invasion of Cuba that ultimately failed since he was caught during the process of building the threat to make the deterrence strategy credible.
Khrushchev was deploying forces to prevent, what his intelligence agency was assessing to be a certainty, a United States invasion of Cuba.
This was based on the Soviet perception that the United States would not be satisfied with the outcome of the Bay of Pigs failure of April 1961 and was actively planning direct support of counter-revolutionary forces to ensure success in the next attempt.
The United States was indeed planning direct support of the counterrevolutionaries in Cuba and had named the effort Operation MONGOOSE.41 It is important to note Khrushchev’s explicit intent with Operation ANADYR using his own words.
Khrushchev was acting on what he believed was the only way to deter an American invasion and that was to introduce nuclear weapons into the equation if only from a geolocation standpoint.
Supporting personnel and equipment started to flow during July 1962.47 Given the numerous overt indications of such a large logistical movement, the United States was well aware of the fact that the Soviets were shipping significant amounts of equipment to Cuba.
U-2 reconnaissance flights in August 1962 had revealed only defensive surface-to-air missile systems like SA-2s being setup in Cuba.
On 4 September 1962, President Kennedy publicly announced the United States assumption that the Soviets were not placing offensive weapon systems in Cuba.
The phrasing used leaves little doubt that this constitutes a clear red line but there are two different interpretations of what is implicit in this statement of the gravest issues.
Kennedy was explicitly referring to war with the Soviets that either included the use of nuclear weapons or not.
The latter implies that nuclear weapons were not a factor in Kennedy’s threat to the Soviets at this time.
Following this logic, one can assess that nuclear weapons were never a part of Kennedy’s deterrent threat.
In effect, nuclear weapons would become irrelevant to the crisis and that the same result would have been reached had neither side had them.
In this case, nuclear deterrence success would be difficult to argue if possession of nuclear weapons was irrelevant to the tripwire Kennedy was setting for the Soviets.
Again on 13 September 1962, Kennedy reinforced his threat during a 6:00 pm press conference.
Kennedy’s nuclear deterrence red line had been set first on 4 September and reinforced 9 days later.
The choice to cross the red line or not was, at this point, up to Khrushchev.
The cargo ship Indigirka departed Severomorsk for Cuba on 17 September 1962 and contained nine IL-28 bombers with six atomic bombs and three Luna battalions that included 12 missiles with 12 nuclear warheads.
Khrushchev would have likely met bureaucratic resistance if he would have decided to cancel Operation ANADYR at this point.
Vivid acknowledgement of Kennedy’s red line can be seen in Khrushchev’s 28 September 1962 letter to the President.
I must tell you straightforwardly, Mr President, that your statement with threats against Cuba is just an inconceivable step.
Under present circumstances, when there exist thermonuclear weapons, your request to the Congress for an authority to call up 150,000 reservists is not only a step making the atmosphere red-hot, it is already a dangerous sign that you want to pour oil in the flame.
Despite all this, Khrushchev continued his actions which were in violation of Kennedy’s unambiguous red line.
Later, Kennedy would emphasize his frustration that Khrushchev did not heed the threat after he had crossed the red line.
Kennedy’s 22 October 1962 letter to Khrushchev stated, It was in order to avoid any incorrect assessment on the part of your Government with respect to Cuba that I publicly stated that if certain developments in Cuba took place, the United States would do whatever must be done to protect its own security and that of its allies.
The central issue for the failure of nuclear deterrence in this crisis is Kennedy’s lack of credibility and his inclination to avoid nuclear war that was clear in his covert dialogue with Khrushchev.
Kennedy expressed this aversive demeanor in his 17 July 1962 letter to Khrushchev.
At this point, Khrushchev could have concluded that Operation ANADYR was a risk worth taking since Kennedy would likely attempt to communicate with him before initiating military action.
If Khrushchev was an opportunist, then Kennedy had, in effect, given him the flexibility to act first then ask for forgiveness afterwards.
Kennedy essentially played his hand after Khrushchev had violated the red line, even if Kennedy was not yet aware.
Kennedy covertly told Khrushchev via his 22 October 1962 letter that no sane person would ever use them.
In other words, United States nuclear deterrence lacked real credibility with the Soviets in 1962 because Kennedy explicitly signaled a lack of resolve to ever use them.
He concludes that nuclear weapons were decisive because of the US’s strategic superiority over the Soviets.
Few would dispute the superiority of the US’s conventional and nuclear weapons capability at the time of the crisis.
However, Trachtenberg associates this imbalance as causal for the Soviet’s capitulation and offers two statements, one by a United States senior military leader and the other by a senior Soviet diplomat.
The number of assumptions for these to directly relate to Khrushchev’s final decision are numerous if you disregard the fact that both statements are coincidental to the outcome.
One assumption of this statement reflecting the reality of intent with Kennedy or Khrushchev is that the strategic imbalance condition mattered to either of them regarding the situation in Cuba.
Kennedy made statements that indicate he thought the military imbalance did not matter.
It seems much more likely that statements made by each of the final decision makers themselves, under a condition of anonymity, reflects the realities of why they chose their actions far more accurately than secondary players that made statements on the outcome, after the fact, which could be coincidental.
Regarding the statement by Kuznetsov, Trachtenberg is suggesting the only reason for Khrushchev’s eventual capitulation was a strategic imbalance but he offers no empirical evidence to establish what the Americans would never be able to do to the Soviets again.
It certainly could be that Kuznetsov was simply referring to the notion that the Soviets were 16 compelled to change their plans for Cuba.
Diplomatically, this appeared to be somewhat of a retreat for the Soviets which was not ideal for them.
Kuznetsov could have been expressing his own personal dissatisfaction with the crisis outcome without any association or thought to why Khrushchev made his decision.
It is a non-sequitur to directly associate the calculus of Khrushchev, who had won a pledge from the United States to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey, to a statement from a deputy minister that may not have known about the missile deal or the covert letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev; and further associate it another degree to strategic imbalance as causal.
However, this notion was debunked by Khrushchev’s 28 September 1962 letter to Kennedy which states, “We have been compelled to order our armed forces to be in peak combat readiness.
In addition, Khrushchev perceived that the Soviets were equally as strong as the US regarding military force.
Whether that was a tangible reality or not is irrelevant, if Khrushchev made decisions based on the balance of power in his mind.
Nuclear war did not happen during the crisis because it was not a viable option on the table for 17 both Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that these particular two men did not want to start a major war, regardless of their nuclear arsenals.
Ultimately, the outcome of the crisis will likely continue to lend itself towards the convenience of a nuclear deterrence success but a closer look at the actual events prior to October 1962 support the notion that nuclear deterrence failed.
Based on the stated intent of Khrushchev, there is little doubt that offensive nuclear attack was not a factor in his decision to move nuclear forces to Cuba.
The fact that he continued to do so after Kennedy’s red line indicates that he did not believe the United States would use nuclear weapons against the Soviets if he was caught.
Believing the notion that nuclear deterrence always works because it is somehow a special case raises a concern if our national leaders buy into a myth that causes them to be lulled into a false sense of security about the nature of war in the future.
The Victorians of the 1900s, before World War I, had a strong sense of security and faith in a seemingly new nature of mankind that was being influenced by revolutionary technologies.
Stephen Cohen reminds us of Norman Angell’s 1910 over-optimistic assessment that war between Austria, Britain, France and Germany would not happen because of economic interdependence.
Two world wars and 18 many limited wars since have proven that mankind’s reluctance to mass violence ebbs and flows.
The suggestion that nuclear deterrence will eliminate the use of nuclear weapons in the future is reminiscent of the Victorians.
Recommendations Senior United States military leaders must recognize and articulate the distinction between relying on nuclear arsenal possession as an instrument of assurance for United States public and the requirement for credible deterrence.
Military strategists must stay grounded in a world of capabilities, not intentions that can change in a matter of hours.
Supreme Commander Author, Elliot Cohen reflects that, “In all wars…brains matter.
Moreover, the challenge of using deterrence as a national strategic policy is that will and resolve must be perceived by your opponent.
Apparent lack of resolve can still be offset by capability as long as the opponent acknowledges it.
The real danger is when will, or lack thereof, influences decisions to reduce military capability.
If the United States no longer has the capability to annihilate any opponent because our targeting policy dictates so, it would be a colossal shift in the credibility of our nuclear deterrence policy.
Further, if opponents retained their capability to annihilate the US, then the US nuclear deterrence strategy has lost significant coercive leverage.
This strategy also surrenders the “balance of terror” towards Russia by signaling to Putin that the United States does not hold its population centers at risk when we have no assurances that it is reciprocated.
Call the strategy something else besides deterrence, and articulate to the American people the risks the United States is accepting.
The sufficient aversion to mass casualties that nuclear power leaders have demonstrated since the end of World War II does not guarantee future abstention.
For the US, there is nothing magical about possessing nuclear weapons that make a state impervious to nuclear attack and strategists should not be hopeful in assuming they are the ultimate insurance policy against another world war.
A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National Security Policy , 214.
PDF. nsarchive.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB400/docs/Interview%20with%20Alekseev.pd 39 Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, trans. and ed.
American Strategy and the Shifting Nuclear Balance, 1949-1954,” International Security , 48.
It should be noted that Fursenko and Naftali have a different interpretation of the nature of this meeting between Khrushchev and Udall as a reflection of Soviet “anxieties” and being “tired of the imbalance” between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Drea, Edward J History of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Vol 6, McNamara, Clifford and the Burdens of Vietnam 1965-1969.
Gaddis, John L., Philip H Gordon, Ernest R May, and Johnathan Rosenberg.
History of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Vol 5, The McNamara Ascendency 1961-1965.
