Maybe it was a business or academic committee, a social group, a church board, a government agency.
Forty years after his tragic death, President Kennedy continues to fascinate the public.
Analysts dissect his political and oratorical skills, his character and legacy.
His relatives — America’s royalty in some eyes — are frequent newsmakers.
The youthful president has engendered both inspiration and disappointment.
A fascinating facet of Kennedy’s legacy involves the decisionmaking procedures he used among his closest advisors.
Yale social psychologist Irving Janis studied these episodes carefully and concluded that too often decision makers are blinded by their own needs for self-esteem they get from being an accepted member of a socially important insiders group.
Fears of shattering the warm feelings of perceived unanimity — of rocking the boat — kept some of Kennedy’s advisors from objecting to the Bay of Pigs plan before it was too late.
After that huge blunder, JFK revamped his decision-making process to encourage dissent and critical evaluation among his team.
This article will consider how groupthink might have affected JFK and a major television enterprise, and how it can affect you.
In 1961, CIA and military leaders wanted to use Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro.
After lengthy consideration among his top advisors, Kennedy approved a covert invasion.
Lacking air support, necessary ammunition and an escape route, nearly 1,200 surrendered.
Other CIA analysts fault the wishful thinking that the invasion would stimulate an uprising among Cuba’s populace and military.
Planners assumed the invaders could simply fade into the mountains for guerilla operations.
Trouble was, eighty miles of swampland separated the bay from the mountains.
Presidential advisor Arthur Schlesinger, for instance, presented serious objections to the invasion in a memorandum to the president, but suppressed his doubts at the team meetings.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy privately admonished Schlesinger to support the president’s decision to invade.
At one crucial meeting, JFK called on each member for his vote for or against the invasion.
Each member, that is, except Schlesinger — whom he knew to have serious concerns.
President Kennedy later revised his group decision-making process to encourage dissent and debate.
A United States naval “quarantine” would block further offensive weapons from reaching Cuba.
The Pentagon directed the Strategic Air Command to begin a nuclear alert.
On October 24, the world held its breath as six Soviet ships approached the blockade.
At the United Nations, United States ambassador Adlai Stevenson publicly pressed his Soviet counterpart to confirm or deny Soviet missiles’ existence in Cuba.
He heard the CIA’s case for air strikes and Stevenson’s counsel for negotiation.
Groupthink and the Seductive Televangelist Once upon a time, a prominent Christian televangelist, despondent about his rocky marriage, had sexual intercourse with a church secretary.
This televangelist and his wife regularly appeared on international TV, providing physical and spiritual care to hurting people.
Their headquarters and conference center displayed a wholesome, positive atmosphere.
Yet the operation was quite lavish and included an opulent five-star hotel, white limousine, corporate jet, and bloated salaries.
The distraught secretary contacted ministry headquarters, wanting justice.
Several insiders were aware of the sex scandal and cover up, but turned a blind eye.
Many of these top leaders also enjoyed privilege, esteem, comfort, and wealth from the successful ministry.
Eventually, fearing media exposure, the televangelist confessed his sexual episode to the local newspaper and stepped down.
The ensuing turmoil became an international soap opera complete with sexual intrigue, power struggles, and legal morass.
The builder’s wife divorced him because of his involvement with the televangelist’s wife, who divorced the televangelist, married the builder and tried to start another TV ministry.
After prison, the televangelist wrote a book admitting wrong{24}, joined an inner city ministry, and remarried.
The PTL scandal exhibited several possible symptoms of groupthink{27}, such as belief in the group’s inherent morality, rationalizations, stereotyping adversaries, and pressures to conform.
Desires for approval, pride, greed, and a false sense of well-being stemming from being an accepted member of a wealthy, influential inner circle apparently stifled dissent.
Richard Dortch, Bakker’s second in command, later admitted, “We were wrong.
Groupthink and You As we have seen, Kennedy’s presidency provides some potent examples of this psychological theory about flawed group decision-making.
JFK’s Bay of Pigs advisors accepted the CIA’s flawed plan almost without criticism.
Leaders underestimated Castro’s military and political capability and overestimated their own.
Jim Bakker and his PTL Christian ministry leaders rationalized away sexual and financial impropriety, to their peril.
Seek to structure groups to avoid blind conformity and encourage healthy debate.
The CIA’s Internal Probe of the Bay of Pigs Affair,” Studies in Intelligence: A collection of articles on the theoretical, doctrinal, operational and historical aspects of intelligence, 42:2, Winter 1998-1999, www.cia.gov/csi/studies/winter98-99/art08.html.
The doctrine of the UPC is definitely heretical; they deny the Trinity in… President Kennedy's SpeechesRecently I was invited to speak at a dinner hosted by a Christian group at the Kennedy Museum in Dallas.
John 1:21 and Matthew 11:14 appear to give different answers to this question.
To begin, the Lord had promised Israel that He would send them… Rusty WrightRusty Wright, former associate speaker and writer with Probe Ministries, is an international lecturer, award-winning author, and journalist who has spoken on six continents.
Probe Ministries is a non-profit ministry whose mission is to assist the church in renewing the minds of believers with a Christian worldview and to equip the church to engage the world for Christ.
Probe fulfills this mission through our Mind Games conferences for youth and adults, our 3-minute daily radio program, and our extensive Web site at www.probe.org.
Permission is granted to use in digital or printed form so long as it is circulated without charge, and in its entirety.
Share this 0 likes Related Articles American Indians in American History Kerby Anderson, January 16, 2006October 7, 2014 Colonial America Two dark chapters in American history are slavery and the treatment of the American Indian.
The Bill of Rights Kerby Anderson, June 18, 2001December 8, 2014 Introduction The Bill of Rights is the first ten amendments to the Constitution.
Weaver makes a case for 18th-century philosopher Leibniz’s contention that this fallen world is still the best of all possible worlds.
WeaverWhy Bible Study Matters April 3, 2022Tom Davis builds a case for why we should study the Bible, drawing on both the Old Testament and New Testament scriptures.
Weaver looks at anti-God arguments from three prominent philosophers, showing why belief is God is more reasonable than their objections to His existence.
Cara Polsley to give an account of the big, magnificent answers to prayer in the wake of a horrific car accident that left her paralyzed but still overcoming major obstacles with God's grace.
Ray Bohlin Presents 'Natural Limits to Biological Change' January 26, 2022Discovery Institute’s Dallas Conference on Science and Faith featured Probe VP and Discovery Institute Fellow Dr.
Weaver has put together an intellectual response to the problem of evil that includes a theology of evil and suffering, and a philosophical/theological series of proper defenses of God and his righteousness considering evil.
Weaver'Return of the God Hypothesis' for Regular People January 9, 2022Dr.
Ray Bohlin provides an overview of Stephen Meyer’s Return of the God Hypothesis, looking at how recent scientific discoveries provide evidence for an intelligent creator.
Science November 22, 2021Steve Cable continues his analysis of Probe's 2020 survey of Americans' views on sexual issues and how they navigate the relationship between religion and science.
November 17, 2021Sue Bohlin reflects on God's question to Adam after he fell and broke the creation.
Sue Bohlin ©2022 Probe Ministries | Designed and Managed by Adquest Creative CONTACT USWe're not around right now.
There's no media found for the request !!"",""rtmedia_load_more_or_pagination"":""load_more"",""rtmedia_bp_enable_activity"":""0"",""rtmedia_upload_progress_error_message"":""There are some uploads in progress.
Do you want to cancel them?"",""rtmedia_media_disabled_error_message"":""Media upload is disabled.
Please choose a different combination."",""i18n_make_a_selection_text"":""Please select some product options before adding this product to your cart."",""i18n_unavailable_text"":""Sorry, this product is unavailable.
