Washington Post Soviets and Cubans to Give Their By Michael Dobbs Washington Post Foreign Service MOSCOW, Jan. — After more than a quarter of a century of official silence, the Soviet Union and Cuba are preparing to tell their behind-the-scenes versions of how the world approached nuclear war during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
The Soviet decision to cooperate with the Harvard project reflects the Kremlin's new foreign policy line under Gorbachev.
As Soviet rhetoric shifts from confrontation with the West to cooperation, the Cuban missile crisis is being held up as a case study in how the superpowers managed to avoid a nuclear apocalypse by demonstrating a willingness to compromise.
The Soviet and Cuban contribution has largely been confined to statements published at the time and occasional nuggets of information from secondary sources.
An indication of the revelations still to come was provided recently by the former Soviet ambassador to Cuba, Alexander Alexeev, who published his reminiscences in a Soviet magazine, Planetary Echo.
The article marked the first detailed account of the crisis by a ranking Soviet participant Alexeev, who will participate in Versions of ’62 Missile Crisis the conference, asserted that some of the 42 medium-range Soviet missiles in Cuba were fully operational by the time the United States announced its blockade of the island.
Western officials and scholars have been arguing for years over whether the Soviet missiles had already been equipped with nuclear warheads by the time the crisis broke.
The former ambassador also said that a local Soviet commander was responsible for shooting down an American U2 plane over Cuba on Oct., 1962, triggering the most tense phase in the two-week crisis.
It is now clear that neither president Kennedy nor Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev ever learned the truth about this vital episode.
They went to bed not knowing that Khrushchev was even more horrified than Kennedy about what had happened,"" said Blight, who visited Moscow last month to organize the conference.
Soviet officials have told the Harvard team that a high-level military cover-up kept the former Kremlin chief in the dark.
This leads us to believe that we may have been luckier than we think,"" said Blight.
In addition to Alexeev, Soviet participants in the conference are expected to include former foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, former ambassador to Washington Anatoliy Dobrynin and a KGB agent known as ""Mr X,"" who opened a back channel through John Scali of ABC News.
Edward M Kennedy will head the American delegation, which will also include John Kennedy Jr., former defense secretary Robert S McNamara, former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy, former White House special counsel Ted Sorensen, former White House press secretary Pierre Salinger and general William Y Smith, former chief aide to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Although the high-level Soviet participation at the conference fits in with the new Kremlin line as proclaimed by Gorbachev, the Harvard historians are convinced that personal factors also play a role.
They are elderly people and they don't want to carry their secrets to the grave,"" said Blight.
Harvard hosted a seminar on the Cuban missile crisis last year that was attended by three Soviet academics in addition to former Kennedy administration officials.
Unlike the Soviet officials who will be attending this month's conference, none of the Soviet participants in last year’s meeting had first-hand knowledge of key events.
According to the former ambassador, the key motivation was the wish to protect the Cuban revolution from a United States /military intervention.
But the United States administration got word of the Soviet preparations, which began in July 1962, and confirmed the presence of Soviet missile sites in Cuba through aerial reconnaissance.
Some of our ships were still en route but they contained only auxiliary supplies and equipment for our military contingent, which it was possible to do without,” wrote Alexeev.
The former ambassador said Castro reacted angrily when Khrushchev decided to dismantle the missiles without consulting or informing him.
According to him , Soviet radio began broadcasting the text of the letter at a time when its end had not even been completed,"" Alexeev said.
The Moscow conference will open with a video recording of Kennedy’s televised speech on Oct. in which he called on the Kremlin to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Some Soviet officials maintain that the crisis could have been defused with much less tension had Kennedy decided to employ quiet diplomacy rather than public pressure.
