Less attention has been given to the state of U.S.-Cuban relations in the aftermath of the missile crisis and during the last year of President John F Kennedy’s life.
Scholars have assumed, however, that Kennedy was in the process of reevaluating his hostile policies toward Cuba.
This article challenges those assumptions by closely examining what Kennedy and his administration intended for Cuba.
It suggests that the Kennedy administration never renounced its policy of overthrowing Fidel Castro.
In analyzing United States relations with Cuba during the Kennedy administration, scholars have understandably focused on dramatic events and policies—the Bay of Pigs invasion, the United States campaign of terrorism and sabotage known as Operation Mongoose, the assassination plots against Fidel Castro, and, of course, the Cuban missile crisis.
Scholars have assumed, however, that Kennedy was in the process of reevaluating his hostile policies toward Cuba and indeed his entire cold war stance.
In his seminal essay, “The Education of John F Kennedy,” Divine suggested that the eventful nature of the missile crisis had a transforming effect on the young president.
Kennedy had once wholeheartedly embraced the cold war verities of Dean Acheson and John Foster Dulles.
Kennedy had pledged to the Soviet Union not to invade Cuba and had ordered the dismantling of Operation Mongoose.
According to Schlesinger , the administration no longer needed to concentrate on Castro, since it had “destroyed” Castro’s influence in Latin America.
Historiography By the mid 1970s, this appealing interpretation of a maturing president who abandoned his confrontational ways encountered the reality of startling new evidence.
The Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, popularly known as the Church Committee, revealed that the United States had participated in plots to assassinate foreign leaders, including Castro.
The Church Committee could not say definitively whether Presidents Dwight D Eisenhower or Kennedy authorized the plots, although individual senators, such as Howard Baker , felt certain that the Central Intelligence Agency operated with presidential approval.
The Church Committee discovered, however, that the assassination plots continued after the missile crisis.
They passed to Cubela a ballpoint pen rigged with a poisonous hypodermic needle intended to produce Castro’s instant death.
In the previous month, Desmond Fitzgerald of the CIA’s Directorate of Plans had assured Cubela that the CIA operated with the approval of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy.
The Church Committee further disclosed that on June 19, 1963, President Kennedy approved a sabotage program against Cuba.
This new evidence provided a challenge to the keeper of the Kennedy flame (i.e., Schlesinger) as he prepared his 1978 biography of Robert Kennedy.
His task proved more daunting than many realized, since Schlesinger had exclusive access to the attorney general’s papers and diary and understood that the United States continued its war against Castro through 1963.
He offered various excuses, suggesting that Cuban exiles forced the Kennedy administration “into action against its will” , or that the CIA and exiles attacked Cuba without authorization, or that the administration had to harass Cuba in retaliation for Cuban meddling in Venezuela.
Schlesinger also suggested that Robert Kennedy knew of CIA support for militaristic Cuban exiles, such as Manuel Artime.
Yet, Schlesinger denied that the Kennedy brothers contemplated assassination, arguing that assassination was illogical in view of the noninvasion pledge and the Daniel and Attwood initiatives.
According to Schlesinger, President Kennedy pursued a dual-track policy toward Castro of ideological antagonism and accommodation.
Paterson had available to him the published record and additional documents that he had obtained through the Freedom of Information Act.
But Paterson displayed uncertainty about what “dual-track” policy meant.
Paterson ended his essay with a series of questions, wondering whether Kennedy truly wanted to improve relations with Cuba.
Paterson concluded that “it does not seem likely” that Kennedy would have normalized relations with Cuba in the post-1963 period.
Two influential studies published in the late 1990s have also offered commentary on the Cuban policies of President Kennedy.
In The Kennedy Tapes, May and Zelikow included an extensive analysis of Kennedy’s policies in their compilation of the audio transcripts of the administration’s secretly recorded deliberations during the missile crisis.
As for the aftermath, May and Zelikow depicted Kennedy’s subsequent anti-Castro policies as “petty harassment” , calculated neither to bring down Castro nor to drag the United States into an open or direct intervention in Cuba.
In their fascinating study “One Hell of a Gamble,” Fursenko and Naftali informed their survey of the missile crisis with some documents from the archives of the former Soviet Union.
But they essentially agreed with Divine, holding that Kennedy focused on improving the strategic relationship with the Soviet Union and achieving the limited test ban treaty.
In particular, Fursenko and Naftali noted that Robert Kennedy contacted the Soviet Union in May 1963 through a “back channel” communication and ensured 1.
But under the weight of new documentary evidence, Naftali apparently revised his judgment.
The new documentary evidence on U.S.Cuban relations sustains Paterson’s pessimistic judgment about the future of U.S.-Cuban relations as they stood in late November 1963.
In fact, the evidence demonstrates that the Kennedy administration pursued an aggressive, belligerent policy toward Cuba in the year after the missile crisis.
The United States approach to Cuba derived from the way the Kennedy administration interpreted its pledge to the Soviet Union not to invade Cuba in the aftermath of the missile crisis.
In his letter to Soviet chairman Nikita S Khrushchev on October 27, 1962, Kennedy directly and concisely offered a noninvasion pledge for the removal of missiles from Cuba.
But that pledge was never guaranteed by a formal document in the United Nations.
Stevenson to seek a comprehensive settlement in which the UN Security Council would guarantee the noninvasion pledge and the removal of offensive weapons systems from Cuba and in which all sides would give reciprocal guarantees to refrain from subversion and sabotage.
At his news conference on November 20, 1962, announcing the lifting of the naval quarantine of Cuba, Kennedy declined to give an unequivocal public pledge not to invade the island.
As Kennedy privately told the National Security Council the next day, Our objective is to preserve our right to invade Cuba in the event of a civil war, if there were guerrilla activities in other Latin American countries or if offensive weapons were introduced into Cuba.
The Rio pact called for multilateral action against aggression in the Western Hemisphere.
The resolution would, in Ball’s words, permit the administration “to do pretty much what we please,” for the president and his advisers understood that the United States could count on persuading twothirds of the members of the Organization of American States to support an invasion of Cuba.
Kennedy made manifest his policy on Cuba in a combative, three-hour meeting with Soviet leader Anastas Mikoyan on November 29, 1962.
Kennedy repeatedly assured Mikoyan that it was not the intention of the United States to invade Cuba.
Cuba might even become a site for an arms buildup by Chinese Communists.
The Soviets had adhered to the October 27 agreement, whereas the United States added conditions.
Mikoyan supported Castro’s demand that the “agreement cut both ways,” for 5.
Kennedy denied that the United States or any other nation in the Western Hemisphere trained Cubans for military action against Cuba.
There would be no formal U.S.-Soviet understanding to end the Cuban missile crisis.
Indeed, the Kennedy administration resumed its pre–October 1962 war against Castro shortly after the removal of offensive weapons systems.
By early December, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy circulated a memorandum that contained an overt program of diplomatic and economic opposition to Cuba and a covert one of extensive sabotage against Cuba.
On December 17, Kennedy asked what could be done about the rising price of sugar, which benefited Cuba.
Studies by the Departments of State and Agriculture gloomily concluded, however, that global market conditions accounted for the increase to ten cents per pound and that the United States could not unilaterally set world market prices for sugar.
Kennedy wanted to send troops to Cuba quickly in case of a general uprising, informing military officials that he wanted them to shorten the eighteen-day preparation period from alert to full-scale invasion.
Exile groups, such as Alpha 66 and the Second Front of Escambray, staged hit-and-run raids on the island and on ships transporting goods to and from Cuba.
The raiders purchased arms in the United States and launched their attacks from the Bahamas.
Responding to Soviet complaints, the Kennedy administration instructed the exiles to cease attacking Soviet ships in the Caribbean.
Rusk bragged that Cuba’s trade with the Atlantic community had dropped by one-third from 1961 to 1962.
The Kennedy administration also subsequently began the process of ejecting Cuba from the International Monetary Fund.
Despite these measures, the Kennedy administration remained frustrated about Cuba.
In late April, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara told colleagues that “the elimination of Castro was a requirement,” and that if present policies could not accomplish that objective, then new policies must be developed.
Bundy confessed that he was coming to believe that the administration could not set a certain date for Castro’s overthrow.
McNamara brought up the idea, often suggested by Robert Kennedy, of staging an attack on Guantánamo, blaming Castro, and then exploiting the situation.
NSC officers would subsequently inspect the military readiness of the Guantánamo garrison, speculating that Castro might retaliate against the increasing U.S. pressure.
The CIA offered an integrated program of propaganda, economic denial, and sabotage against Cuba.
The agency assumed that the United States did not currently intend to invade Cuba or provoke an invasion.
NSC officers kept the president and the attorney general apprised of the details of U.S.-supported raids by Cuban exiles.
Higher Authority conducted a major review of the program on November 12, 1963.
Cuba still belonged to Castro, and the Cuban strongman retained the loyalty of the military.
But Castro’s “grip was weakening,” and the CIA was attempting to exploit dissension and dissidence within the military.
Kennedy briefly inquired about the efficacy of the attacks and then authorized a continuation of the program.
Havana certainly exhorted Latin American revolutionaries, such as the Movement for the Revolutionary Left in Venezuela, and invited them to Cuba to study and train.
But the United States had no hard evidence of direct Cuban support, in the form of arms or troops, of insurgent groups.
United States intelligence analysts also understood that Khrushchev made clear to Castro in May 1963 that the Soviet Union would not support armed insurrection in Latin America.
And they were informed that Castro had repeatedly suggested, through a variety of intermediaries, that he was interested in a rapprochement with the United States.
As such, the Kennedy administration needed evidence to justify its continuing war against Cuba.
That evidence surfaced on a Venezuelan beach in early November 1963, when Venezuela announced that it had discovered a cache of Cuban arms, allegedly left for insurgents determined to disrupt the upcoming presidential election.
In February 1963, after meeting with President Rómulo Betancourt, Kennedy wrote to McCone that “it is obvious that the Communists in Venezuela support Castro.
The president was shown where the Cuban coat of arms had been sanded off the rifle.
In fact, some have subsequently questioned the validity of the discovery.
Joseph Burkholder Smith , who had once served as the CIA chief of station in Caracas, implied that CIA operatives, responding to presidential pressure, engaged in a form of “black propaganda” and planted the arms.
In May 1963, the CIA submitted a paper to the NSC on additional actions against Cuba.
Schlesinger suggested that Kennedy gave a conciliatory speech about Cuba, reinforcing the Attwood and Daniel initiatives.
Hersh , citing interviews he had with lawyers on the Church Committee, noted that the CIA inserted in the speech a reference to Castro as a “barrier” to be removed.
On December 19, 1963, Bundy informed Johnson that the Kennedy speech “was designed to encourage anti-Castro elements within Cuba to revolt,” especially in the armed forces.
As he intensified his war against Cuba, Kennedy indeed opened indirect lines of communication with Castro.
But neither the Daniel nor the Attwood initiative can be characterized as a meaningful diplomatic effort.
Daniel met with Kennedy in Washington on October 24, 1963, and then interviewed Castro on November 19 and November 22.
Kennedy told Daniel that the United States primarily objected to Cuba’s subversive activities in Latin 34.
Kennedy had previously made similar statements about the flexible nature of United States policies in conversations with Brazilian officials and Prime Minister Cheddi Jagan of British Guiana.
Kennedy claimed that he focused on whether a country maintained its diplomatic independence and that he accepted the principle that every country has the right to choose its internal political and economic philosophies.
Formerly a journalist, Attwood had interviewed Castro in 1959, served as Kennedy’s ambassador to Guinea, and then joined the United States mission at the United Nations in 1963.
With the knowledge of the president and the attorney general, Attwood began preliminary discussions with Cuba in September 1963.
Attwood speculated that Castro wanted to normalize relations with the United States and that he was prepared to renounce subversion, eject Soviet military personnel from Cuba, and adopt a policy of nonalignment.
Kennedy further denied Attwood permission to accept a Cuban invitation to travel to Cuba for discussions.
The Kennedy administration also showed no interest in Castro’s repeated request that the United States cease its campaign of sabotage and terrorism against Cuba.
Kennedy did not pursue a dual-track policy toward Cuba during the last thirteen months of his administration.
At the minimum, the administration required that Castro sever his ties with the Soviet Union and renounce his commitment to revolution.
Whether the administration would acknowledge a nonaligned Communist state in the hemisphere remains problematic.
The Department of State warned that any approval of a Communist Cuba would strengthen Latin American Communists, threaten foreign investments, provoke a regional capital flight, and undermine the Alliance for Progress.
As Bundy once put it, it was fine to talk to Castro, but “things would have to get rougher for Castro before he would consider any deal 38.
The CIA’s classified account of its operations in Guatemala, 1952-1954.
Betancourt, Castro, and Trujillo and United States foreign policy, 1958-1963.
United States Congress, Senate, Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities.75.
Alleged assassination plots involving foreign leaders.th Cong., 1st sess., Senate Report no.5.
