The group is composed of American President John F Kennedy and his advisers.
The results are consistent with much experimental evidence showing that reference levels play an important role in determining preferences.
The results also extend the notion of reference-dependent risky choice to the group level, where the group consists of seasoned experts who each have a different role to play within the group and who are dealing with an issue of great importance.
KEY WORDS Group decision making Prospect theory Risky choice Case study Groupthink When making foreign policy decisions and other types of important decisions, leaders must assess the relative merits of competing alternatives.
One such context effect is the reference level, or standard of comparison, against which the potential outcomes of choice are evaluated.
The most prominent of these models is prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, I979), which aims to explain and predict individual decision making under risk.
Most of this research, however, has been conducted with individuals making hypothetical or low-stakes decisions, often in a laboratory setting.
Few, if any, studies have investigated the reference dependence of crucial decisions made by groups of experienced decision makers.
Consequently, it is an open question whether the predictions derived from prospect theory will hold true for such groups as well as individuals.
CCC 0894-32571941040243-18 Received I I Janurrry 1994 0 1994 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
At the current stage of research on decision making under risk, case studies of well-documented group and organizational decisions can advance our understanding in two ways.
First, they can indicate whether prospect theory predictions are valid beyond the individual level.
Second, case studies can suggest additional determinants of risky choice that can supplement prospect theory, and thus provide a more comprehensive understanding of decision making in complex and realistic settings.
In this paper, we follow this approach in applying prospect theory to a crucial decision made under uncertainty by a group of talented and experienced decision makers.
In particular, we examine the role of the reference point in the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.
Moreover, the extensive documentation of the CMC, which includes transcripts of group meetings, enables investigators to trace the decision makers’ perceptions and actions during the crisis.
For these reasons, the CMC is an excellent case in which to study reference level effects at the group level and to attempt to forge links between theories of individual and group decision making under risk.
To guide our analysis, we focused on a set of questions relevant for testing and extending prospect theory to the group level.
After exploring these questions through our analysis of decision making during the CMC, we derived propositions relating prospect theory to group-level decision making.
These propositions, in turn, can be used to guide future research on group decision making under uncertainty.
PROSPECT THEORY According to Kahneman and Tversky’s analysis ofchoice under uncertainty, individual attitudes toward risky options are depicted by a value function.
Reference dependence: the carriers of value are gains and losses defined relative to a neutral reference point.
The location of the reference point affects the perceived attractiveness of outcomes by defining the possible outcomes of choice as positive or negative.
The literature contains many examples of preference reversals that occurred through a shift in the reference level and the subsequent reframing of decisions, even though objectively the choices were unchanged.
In contrast, the neutral reference level implied by the characterization of the choice as people dying is 0 dead; hence the choice is between a certain loss and potentially greater losses combined with the chance of returning to the reference level.
Individuals are often risk averse in choices involving gains but risk taking in choices involving losses , a discrepancy that is illustrated in prospect theory by the S-shaped value function that is concave for gains but convex for losses.
The dramatic reversals of preference produced by different descriptions of the same option in the lives saved/lost dilemma occur because of the conjunction of a framing effect with attitudes toward risk that differ for choices involving either losses or gains.
Loss aversion entails a bias in the evaluation of gains and losses, because losses are felt more strongly than gains of equivalent magnitude.
This notion is illustrated by a value function that is steeper for losses than for gains.
People consequently are reluctant to accept even chance gambles in the absence of very favorable payoffs.
Although prospect theory concerns the behavior of individuals, most crucial decisions under uncertainty are made by groups.
Hence the study of group risk management is of practical as well as theoretical importance.
As Kameda and Davis have observed, however, research in this area has for the most part proceeded independently and with little conceptual connection to work at the individual level, which has been rooted in utility theory.
The two levels of analysis have remained largely separate, even though comprehensive explanations of decision making under uncertainty are likely to require both.
Some empirical studies have found, however, that group and organizational level decision making under risk is consistent with predictions implied by prospect theory (e.g.
These studies suggest that group and organizational risk taking is affected by the reference level used to frame the decision, a result consistent with research findings on individual decision making.
Prospect theory is also relevant to research on choice shifts, which has found that group discussion tends to enhance the point of view initially dominant within the group.
Thus it becomes important to identify the reference levels that individual group members are using to frame the decision they are making.
I n the following sections we first summarize the key events of the Cuban missile crisis, and then describe our analysis of reference level effects on group decision making during that crisis.
THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS A summary of key events surrounding the Cuban missile crisis is as follows.
Soviet military aid to Cuba increased significantly during the summer of 1962.
The increase was justified by the Soviets on the basis of the threat of an imminent American invasion of the island.
On 1 1 September the Soviet government in response denied any intention to place nuclear weapons in Cuba.
It also claimed its rockets were so powerful that there was no need to locate them elsewhere than in the Soviet Union, and warned that United States military action against Cuba would provoke nuclear war.
Kennedy replied on 13 September that nuclear weapons in Cuba were unacceptable to the United States.
On 16 October 1962, President Kennedy received photographs taken from a United States U-2aircraft showing that the Soviet Union was building launch sites in Cuba for both mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles.
From this day until the end of the crisis, a group of advisers, later formally designated the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , met secretly and often to debate potential course of action.
A week of secret meetings among Kennedy and his advisers, however, culminated in Kennedy’s address to the nation on 22 October declaring the imposition of a naval blockade on Cuba against offensive weapons only.
The blockade was intended to prevent further Soviet military shipments to the island and to impress upon the Soviets the seriousness of American intentions to remove the missiles, but its effect was to bring the world under the cloud of possible nuclear war.
The crisis ended on 28 October when Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the bases and pull Soviet missiles out of Cuba in exchange for an American pledge not to invade Cuba.
METHOD Data Considerable documentation of the decision making process that occurred before 22 October has been placed in the John F Kennedy Library and is now available.
These sources, supplemented by the published accounts of participants, social scientists, and journalists, provide traces of the decisionmaking process leading to the blockade of Cuba.
Also, the ExCom held informal meetings for which there seem to be no records.
As a result, a small amount of sensitive material has been expunged because it pertains to intelligence sources or methods.
Data analysis Although the crisis is commonly described as lasting thirteen days, the focus of this analysis was on the initial seven-day period commencing from the discovery of the missile bases on 16 October to the announcement of the United States course of action on 22 October.
The data were analyzed using historiographical methodology , which is similar to techniques used in Chandler’s Strategy and Structure and Janis’s Grouprhink.
Propositions were induced by examining subjects’ direct statements regarding the issues under discussion.
Subsequently, the case was revisited to determine whether the data supported the proposed relationships.
The main category of information for which the data sources were examined pertains to the reference level employed.
In attempting to answer the questions under investigation, we relied as much as possible on direct statements made by key decision makers.
Thus, to the fullest extent possible. our discussion of the process of decision is based on direct statements made by the decision makers as they were engaged in their task.
Where possible we have supported our interpretations with direct quotes, and have included these quotes in the text so that readers may judge for themselves the reasonableness of the conclusions drawn.
The data from this research suggest that group choice in uncontrolled environments is also reference dependent.
The executive team in the present study relied unequivocally on one reference point in their evaluation of the alternatives.
This reference point originated with JFK’s statement on 13 September 1962 in which he publicly committed the United States to a reference level of zero nuclear missiles with which to evaluate the situation in Cuba, and to action should this line be crossed.
This pledge to act in the event of Soviet placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba drew the line for both the American public and Kremlin leaders beyond which the Soviets could not go, and indicates the existence of a neutral reference level against which events in Cuba would be evaluated.
Moreover, this reference point was the only one used in the first two meetings, where it was referred to over a dozen times during the course of discussion.
In answering this question, consider the case of an entrepreneur who has recently suffered a $2 million loss, and must now decide which of two new projects to pursue.
One project provides a certain return of $1 million; the other offers an even chance of $2 million or nothing.
In other words, if the reference level does not shift to reflect recently suffered losses, current choices undergo a negative transformation.
In this case, the probability of the decision maker choosing the riskier option (i.e. an even chance of earning $2 million or nothing in this example) is increased.
Because of loss aversion, individuals who have recently suffered losses therefore are more likely to accept risky options they would otherwise have rejected.
Evidence for the negative framing/loss aversion hypothesis is found in JFK’s 22 October address to the nation.
The substance of these remarks is entirely consistent with prospect theory.
That is, the current reality represents a negative deviation from a neutral point of reference.
Decisions about how to respond to the current situation therefore appear as choices between a certain loss, on the one hand, and potentially greater losses combined with a chance to return to the neutral reference point, on the other.
At Point B, diminished sensitivity to further losses results in the overweighting of certain losses in relation to losses that are more substantial but might be avoided.
As a result, most people at Point B are inclined to avoid the certain losses by risking further losses, in an attempt to return to the neutral reference level.
That is precisely the situation described in Kennedy’s speech to the nation on 22 October.
Given the location of the reference level, the presence of any nuclear missiles in Cuba represented a negative deviation from the neutral reference point and created the perception of a certain loss.
Accepting the Soviet missiles in Cuba would also have entailed losses in non-military domains, such as in terms of the credibility of United States commitments.
The greater danger of war, however, was uncertain and therefore preferable to the high certain costs associated with a nonmilitary response.
Proposition 1: Groups making decisions under risk will adopt a reference point with which to frame their problems.
Groups that adopt reference points that do not reflect recently suffered losses will frame their choices negatively, and will therefore be risk-accepting.
Groups will manifest susceptibility to the status quo bias because of the existence of loss aversion at the group level of analysis.
By these measures, the risk level of the option chosen by JFK and his advisers as they perceived it was considerable.
Of course, if Soviet missiles in Cuba had been believed to threaten the security of America’s cities, then it could be argued that the choice of a naval blockade as a first step was both cautious and judicious.
But the issue of the strategic impact of the missiles was not even raised during the ExCom’s first meeting, and did not overly concern those who were most influential in deciding which course of action to follow.
Mac, I asked the Chiefs [Joint Chiefs of Stam that this afternoon, in effect.
JFK agreed that the missile bases did not affect the strategic balance of power.
You may say it doesn’t make any difference if you get blown up by an ICBM flying from the Soviet Union or one that was ninety miles away.
As Kennedy reflected shortly after the crisis, he knew that the Soviets did not intend to fire the Cuban missiles, ‘because if they were going to get into a nuclear struggle, they have their own missiles in the Soviet Union.
T o put the Soviet actions into perspective, it should be recalled that in the late 1950s the United States placed nuclear missiles along the Soviet border in Turkey.
If a more cautious policy was called for, as it seems from JFK’s own perception of the risks, then reference level effects may partially explain why the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba provoked a military confrontation.
A diversity of factors determine the reference outcome in everyday life.
The reference outcome is usually a state to which one has adapted; it is sometimes set by social norms and expectations; it sometimes corresponds to a level of aspiration, which may or may not be realistic.
Our findings are consistent with this statement, but also suggest some additional influences on the group’s adoption of its reference point of zero nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Moreover, these factors operated jointly rather than independently such that their effects on reference point selection were mutually reinforcing.
Expectations The ExCom members had become accustomed to the absence of missiles in Cuba, and the prevailing expectation was that the Soviets would never risk violating the status quo by placing them there.
JFK and the others had accepted the unanimous judgment of Soviet experts that Khrushchev would not send nuclear weapons to Cuba.
As it turned out, the prevailing expectation regarding Soviet intentions was incorrect.
The arms build-up in Cuba during 1962 caused considerable consternation in the USA, fueled in part by the impending Congressional elections.
As the fall Congressional electoral campaign heated up, the dangers posed by the Soviet arms build-up and rumors of nuclear missiles on Cuba were used to attack the Kennedy administration.
These attacks found their mark because Cuba was the ‘Achilles’ heel’ of JFK and his administration.
Disaffection with Communist influence on Cuba was growing, and Castro remained in power, despite the botched invasion at the Bay of Pigs a year earlier and the policy of isolationism toward Cuba that followed (Hilsman, 1967.
I say that believing very strongly that would have been an act of prudence, not weakness.
Thus Sorensen implied that JFK’s public warning to the Soviets was an attempt to neutralize political criticism without incurring much military risk.
In addition, Sorensen’s comments raise the possibility that events would have unfolded differently, and that there might not have even been a crisis, had the administration selected a reference level that correctly anticipated the Soviet missile deployment.
According to Sorensen, the reference level of zero nuclear missiles was carefully chosen to defuse a troublesome domestic political issue, and did not reflect a careful analysis of the strategic implications of the missiles.
Regardless of these facts, JFK’s public commitment to no Soviet missiles on Cuba unintentionally established the standard against which the implications of missiles on Cuba would come to be measured.
Had JFK and others believed that Khrushchev was planning to send nuclear weapons to Cuba, Sorensen suggests that JFK might have committed to a different reference level rather than risk nuclear war.
If the military threat posed by missiles in Cuba had been JFK’s main concern, however, he would have been unwilling to do that.
Data from the second meeting on the day the missiles were discovered support Sorensen’s interpretation that the reference level was inappropriately located.
JFK’s warnings to the Soviets against placing missiles in Cuba were based on the assumption that the Soviets had no intention of placing nuclear warheads in Cuba.
But when we said we’re not going to and then they go ahead and do it, and then we d o nothing, then I would think that our risks increase.
A shift in the reference level to, for example, 50 nuclear missiles on Cuba might have spared the world a brush with disaster.
JFK, however, appears to have been unalterably committed to the initial reference level of zero nuclear missiles.
But even though JFK was committed to a reference point of zero nuclear missiles, this did not mean that the United States had to remove the missiles coercively at the risk of nuclear war.
The announcement we didn’t say we’d go in . . . and kill them, we said we’d act.
The strength of JFK’s commitment to a reference level of zero nuclear missiles can be traced to his September statements to the press, in which he drew the line beyond which the Soviets could not go.
The nature of these statements, and the conditions under which they were made, were precisely those that should, on theoretical grounds, fix an initial reference level in place.
Explicitness in the context of reference level formation refers to the extent that the setting of the initial reference level is an observable process, and to the degree to which actions leading to the setting of the reference level are subject to multiple interpretations.
Irrevocability refers to the extent to which behavior leading to the setting of the initial reference point cannot be reversed.
Actions that are permanent or that can be reversed only at high cost are highly committing.
Volition refers to the extent to which the initial reference level is chosen in the absence of compelling exogenous reasons, such that feelings of personal responsibility for reference level selection are induced.
Publicity refers to the extent to which actions and behavior leading to the setting of the initial reference level are widely known by a constituency that is important to the decision maker.
Explicitness, revocability, volition, and publicity all bind people to their behavior and may contribute to freezing the reference point it its initial location.
The statements were also irrevocable, given the vulnerability of both JFK and his administration to charges of being ‘soft on Communism’ if the line were redrawn.
Expectations, political pressures, and behavioral commitment operated jointly, reinforcing each other in the ExCom’s selection of, and commitment to, the reference point.
The expectation that the Soviets would not deploy any missiles on Cuba established the boundaries of acceptable Soviet behavior.
Political pressure provided the motivation to state this expectation publicly in terms of a warning against Soviet placement of missiles in Cuba.
Finally, behavioral commitment, in the form of an explicit, public, and voluntary statement, helped to ‘freeze’ the reference point.
Proposition 4: The influence of cognitive factors on the selection of the reference point will be augmented by political pressures and behavioral commitment.
Leader behavior The application of prospect theory to the group level raises the question of how consensus is achieved on the reference point when differences in reference point among group members exist.
If the objective is to predict group decisions, it is necessary to consider the nature of the process by which consensus is achieved.
Some individuals will have greater influence over the reference point a group adopts than will others.
Other things being equal, it is reasonable to expect that the formal group leader will have the strongest influence.
This influence is likely to be augmented under conditions of threat or crisis.
Under such conditions, groups tend to become more unified, consensus seeking, and autocratic in decision making (e.g.
In the CMC, many conditions were favorable for the group’s acceptance of JFK’s reference point.
For example, JFK was respected by ExCom members ; his personal stake in the decision was heightened by his political vulnerability on Cuba and by Khrushchev’s violation of his September warning against placing missiles in Cuba; and the crisis atmosphere led the ExCom to accept without critical analysis JFK’s reference point of zero nuclear missiles.
JFK was highly personally committed to the zero nuclear missiles reference level, and others were keenly aware of this.
I don’t think we got much time on these missiles. . . . we can’t wait two weeks while we’re getting ready to roll.
Maybe just have to just take them out, and continue our other preparations if we decide to do that.
We’re certainly going to du number one; we’re going to take out these missiles.
The questions will be whether, which, what I would describe as number two, which would be a general air strike.
At least we’re going to d o number one, so it seems to me that we don’t have to wait very long.
Effectively, then, the mission of the ExCom was to devise a strategy to remove the missiles from Cuba before they could fire but without causing war.
All alternatives considered were coercive; all entailed considerable risk, with the risk rising in direct proportion to the size of the military response.
Given the constraints imposed on the options, and the fact that all roads leading to the early removal of the missiles were strewn with hazards, the success of the ExCom was in selecting one of the less extreme means available to achieve the inherently risky objective set by Kennedy.
Although a blockade was not the riskiest strategy available, it was one of a limited range of risky alternatives that were considered because of their potential to recover the losses suffered.
Having decided at the outset to remove the missiles precluded acquiescence or diplomacy and dictated a high-risk, coercive strategy.
As a result, the options of leaving the missile bases untouched, or of relying on diplomatic solutions, were almost entirely ignored during group discussions.
An examination of the transcripts of the first day’s meetings reveals a narrow focus on the routes, mainly military, by which the missiles might be removed; why the missiles should be removed was rarely discussed.
The most crucial issue, that of the strategic impact on the United States of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, as mentioned was not even raised until well into the second meeting on the first day.
The need to remove the missiles was an unexamined assumption underlying much of the discussion.
JFK’s ability to set the terms of the discussion was clearly an important device for influencing the subsequent behavior of the ExCom.
All ExCom members were well aware of JFK’s recent statements and commitments, which set the context within which the placement of missiles on Cuba was evaluated and determined what group members saw and how they saw it.
Proposition 5: The reference point in group crisis decision making will reflect that of the leader.
A group whose leader has recently suffered losses should make a riskier decision than a group without such a leader.
DISCUSSION In this paper, we have focused on reference level effects in group crisis decision making, and have relied on the Cuban missile crisis to examine these effects.
The evidence suggests that the neutral reference point, which framed the issue of Soviet missiles on Cuba as a choice between losses, had its origins in the public statements made by JFK in September.
Those statements, which warned the Soviets not to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, reflected the political vulnerability of the Kennedy administration on the Cuban issue but exaggerated the military significance of the missiles.
At the time, such exaggeration seemed inconsequential, because the Soviets appeared to have no intention of exceeding the limits set for them.
Had JFK realized otherwise, he might have either drawn the line at the point that more accurately reflected the missiles’ military significance or been more vague in his pronouncements.
N 4 different the ExCom meetings might have been had J F K not established a zero-missile reference point from which to evaluate the situation in Cuba.
Instead of planning how to take the missiles out, JFK and his advisers would have been able to contemplate whether to do so.
In this scenario, the options of leaving the missiles in place or attempting to remove them via political or diplomatic channels would have been available.
But the political context, defined in part by JFK himself, provided powerful disincentives against any readjustment in the reference level; thus Kennedy’s earlier statements could not be ignored without suffering large certain losses.
To avoid these losses. the President and his advisers risked even greater losses to remove missiles that he, his Secretary of Defense, and a majority of the ExCom agreed did little to threaten national security.
This analysis is consistent with a strong status quo bias that is evident even in international conflict.
Reference level effects were apparent in all stages of the process leading to the decision to blockade Cuba.
The problem was defined in terms of a negative deviation from a neutral point of reference; the goal was to return to the neutral reference point; only those alternatives with the capacity to accomplish this goal were considered; and the options were evaluated from the perspective of the neutral reference point.
These results are particularly notable, because they characterize a group decision making process.
One salient difference between the individual and group levels, however, is the additional influences on reference level placement that exist at the group level.
A crucial influence in this case was a leader who clearly established for the group the reference level to be used.
Leaders who state their opinions early may establish the reference point for the group, and reduce the likelihood that alternative reference points will be used.
The focus of this study is on the decision processes of the ExCom, but it is worth noting that from the ExCom’s perspective the outcome of the decision taken was positive.
A successful decision outcome, however, does not necessarily mean that high quality decision making procedures have been used.
Janis argued persuasively that there is an imperfect link between the quality of decision making practices and the outcome of a group decision.
That is because decision outcomes may be determined by actors or events that are beyond the control of the decision maker.
This certainly applies to the Cuban missile crisis, the resolution of which depended not on the ExCom’s decision but on the Kremlin’s response.
Janis described the decision making practices employed by the ExCom during the Cuban missile crisis as exemplary.
Janis’s main points were that the ExCom displayed all major dimensions of sound decision making and showed few symptoms of groupthink.
Groupthink is indicated by the development of shared illusions and related norms.
These symptoms of groupthink enable groups under stress to maintain esprit de corps, but at the cost of a decline in mental efficiency, reality testing, moral judgment, and decision quality.
As is clear from several accounts of the Cuban missile crisis, the ExCom succeeded at preventing or remedying most groupthink symptoms by using several techniques designed to facilitate openminded inquiry and debate.
The absence of groupthink notwithstanding, we take issue with Janis’s view that the ExCom’s decision to force the missiles out of Cuba can be accurately characterized as the product of high-quality decision making procedures.
Our view diverges from that of Janis primarily because Janis evaluates the ExCom’s performance in relation to the objective set for it at the outset by JFK, which was to devise a strategy involving some form of coercive action to remove the missiles from Cuba before they became operational.
In contrast, we consider the ExCom’s uncritical acceptance of JFK’s reference point to be a significant act that had major implications for the process of group decision making and the decision that was ultimately taken.
The evidence in this regard suggests that the ExCom accepted at face value JFK’s reference point.
In other words, JFK provided a frame for the group’s decision, on which the group unquestioningly relied.
As a result, options involving diplomacy or leaving the missile bases alone were precluded from consideration.
This perspective, by including consideration of reference level effects, implies that groupthink can provide only a limited explanation for risky group decision making.
Such behavior may be explained more potently by the way group members frame decisions and choose between alternatives.
Groupthink provides the mechanisms to explain the convergence of group members’ views on a poor choice, but the theory provides no clue as to the initial positions of group members at the outset of discussion, from which a consensus is usually forged.
Prospect theory implies, however, that when a group adopts a reference point that frames its decision as a choice between losses, most group members will prefer the risky option over the sure loss.
Future research should address the shape of the value function for groups as opposed to individuals.
The present findings indicate that groups, like individuals, rely on some neutral reference point from which they evaluate their options in terms of gains or losses.
Based on the group polarization literature , it seems reasonable to suggest that given the same reference level, loss aversion and diminishing sensitivity in general should be more pronounced in group than in individual attitudes toward risky options.
A surprising finding in light of a prospect theory based analysis was the group shift toward a more cautious option than was initially favored by group members at the outset of group discussion.
If our deliberations had been publicized, if we had to make a decision in twenty-four hours, I believe the course that we ultimately would have taken would have been quite difTerent and filled with far greater risks.
Based on the group-polarization literature, one would have expected a risky shift, because the President and most of his advisers were initially in favor of an air strike on the missile sites.
The techniques relied on by the ExCom to encourage free-flowing discussion and debate and described by Janis likely helped to preclude group polarization and induce the cautious shift that is observable in the final decision.
The utility of these techniques was considerable, considering that a decision consistent with the initial predispositions of group members involved a high risk if not the certainty of nuclear war.
These techniques moderated, but did not eliminate, the risk-seeking tendencies of the ExCom that, according to this analysis, were caused by the way the decision was framed.
Anticipation on the part of group members of the public expression of the group’s decision may also have shifted their individual preferences toward more socially desirable or normative values, resulting in a cautious shift.
In the Cuban missile crisis, such values may have been made salient by Robert Kennedy, who was instrumental in the rejection of the proposal for a surprise attack against Cuba.
In this study, substantial opinion changes were induced in mock jurors toward a not guilty verdict a more socially acceptable position merely by the anticipation of publicly stating their preferences.
Group polarization may also not have occurred because the majority position at the outset of discussion did not dictate the final decision.
Although majority process often characterizes decision making for judgmental tasks , field research on how managers actually make fast, yet high-quality, strategic decisions suggests a more judicious use of advice.
Top management teams that are capable of such decisions typically employ a two-tier advice process.
This process appears to describe decision making during the CMC, in which the discussion on the first day of meetings focused on direct military action.
By the afternoon of the second day, the ExCom was discussing whether to launch an air strike or to impose a blockade.
These discussions were held in the absence of JFK, who as previously scheduled spent the day campaigning in Connecticut to prevent arousing suspicion of the discovery of the bases.
By his return that evening, his three most trusted advisers had adopted a position in favour of a blockade.
These advisers, Secretary of Defense Robert MacNamara, Attorney General Robert Kennedy (JFK’s brother and campaign manager), and Presidential Counsel Theodore Sorensen were able to moderate the risk preferences of JFK in spite of his refusal to shift his reference point to reflect the reality of the missile bases.
Whether these results are anomalous or reflect something important about reference level effects at the group level is a question that requires further investigation.
Another unresolved but important issue is how decision making groups cope with differences in the reference point among group members.
Under the conditions that prevailed in the CMC, which included the perception of threat and the need to reach consensus under time pressure, the group adopted its leader’s reference point.
Reference level effects according to the present results appear to be very important at the group as well as the individual level, and prospect theory is explicit about the relationship between the neutral reference level and choice.
Such a theory would greatly enhance the utility and predictive validity of prospect theory.
One possible source of a theoretical framework from which a theory of framing might be developed is control theory or cybernetics.
Cybernetic principles concern the functioning of self-regulating systems.
The basic unit of cybernetic control is the negative feedback loop, which acts to eliminate discrepancies between the environment and relevant reference criteria.
Cybernetic principles have been applied to general theories of human behavior , and an approach based on cybernetics may help move us beyond being able to offer only general guidelines for predicting reference level selection, and ultimately decisions.
The group studied here was composed of seasoned experts, each with a distinct role to play within the group, who were dealing with an issue of great importance.
This case study of one such group illustrates how prospect theory can help yield an understanding of group decision processes.
In this study, we have documented the use of the reference point and its effects on decision making, illustrated the origins of the reference point, and suggested a number of determinants of the reference point, some of which are unique to group decision making.
Although the generalizability of these findings is an open question, this analysis suggests the need for more theoretical and empirical work integrating theories of individual and group decision making under uncertainty.
Such efforts will shed light on the act of making complex choices and suggest means by which high-quality decision making can be achieved.
Chupters in the history of the American industrialetiterprise, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962.
Selected examples, 1950-1990’, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 52 , 3-38.
Sequential voting pattern, timing, and local majorities’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55 ( 1988j, 9 1 8-926.
R ’Status quo bias in decision making’, Jotirnal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1 , 7-59.
