The realization of a nuclear missile threat within 90 miles of the United States escalated into a thirteen-day siege of Cuba and brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
The following documents lead us through the decision making process in Washington and in Moscow that accelerated the United States toward nuclear war.
In both cases irrational fears, misunderstanding of intent, and the overwhelming protection of self-image play a role.
However, in the end independent cooperation succeeded as the United States and the Soviet Union both realized the stakes in Cuba were not worth a nuclear war.
It quickly becomes apparent that the discussion of Khrushchev's motives is clouded by our judgement that Soviet actions are always taken unilaterally to further solely Soviet interests.
The conversation about motives revolves around Berlin and Turkey and using Cuba as leverage in those or other locations.
When the the discussion turns to responses it is clear that having Soviet missiles in Cuba is unacceptable United States policy makers were willing take any risk necessary to remove them.
Just as the Soviets saw Eastern Europe as a non-negotiable strategic area so we saw Cuba.
Uh, they, uh, seemed to be denying that they were going to establish bases of their own with a Soviet base, thus making it Cuban point of view.
Now, um, I do think we have to set in motion a chain of events that will eliminate this base.
Um, so I think we, we have to think very hard about two major, uh, courses of action as alternatives.
Uh, or we're going to decide that this is the time to eliminate the Cuban problem by actually eliminating the island.The other would be, if we have a few days—from the military point of view, if we have the whole time—uh, then I would think that, uh, there would be another course of action, a combination of things that, uh, we might wish to consider.
Um, first, uh, that we, uh, stimulate the OAS procedure immediately for prompt action to make it quite clear that the entire hemisphere considers that the Rio Pact has been violated what acts should in, under the terms of the Rio Pact.
I naturally need to think about this very hard for the next several hours, uh, what I and what my colleagues at the State Department can do about it.But before commenting on either the unknowns or outlining some military alternatives, there are two propositions I would suggest that we ought to accept as, uh, foundations for our further thinking.
Because, if they become operational before the air strike, I do not believe we can state we can knock them out before they can be launched; and if they're launched there is almost certain to be, uh, chaos in part of the east coast or the area, uh, in a radius of six hundred to a thousand miles from Cuba.Uh, secondly, I, I would submit the proposition that any air strike must be directed not solely against the missile sites, but against the missile sites plus the airfields plus the aircraft which may not be on the airfields but hidden by that time plus all potential nuclear storage sites.
Still, about why the Soviets are doing this, um, Mr McCone suggested some weeks ago that one thing Mr Khrushchev may have in mind is that, uh, uh, he knows that we have a substantial nuclear superiority, but he also knows that we don't really live under fear of his nuclear weapons to the extent that, uh, he has to live under fear of ours.
Um, for the first time, I'm beginning really to wonder whether maybe Mr Khrushchev is entirely rational about Berlin.
What you're really talking about are two or three different, uh, operations.
One, the second is the broader one that Secretary McNamara was talking about, which is on the airfields and on the SAM sites and on anything else connected with, uh, missiles.
Third is doing both of those things and also at the same time launching a blockade, which requires really the, uh, the, uh, third and which is a larger step.
And then, as I take it, the fourth question is the, uh, degree of consultation.
I would say that, uh, you're dropping bombs all over Cuba if you do the second, uh, air, the airports, knocking out their planes, dropping it on all their missiles.
Yeah.RFK: … and, uh, and then, uh, you know, the heat, you're going to announce the reason that you're doing it is because, uh, they're sending in these kind of missiles.
Well, I would think it's almost incumbent upon the Russians, then, to say, Well, we're going to send them in again, and if you do it again, we're going to do, we're going to do the same thing to Turkey, or We're going to do the same thing to Iran.Analysis Questions:1.
Those present at the meeting seemed baffled by why Khrushchev would take such a risk when it does very little strategically to change the balance of power of arms.
Not so much.McNamara: And, and I think this is an important element here.
Mr McCone's reasoning, however, was if this is so, then what possible reason have they got for going into Cuba in the manner in which they are with surface-to-air, uh, missiles and cruise-type missiles.
You're quite right in saying that these, these are just a few more missiles, uh, targeted on the United States.
Well, I ask the question …Taylor: Yeah.Bundy: … with an awareness of the political …JFK: I will say, my understanding's that let's just say that, uh, they get, they get these in there and then you can't, uh, they get sufficient capacity so we can't, uh, with warheads.
We'd have to target them with our missiles and have the same kind of, of pistol-pointed-at-the-head situation as we have in the Soviet Union at the present time.Bundy: No question, if this thing goes on, an attack on Cuba becomes general war.
Well, there are several, several possible …JFK: … Berlin, he's been cautious, I mean, he hasn't been, uh …Ball?: Several possibilities, Mr President.
I'm sure his generals have been telling him for a year and a half that he had, was missing a golden opportunity to add to his strategic capability.Ball?: Yes, I think, I think you, you look at this possibility that this is an attempt to, to add to his strategic capabilities.
A second consideration is that it is simply a trading ploy, that he, he wants this in so that he could, he could …Analysis Questions:1.
The American policy makers in these meetings understood that a few missiles in Cubs would not strategically change the balance of power in the Cold War.
However, here too, fear plays a role in the decisions that would follow.
ICIPHERED TELEGRAMOn the night of October 26, Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin.
Dobrynin met with RFK and then relayed Kennedy's message in a cable back to Moscow.
Kennedy's message hinted at the potential of JFK losing control to the war hawks or to circumstances in which case general war would become unavoidable.
Whether this was a fear tactic or a recognition of the true nature of the situation is unclear.
What is clear was that JFK acknowledged that Cuban security was important to the Soviets and that he was willing to guarantee it as a solution to the present situation.
Kennedy also laid out a plan for a secret removal of the missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy's proposal recognized the true goals of United States and Soviet policy and finds a path that satisfies both by highlighting the risks if an agreement cannot be found.Late tonight R Kennedy invited me to come see him.
We talked alone.The Cuban crisis, R Kennedy began, continues to quickly worsen.
If that is the only obstacle to achieving the regulation I mentioned earlier, then the president doesn't see any unsurmountable difficulties in resolving this issue,"" replied R Kennedy.
I noted that it went without saying that the Soviet government would not accept any ultimatums and it was good that the American government realized that.
In this regard, R Kennedy gave me a number of a direct telephone line to the White House.In the course of the conversation, R Kennedy noted that he knew about the conversation that television commentator Scali had yesterday with an Embassy adviser on possible ways to regulate the Cuban conflict I should say that during our meeting R Kennedy was very upset; in any case, I've never seen him like this before.
Both Khrushchev and Kennedy came to understand that their goals in Cuba were not worth the potential costs and that the risk of events spiraling out of control was quite real.
In the following letter to JFK Khrushchev identified the shared desires and areas of shared focus that could benefit the world.
He went on to chide Kennedy for being hypocritical for claiming that Soviet missiles in Cuba are too great of a threat to United States security while maintaining missile bases in Turkey.
In the end Khrushchev, promised that if his initial goal of Cuban security was guaranteed, he would be willing to remove the missiles in Cuba provided the United States does the same in Turkey.
This Hurts Me More Than It Hurts You﻿Published in The Hartford Times, October 30, 1962﻿ Analysis Questions:1.
In history, periods of stagnation are often followed by periods of rapid change.
JFK was elected in part by a population that was no longer content with the status quo.
People wanted progress instead of an intense standoff and mere containment.
However, the end result was that each side better understood each other and realized that misunderstandings and a lack of communication could escalate into a general war even if the root cause could not justify a nuclear war to any of the parties involved.
In the following letter Kennedy pushed Khrushchev to do more to reduce tension in Cuba while promising to protect Soviet ships from private attacks.
It has been some time since I have written you directly, and I think it may be helpful to have some exchange of views in this private channel.
As we have both earlier agreed, it is of great importance that we should try to understand each other clearly, so that we can avoid unnecessary dangers or obstacles to progress in the effort for peaceful agreements.Although together we found workable arrangements for ending the very dangerous crisis which was created when strategic weapons were introduced into Cuba last year, I am sure we can agree that the situation in that island is not yet satisfactory or reassuring to those who care for the peace of the Caribbean.
Although the recent withdrawal of a number of your forces has been an important contribution to the reduction of tension, the continued presence of Soviet forces in Cuba can never be regarded with equanimity by the people of this Hemisphere and therefore further withdrawals of such forces can only be helpful.Meanwhile, we on our side have been endeavoring to reduce tension in this area in a number of ways.
For example, the fundamental justification of our practice of peaceful observation of Cuba is precisely that it is necessary to prevent further increase in tension and a repetition of the dangers of last fall.
Without such peaceful observation in 1962, this Hemisphere would have been confronted with intolerable danger, and the people of the Hemisphere could not now accept a situation in which they were without adequate information on the situation in Cuba.
It is for this reason that this peaceful observation must continue, and that any interference with it from Cuba would necessarily evoke whatever response was necessary to retain it.We are also aware of the tensions unduly created by recent private attacks on your ships in Caribbean waters; and we are taking action to halt those attacks which are in violation of our laws, and obtaining the support of the British Government in preventing the use of their Caribbean islands for this purpose.
The efforts of this Government to reduce tensions have, as you know, aroused much criticism from certain quarters in this country.
But neither such criticism nor the opposition of any sector of our society will be allowed to determine the polices of this Government.
In particular, I have neither the intention nor the desire to invade Cuba; I consider that it is for the Cuban people themselves to decide their destiny.
I am determined to continue with policies which will contribute to peace in the Caribbean.Analysis Questions:1.
