It’s now clear that the drama held challenges of diplomatic strategy and political calculation far more complex than the military reckoning of what was actually at stake.
Indeed, at one point as the crisis unfolded, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara asserted that Moscow’s placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba would have no effect, none “at all,” on the strategic balance of power with the Soviet Union.
Kennedy was “obsessed” with appearances, Vidal wrote, a man “compulsively given to emphasizing, often with great charm, the division” between how things looked—or could be made to look—and how they really were.
Kennedy’s intense interest in appearances was only natural, for his very attractive political persona very much depended on certain appearances that were at some variance from reality.
The Kennedy whom Americans came to know when he ran for president in 1960 was an avowed liberal, but one who had been a war hero and—in unspoken contrast with the liberal champion, Adlai Stevenson—gave the impression that he would be suitably tough as president.
A student of history, he had a Pulitzer Prize–winning book, Profiles in Courage, to his credit.
Movie-star handsome, he had a beautiful, intelligent wife and one child, with another on the way—the apotheosis of the happy American family.
In the decades after Kennedy’s assassination, Americans learned more about who he really was.
Far from being healthy and vigorous, he had Addison’s disease, severe back pain, and other ailments; only powerful drugs allowed him to simulate good health.
Far from the ideal family man, he was in reality a compulsive womanizer whose tawdry liaisons endangered his presidency.
And though he was the superintending author of Profiles in Courage, he was not the writer of it , as Herbert S Parmet showed in Jack.
Through various errors of his own making, Kennedy himself helped to bring on the collision—the ramming of his nimble little PT boat by a big Japanese destroyer—that subsequently called forth his acts of genuine heroism.
The cultivation of illusions, in other words, was part and parcel of Kennedy’s political success.
Reading several excellent accounts of those famous thirteen days in the fall of 1962, I was struck by the way illusory appearances serve as a leitmotif in the crisis from its very beginning, when the presence of Soviet missiles “ninety miles from our shore” was discovered, to its end, when JFK emerged a triumphant hero, the embodiment of toughness and cool intelligence under pressure.
The run-up to the missile crisis involved some illusions conjured up, perhaps cynically, for political gain.
During the 1960 campaign, Kennedy had charged—falsely—that the Eisenhower administration had allowed a “missile gap” to develop that favored the Soviet Union.
In fact, there was a vast missile gap—but it favored the United States, which had four times as many intercontinental ballistic missiles as its rival superpower.
Still, the Soviets had plenty of medium-range ballistic missiles , with a reach of 1,000-plus miles, targeted on Europe, and once some of these were redeployed to Cuba, as journalist-historian Michael Dobbs observes in One Minute to Midnight , they were “magically transformed into strategic weapons,” able to hit United States territory.
Even so, the United States remained in an overwhelmingly superior position militarily, more than sufficient to withstand a Soviet first strike and still devastate the Soviet Union—which was Robert McNamara’s point.
But if the nuclear missiles in Cuba would add little to the already existing threat posed by ICBMs based in the Soviet Union, their presence surely would loom large in the minds of Americans.
The appearance, illusory but unavoidable, that the missiles made a significant strategic difference would enhance the Soviet Union’s political position in the world and strengthen Cuban leader Fidel Castro’s efforts to export communism to other nations in the region—which was Kennedy’s point.
Unbeknownst to him, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had already ordered placement of the missiles.
Yet politically there was no escaping the fact that the missiles appeared to make a big difference.
Doing nothing in response to Khrushchev’s stealthy maneuver was never a realistic option.
At their June 1961 summit meeting in Vienna, he had given Khrushchev the impression of weakness, confirming a suspicion induced by the failed invasion at Cuba’s Bay of Pigs in April.
Furthermore, Kennedy had angered the Soviet leader with his determined efforts to get rid of the Castro regime.
In his mind, the missiles in Cuba were not meant to be used, but rather were “defensive,” deployed in order to ward off an American invasion and to marginally reduce the Soviet missile gap.
He planned to unveil their presence after United States congressional elections in November; Kennedy, he thought, would accept it as a fait accompli, just as the Kremlin had tolerated, however resentfully, the presence of United States nuclear missiles in Turkey.
Compounding the mistake, he lacked a plan for what to do if the Americans discovered them first.
When the missiles and sites were detected, Kennedy and his advisers viewed Khrushchev’s secret move as unprovoked aggression, and were especially angry about the deceit involved.
Ironically, Stern suggests, had Khrushchev taken Castro’s advice and openly deployed the missiles “as a legitimate act of bilateral diplomacy ,” Kennedy would have found the deployment far more difficult to thwart.
In the event, Kennedy exposed the secret ploy and announced the blockade of ships heading for Cuba in a television address to the nation on Monday, October 22.
After he spoke, Americans felt for the first time that nuclear war was more than just an abstract possibility.
I was a junior at Brown that fall, and I recall the quiet dread evident everywhere I went in Providence.
This was the day when Fidel Castro urged Khrushchev to use his nuclear weapons, and when the Kennedy brothers secretly offered to get rid of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for a Soviet withdrawal of the offensive weapons from Cuba.
Any one of these incidents could have led to a nuclear exchange between the two superpowers.
Kennedy and his advisers strained to discern the intentions, and anticipate the responses, of the other side.
The next morning, Saturday, the Americans learned that, according to United States photo interpreters, most of the MRBM sites on Cuba were now fully operational.
They had to assume that nuclear warheads for the missiles were available.
Soon thereafter, via the news media, came a puzzling report that Khrushchev was sending another letter to Kennedy, this one offering removal of the weapons if the United States withdrew its missiles from Turkey.
NATO had put the Jupiter missiles in Turkey to serve as a “nuclear trip wire, linking the security of Turkey and other NATO countries irrevocably to the security of the United States,” Dobbs explains.
Though the missiles had been installed only recently, they were already obsolete.
The Jupiters’ deficiencies were not news to Khrushchev, according to Fursenko and Naftali.
He knew from KGB sources that NATO had little confidence in the missiles’ deterrent value and that they were expected to be replaced before long with Polaris subs.
In Moscow as in the West, illusory appearances sometimes had their advantages.
That same illusion and its political and diplomatic consequences weighed heavily on Kennedy’s advisers.
Though the Jupiter missiles were militarily useless, McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy’s national security adviser, warned that removing them now, in the middle of the Cuban crisis, would spark outrage among the NATO allies.
Instead, Bundy suggested—he was the first to do so, despite Robert Kennedy’s later attempt to take credit—that the United States answer Khrushchev’s Friday night letter calling for a no-invasion pledge, and ignore his Saturday proposal.
Though the quarantine had been effective—the Soviet ships had turned around—it could not get rid of the missiles already in Cuba, he pointed out.
And if the United States attacked Cuba, and Khrushchev retaliated with an attack on Turkey or Berlin, the NATO allies’ perception of a Cuba-Turkey trade would change dramatically, Kennedy said.
And so, in his written response to Khrushchev, Kennedy followed Bundy’s stratagem—but added a nod to the Cuba-Turkey deal.
As the ExComm meeting broke up, Kennedy invited a select group of eight advisers—including McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and Bundy—into the Oval Office to consider what Robert Kennedy, who was to deliver the formal letter to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, should say to him.
But JFK also wanted his brother to say more to Dobrynin about a Cuba-Turkey trade.
Rusk suggested that Bobby say that there could be no public deal, but assure Dobrynin privately that the president would withdraw the Jupiters soon after the Cuban crisis was resolved.
However, if the Soviets made any reference to this assurance in public, it would be null and void.
Rusk’s suggestion dissolved the conflict between the illusory appearance of betraying a NATO ally and the reality that the missiles in Turkey were hardly worth the risk of nuclear war.
All present agreed to tell no one about the confidential assurance being offered to Khrushchev.
Rusk would arrange it so that if Khrushchev rejected Kennedy’s terms, United Nations Secretary-General U Thant would publicly call for the two superpowers to remove their missiles from Cuba and Turkey.
Khrushchev’s acceptance of Kennedy’s offer the next morning, Sunday, October 28, obviated the need for JFK’s secret back-up plan.
Worried that a United States invasion was in the offing, the Soviet premier had decided to accept Kennedy’s offer of a no-invasion pledge in return for removal of the Cuba missiles even before he received word of Robert Kennedy’s private assurance on the Turkish missiles.
Behind the scenes, both Khrushchev and Kennedy had been looking for a way out.
That appraisal goes too far in rehabilitating Khrushchev—a henchman of Stalin’s, after all, complicit in his murderous crimes.
Still, humanity remains in Khrushchev’s debt for backing down from his rash scheme.
As for Kennedy, he emerged from the ordeal with his reputation greatly enhanced—and rightly so.
The day after the crisis ended, Kennedy, ever conscious of appearances, told Schlesinger he feared people would wrongly conclude that in dealing with the Russians, sheer toughness sufficed.
Yet his enhanced reputation for being tough with the Russians was politically useful, and he intended to use it—and not merely to help him win reelection in 1964.
Kennedy worried that his ability to attempt such an overture would be damaged if Americans discovered the secret deal he had made on the Turkish missiles.
So when rumors surfaced in influential circles that there had been a Cuba-Turkey trade, he acted to squelch them, according to Naftali and Fursenko, by contriving to blame them on his United Nations ambassador, Adlai Stevenson.
This charge—which Kennedy, who had read the article before publication, let stand—was grossly unfair to Stevenson.
The article caused a stir, embarrassed Stevenson, and—in a fitting coda to this game of shadows—it achieved Kennedy’s purpose, quashing rumors of a secret trade while preserving the illusory but useful appearance that in the moment of supreme crisis, the president had simply been tough.
