Michael Cassidy of African Enterprise at the Fuller Theological Seminary's celebration of the new school year on September 23 at First United Methodist Church on Colorado Boulevard.
Cassidy, a 1963 graduate, was awarded a Distinguished Alumnus Award at the Fuller service in recognition of his leadership of African Enterprise , an evangelistic and mission agency which he launched during his student days here in 1961.
Now AE is at work in ten nations across Africa practicing ""multilevel evangelism"" in Africa's cities and making inroads into Africa's challenging social problems while preaching the gospel.
Tom Brokaw African Harvest Prime-Time Widows, orphans, street children and those who have been Reconciling sexually exploited in countries such as Rwanda, Burundi, Ghana, Kenya and Zimbabwe are given job training and counseling to D uring his 2012 Olympic report Tom Brokaw highlighted the story of Mike help make them effective in leading their nations in the future.
On October 2 Fuller's Dean of Intercultural Studies reported that in 1965 there were twice as many Muslims as Christians Logan, who had survived the across Africa.
Today, he said, the numbers stand at catastrophic Nazi air raid on 380,000,000 Christians and 320,000,000 Muslims.
It is the Coventry in September 1940. efforts of groups such as African Enterprise that have made a Mike was orphaned as a result difference.
AE has been a pioneer in training African missionaries and only in 2011 did he get to in their home areas through the help of local church bodies. visit another site of air-borne That's why their staff stays small while their efforts reach from tragedy, Dresden, in southtop to bottom across the continent. eastern Germany.
Christian of the Minister of Such stories take us to the Telecommunications in highest levels of reconciliation. the new nation of Souther n Sudan.
Dear Mr Curtis May, A nthony Kevin ""Tony"" Dungy is a former professional American football player Thanks a million times at least for your September 2012 letter to the reconciler family.
He was head seeing the pictures of the lovely McCollough family. coach of the Tampa Bay Mariah Thompson Buccaneers from 1996 to Inglewood, CA Curtis May, publisher 2001 and head coach of the Indianapolis Colts from 2002 Dear Curtis, to 2008.
Tony is a devout Christian who openly confesses Marilyn & Barry Fall his faith in God and prays publicly.
Another hallChandler, AZ mark of his life is his love for and emphasis on family.
He was taught from early childhood Hi Curtis, the value of a good Thank you for your wonderful book, Mending education and good decision making.
Ben Carson Sr. said about Tony: ""In today's world where sports figures and movie stars are idolATimeToReconcile.org ized, Tony Dungy is a true hero because his life is a testimony to the fact if you 'do your best and let God do the rest,' not only will success follow, but your life will have a positive impact on others.
Ste.-C #108 ""Tony Dungy's life is a living testimony of a man's Banning, CA 92220 faith in God.
Where It’s Working flict without fear, to P eter McGuire was once a ""career terrorist"" for Photo courtesy www.sfpeace.org a Protestant paramilitary organization in see them as opportuNorthern Ireland.
Joe Doherty is a former IRA nities, to react conmember who had spent 20 years in prison for structively."" murder.
Gleich and his colToday, in their forties, they work with at-risk leagues know that youth convincing the next generation to shun the the standard cliché paramilitary recruiters lurking among the unemsolutions of sympathy School for Peace and understanding ployed.
They are helping the Irish peace accords take hold at the grassroots. don't always work.
Nava Sonnenschein of the On the partitioned Mediterranean island of School for Peace, located west of Jerusalem, Cyprus, two teachers, Ulus, a Turk, and Nicos, a knows that honest dialogue and encounter is Greek Cypriot, utilize youth's love for soccer as a sometimes necessary to dig through the ""archaefocal point for cultural exchanges and viewing ology of revenge"" in this region.
Only when the the other side as human. structural problems stemming from economics In the 1980s Yoshioka Tatsuya of Japan was and politics have been addressed can meaningPhoto courtesy www.japantoday.com pressed in spirit about the atrocities inflicted by ful one-on-one dialogue take place. his nation on the Korean To date, more than 35,000 students have been peninsula during the World trained in peace activism at the School for Peace.
Japanese Yes, the ruffled dove of peace still flies. school texts ignored the realities.
Through a project Thinking Local known as Peace Boat he brought Japanese and Gleich notes that the peacemaking vision must Yoshioka Tatsuya South Korean youth together go beyond the needs of the present. to share humanitarian missions and to study Unpredictable events are to be expected and conflict resolution. grass-roots, individual initiatives usually outlast official government policies.
Narasingham was a Tamil who left his home in northern Sri Sturdy Optimism Lanka when a long and bloody civil war broke These and other efforts around the world are out in 1982.
Returning to a region ravaged by reported on regularly by The Institute for Peace civil war, Narasingham began to build houses for Education in Tubingen, Germany.
The Institute's war widows and orphans, first ten, then 65, then efforts are rooted in hard-edged reality.
Then know that war is a much more attractive scoop came a school for the deaf, a center for street for journalists. children and an organic farm, plus relief to Yet they stress optimism.
This is ""micropossess substantial experience in peacemaking peacemaking"" and it tends to last because it we wouldn't exist,"" says Michael Gleich in ""How to builds from the ground up.
No culture on earth is without program that ORM and Reconcile have been forms of diplomacy and appeasement... rituals of applauding and promoting in recent years.
To benefit from them we must give peace is possible and deeply rooted patterns of our best.
We need awareness, self-knowledge, negativism and conflict can be turned around empathy and rhetorical talent to approach conworldwide.
Bush was urged by vociferous members of both The Soviets' reckless act 90 miles off American political parties to stand up and ""declare victory in the shores forced President John F Kennedy's (1961Cold War,"" or at least send overt aid to the other 1963) hand.
President ruled out both air strikes and invasion, But the President remembered how earlier reform fearing what the escalation could imply. movements had been crushed in Eastern Europe.
On The President's October 22, 1962, televised address October 23, 1989, he wrote the West German calling for a blockade of all Soviet ships bound for government, then in tense negotiations with their Cuba initiated the week the world held its breath.
But opposite numbers in the East. it gave time for Russian leaders to think about their ""We are trying to react very cautiously and carefulactions, and gave them time to save face. ly to change in East Germany,"" he wrote the German ""A Soft Answer"" President.
In 1991 he and morning a much sterner note arrived from Moscow. the Soviet leader Mikhail This second letter provoked renewed consternation.
Arms Reduction Treaty On Saturday night, October 28, Radio Moscow trimmed the superannounced the dismantling of the missiles.
