Location Trinity and Beyond Chronology of First Five Nations With Nuclear Weapons 1945 July 16 United States United States explodes the.
Soviet Union detonates its first atomic bomb, Joe 1, at Semipalatinsk in Kazakhstan.
Its a copy of the Fat Man bomb and had a yield of 21 kilotons October 3 UK First British atomic bomb, Hurricane, was tested at Monte Bello Islands, Australia, with a yield of 25 kilotons February 13 FRANCE First French nuclear test occurs at Reganne, Algeria, in the Sahara Desert.Gerboise Bleue had a yield of kilotons.
Close the Missile Gap Currently far behind United States in terms of number of missiles Verbal threats no longer effective with overwhelming evidence of United States superiority 2.
Reciprocity The United States has missiles pointing at us, lets see how they feel now 4.
Negotiate – United States should offer the Soviet Union a deal. – USSR remove missiles in Cuba United States withdraw her nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy.
Negotiate \u2013 United States should offer the Soviet Union a deal. \u2013 USSR remove missiles in Cuba United States withdraw her nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy.
Considerations."", ""width"": ""800"" } 27 Invasion – Send United States troops to Cuba to overthrow Castro's government. – Missiles could then be put out of action and the Soviet Union could no longer use Cuba as a military base.
Nuclear Weapons \u2013 Use nuclear weapons against Cuba and\/or the Soviet Union.
PRISONERS RELEASED The 1,113 prisoners captured during the Bay of Pigs invasion were exchanged by Castro for $50 million in food, drugs, medicine and cash.
USSR RESOLVE The Soviet Union became determined to have a nuclear capability that was equal to the United States.
United States RESOLVE The United States became convinced that the Soviet Union would not go to war over another communist country.
It has been argued that this encouraged the United States to help attempts to overthrow socialist and communist governments in Vietnam, Nicaragua and Grenada.
Were Castro and Khrushchev justified in placing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
If Venezuela began receiving nuclear warheads and missile shipments , what would you recommend as an effective response.
The United States and Latin America 1823 Monroe Doctrine Monroe Doctrine – The United States wishing to prevent any foreign power becoming.
PowerPoint by Mr Hataway Created February 26, 2003 Revised March 16, 2011 JFK and the Cold War.
Khrushchev makes veiled references to a plot (How would the United States feel.
