Less explicit acknowledgment has been given to the successful detection and identification of the missiles in Cuba that permitted the American leadership to take the initiative in moving to obtain their removal.
Yet these are far from the only important issues with respect to the role of United States intelligence in the crisis.
Moreover, although the fact that an erroneous estimate was made shortly before the discovery of the missiles has been known for many years, far too little attention has been given to the underlying reasons for that failure.
Also, although there has been criticism of delays in reconnaissance flights that might have made possible earlier discovery of the missiles, it was evident that intelligence did identify the missiles in sufficient time to allow successful American initiative and action to compel their withdrawal.
There remain, however, other questions with respect to performance, in particular shortcomings in identification of other significant Soviet military elements sent to Cuba, including but not limited to a substantial arsenal of tactical nuclear weapons.
These shortcomings were not, however, known for many years, indeed not until more complete disclosures of the actual Soviet deployments had been made by Russian sources, and partial access to Soviet archives was granted, beginning in the early 1990s.
A second and even more important purpose is to clarify why errors or shortcomings occurred in United States intelligence collection, analysis, and estimative assessments.
United States INTELLIGENCE 19 A third purpose is to consider the impact on the crisis if more full and accurate intelligence had been available.
The usual assumption is, and probably should be, that more and better intelligence provides the basis for better policy and better historical outcomes yet, as we shall see, in this case more information would have made the crisis more difficult to resolve, if indeed not intractable.
Finally, it may be useful to see if one can generalize any lessons from American experience in the crisis on the relationship between intelligence and policy.
THE United States INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY It may be useful at the outset to describe briefly the organization and process of intelligence in the United States government at the time.
The 'intelligence community', as it is called, comprised several independent agencies apart from the Central Intelligence Agency , the director of which is also the Director of Central Intelligence with a loose coordinating role with respect to the community.
The largest elements by far are several military organizations under the Department of Defense.
The Defense Intelligence Agency had only been created about a year before the crisis.
If any USIB members dissented from the final NIE as approved by USIB and issued by the DCI, they could include a footnote of dissent in the Estimate.
Such dissents were not uncommon, but there were none in any of the SNIEs relating to the Cuban missile crisis.
Various technical committees of the USIB members dealing with such subjects as overhead reconnaissance, and nuclear and missile programs in 20 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS the USSR, and other intelligence organizations such as CIA's National Photographic Intelligence Center , played an important part in providing intelligence support to USIB, the DCI, and ultimately the President and his advisers on the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , a new body created during the crisis.
Intelligence collection included espionage and other forms of human intelligence of which the systematic debriefing of refugees from Cuba by a joint CIA-military processing facility in Opa-Locka, Florida, was the most important.However, no CIA agents in Cuba or the Soviet Union were able to provide firm evidence of the Soviet missile deployment.
Some information was received from other Western intelligence organizations.
The United States military intelligence agencies tracked the Soviet arms shipping to Cuba.
Finally, aerial reconnaissance around and over Cuba by CIA until October 1962, and thereafter by United States Air Force and United States Navy aircraft, was the most important direct means of monitoring the military buildup in Cuba, including the discovery and the monitoring of the construction of missile bases.
Satellite photographic reconnaissance was not directed against Cuba in 1962.
Intelligence organizations of the armed forces including the staff of the Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic who was given overall responsibility not only for operation of the quarantine, but also for the entire US military buildup for contingent intervention in Cuba by air strikes and invasion were of course engaged in intelligence support of military implementation of policy in the field.
COLLECTION, ANALYSES, AND ESTIMATES A Special National Intelligence Estimate on ""The Military Buildup in Cuba' was issued on 19 September 1962.
Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone United States INTELLIGENCE 21 was not in Washington when the SNIE was issued, and although his divergent view was known, the Acting Director, Lieutenant General Marshall S Carter, and the other chiefs of the intelligence community approved the estimate without any dissent.
Nonetheless, while it is clear that in this case the American estimators had a better grasp of what would serve Soviet interests than did Khrushchev, the task of course was to estimate what in fact the Soviet Union would do, and the estimate was wrong.
It is, however, more difficult to say what would have been the correct estimate for the United States intelligence community to have made in September 1962.
There was insufficient evidence to justify a conclusion that Soviet missiles would be placed in Cuba.
In the absence of clear evidence of deployment, the estimate had to rest on an assessment of Soviet intentions, and the past record tended to support the conclusion that the Soviet leaders would not deploy strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba.
In retrospect, taking account of what was and was not then known, the SNIE probably should have concluded that the Soviet leaders probably would not place nuclear missiles in Cuba.
At the same time, however, it should have given more weight and attention to the possibility that they would do so.
President John F Kennedy's public statements of 4 and 13 September stated, correctly, that the United States had no evidence of the deployment of strategic missiles in Cuba.
His further statements of policy that such deployment, if it were to occur, would have 'the gravest consequences' were made before the SNIE was written, but were consonant with the general consensus reflected in the estimate that the Soviet leaders probably would not take that step.
The statements were intended in part to reassure the American public, but also to warn the Soviet leaders.
While the president might have been less categorical if he had believed the chances of such deployment were greater, he would still have wanted to warn the Soviet leaders with the aim of deterring them from taking such an action.
A more open-ended and cautionary SNIE would have made no essential difference.
In order to be an effective warning to the Soviet leaders, a firm statement of the United States position should have preceded the Soviet decision.
An intelligence alert to the possibility would have to have been made in the spring of 1962, before the decision was made in Moscow in May and June.
In retrospect, that should have been done; it would at least have forced the Soviet leaders to weigh more carefully the risks of their action, and might have led them to refrain from including strategic mediumand intermediate-range nuclear armed missiles in the military contingent they were contemplating dispatching to Cuba.
In the early spring of 1962, however, there not only was no evidence of possible Soviet deployment of missiles to Cuba, there could not have been, inasmuch as no one had even posed the matter in Moscow.
To be sure, the potential military and political value to the Soviet Union of placing such weapons in Cuba could have been given attention.
But in March-April 1962 the likelihood of such a Soviet action was seen as very low.
Castro in March had moved to purge key old Moscow-line communist leaders from his regime, and some in the United States intelligence community saw this as causing a significant rift in Cuban-Soviet relations.
The evidence before July 1962 thus tended to support an estimate that a major Soviet military buildup in Cuba was not likely.
MONITORING THE SOVIET BUILDUP IN CUBA Most criticisms of United States intelligence have centered on the disinclination (with individual exceptions, notably DCI McCone) to recognize a greater likelihood of Soviet deployment of missiles when it became apparent from July into October that a major buildup of other arms was underway.
McCone tied his own hunch to the appearance after late August of a network of surface-to-air anti-aircraft missile complexes, although there was no necessary relationship.
In fact, we now know that Castro had sought such air defense missiles as early as September 1961, and the decision in Moscow to send them was made in April 1962, more than a month before the idea of sending Soviet nuclear-armed medium range missiles was considered and decided upon by the Soviet leadership.
The overall buildup of weapons delivery to Cuba that began in July 1962 was detected in a timely way and reported, and indeed it led to President Kennedy's public warnings of 4 and 13 September.
There were reports from agents on the island and especially from refugees interviewed after leaving Cuba of suspicious military, including possible missile, activities in Cuba.
Only in late September and early October were a United States INTELLIGENCE 23 few reports from Opa-Locka received in Washington that, in retrospect, probably were valid sightings of the medium-range missiles but that could not be determined at the time.
Other bits of intelligence were noted that could not alone be credited but, along with suspicions by McCone and others, did lead to continuing efforts above all in aerial reconnaissance.
Some ambiguous or equivocal intelligence indications in September-October were noted but did not command as much attention as, in hindsight, they should have.
After the missiles were discovered, in retrospect it was recognized that these particular ships had undoubtedly brought in the missiles in early to mid-September.
The most significant report was one received from a recently arrived refugee in Cuba in mid-September, processed at Opa-Locka.
The refugee had personally seen a convoy of SS-4 missiles near Havana on 12 September, accurately describing and readily identifying the SS-4 among missile photographs he was shown.
In retrospect, these were evidently SS-4 missiles unloaded from the Omsk, the first Soviet ship carrying the missiles to arrive in Cuba, on 9 September.
The screening center sent its report immediately, and it was received by key analysts on 21 September, with general distribution on 27 September.
DIA analysts evaluated it as 'potentially significant', although not in itself sufficient to reach a firm conclusion.
Both CIA and DIA analysts then took seriously the possibility of SS-4 missiles in Cuba.
Coupled with suspicions in DIA as to the pattern of SA-2 surface-toair missile sites in Western Cuba, and some other unconfirmed reports, these reports directly contributed to targeting the area around San Cristobal in Pinar del Rio province.
On 3 October the San Cristobal area was given top priority for attention.
The interagency Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance , in meetings on 4 and 9 October, agreed to fly U-2 reconnaissance over that area as soon as weather permitted.
On 14 October a U-2 photographed the first MRBM sites under construction at San Cristobal.
First, Secretary of State Dean Rusk was greatly concerned after 10 September about the consequences if a U-2 were shot down over Cuba (as one just had been over China) and had requested peripheral flights with slant photography.
The second reason was that the weather was very bad during most of September and the first half of October, causing many planned flights to be canceled or postponed.
Even those flights that were flown in this period were largely unproductive, owing to bad weather.
In addition during this period there was a transfer of responsibility for such flights from the CIA to the United States Air Force, although that transfer did not cause any delay in flights.
At best, however, the missile sites would only have been discovered a few weeks earlier; indeed, coverage in September in most cases would have shown nothing yet identifiable as missile site construction.
Discovery a week or two earlier in October (when weather caused delay) would not have changed the situation faced by the President and his advisers.
ASSESSING SOVIET MOTIVES The real shortcoming in the intelligence estimative process was not owing to flaws in intelligence collection, or analysis, but in assessments of Soviet intentions and motivations for placing missiles in Cuba.
Judgments by historians as well as surviving Russian participants in the events vary on the relative weight of these considerations in the Soviet decision.
What is clear is that assessments by President Kennedy and his advisers, including Director of Central Intelligence McCone, and the National Intelligence Estimates placed greatest weight on Khrushchev's desire to enhance the Soviet position in the strategic balance and strengthen the Soviet global political position.
Intelligence analysts in CIA also initially gave attention to the factor of United States INTELLIGENCE 25 deterring an American attack on Cuba, but this consideration was almost entirely absent from the coordinated National Intelligence Estimates and from the discussions by policy makers and senior advisers in the ExComm.
In the actual discussions in the ExComm, however, McCone emphasized the latter objective and in available records never mentioned the former.
Most discussion in the ExComm centered on the theme that Khrushchev was probably seeking to bolster his stance both militarily and politically.
For the President and most of his advisers the central concern was a renewed Soviet push to eject the West from Berlin, and they believed this to be Khrushchev's principal motivation.
Hence the consensus from the outset that the United States must stand firm and, one way or another, get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
Two Special National Intelligence Estimates were prepared after discovery of the missile deployment, on 19 and 20 October, to aid policy makers in gauging probable Soviet reactions to the alternative American actions being weighed in the ExComm.
These estimates also provided the first occasions for the intelligence community to assess the Soviet motivations in placing the missiles in Cuba.
The second estimate also stated more strongly than had the first the likelihood of a further continuing missile buildup if the United States acquiesced.
In the first ExComm meetings, on 16 October, several participants referred, but almost in passing, to the inadequacy of Soviet intercontinental missile forces as a likely motivation.
Although the SNIEs, especially the second, recognized the Soviet purpose of enhancing their strategic forces in the intercontinental balance, they did not note that the balance was heavily tilted in favor of the United States and that the Soviet leaders might have a defensive motivation in seeking to redress the strategic imbalance.
Thus the defense of Cuba, although noted at the outset by CIA analysts as a primary Soviet objective, did not appear at all in the formal interagency or CIA intelligence assessments that went to the ExComm and the President.
Only a CIA briefing note for use with foreign heads of government, drafted on 21 October, noted that one reason that the Soviet leaders 'believed decisive action necessary' was that 'there seemed to be mounting pressure in the United States for intervention' in Cuba.
That briefing memorandum, however, placed greater emphasis on the fact that the Soviet leaders saw 'opportunity to 1.
Demonstrate that the United States can no longer prevent advance of Soviet offensive power even in its own hemisphere; 2.
Significantly expand Soviet capabilities for initial attack on United States targets; 3.
In the earliest meetings, members of the ExComm gave great weight to the question of when the missiles would become operational.
Both Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara and Secretary Dean Rusk argued at the very first meeting on 16 October that it was important that an air strike, if one was decided upon, should be made before the missiles could become operational in case any survived the strike.
And by 20 October, when McCone reported to the ExComm that morning that the first eight launchers had 'at least limited operational readiness at this time', the SNIE later that same day stated that two regiments, 16 launchers, 'must be considered operational now'.20 By that time, although the ExComm was still considering an early air strike, they no longer considered it necessary to give so much weight to the operational status of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
CIA was able to report that while work was continuing apace on the construction and preparation of the missile launch sites, there was no sign of a crash effort to attain the earliest possible capability.
By 21 October, CIA had concluded that 'the Soviet objective in Cuba is to attain full operational capability at all sites as soon as possible, rather than to prepare each site for an emergency launch capability as soon as the missiles and equipment arrive'.21 All 24 MRBM launchers were believed to be operational by 27 October.
United States intelligence was not able to identify the presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba at any time during the crisis.
Although the question was raised in the ExComm on several occasions, no information was acquired that could positively answer it.
Instead, there was a general consensus, shared in the intelligence community, and by policy makers, that the availability of nuclear warheads in Cuba must in prudence be assumed.
At the onset of the crisis, on 16 October, McNamara had raised the question of whether the nuclear warheads for the missiles were there, and emphasized the importance of locating the nuclear warheads.
McGeorge Bundy even wondered briefly whether the Soviet leaders were prepared to bluff over the warheads.
On 17 October General Taylor and Deputy 28 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Secretary of State George Ball raised the question as to whether the whole deployment might be a deception to provoke the United States into some action, but that speculation was quickly rejected.
In general, as noted above, it was taken as a deliberate assumption that the nuclear warheads were there.
ASSESSING INTELLIGENCE PERFORMANCE PRIOR TO AND DURING THE ACUTE PHASE OF THE CRISIS During the first week of secret deliberations on what to do about the Soviet missiles in Cuba, from 16 to 23 October, United States intelligence provided very good support to policy makers.
The deployment of medium-range missiles in Cuba had been detected and identified in a timely way.
The nature, location, scale and operational status of the missile deployment were accurately determined despite some Soviet camouflage and deception.
Although nuclear warhead presence and storage was not confirmed, absence of this information was not critical because it was assumed that the nuclear warheads for the missiles were there.
Intelligence had failed to break the very tight Soviet and Cuban security as to their plans to deploy the missiles.
It was known that a substantial number of Soviet military personnel had accompanied these arms deliveries, estimated in early October at 4,000-4,500 men, numbers consistent with training instructors, not full operational manning of the units equipped with these weapons.
With respect to weaponry, it has also come as a surprise to learn that there were also two tactical air force missile regiments armed with 16 launchers and 80 cruise missiles for support of the ground forces.
Intelligence error on the number of Soviet military personnel was not significant in military terms, but it did reflect a more serious shortcoming.
Even after the crisis and after the withdrawal of most Soviet personnel, until 1988 it was not realized that in addition to the missile deployment, the Soviet leaders had dispatched a large expeditionary force to Cuba, comprising Soviet air force, air defense, coastal defense, and ground force elements totaling some 42,000 men.
Although this would not have constituted a serious error in military terms even if United States forces had invaded, it could in itself have created a political crisis.
President Kennedy, after all, on 4 September had not only warned against Soviet introduction of strategic offensive forces, but also against 'any organized combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc country' and the Soviet contingent certainly was that.
If in November 1962 the nature of the Soviet expeditionary force had been known, President Kennedy would certainly have had to insist upon its complete removal.
In addition to the tactical and strategic missile nuclear weapons in Cuba, four F-class diesel attack submarines were sent to Cuban waters in October.
What was not known to US intelligence was that in addition to their standard non-nuclear torpedoes, each of these four submarines also had been loaded with one nuclear-armed torpedo for possible use against United States aircraft carriers or other major ships.
These submarines departed for Soviet waters in late November as the crisis wound down.
Intelligence analysis concentrated on determining what was taking place in Cuba, above all with respect to the missile deployment.
As earlier noted, even the question as to why the Soviet leaders had decided contrary to our best estimate to install the missiles in Cuba was given little attention.
Although never 'tested', the estimate that in the case of United States military action against Cuba the Soviet leaders would not retaliate by attacking the United States was undoubtedly correct, given the overwhelming United States strategic superiority even in the case of a Soviet surprise attack.
The prediction of Soviet reaction to a blockade was tested in the crisis.
The Estimate , keyed to the pending decision soon made by the president, correctly concluded that the Soviet reaction would 'concentrate on political exploitation', although the estimators apparently exaggerated the international political pressures on the United States to desist from continuing a blockade.
The estimate suggested that the Soviet leaders 'could heighten these pressures by threatening retaliation on Berlin or actually undertaking major harassments on the access routes, which could become tantamount to a blockade, and would probably do so at some stage'.34 This, of course did not happen.
And we have learned from Ambassador Oleg Troyanovsky, who as the foreign policy aide to Khrushchev was present, that when pressure on West Berlin was suggested tentatively early in the crisis by First Deputy Foreign Minister Vasily Kuznetsov, Khrushchev 'raised his voice and said they could do without that sort of advice'.35 There was no Soviet counter pressure in Berlin or elsewhere.
The predicted difference was, however, counterintuitive and at least in retrospect clearly seems to have been mistaken.
Evidently the estimators were not aware that the military contingency plan for invasion of Cuba called for seven days of air attack before the first landing of US troops, and the campaign against the Cuban Army was expected to take about ten days.
Moreover, as the estimate noted, the Soviet Union could have stood aside and claimed not to have had missiles or even any military presence in Cuba if there had been an air strike, but not if there had been a US invasion and occupation.
The error with respect to the invasion plans was not the fault of the intelligence estimators, but of a process that failed to bring to their attention critical military planning considerations.
This was a result of the unusually closely-held compartmentation of the first week of the crisis, as well as time pressures.
The second week was dominated by the question of the Soviet response to the United States' demand for removal of the missiles, and the interaction of United States and Soviet diplomatic and military moves.
The United States intelligence community continued to monitor closely developments in Cuba and around the world, and presented to the ExComm special daily reports on the situation in and relating to Cuba.
No further formal national intelligence estimates were prepared on possible Soviet actions or responses relating to the closely held communications between Kennedy and Khrushchev during the crisis.
Most important was the advice given to the President by his trusted adviser on Soviet affairs, Ambassador Thompson.
The President and other members of the ExComm relied above all on their own assessments.
The intelligence community, nonetheless, provided such information and judgments as it could.
There was no reliable direct intelligence on the deliberations of the Soviet leaders, but intelligence estimators tended correctly not to support worst-case prognoses.
Most intelligence analysts believed, correctly, both that Khrushchev remained in command, and that he would back down.
The most significant formal estimate was a memorandum from the Board of National Estimates to Director McCone on 27 October, owing to time constraints not coordinated as a national estimate.
The Board again estimated that Soviet reaction to a United States air strike against the missiles and air bases would stop short of military action anywhere beyond Cuba itself.
Apart from Soviet efforts to generate strong political condemnation of the US action around the world, the estimators believed the Soviet reaction would probably be directed toward political pressures against United States bases surrounding the Soviet Union, but would not extend to military action against them.
Not all policy makers were so certain of that judgment, and of course it was never tested.
Nonetheless, in retrospect on the basis of present evidence it appears sound.
Intelligence did not recognize the extent of Soviet military alert, in particular of Soviet strategic forces, in part because it did not include some elements of comparable United States alerts, such as airborne alert of part of the strategic bomber force.
United States INTELLIGENCE 33 Although intelligence on Soviet weaponry in Cuba was good (with the two noted major exceptions of tactical nuclear weapons and the presence of a major Soviet expeditionary force), there was no direct evidence on Soviet command and control procedures.
The intelligence community correctly estimated Soviet control over the medium-range missiles and the antiaircraft missiles, but it did not know the Soviet rules of engagement and degree of effective Moscow control.
The intelligence estimates correctly believed Khrushchev and the leadership in Moscow would retain authority over any use of the nuclear missiles in Cuba, even in the event of a United States air attack on them.
The ExComm members, however, were prudently less sure that in the event of a United States attack no surviving missiles would be fired by local commanders.
Nor was there intelligence information on cohesion or division among the Soviet leaders in Moscow.
United States intelligence did not have information as to how much Soviet intelligence knew about United States plans and intentions (the answer, from all we have been able to learn, was virtually nil).41 Efforts to mask the initial limited buildup of United States military forces from 16 to 22 October, while American awareness of the Soviet missile deployment was being kept secret, were successful in not tipping the American hand, although the first Soviet reconnaissance satellites probably did provide some data on air force concentrations in Florida and Texas.
Later, it was correctly assumed that Soviet intelligence would be aware of the massive buildup after 22 October.
United States intelligence had not, however, prior to the crisis evaluated what Soviet intelligence and the Soviet political leadership would have known, and would have assumed and believed, about United States intentions with respect to Cuba.
No attention was given to how the Soviets would have regarded the extensive American political and economic isolation of Cuba, covert 34 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS subversive activities, and active exercise of military contingency plans underway by May-June 1962 at the time of the Soviet decision to deploy a conventional and tactical nuclear armed expeditionary force for deterrence of an American attack on Cuba, as well as to deploy the medium-and intermediate-range ballistic missiles reinforcing the Soviet strategic nuclear deterrent.
Shortcomings in earlier United States intelligence estimates of Soviet motivation for deployment of missiles in Cuba also contributed to a failure by intelligence and policy makers during the crisis to foresee the possible terms for a settlement.
Believing that the main Soviet purpose was to bolster an offensive Soviet policy on Berlin and other issues, American decisionmakers did not recognize the possible key role of an assurance against US invasion of Cuba.
THE SETTLEMENT PHASE In the settlement phase from 28 October to 20 November, intelligence played an important part in reassurance as to the withdrawal of the missiles, bombers and nuclear weapons.
Intelligence, as a unilateral means of verification, could not positively determine that there were no additional missiles that had not been seen or declared.
It was, however, able to provide data on shipments to Cuba based on retroactive analysis that made it clear that any additional number would have had to be small, and in general provided reassurance that the missiles and bombers declared, counted, and observed in withdrawal were probably all that had been brought in.
The question of verifying the withdrawal of nuclear warheads was much more difficult.
Inasmuch as no nuclear warheads had been positively identified in Cuba, and the United States did not know whether any were there, there was a serious problem in even posing demands for cooperative verification of withdrawal.
If the United States acknowledged that it did not know, it might even tempt a Soviet decision to leave some in Cuba.
There was, however, no issue over the matter; the United States specified in its listing of 'offensive weapons' that must be withdrawn, in addition to the missiles and bombers, 'any nuclear warheads for missiles, nuclear bombs for aircraft, and any type nuclear weapon'.46 The United States did, however, note that Khrushchev, in an unusual interview he had arranged on 24 October with a visiting American businessman, William Knox when he first acknowledged the presence of missiles in Cuba had stated that the United States INTELLIGENCE 35 nuclear warheads for them were also in Cuba.
Khrushchev himself gave such an assurance in his letter of 20 November to President Kennedy.
The United States had some intelligence indications that the Soviet ship Aleksandrovsk, which departed Havana on 5 November, carried nuclear warheads.
Although there was no clear confirmation of Kuznetsov's and Khrushchev's official assurance, the United States did not again raise the question of nuclear warhead removal.
The tactical nuclear warheads were, however, withdrawn separately and later.
General Anatoly Gribkov and the officer in Cuba charged with custody of the nuclear warheads, General Nikolai Beloborodov, have both confirmed that the tactical nuclear warheads were not withdrawn until early December.
United States intelligence, unaware of the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, was also of course not aware that from 20 to 23 November Castro pressed to keep the tactical weapons in Cuba under his own, or if necessary Soviet, control.
The issue arose in the difficult discussions between Castro and Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan immediately after the crisis.
Mikoyan insisted, and Moscow confirmed, that the tactical nuclear weapons must all be returned to the Soviet Union.
This dispute delayed Mikoyan's departure from Havana; but Castro had no recourse but to give in to the Soviet decision.
The 15 November official assurance by Kuznetsov that all nuclear weapons had been removed 'from [the territory of] Cuba' appears at best to have been misleading, and Khrushchev's own assurances in his letter of 20 November to President Kennedy, echoed by Ambassador Dobrynin, were premature.
There is no reason now, however, to doubt that all nuclear warheads were withdrawn by December 1962; nor was there any reason to doubt this at the time.
POST-CRISIS REVIEWS In addition to intelligence materials generated during the crisis and now declassified, several post-crisis assessments of the intelligence performance 36 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS are valuable sources for current review.
This report, which has now been declassified with only two small deletions relating to sources, examined critically the performance of the United States intelligence system prior to 22 October 1962.54 The PFIAB report focused almost exclusively on why the US intelligence community had failed to obtain more full and timely intelligence on the Soviet military buildup, and to exploit that intelligence more effectively in estimating Soviet plans and intentions.
It also criticized the failure to mount more active aerial reconnaissance in September-October.
With respect to intelligence analysis, the report took to task the incorrect SNIE of 19 September, both for a mindset that believed that Soviet leaders would not take the risks in deploying nuclear strike forces in Cuba, and for failing to highlight the cautionary statement that did acknowledge the possibility.
Finally, the report in summary form (based on an annex that has not been declassified and that marshaled 35 examples) argued that various 'indicators' could have been seen to have at least pointed toward the missile deployment.
DCI McCone responded to the PFIAB Report on 28 February 1963, briefly rebutting their criticisms.
It is evident why the PFIAB Report would zero in on the mistaken estimate of 19 September, and why it would retroactively marshal intelligence indicators that could, and for the most part should, have been given greater weight in drawing attention to the possibility of a Soviet deployment of missiles.
PFIAB did not, however, apply a broader framework for evaluation of the overall performance of intelligence.
A number of other post-crisis reports on the activities of the Department of Defense and many of its components were prepared, but none sought to evaluate the performance of intelligence.
United States INTELLIGENCE 37 The question of intelligence and policy performance was also raised publicly by many Congressional critics of the administration and in the press, although the dominant public reaction was relief as the crisis faded and belief that the administration had attained a victory in compelling the removal of the missiles.
Nonetheless, administration spokesmen, and Secretary McNamara in particular, gave extensive intelligence background briefings designed to squelch critics who were arguing that the Soviets might have secretly left strategic weapons in Cuba.
Similarly, Secretary Rusk and Director McCone testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in executive session in January 1963, with extensive reviews of intelligence on Soviet forces in Cuba.
These presentations and the ensuing discussions were, of course, intended to reassure members of the Senate and accented the comprehensiveness of intelligence.
A National Intelligence Estimate on Soviet military policy and capabilities, NIE 11-4-63, prepared in early 1963, did address the question of Soviet motivation in deploying the missiles to Cuba.
The intelligence estimators recognized that the Soviet leaders' decision had been inspired by a need to bolster their strategic situation after the United States had punctured the inflated missile gap, but also by the aim of 'improving the strategic position of the USSR vis-a-vis the US' in order to 'create new opportunities for Soviet foreign policy' and to deter United States actions in Cold War confrontations such as Berlin.
The outcome of the crisis, of course, had both 'highlighted and heightened the dilemma of the Soviet leaders.
Also available for analysis are two important retrospective analyses of the Soviet calculations, decisions and actions in deciding to place the missiles in Cuba, and then in managing the crisis.
Both were 'all-source, code word' documents prepared in CIA, one by the Office of Research and Reports , the other by the Research Staff , under the Deputy Director for Intelligence , both prepared a little over a year after the crisis.
Neither study was designed as a post-mortem on the National Intelligence Estimates or other performance of the Intelligence 38 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Community with respect to the crisis; both addressed the Soviet motivations, decisions and actions leading up to and during the crisis.
Unlike the intelligence analyses and estimates prepared during the crisis, both retrospective intelligence studies focused in the first instance on the motivations for the Soviet decision to deploy nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba.
Both studies also suggested that the enhanced Soviet standing would probably have led to a new initiative against the allied position in Berlin.
They also suggested potential use of the base in Cuba to bargain over US overseas bases or in disarmament talks.
In addition to enhancing the Soviet military and political weight in the global balance of power, a successful Soviet establishment of missile bases in Cuba was also seen as challenging United States credibility around the world.
Both studies attributed such belief to the Soviet leaders who, they concluded, had 'probably judged that the Soviet bargaining position in any international crisis affecting vital United States interests would be sharply improved, perhaps as much by having discredited United States resoluteness and will to resist as by the increase in both the substance and the image of Soviet military power'.63 The retrospective studies thus emphasized the highly important global strategic military and political motivations for the Soviet missile deployment decision.
The perceived Soviet need to redress the unfavorable strategic military imbalance was given somewhat more attention than it had been during the crisis, but the main weight continued to be given to anticipated Soviet political gains.
The defensive imperative for redressing the Soviet 'missile gap' continued to be underplayed.
Most striking, the second major Soviet motivation for placing missiles in Cuba (and a Soviet expeditionary force, of which the intelligence analysts remained unaware), to deter a feared United States attack against Cuba, was still not recognized.
In the ORR study, this consideration received only a single mention, lumped together with other subsidiary gains sought.
On the basis of information now available, that consideration would appear only to have had an indirect background role, if any, in the Soviet decision to place missiles in Cuba.
The review of the intelligence evidence led to a similar conclusion as the only one consonant with Soviet awareness of the US reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
At the same time, while noting the possible potential of a Soviet missile base in Cuba as a lever in general negotiations on overseas bases, the study concluded from a review of the intelligence that the Soviet leaders in reaching their deployment decision had not intended or expected to trade the missiles in Cuba for the United States missiles in Turkey, or for an American assurance of intention not to invade Cuba.
Notwithstanding the lack of direct intelligence on the Soviet and Cuban decisions in May to July on deploying the missiles and Soviet forces to Cuba, the retrospective studies correctly concluded that the Soviet decision on placing the missiles in Cuba occurred in April to June (actually, May and June).70 The intelligence on shipments and buildup of arms from July to October was reviewed; indeed, the shipments of missiles in September were retroactively identified even during the crisis.
Both studies correctly believed that Khrushchev was the main author of the missile venture, and the main voice in deciding on the withdrawal of the missiles.
These studies more than a year after the events still did not reflect recognition that a major Soviet expeditionary force had been sent to Cuba, 40 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS still estimating that a total of about 22,000 Soviet military personnel had been there only about half of the 42,000 actually present.
On the whole, however, with these two major exceptions, the intelligence on the Soviet forces was good.
The SA-2 air defense missile system was correctly seen as not having been intended to provide a screen to preclude United States aerial reconnaissance of the missile buildup, which took place concurrently.
The analysts assumed that each missile launcher was to have a second reload missile; we now know the ratio was three missiles for every two launchers.
As earlier noted, United States intelligence during the crisis had counted 33 SS-4 missiles for the 24 launchers, and assumed there might be up to 48.
Before withdrawal, the Soviet side disclosed there were 42, and the United States then confirmed the presence and withdrawal of the 42 missiles.
The 1964 study noted United States inability to confirm the presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba in 1962, but estimated that nuclear warheads if present were probably not stored in the permanent nuclear warhead storage facilities being built near the launch sites.
Even during the crisis CIA judged that any nuclear weapons in Cuba were 'probably in an unlocated facility between the entry port of Mariel and the sites'.73 These were good estimates; it is now known that the central nuclear warhead storage facility was located at Bejucal.
The 1964 study reconstructed the evidence identifying Aleksandrovsk as the ship that carried out the missile nuclear warheads, but did not identify Indigirka as having brought most of them to Cuba nor of course Arkhangelsk as the ship that took out the tactical nuclear warheads.
By early 1963, but not during the crisis, the intelligence analysts in reviewing satellite photography of the Soviet Union and other intelligence had discovered that Aleksandrovsk had sailed to Cuba from Severomorsk in early October, and probably had taken nuclear warheads to Cuba, but even in retrospective searches of available evidence they did not discover that a few weeks earlier Indigirka had taken the first and most United States INTELLIGENCE 41 important load of nuclear weapons, those for the SS-4 missiles.
Curiously, although the study correctly notes that those 11-2 8s remaining in service in the Soviet Union in 1962 were mainly in naval coastal defense air units, it failed to draw the inference that this was probably also their mission in Cuba.
Of course, the fact that one squadron of the Il-28s was configured for delivery of tactical nuclear bombs against an invasion force was not then known.
The 1964 study noted that during the crisis most of the cruise missiles had been moved to an inland location at Campo Florido, but assumed that was for training, because, although deployed 'in an operational mode', that location was not suitable for firing for the presumed coastal defense purpose.
If the fact that they had been supported with substantial tactical nuclear capabilities had been loiown, this would of course have made such a conclusion much clearer.
Nonetheless, the failure even in retrospect to understand the role of these forces reflects the underlying failure to recognize the Soviet and Cuban objective of deterrence of an American attack or defense against it.
In fact, the failure of United States intelligence to recognize in 1962-63 the broader deterrent role of the Soviet conventional forces in Cuba had a negative effect on United States efforts to get the Soviet Union to remove the Soviet troops.
Accordingly, 42 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS although efforts were made to persuade the Soviet leadership to remove Soviet troops, this was not made a requirement for ending the crisis.
American negotiator John J McCloy made the first real pitch to Vasily Kuznetsov on 18 November, noting that the United States had identified 'fully manned Soviet combat teams', asserting at the same time that these units 'bore no relation to the defense of Cuba as such but were part of defense of Soviet missile batteries' in Cuba.
This argument may have been intended in part to provide a rationale as to why the troop units should be withdrawn, but it also reflected the prevailing American view of their role.
In his public statement on 20 November ending the quarantine, President Kennedy stated that 'we are informed' the Soviet troop units in Cuba were 'associated with the protection of offensive weapon systems and will also be withdrawn in due course', although in fact the Soviets had not so described the units, and Khrushchev had promised only to withdraw Soviet personnel 'servicing' the missiles and bombers.
The United States unilaterally stretched that to refer to 'the stated intention of the USSR to withdraw all military units and personnel in Cuba for the servicing or guarding' of the offensive systems.
By February 1963, the Soviet Union had agreed to withdraw 'several thousand Soviet military personnel having to do with guarding the kinds of weapons which were removed from Cuba', although no commitment was made to withdraw all Soviet combat troops.
The American assumption that the troops had in fact been sent to Cuba to guard the missiles made it easier to assume that all such troops had been withdrawn, and the United States did observe the withdrawal of large numbers of the Soviet troops.
On 26 August 1963, Ambassador Dobrynin finally told President Kennedy that Khrushchev had said that all Soviet combat units had been withdrawn from Cuba.
Whether through a misunderstanding by Dobrynin of what Khrushchev had said, or intentional deceptive Soviet misstatement, that was not true.
Castro had asked that at least one 'brigade' (one of the four reinforced regiments) be left in Cuba as a token of Soviet support and tripwire deterrent, and the Soviets agreed.
United States intelligence was not aware of this Soviet agreement to leave one brigade in Cuba.
In April 1963, however, in an internal CIA memorandum, Sherman Kent, the head of the Office of National Estimates, did send to DCI John McCone a prediction that the Soviets would 'maintain some sort of a military presence' in Cuba as a 'tripwire deterrent against a United States invasion'.88 This prescient CIA prediction was borne out, although it did not have any effect on American policy consideration.
This lapse was perhaps understandable as intelligence priorities had shifted over a long period of time, but nonetheless this intelligence failure, compounded by inept political handling, resulted in a diplomatic debacle.
Neither of the intelligence studies in 1964 was able to throw much light on Soviet decision-making during the crisis.
The RS study did, however, note one important fact that has since been confirmed.
It commented that 'the Cubans are known to have expected an attack on or soon after the night of 26 October', and therefore 'it seems likely that Khrushchev's sense of urgency was heightened by frantic messages from Havana.
These early efforts retrospectively to evaluate the performance of US intelligence, and to reconstruct the Soviet decisions leading to and during the missile crisis, were useful but were necessarily limited to what was known in 1962-64.
Since 1987 American historians have been working to assimilate new information first from declassified United States records, and more recently from former Soviet officials and from declassified Soviet records.
Also, former United States and Soviet officials who participated in the deliberations of the two sides have exchanged views on it with one another and with historians.
The conference did not, however, address the performance of United States intelligence in 1962 in the light of new disclosures about the actual subject of intelligence, namely, Soviet objectives, decisions, actions, and reactions; rather it continued to focus on reminiscences and newly available data on what United States intelligence had known and concluded in 1962 on the basis of information then available.
The former gives us the United States intelligence evaluations; the latter provides part of the basis for measuring their validity and effectiveness.
The basic historical developments have been known, but many important aspects have only recently been revealed.
By the same token, not all relevant information has yet been disclosed and some may never be.
With respect to the performance of United States intelligence, although a remarkably broad range of data has now been declassified, some has not been released.
Most deletions in 'sanitized' documents released have related to 'sources and methods', zealously protected by the intelligence community.
Similarly, the information on Soviet arms shipping obtained from a wide variety of sources has generally been available because it was in part obtained and almost entirely confirmed by Photint and Humint sources.
Most of this information would not affect the kind of questions addressed in this analysis, but some could.
For example, information on the C3 of Soviet forces in Cuba and on the ranks and service affiliation of senior commanders could have provided data heightening awareness of the existence of a major Soviet expeditionary force in Cuba, and even of the possible presence of nuclear missiles.
In some cases, security deletions now made in declassification of intelligence analyses presented to policy makers at the time preclude judgments as to whether certain information was made available.
But it is quite clear that the shortcomings in intelligence evaluation identified in this study were not known in 1962 and simply deleted from materials now made available.
In addition, they provide additional material that helps to evaluate various categories of sources.
As McCone indicated in that same memorandum, aerial photography was 'our best means of establishing hard intelligence'.98 Security deletions in declassification suggest that Sigint and other technical intelligence means were the second most useful category, followed by 'collateral' sources.
As noted, the PFIAB evaluation sharply criticized the adequacy of clandestine Humint intelligence.
PFIAB also criticized the intelligence estimates for not giving more attention to indicators of possible missile deployment before the discovery of the missiles, but failed even to pose the question of more deeply analyzing Soviet motivations for such a decision.
Overall, 'on balance, and judged by the result, a basically creditable job' had been done by intelligence.0 A RETROSPECTIVE EVALUATION Today, I believe it is clear that there was a failure of estimative empathy, of viewing the situation as the Soviet leaders did as they made their decision to place missiles in Cuba.
In particular, even if Soviet considerations of redressing the unfavorable strategic global balance for defensive and offensive purposes were paramount, as I continue to believe they were, it is now evident that deterrence of a United States attack on Cuba was also a consideration of major if not equal importance.
Yet the failure to see the situation through Soviet eyes blinded the United States intelligence community as a whole to that significant factor.
At the least, even if United States policy precluded any assurances to alleviate that concern , the United States could have delivered strong private warnings that might well have led the Soviet leaders at least not to proceed with a nuclear missile deployment.
Later, during the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba, in weighing the possible Soviet incentives to deploy missiles, if the estimators had realized the extent to which the Soviet leaders saw a serious if not desperate need to shore up their growing missile gap in the early 1960s, they would have been more inclined to recognize the possibility of a Soviet decision to place missiles in United States INTELLIGENCE 47 Cuba.
They believed that the Soviet leaders, who had always shown great caution in their attempts to pressure the West, would not assume such risks to advance their position.
But if the estimators had recognized that the Soviet leaders saw great risks in doing nothing to counter the United States increase in its superiority, the risks in an overseas missile deployment on the territory of an ally (which the United States had repeatedly done with impunity) would have appeared much less and perhaps worth assuming.
Finally, the Soviet leaders (in reality, Khrushchev) had been guilty of a major failure in intelligence assessment of the likely United States reaction.
There was reciprocal projection by both the Soviet and United States leaders in misestimating the other side and what it would perceive and would do.1 Even more, there was a dialectical interaction between these misevaluations.
The reason that the United States estimators erred in their assessment was only in part owing to failure to assess Soviet motivations.
It was also in error because the Soviet leadership had misevaluated the United States reaction to a Soviet missile deployment.
If Khrushchev and his colleagues had realized that Kennedy would do what he did do, they would never have made their decision to deploy the missiles.
There is one intriguing datum in the recently released Russian records of the conversations between Mikoyan and Castro in November 1962.
Mikoyan told Castro that the Soviet leaders believed that the Americans had learned of the transport of 'Soviet troops and strategic missiles' to Cuba by mid-September.
They believed, however, according to Mikoyan, that Kennedy had intentionally been holding back because of the election campaign and therefore that he presumably was 48 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS inclined to acquiesce in the deployment.
This assertion that the Soviet leaders in late September-October 1962 believed that Kennedy was aware of the missiles in Cuba has not been confirmed, although it is not evident why Mikoyan would have made up such a story for Castro.
At the time of the crisis, apparently only one United States intelligence paper suggested that the Soviet leaders probably believed that the United States leaders were aware of the missiles by mid-October, a memo on 21 October by Roger Hilsman, the head of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the State Department, based on analysis of the tenor of conversations between Ambassador Dobrynin and Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles on 13 October, Khrushchev and Ambassador Foy Kohler on 16 October, and Gromyko and President Kennedy on 18 October.
Most contemporary and subsequent analyses have assumed that the Soviet leaders believed their secret was safe until 22 October when President Kennedy spoke publicly and the crisis began to unfold.
The retrospective CIA analyses considered at length the evidence available at that time and concluded that the Soviet leaders might have been less confident after mid-September that the US leaders would acquiesce, but not that they believed the United States leaders knew about the missiles in Cuba.5 A few American critics of the Kennedy administration's handling of the crisis have also darkly suggested that Kennedy was aware of the missiles in Cuba, but until his hand was forced by Keating and the U-2 photographs had preferred to turn a blind eye.
Most such speculations were critical of Kennedy for weakness, but at least one has argued that Kennedy was waiting for the optimum timing to justify a United States attack on Cuba although failing to explain why, if that had been his purpose, Kennedy had then failed to attack Cuba in October.6 Based on materials available at this writing, it is not clear whether the Soviet leaders believed that Kennedy was aware of the missiles in Cuba in late September and early October and chose to conceal that knowledge at the time.
Perhaps there was speculation on that possibility among the Soviet leaders, but it is difficult to believe it could have been held with any confidence.
There do remain anomalies that may, or may not, be related to such a Soviet misperception.
The missile sites under construction were not appropriately camouflaged against aerial observation, notwithstanding Soviet and Cuban awareness of United States aerial reconnaissance air flights.
Yet that could be explained by standard operational practices or failures in planning and implementation at least as probably as by calculated lack of concern.
Similarly, Gromyko's satisfaction and optimism after his meeting with President Kennedy on 18 October could have been the result either of seeming confirmation that Kennedy was not disposed to make an issue of the deployments, or that he remained unaware of them.
Khrushchev in several statements in September and October railed against a possible United States blockade, but he was not then anticipating such action as a response to discovery of the missiles.
Those statements were prompted by the fact that a blockade was then being publicly advocated by prominent Republican political figures as a move to unseat Castro.
A continuing though reduced 'significant' Soviet military presence was expected.
As to other weaponry, it was estimated that 'at some point the Soviets might attempt to increase their military strength in Cuba by introducing other weapons previously labeled ""offensive"" by the US', as did occur when probing attempts were later made to introduce a Soviet submarine presence in Cuba.
All in all, the estimate was sound.7 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone, whose suspicions of the Soviet leaders' designs on having a missile base in Cuba had in August to October 1962 stood him in such good stead in contrast to the prevalent views of the intelligence community, had less well-founded suspicions and fears after the crisis.
Even during the crisis, McCone had occasionally voiced unjustified alarmist views.
First, as was well understood at the time, the intelligence community had erroneously estimated on 19 September that the Soviet leaders probably would not station nuclear-armed mediumor intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
On the other hand, continuing efforts were made to monitor closely the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba that had begun in mid-July, and specifically to search for possible missile deployment, and that effort was successful.
Moreover, throughout the crisis intelligence did a generally good job of monitoring and reporting the changing status of the missile sites in Cuba, other military activities on the island, and the status of Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces worldwide.
Virtually no information on Soviet political deliberations was obtainable, but such indications as were available were reported and analyzed.
In retrospect, several shortcomings have become known from more recently available information that were not at the time.
The first of these was recognized, although underestimation of the defensive element of that motivation contributed to the erroneous estimate that the missile deployment would United States INTELLIGENCE 51 probably not be made.
The aim of advancing Moscow's geostrategic position, while clearly present, would probably not have sufficed to justify the decision.
The estimators correctly understood that as an opportunistic move to enhance Soviet power positions the risks were probably too great; they did not, however, consider concern that without such a move the Soviet position might incur even greater risks.
The second purpose of the deployment, deterrence of an expected United States attack on Cuba, while appreciated by some intelligence analysts, was neglected to the point of virtual omission from consideration in formal intelligence assessments and in policy deliberations.
The second, and most threatening, component was of course fully recognized and featured as the central element of the entire crisis.
What was not appreciated in the intelligence analysis was the first element, at least in part because of overlooking the local deterrent role of the military deployments.
If the Soviet leaders had not decided to include the nuclear missile forces, there would still have been a challenge to the United States, indeed one that in many political respects would have been even more difficult to meet.
The Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba, minus the strategic missiles, would still have been a substantial combat force comprising air force, ground force and naval components for air defense, coastal defense and ground antiinvasion defense.
Three of these regiments were first detected in low-level air reconnaissance on 17 October, the fourth not until 25 October.
Coastal defense forces comprised one brigade of missile-armed PT boats (three squadrons of 12 Komar boats armed with 24 launchers for 52 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS short-range missiles), one regiment of coastal defense missiles (4 batteries with 8 launchers and 32 cruise missiles), and one augmented regiment of naval light bombers for action against any invading fleet.
Even without the tactical nuclear weapons, the 35,000-strong Soviet conventional combat forces in Cuba would certainly have been a challenge given President Kennedy's warnings against the introduction of any communist bloc 'combat forces' into Cuba.
Moreover, the range of the Il-28s and the ground-launched cruise missiles with nuclear weapons would have constituted at least some potential threat to Florida.
The original Soviet deployment plan developed in JuneJuly had also included a sizable naval contingent, to be introduced later, comprising a squadron of 6 surface ships, with 2 cruisers, 2 guided-missile destroyers, and 2 conventionally armed destroyers, and a squadron of 11 submarines, 7 nuclear-armed missile-launching and 4 torpedo attack.
In late September, the plans for this naval deployment were dropped, because it was considered unnecessarily provocative.
Based on what has been declassified, the intelligence community cannot be faulted.
It is possible that still classified Sigint included data on the Soviet command personnel and units that should have alerted intelligence analysts to the structure and nature of the large Soviet Group of Forces.
If so, security of intelligence sources at the time may have impeded intelligence analysis, even though almost all such analysis at the time were based on all-source data.
I have argued above that the National Intelligence Estimate of 19 September 1962, that deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba was not United States INTELLIGENCE 53 likely, notwithstanding that it was in error, was the proper estimate to make based on all available evidence.
I believe the same judgment should be made on the intelligence failure to estimate the presence of tactical nuclear weapons.
The possibility of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba was recognized.
Humint in the form of unverified refugee and agent reports (moreover, in a mass of other invalid reports) was not sufficient.
And certainly, as PFIAB complained, it would have been nice to have had a better clandestine collection network.
But Humint, and analytical hypotheses in Washington, along with recognition of the need for full aerial photography, did lead to targeting the San Cristobal area and to timely discovery of the missile base construction.
Basic intelligence on Soviet military systems earlier collected and analyzed (mostly from reconnaissance photography and Sigint, but also from other sources including the United States agent Colonel Oleg Penkovsky) underlay the correct identification of the missile deployment.
If United States intelligence had not discovered the missiles bsfore their complete installation and unveiling by Khrushchev, it would have been much more difficult, and perhaps not possible, to secure their withdrawal.
An interdiction blockade would not have been possible, and international pressures for mutual accommodation might have led to greater US concessions elsewhere or to reluctant acquiescence in the existing Soviet deployment.
Paradoxically, as I have suggested earlier, full intelligence information could have made the resolution of the crisis much more difficult.
If the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba had been known in the last week of October, although that fact would have made an invasion potentially much more costly, it would not necessarily have deterred it.
At the least, pressure for on-site inspection of Cuba to ensure the removal of all nuclear weapons would have 54 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS been great and would almost certainly have remained non-negotiable, given Castro's adamant stance.
There would also have been strong pressures on President Kennedy to demand withdrawal of all Soviet forces from Cuba, and although I believe Khrushchev would probably have eventually acceded to that demand, the negotiation would certainly have been more difficult.
The issue of assurance against continued presence of any nuclear weapons in Cuba might, on the other hand, have led the United States to press more seriously a limited nuclear-free zone in Latin America, as Brazil and several other states were then proposing.
This idea was, in fact, considered in the State Department and the ExComm and pursued for a time as a supplementary measure for assuring no reintroduction of Soviet nuclear weapons.
I note these illustrations to point out that the issue of assurance against the continued presence of nuclear weapons in Cuba might have led the United States to military action, or to broader negotiation, but it would almost certainly not have been possible to put it aside as was done on the basis of the agreement of 28 October and subsequent implementation without on-site inspection of Cuba.
American intelligence assessments generally assumed a high degree of centralized control from the top leadership over all Soviet military forces, in keeping with observed practice and the general nature of the Soviet political system.
When a Soviet air defense missile unexpectedly shot down a U-2 aircraft over Cuba on 27 October, however, American intelligence analysts, and policy makers, were unsure whether this marked a changed line from Moscow or a breach in Soviet military discipline.
In decisions on what course of action to take from the outset of the crisis, in assessments of Soviet reactions, and in military contingency planning, policy makers prudently allowed for the possibility that even if Moscow instructions prohibited initiative of Soviet forces in Cuba to fire the nuclear missiles there, in case of an American air strike or invasion any surviving Soviet missiles might be fired either with or without authorization from Moscow.
Both the general assumption of tight Moscow control, and the recognition that it nonetheless might fail, were properly taken into account.
CIA played a lead role, but by no means a lone role, in backing up the ExComm.
DIA and the intelligence organizations of the army, navy and air force provided back up to the military planners and commands in Washington and Norfolk.
There also was good communication and cooperation between the intelligence community and the policy makers.
Senior intelligence estimators and analysts have said that they received only limited feedback from the ExComm through DCI McCone, especially during the deliberations from 16 to 21 October, but DDI Ray Cline attended many of these meetings, and was also in touch with McGeorge Bundy.
There was, of course, full understanding of the common task, and determination by both the intelligence community and policy makers and their advisers to meet the common challenge.
In sum, judged on the basis of what could reasonably have been expected of the contribution of United States intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis, performance was generally good, in some respects outstanding, albeit with a few shortcomings.
More useful than assigning any 'grade' to performance, however, is reflection on the potentialities and natural limitations of intelligence, and the difficulty of judging performance without reasonably full access to real data rarely available at the time, and often never.
This case illustrates the challenge to historians, and to intelligence historians in particular, to review historical episodes when data do later become available.
It also suggests that more complete information at the time may sometimes make political and diplomatic decisions and conflict resolution more, rather than less, difficult but, to the historian, not less interesting.
The last previous estimate, NIE 85-2-62, on The Situation and Prospects in Cuba, issued on 1 Aug.62, early in the arms buildup, had not discussed the possibility of Soviet missiles in Cuba and considered it unlikely that any Soviet Bloc combat forces would be stationed in Cuba at least over the coming year.
This estimate was wrong; the decision to do so had been made, but there was no evidence in the initial Soviet arms shipments in July or in other intelligence that would have provided the basis for a different estimate.
Domingo Amuchastegui reports that Castro saw his purge of the old-line Moscow 56 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Communists in Cuba as a preliminary clearing of the decks to allow closer collaboration with the Soviet Union.
There was no evidence at the time to support such a counterintuitive evaluation.
For more detailed discussion, see the editors' introductory essay, in this volume.
The most detailed available report on the CIA agent and refugee reporting is now a declassified article by a CIA clandestine service officer who argued after the crisis that insufficient attention had been given to their reports.
A rebuttal was prepared by two senior CIA analysts who had participated in the main retrospective intelligence analyses of the crisis.
The most authoritative summary of the delays in U-2 coverage is in a report prepared in CIA for Director McCone and circulated to USIB members in Feb.63.
In a discussion of the subject with President Kennedy, McCone gave as his judgment that any earlier aerial photography would not have provided clear evidence to justify decisions on action.
It is now known from Soviet archives and accounts of participants that no additional missile buildup beyond the 40 launchers was then planned.
If the deployment had proceeded without any agreed limit, Soviet leaders in 1963 or later might, however, have decided to increase the number of missiles and launchers.
By 18 Oct., three SS-4 MRBM launch sites and the first two SS-5 (2200 run) IRBM launch sites had been identified in later photography.
But from 16 Oct. on it had been clear that Soviet medium range missiles capable of striking deep in the United States, as far as Washington DC, were being deployed in Cuba.
Aviation Week and Space Technology, 12 Nov.62,21 gave rise to a school of revisionist analysis (including articles or books by Ronald Steel, David Detzer, Ronald Pope and Barton J Bernstein) that questioned whether the Kennedy administration had honestly presented the picture of the missile threat, but these speculations were misinformed and without merit.
McCone's prepared notes for that meeting included a judgment that the missiles would be nuclear armed.
Of particular value was detailed information on the readiness and operating procedures of the SS-4 missile system earlier provided by the United States agent, GRU Col.
Although Penkovsky was not in a position to inform about the planned missile deployment in Cuba, this information on the missile systems complemented earlier U-2 and satellite photography that had made US analysts familiar with the pattern of SS-4 and SS-5 site preparation and construction in the Soviet Union.
Most of them were counted before the crisis broke out and all were counted during the crisis.
Most of the new weaponry was identified soon after arrival in Cuba, and some while still en route, by a technique that CIA analysts had unofficially dubbed 'cratology', analysis of the characteristics of various crates for transporting particular weapons.
This permitted identification and counting MiG21s, Il-28s, and helicopters arriving in Cuba before they were reassembled.
Two types of cruise missile crates were seen, but this did not lead analysts to recognize that there were both coastal defense and tactical air support cruise missile units in Cuba.
Goodell noted there were two types of cruise missile crates, but did not draw from that fact that there had been two types of cruise missile systems in Cuba.
The identification of the coastal defense cruise missile system in Cuba (initially identified at Banes) was not easy.
First seen in U-2 photography taken on 29 Aug., it was not reported to policy makers until 7 Sept., and even then the analysts were unsure whether it was an 'offensive' system capable of striking targets in Florida.
President Kennedy was quite annoyed that it 58 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS could not promptly be identified.
Intensive analysis finally led to a confident report to him on 13 Sept. that the system was for coastal defense and of limited operational range.
Brugioni was, however, in 1991 still unaware that another, tactical support cruise missile system with nuclear capability had been in Cuba.
The CIA Task Force W in Florida, working with both the network of agents in Cuba and escapees and emigres, had concluded by September that there were probably 45,000-50,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba.
The clandestine collectors could not, of course, prove their view, which was an impression based on many contacts and reports, and it was discounted by the analysts and estimators in Washington and not reflected in the official estimates.
In this instance, however, the 'feel' of the clandestine intelligence collectors we now know had been fairly accurate.
Gribkov has on occasion erred, but with the exception of the naval mines these figures are confirmed by other Soviet sources with access to the archives.
He so stated to a conference on the Cuban missile crisis in Moscow on 28 Sept.94, and repeated details in an interview with me following the conference.
At the 1994 Moscow conference noted above, in a private conversation Gribkov agreed with Beloborodov that probably the naval mines had been sent to Cuba.
See also an account based on an interview with the commander of one of the F-Class diesel submarines, indicating that their orders were very obscure, but included authorization to fire their nuclear torpedoes if they were fired upon or bombed and the submarine hull penetrated by attacking fire.
If Fired Upon, Use the Nuclear Weapon', Komsomol 'skayapravda, 27 June 1995,3.
The language differed in some respects from the estimate the day before.
Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin in Washington also had suggested, in a cable on 23 Oct., United States INTELLIGENCE 59 possible blockade pressure on the land routes to West Berlin; from available materials, it appears that this suggestion was simply ignored in Moscow.
According to the official news agency TASS, the Soviet armed forces had been placed on an announced 'alert' status as early as 12 Sept.
On 23 Oct., in response to President Kennedy's speech, alerts were announced both by Defense Minister Marshal Rodion Malinovsky for the Soviet Armed Forces, and Commander-in-Chief Marshal Andrei Grechko for the forces of the Warsaw Pact.
From that time throughout the crisis, although noting some signs of higher alert than usual , CIA repeatedly reported that it had not detected signs of any high alert of the Soviet armed forces.
After a limited alert announced by TASS on 12 Sept.62, before the crisis, Marshal Malinovsky reported to the Central Committee that the armed forces were 'fulfilling the orders of the USSR government on placing the Armed Forces on the highest combat readiness' in memoranda dated 14, 20, and 27 Sept.
Viktor V Mukhin, chief of the Historical Archive Section of the General Staff, told me in 1992 that the armed forces as a whole were on 'increased' alert, but the Strategic Rocket Forces were on 'highest' alert.
Two former Soviet strategic missile forces veterans on duty during the crisis have, however, said the strategic missile forces were only on 'increased' alert, although one of them states that at one point in mid-crisis they were raised to the 'highest' level for about six hours.
At least on the basis of United States intelligence materials declassified to date, there is no indication that the United States was aware of any special alert measures taken by the Soviet strategic missile forces during the crisis.
See the essay by Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali in this volume.
In conversation with me, Dobrynin has clarified that this statement includes the period leading up to the crisis.
The KGB Station Chief in Washington, Aleksandr Feklisov has acknowledged that the first indication his Station obtained was not until midday on 21 Oct., the day before 60 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS President Kennedy's speech, when a TASS man learned that American press representatives were gathering at the White House because of a reported meeting there of the President's cabinet and military leaders.
The Soviet military attache also picked up information on increased military alert in the southeastern United States.
Only then, from 21 Oct. on, did Soviet intelligence scurry around to try to pick up information.
Feklisov confirmed to me in a conversation in 1992 that except for intelligence on United States military preparations during the crisis, they obtained no real information on American deliberations or decisions before or during the crisis.
Feklisov was removed as chief of the KGB Station in Washington soon after the crisis.
The first successful, if still primitive, Soviet reconnaissance satellites, Kosmos 10 and 11, were launched on 17 and 20 Oct., overflying the United States.
In the ExComm and other deliberations, only the President himself even raised the possibility of giving an assurance against invasion on the morning of 26 Oct., as indeed he had in his conversation with Foreign Minister Gromyko on 18 Oct.
But neither he nor any of his advisers considered that might be the key to resolving the crisis until Khrushchev's message (and a report on Soviet Embassy counselor and KGB chief Aleksandr Fomin's conversation with John Scali of ABC Television) were received later that day.
Prior to the Soviet declaration that they had 42 medium-range missiles in Cuba, United States intelligence had in fact identified only 33 SS-4 missiles, although there was no surprise that there were a few more than that.
It was assumed, particularly because there were more missiles than launchers , that the Soviet intention was to supply each launcher with a reload second missile, for a total of 48 missiles.
What was not known was whether all had been delivered before the blockade.
The United States was therefore prepared to be told there were some number between 33 and 48 medium-range missiles.
This was given to the Soviet negotiators on 8 Nov.62; warheads had also been mentioned on 2 Nov.
President Kennedy mentioned this reference by Khrushchev in a message to the United States negotiators on 5 Nov.
The reference to detection of radioactive emanations from Aleksandrovsk was deleted in declassification from91, but is given in a cross-reference on97.
It was still regarded as 'tenuous' at the time, but missile nuclear nose-cone transport vans were seen aboard and being unloaded from Aleksandrovsk after she had landed in Guba Okol'naya in the Northern Fleet area of the United States INTELLIGENCE 61 Soviet Union, on 23 Nov.; ibid.
A CIA study in 1964 laid out in some detail the analysis underlying the correct conclusion that Aleksandrovsk had probably brought nuclear weapons to Cuba, and later withdrawn them.
It even hypothesized, correctly, that the call of Aleksandrovsk at a second Cuban port before departing for the Soviet Union might have been to pick up additional nuclear warheads, implying that some nuclear warheads had also been brought in by another ship.
The one significant gap was not in analysis but in collection; United States intelligence had not identified the departure of Indigirka from Guba Okol'naya, Severomorsk, in Sept., and therefore even after the crisis analysts believed that Aleksandrovsk was the only ship to have departed from that port , to which it then returned in Nov.
Accounts of the missile crisis written since 1987, including by this author, erroneously identified Poltava as a likely carrier of nuclear weapons turned back by the quarantine.
Poltava, which had delivered one load of SS-4 missiles in Sept., was en route Hearing Cuba in mid-Oct. with a cargo of SS-5 intermediate-range missiles, but not nuclear warheads.
Pliyev, the Soviet commander in Cuba, on 30 Oct.62, to load the 36 SS-4 MRBM warheads on Aleksandrovsk (which had kept the 24 SS-5 IRBM warheads in its hold throughout the crisis) and to return them to the Soviet Union.
Gribkov's statements on the tactical nuclear warheads were made on the same occasion, 4 April 1994, citing a Malinovsky order to Pliyev of 20 Nov.62.
Gribkov appears, however, to be in error in identifying the ship that withdrew the tactical nuclear warheads as Okhotsk, which left Cuba on 4 Dec, and Beloborodov is more likely to be correct that it was Arkhangel'sk, departing Cuba on 1 Dec. and arriving in the Soviet Union on 25 Dec.
Fursenko and Naftali, 'One Hell of a Gamble' 315, erroneously cite 25 Dec. as the date of departure from Havana.
This statement was correct based on what was known at the time, but in error in that the two regiments of tactical cruise missiles were never identified, nor of course were the tactical nuclear warheads for those tactical cruise missiles, the nuclear warheads for the Luna tactical rockets, and the tactical nuclear bombs for the Il-28s.
Estimates on Soviet Strategic Forces, 1950-1983 152; from paras.-2118, of NIE 11-4-63.
The nuclear warheads apparently passed through Mariel Naval Air Station, and the ORR analysis identified it as a probable nuclear warhead processing facility.
Castro confirmed this to me at the 1992 Havana Conference on the Cuban missile crisis.
One reason for such confidence is that the major studies were 'all-source' documents, and even though one cannot know what has been deleted owing to sensitive 'sources and methods', it is clear that other conclusions stated in the same document would not have been made if they were contradicted by information in the passages excised.
For further discussion, see the essay by Beth Fischer, later in this volume.
