While critics accuse Kennedy of making mistakes, including creating the conditions for the crisis in his mismanagement of the Bay of Pigs, his overall performance during the crisis was helpful.
At that date, the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles in Cuba were just 90 miles from United States territory, and the American government saw them as a clear threat.
In response, President Kennedy quickly confronted Soviet leaders and demanded that the Soviet missiles be removed immediately from Cuba.
He met with Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, on October 18th, who argued that the weapons were for defensive purposes only.
The president met with his military aides, his advisors and his brother Robert in the upcoming days to discuss military options.
On October 22, 1962, at 7m., Kennedy gave a televised address to the American people.
Eventually, however, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev backed down, and Soviet missiles were removed from Cuba.
While the end result of Kennedy's handling of the crisis was positive, as the world avoided nuclear warfare, many critics argued that he mishandled the crisis.
In contrast, others suggest that he showed solid leadership and managed to diffuse a potentially devastating situation.
Supporters of Kennedy argue that the young American president effectively diffused a direct and serious threat to American cities during the crisis.
Kennedy's supporters suggest that his actions were important in showing that the United States was willing to defy Soviet actions.
Supporters also cite Kennedy's restraint in ruling out an air strike or military invasion as proof that Kennedy handled the crisis well.
By standing up to the Soviets without resorting to drastic military measures, Kennedy may have preserved the delicate Cold War balance between the Soviets and the United States for years to come.
Specifically, Kennedy chose to respond to a more conciliatory Russian communication, rather than a more antagonistic communication.
In contrast, Kennedy's critics argued that his reaction to the Soviet buildup of nuclear weapons was fundamentally flawed.
This over-escalation, they argue, brought the world unnecessarily close to nuclear war.
Critics also suggest that Kennedy's actions were motivated by political gain.
Mid-term elections were due in November of the year of the crisis , and critics note that Kennedy might have been trying to gain domestic support with his hard line stance on the nuclear missiles.
Kennedy's critics also note that his supporters often gloss over the fact that Kennedy gave up some crucial strategic points in order to have the missiles removed.
