Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz ; August 13, 1926 November 25, 2016) was a Cuban communist revolutionary and politician who governed the Republic of Cuba as Prime Minister from 1959 to 1976 and then as President from 1976 to 2008.
Under his administration, Cuba became a one-party communist state , while industry and business were nationalized and state socialist reforms were implemented throughout society.
After participating in rebellions against right-wing governments in the Dominican Republic and Colombia , he planned the overthrow of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista, launching a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953.
After Batista's overthrow in 1959, Castro assumed military and political power as Cuba's Prime Minister.
The United States came to oppose Castro's government and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him by assassination , economic blockade and counter-revolution, including the Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961.
Policies introducing central economic planning and expanding healthcare and education were accompanied by state control of the press and the suppression of internal dissent.
Abroad, Castro supported anti-imperialist revolutionary groups, backing the establishment of Marxist governments in Chile, Nicaragua and Grenada , as well as sending troops to aid allies in the Yom Kippur.
These actions, coupled with Castro's leadership of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1979 to 1983 and Cuba’s medical internationalism , increased Cuba’s profile on the world stage.
Following the Soviet Union’s dissolution in 1991, Castro led Cuba through the economic downturn of the "" Special Period "", embracing environmentalist and anti-globalization ideas.
In 2006, Castro transferred his responsibilities to Vice President Raul Castro, who was elected to the presidency by the National Assembly in 2008.
The longest-serving non-royal head of state in the 20th and 21st centuries , Castro polarized world opinion.
Critics view him as a dictator whose administration oversaw human-rights abuses, the exodus of a large number of Cubans and the impoverishment of the country's economy.
Castro was decorated with various international awards and significantly influenced different individuals and groups across the world.
Castro became critical of the corruption and violence of President Ramon Grau ’s government, delivering a public speech on the subject in November 1946 that received coverage on the front page of several newspapers.
A charismatic figure, Chibas advocated social justice, honest government and political freedom, while his party exposed corruption and demanded reform.
Though Chibas came third in the 1948 general election , Castro remained committed to working on his behalf.UZl Student violence escalated after Grau employed gang leaders as police officers, and Castro soon received a death threat urging him to leave the university.
However, he refused to do so and began to carry a gun and surround himself with armed friends.
The military force consisted of around 1,200 troops, mostly Cubans and exiled Dominicans, and they intended to sail from Cuba in July 1947.
Grau's government stopped the invasion under United States pressure, although Castro and many of his comrades evaded arrest.
Returning to Havana, Castro took a leading role in student protests against the killing of a high school pupil by government bodyguards.
At this point, his public speeches took on a distinctly leftist slant by condemning social and economic inequality in Cuba.
In contrast, his former public criticisms had centered on condemning corruption and United States imperialism.
There, the assassination of popular leftist leader Jorge Eliecer Gaitan Ayala led to widespread rioting and clashes between the governing Conservatives backed by the army and leftist Liberals . r26l Castro joined the Liberal cause by stealing guns from a police station, but subsequent police investigations concluded that he had not been involved in any killings.
Returning to Cuba, Castro became a prominent figure in protests against government attempts to raise bus fares.
That year, he married Mirta Diaz Balart , a student from a wealthy family connected to Fulgencio Batista[281. through whom he was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite.
I was like a blindfolded man in a forest, who doesn’t even know where north or south is.
He came to interpret Cuba's problems as an integral part of capitalist society, or the ""dictatorship of the bourgeoisie"", rather than the failings of corrupt politicians, and adopted the Marxist view that meaningful political change could only be brought about by proletariat revolution.
Visiting Havana's poorest neighborhoods, he became active in the student anti-racist campaign.
The group's purpose was to oppose the influence of the violent gangs within the university; despite his promises, Prio had failed to control the situation, instead offering many of their senior members jobs in government ministries.
Castro volunteered to deliver a speech for the Movement on November 13, exposing the government's secret deals with the gangs and identifying key members.
Castro co-founded a legal partnership that primarily catered for poor Cubans, although it proved a financial failure.
Caring little for money or material goods, Castro failed to pay his bills; his furniture was repossessed and electricity cut off, distressing his wife.
He took part in a high-school protest in Cienfuegos in November 1950, fighting with police in protest at the Education Ministry's ban on student associations; arrested and charged for violent conduct, the magistrate dismissed the charges.
Seeing himself as Chibas’ heir, Castro wanted to run for Congress in the June 1952 elections, though senior Ortodoxo members feared his radical reputation and refused to nominate him.
Instead he was nominated as a candidate for the House of Representatives by party members in Havana's poorest districts, and began campaigning.
The Ortodoxo had considerable support and was predicted to do well in the election.
On March 10, 1952, Batista seized power in a military coup, with Prio fleeing to Mexico.
Castro was deprived of being elected in his run for office by Batista's move, and like many others, considered it a one-man dictatorship.
Batista moved to the right, solidifying ties with both the wealthy elite and the United States, severing diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, suppressing trade unions and persecuting Cuban socialist groups.
Intent on opposing Batista, Castro brought several legal cases against the government, but these came to nothing, and Castro began thinking of alternate ways to oust the regime.
Fidel Castro in the Cuban Revolution The Movement and the Moncada Barracks attack: 1952 1953 In a few hours you will be victorious or defeated, but regardless of the outcome listen well, friends this Movement will triumph.
If you win tomorrow, the aspirations of Marti will be fulfilled sooner.
If we fail, our action will nevertheless set an example for the Cuban people, and from the people will arise fresh new men willing to die for Cuba.
Although a revolutionary socialist, Castro avoided an alliance with the communist PSP, fearing it would frighten away political moderates, but kept in contact with PSP members like his brother Raul.
The attack took place on July 26, 1953, but ran into trouble; 3 of the 16 cars that had set out from Santiago failed to get there.
Reaching the barracks, the alarm was raised, with most of the rebels pinned down by machine gun fire.
Four were killed before Castro ordered a retreat.[57l The rebels suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties, whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded.
Responding to the attack, Batista's government proclaimed martial law , ordering a violent crackdown on dissent, and imposing strict media censorship.
The government broadcast misinformation about the event, claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients, although news and photographs of the army's use of torture and summary executions in Oriente soon spread, causing widespread public and some governmental disapproval . \6 ll Over the following days, the rebels were rounded up; some were executed and others including Castro transported to a prison north of Santiago.
The trial embarrassed the army by revealing that they had tortured suspects, after which they tried unsuccessfully to prevent Castro from testifying any further, claiming he was too ill.
The trial ended on October 5, with the acquittal of most defendants; 55 were sentenced to prison terms of between 7 months and 13 years.
I would not be stopped by the hatred and ill will of a few thousand people, including some of my relatives, half the people I know, two-thirds of my fellow professionals, and four-fifths of my ex-schoolmates -Fidel Castro, 1954.
T681 Imprisoned with 25 comrades, Castro renamed his group the "" 26th of July Movement "" in memory of the Moncada attack's date, and formed a school for prisoners.
He read widely, enjoying the works of Marx, Lenin, and Marti but also reading books by Freud , Kant , Shakespeare, Munthe, Maugham and Dostoyevsky , analyzing them within a Marxist framework.
Corresponding with supporters, he maintained control over the Movement and organized the publication of History Will Absolve Me.
J72] Meanwhile, Castro's wife Mirta gained employment in the Ministry of the Interior, something he discovered through a radio announcement.
Both Fidel and Mirta initiated divorce proceedings, with Mirta taking custody of their son Fidelito; this angered Castro, who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment.31 In 1954, Batista's government held presidential elections, but no politician stood against him; the election was widely considered fraudulent.
It had allowed some political opposition to be voiced, and Castro's supporters had agitated for an amnesty for the Moncada incident's perpetrators.
Some politicians suggested an amnesty would be good publicity, and the Congress and Batista agreed.
Backed by the United States and major corporations, Batista believed Castro to be no threat, and on May 15, 1955, the prisoners were released.
Returning to Havana, Castro gave radio interviews and press conferences; the government closely monitored him, curtailing his activities.
Now divorced, Castro had sexual affairs with two female supporters, Naty Revuelta and Maria Laborde, each conceiving him a child.
Setting about strengthening the MR-26-7, he established an 11-person National Directorate but retained autocratic control, with some dissenters labeling him a caudillo ; he argued that a successful revolution could not be run by committee and required a strong leader.
As a follower of Marti, I believe the hour has come to take our rights and not beg for them, to light instead of pleading for them.
Antonio met with Castro in Mexico City , but Castro opposed the student's support for indiscriminate assassination.
After purchasing the decrepit yacht Granina , on November 25, 1956, Castro set sail from Tuxpan , Veracruz, with 81 armed revolutionaries.
At some points, they had to bail water caused by a leak, and at another, a man fell overboard, delaying their journey.
The plan had been for the crossing to take 5 days, and on the Granma' s scheduled day of arrival, November 30, MR-26-7 members under Frank Pais led an armed uprising in Santiago and Manzanillo.
However, the Granma's journey ultimately lasted 7 days, and with Castro and his men unable to provide reinforcements, Pais and his militants dispersed after two days of intermittent attacks.
Castro biographer Robert E Quirk noted that there was ""no better place to hide” in all the island, f 90] The Granma ran aground in a mangrove swamp at Playa Las Coloradas, close to Los Cayuelos , on December 2, 1956.
Fleeing inland, its crew headed for the forested mountain range of Oriente's Sierra Maestra. being repeatedly attacked by Batista's troops.
TO l They began launching raids on small army posts to obtain weaponry, and in January 1957 they overran the outpost at La Plata, treating any soldiers that they wounded but executing Chicho Osorio, the local mayoral , who was despised by the local peasants and who boasted of killing one of Castro's rebels.
Osorio's execution aided the rebels in gaining the trust of locals, although they largely remained unenthusiastic and suspicious of the revolutionaries.
As trust grew, some locals joined the rebels, although most new recruits came from urban areas.
In March 1957, the DR launched a failed attack on the presidential palace, during which Antonio was shot dead.
Beginning on April 9, it received strong support in central and eastern Cuba, but little elsewhere.
By November, Castro's forces controlled most of Oriente and Las Villas, and divided Cuba in two by closing major roads and rail lines, severely disadvantaging Batista.
I I loi Fearing Castro was a socialist, the United States instructed Cantillo to oust Batista. r till By this time the great majority of Cuban people had turned against the Batista regime.
Smith, who felt the whole CIA mission had become too close to the MR-26-7 movement, | l 121H131 personally went to Batista and informed him that the United States no longer would supported him and felt he no longer could control the situation in Cuba.
General Cantillo secretly agreed to a ceasefire with Castro, promising that Batista would be tried as a war criminahrilll however, Batista was warned, and fled into exile with over US$300,000,000 on December 31, 1958.
He ensured that the government implemented policies to cut corruption and fight illiteracy and that it attempted to remove Batistanos from positions of power by dismissing Congress and barring all those elected in the rigged elections of 1954 and 1958 from future office.
U26] More recent estimates place the death toll between 1 OOO r 1271 and 4000.
U28] In response to popular uproar, which demanded that those responsible be brought to justice, Castro helped set up many trials, resulting in hundreds of executions.
Acclaimed by many across Latin America, he traveled to Venezuela where he met with President-elect Romulo Betancourt , unsuccessfully requesting a loan and a new deal for Venezuelan oil, r 1301 Returning home, an argument between Castro and senior government figures broke out.
He was infuriated that the government had left thousands unemployed by closing down casinos and brothels.
Before he died Meyer Lansky said Cuba ""ruined"" him. [l4ll Although refusing to categorize his regime as socialist and repeatedly denying being a communist, Castro appointed Marxists to senior government and military positions.
Most notably, Che Guevara became Governor of the Central Bank and then Minister of Industries.
Appalled, Air Force commander Pedro Luis Diaz Lanz defected to the United States H42l Although President Urrutia denounced the defection, he expressed concern with the rising influence of Marxism.
Over 500,000 Castro-supporters surrounded the Presidential Palace demanding Urrutia's resignation, which he submitted.
On July 23, Castro resumed his Premiership and appointed Marxist Osvaldo Porticos as president.
Castro and Indonesian President Sukarno in Havana, 1960 Castro's government emphasised social projects to improve Cuba's standard of living, often to the detriment of economic development.
The Cuban primary education system offered a work-study program, with half of the time spent in the classroom, and the other half in a productive activity.
Universal vaccination against childhood diseases was implemented, and infant mortality rates were reduced dramatically.
Expressing contempt for the U.S., Castro shared the ideological views of the USSR, establishing relations with several Marxist-Leninist states.
Castro agreed to provide the USSR with sugar, fruit, fibers, and hides, in return for crude oil, fertilizers, industrial goods, and a $100 million loan.
Retaliating, the United States cancelled its import of Cuban sugar, provoking Castro to nationalize most U.S.-owned assets on the island, including banks and sugar mills.
The ship carried weapons purchased from Belgium, the cause of the explosion was never determined, but Castro publicly insinuated that the United States government were guilty of sabotage.
He ended this speech with "" jPatria o Muerte!"" , a proclamation that he made much use of in ensuing years.
He also met Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, with the two publicly condemning the poverty and racism faced by Americans in areas like Harlem.
Relations between Castro and Kh rushchev were warm; they led the applause to one another's speeches at the General Assembly, r 1601 Subsequently, visited by Polish First Secretary Wladyslaw Gomulka , Bulgarian Chairman Todor Zhivkov.
Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser and Indian Premier Jawaharlal Nehru . ri6ll Castro also received an evening's reception from the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . r 1621 Back in Cuba, Castro feared a U.S.-backed coup; in 1959 his regime spent $120 million on Soviet, French, and Belgian weaponry and by early 1960 had doubled the size of Cuba's armed forces.
By 1970, a third of the population would be involved in the CDR, and this would come to rise to 80%. r 1651 Castro proclaimed the new administration a direct democracy, in which Cubans could assemble at demonstrations to express their democratic will.
As a result, he rejected the need for elections, claiming that representative democratic systems served the interests of socio-economic elites. r 1661 United States Secretary of State Christian Herter announced that Cuba was adopting the Soviet model of rule, with a one-party state, government control of trade unions, suppression of civil liberties, and the absence of freedom of speech and press.
Cuba’s stature in the world soared to new heights, and Fidel’ s role as the adored and revered leader among ordinary Cuban people received a renewed boost.
The United States responded by ending diplomatic relations, and it increased CIA funding for exiled dissidents; these militants began attacking ships that traded with Cuba, and bombed factories, shops, and sugar mills.
On the night of April 16 to 17, Brigade 2506 landed along Cuba's Bay of Pigs , and engaged in a 11 re fight with a local revolutionary militia.
Castro ordered Captain Jose Ramon Fernandez to launch the counter-offensive, before taking personal control of it.
Castro sent Fidelito for a Moscow schooling, Soviet technicians arrived on the island, £178] and Castro was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize . fi79l In December 1961, Castro admitted that he had been a Marxist-Leninist for years, and in his Second Declaration of Havana he called on Latin America to rise up in revolution.£l80j In response, the United States successfully pushed the Organization of American States to expel Cuba; the Soviets privately reprimanded Castro for recklessness, although he received praise from China.
Kh rushchev wanted to install Soviet R-12 MRBM nuclear missiles on Cuba to even the power balance.
Cuba's foreign policy was staunchly anti-imperialist, believing that every nation should control its own natural resources.
However, recognising Cuba's economic dependence on the Soviets, Castro relented to Brezhnev's pressure to be obedient, and in August 1968 he denounced the leaders of the Prague Spring and praised the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia . [2l7l[2l8l Influenced by China's Great Leap Forward , in 1968 Castro proclaimed a Great Revolutionary Offensive, closing all remaining privately owned shops and businesses and denouncing their owners as capitalist counter-revolutionaries.
The severe lack of consumer goods for purchase led productivity to decline, as large sectors of the population felt little incentive to work hard.
This was exacerbated by the perception that a revolutionary elite had emerged consisting of those connected to the administration; they had access to better housing, private transportation, servants, and the ability to purchase luxury goods abroad.
Under United States pressure, the hostages were released, and Castro welcomed them back as heroes.
In April 1971, Castro was internationally condemned for ordering the arrest of dissident poet Heberto Padilla who had been arrested March 20; Padilla was freed, but the government established the National Cultural Council to ensure that intellectuals and artists supported the administration.
Castro supported Allende's socialist reforms, but warned him of right-wing elements in Chile's military.
Algeria, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union, where he was given further awards.
Various NAM members were critical of Castro's attendance, claiming that Cuba was aligned to the Warsaw Pact and therefore should not be at the conference.
This earned Castro respect throughout the Arab world, in particular from the Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, who became his friend and ally.
Castro remained the dominant figure in governance, taking the presidency of the newly created Council of State and Council of Ministers , making him both head of state and head of government.
When the United States and South Africa stepped up their support of the opposition FLNA and UNITA , Castro ordered a further 18,000 troops to Angola, which played a major role in forcing a South African and UNITA retreat.
From there he proceeded to Somalia, Tanzania, Mozambique and Angola where he was greeted by crowds as a hero for Cuba's role in opposing apartheid South Africa.
I speak on behalf of the children in the world who do not have a piece of bread.
I speak on the behalf of the sick who have no medicine, of those whose rights to life and human dignity have been denied. -Fidel Castro's message to the UN General Assembly, 7979 12451 In 1977 the Ogaden War broke out over the disputed Ogaden region as Somalia invaded Ethiopia; although a former ally of Somali President Siad Barre , Castro had warned him against such action, and Cuba sided with Mengistu Haile Mariam 's Marxist government of Ethiopia.
He sent troops under the command of General Arnaldo Ochoa to aid the overwhelmed Ethiopian anny.
After forcing back the Somalis, Mengistu then ordered the Ethiopians to suppress the Eritrean People’s Liberation Front , a measure Castro refused to support.
In 1979, the Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement was held in Havana, where Castro was selected as NAM president, a position he held till 1982.
In his capacity as both President of the NAM and of Cuba he appeared at the United Nations General Assembly in October 1979 and gave a speech on the disparity between the world's rich and poor.
Carter continued criticizing Cuba's human rights abuses, but adopted a respectful approach which gained Castro's attention.
Considering Carter well-meaning and sincere, Castro freed certain political prisoners and allowed some Cuban exiles to visit relatives on the island, hoping that in turn Carter would abolish the economic embargo and stop CIA support for militant dissidents.
For the first time, unemployment became a serious problem in Castro's Cuba, with the government sending unemployed youth to other countries, primarily East Gennany, to work there.
Increasing numbers of Cubans fled to Florida, but were labelled ""scum"" and "" lumpen "" by Castro and his CDR supporters.
In one incident, 10,000 Cubans stormed the Peruvian Embassy requesting asylum, and so the United States agreed that it would accept 3,500 refugees.
Castro conceded that those who wanted to leave could do so from Mariel port.
Hundreds of boats arrived from the U.S., leading to a mass exodus of 120,000; Castro's government took advantage of the situation by loading criminals, the mentally ill, and suspected homosexuals onto the boats destined for Florida.
The event destabilized Carter's administration and in 1981, Ronald Reagan was elected United States President.
Reagan's administration adopted a hard-line approach against Castro, making its desire to overthrow his regime cl car.
In late 1981, Castro publicly accused the United States of biological warfare against Cuba by orchestrating a dengue fever epidemic.
Although despising Argentina's right wing military junta, Castro supported them in the 1982 Falklands War against Britain and offered military aid to the Argentinians.
When Bishop was executed in a Soviet-backed coup by hard-line Marxist Bernard Coard in October 1983, Castro condemned the killing but cautiously retained support for Grenada’s government.
A reformer, he implemented measures to increase freedom of the press and economic decentralization in an attempt to strengthen socialism.
Like many orthodox Marxist critics, Castro feared that the reforms would weaken the socialist state and allow capitalist elements to regain control.
Gorbachev conceded to United States demands to reduce support for Cuba, with Soviet-Cuban relations deteriorating.
A number of senior military officers, including Ochoa and Tony de la Guardia, were investigated for corruption and complicity in cocaine smuggling, tried, and executed in 1989, despite calls for leniency.
On medical advice given him in October 1985, Castro gave up regularly smoking Cuban cigars, helping to set an example for the rest of the populace.
Castro became passionate in his denunciation of the Third World debt problem, arguing that the Third World would never escape the debt that First World banks and governments imposed upon it.
In 1985, Havana hosted five international conferences on the world debt problem.
Castro’s image painted onto a now-destroyed lighthouse in Lobi to , Angola , 1995 By November 1987, Castro began spending more time on the Angolan Civil War , in which the Marxists had fallen into retreat.
Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos successfully appealed for more Cuban troops, with Castro later admitting that he devoted more time to Angola than to the domestic situation, believing that a victory would lead to the collapse of apartheid.
Gorbachev called for a negotiated end to the conflict and in 1988 organized a quadripartite talks between the USSR, U.S., Cuba and South Africa; they agreed that all foreign troops would pull out of Angola.
Castro was angered by Gorbachev's approach, believing that he was abandoning the plight of the world's poor in favor of detente.
In Eastern Europe, socialist governments fell to capitalist reformers between 1989 and 1991 and many Western observers expected the same in Cuba j275l Increasingly isolated, Cuba improved relations with Manuel Noriega ’s right-wing government in Panama despite Castro's personal hatred of Noriega but it was overthrown in a United States invasion in December 1989.
T2761 In February 1990, Castro's allies in Nicaragua, President Daniel Ortega and the Sandinistas, were defeated by the U.S.-funded National Opposition Union in an election j277l With the collapse of the Soviet bloc, the United States secured a majority vote for a resolution condemning Cuba's human rights violations at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, Switzerland.
Petrol rations were dramatically reduced, Chinese bicycles were imported to replace cars, and factories performing non-essential tasks were shut down.
Oxen began to replace tractors, firewood began being used for cooking and electricity cuts were introduced that lasted 16 hours a day.
He welcomed Western politicians and investors to Cuba, befriended Manuel Fraga and took a particular interest in Margaret Thatcher ’s policies in the UK, believing that Cuban socialism could learn from her emphasis on low taxation and personal initiative. [284l He ceased support for foreign militants, refrained from praising FARC on a 1994 visit to Colombia and called for a negotiated settlement between the Zapatistas and Mexican government in 1995.
In 1991, Havana hosted the Pan American Games , which involved construction of a_ stadium and accommodation for the athletes; Castro admitted that it was an expensive error, but it was a success for Cuba's government.
A larger pro-Castro crowd confronted them, who were joined by Castro; he informed media that the men were anti-socials misled by the United States The protests dispersed with no recorded injuries.
Fearing that dissident groups would invade, the government organised the ""War of All the People"" defense strategy, planning a widespread guerrilla warfare campaign, and the unemployed were given jobs building a network of bunkers and tunnels across the country.
We are facing a world completely ruled by neo-liberalism and capitalism.
That is what we are doing, with great equanimity, without giving up our ideals, our goals.
They are defending, to the last atom, socialist ideas, principles and goals. Fidel Castro explaining the reforms of the Special Perio d\290 1 Castro believed in the need for reform if Cuban socialism was to survive in a world now dominated by capitalist free markets.
Many older members of government were to be retired and replaced by their younger counterparts.
A number of economic changes were proposed, and subsequently put to a national referendum.
Free farmers' markets and small-scale private enterprises would be legalized in an attempt to stimulate economic growth, while United States dollars were also made legal tender.
Certain restrictions on emigration were eased, allowing more discontented Cuban citizens to move to the United States.
Further democratization was to be brought in by having the National Assembly's members elected directly by the people, rather than through municipal and provincial assemblies.
Castro welcomed debate between proponents and opponents of the reforms, although over time he began to increasingly sympathise with the opponent's positions, arguing that such reforms must be delayed.
Castro's government diversified its economy into biotechnology and tourism, the latter outstripping Cuba's sugar industry as its primary source of revenue in 1995.
The arrival of thousands of Mexican and Spanish tourists led to increasing numbers of Cubans turning to prostitution; officially illegal, Castro refrained from cracking down on prostitution in Cuba, fearing a political backlash.
Although he viewed the Roman Catholic Church as a reactionary, pro-capitalist institution, Castro organized a visit to Cuba by Pope John Paul II for January 1998; it strengthened the position of both the Cuban Church and Castro's government.
In the early 1990s Castro embraced environmentalism, campaigning against global warming and the waste of natural resources, and accusing the United States of being the world's primary polluter.
By 2006, Cuba was the world's only nation which met the United Nations Development Programme 's definition of sustainable development, with an ecological footprint of less than 1. hectares per capita and a Human Development Index of over 0.8.
Castro also became a proponent of the anti-globalization movement, criticizing United States global hegemony and the control exerted by multinationals . [296l Castro maintained his devout anti-apartheid beliefs, and at the July 26 celebrations in 1991, he was joined onstage by the South African political activist Nelson Mandela , recently released from prison.
Mandela praised Cuba's involvement in battling South Africa in Angola and thanked Castro personally.
He later attended Mandela's inauguration as President of South Africa in 1994.
In 2001 he attended the Conference Against Racism in South Africa at which he lectured on the global spread of racial stereotypes through United States film.
ALBA sought to redistribute wealth evenly throughout member countries, to protect the region’s agriculture, and to oppose economic liberalization and privatization. [309l ALBA's origins lay in a December 2004 agreement signed between the two countries, and was formalized through a People's Trade Agreement also signed by Evo Morales ’ Bolivia in April 2006.
This development makes Cuba the only country to have embassies in all independent countries of the Caribbean Community.
Castro amid cheering crowds in 2005 In contrast to the improved relations between Cuba and a number of leftist Latin American states, in 2004 it broke off diplomatic ties with Panama after centrist President Mireya Moscoso pardoned four Cuban exiles accused of attempting to assassinate Castro in 2000.
Diplomatic ties were reinstalled in 2005 following the election of leftist President Martin Torriios . r3l4l Castro's improving relations across Latin America were accompanied by continuing animosity towards the United States However, after massive damage caused by Hurricane Michelle in 2001, Castro successfully proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States while declining its government's offer of humanitarian aid.
In 1998, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien arrived in Cuba to meet Castro and highlight their close ties.
That month, the Non-Aligned Movement held its 14th Summit in Havana, there agreeing to appoint Castro as the organisation's president for a year's term.
On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People’s Power unanimously voted Raul as president.
He continued to interact with the Cuban people, published an opinion column titled ""Reflections"" in Granma, used a Twitter account, and gave occasional public lectures.
In July 2010, he made his first public appearance since falling ill, greeting science center workers and giving a television interview to Mesa Redonda in which he discussed United States tensions with Iran and North Korea.
In March 2011, Castro condemned the NATO-led military intervention in Libya . [34ll In March 2012, Pope Benedict XVI visited Cuba for three days, during which time he briefly met with Castro despite the Pope's vocal opposition to Cuba's government.
Calling the situation ""incredible and absurd"", he maintained that war would not benefit either side, and that it represented ""one of the gravest risks of nuclear war"" since the Cuban missile crisis.
In December 2014, Castro was awarded the Chinese Confucius Peace Prize for seeking peaceful solutions to his nation’s conflict with the United States and for his post-retirement efforts to prevent nuclear war. [345l In January 2015, he publicly commented on the "" Cuban Thaw "", an increased normalization between CubaUnited States relations, by stating that while it was a positive move for establishing peace in the region, he mistrusted the United States government.
Highlighting that he was soon to turn 90 years old, he noted that he would die in the near future but urged those assembled to retain their communist ideals.
His death came 9 months after his older brother Ramon died at the age of 91 in February.
Politics of Fidel Castro Castro with South American leaders of the Mercosur trade bloc in 2006.
Castro proclaimed himself to be ""a Socialist, a Marxist , and a Leninist "", and publicly identified as a Marxist-Leninist from December 1961 on ward.
Influenced by Guevara, he suggested that Cuba could evade most stages of socialism and progress straight to communism.
The Cuban Revolution nevertheless did not meet the Marxist axiom that socialism would be achieved through proletariat revolution, for most of the forces involved in Batista's overthrow were led by members of the Cuban middle-class.
According to Castro, a country could be regarded as socialist if its means of production were controlled by the state.
Castro biographer Sebastian Balfour noted that ""the vein of moral regeneration and voluntarism that runs through"" Castro's thought owes far more to ""Hispanic nationalism"" than European socialism or Marxism-Leninism.
Castro described Martl's political ideas as ""a philosophy of independence and an exceptional humanistic philosophy"", and his supporters and apologists repeatedly claimed that there were great similarities between the two figures.
Instead, he advocated hard work, family values, integrity, and self-discipline.
He despises any system in which one class or group of people lives much better than another.
He wanted a system that provided the basic needs to all enough to eat, health care, adequate housing and education.
The authoritarian nature of the Cuban Revolution stems largely from his commitment to that goal.
Castro was convinced that he was right, and that his system was for the good of the people.
Thus, anyone who stood against the revolution stood also against the Cuban people and that, in Castro’s eyes, was simply unacceptable.
There is, then, very little in the way of individual freedoms especially freedom of expression and assembly.
And there are political prisoners those who have expressed positions against the revolution though today only some 300, down markedly from the number at the outset of the revolution. Wayne S Smith.
Biographer Peter Bourne noted that Castro ""suffers fools poorly"" and that in his younger years he was intolerant of those who did not share his views.
Balfour described Castro as having a ""voracity for knowledge"" an ""elephantine memory"" that allowed him to speak for hours on a variety of different subjects.
Castro with his son Angel in 1954 Castro was known for his busy working hours, often only going to bed at 3 or 4 m.
He described Ernest Hemingway as his favorite writer, and enjoyed reading but was uninterested in music.
A sports fan, he also spent much of his time trying to keep fit, undertaking regular exercise.
He took a great interest in gastronomy , as well as wine and whisky, and as Cuban leader was known to wander into his kitchen to discuss cookery with his chefs.
Castro had a lifelong love of guns. [3891 and a preference for life in the countryside over the city.
He also criticized use of the Bible to justify the oppression of women and Africans, but commented that Christianity exhibited ""a group of very humane precepts"" which gave the world ""ethical values"" and a ""sense of social justice"", relating, ""If people call me Christian, not from the standpoint of religion but from the standpoint of social vision, I declare that I am a Christian.
Unlike a number of other Soviet-era communist leaders, Castro's government did not intentionally construct a cult of personality around him, although his popularity among segments of the Cuban populace nevertheless led to one developing in the early years of his administration.
T3941 By 2006, the BBC reported that Castro's image could frequently be found in Cuban stores, classrooms, taxicabs, and on national television.
For 37 years, Castro publicly wore nothing but olive-green military fatigues, emphasizing his role as the perpetual revolutionary, but in the mid-1990s began wearing dark civilian suits and suavabera publicly as well.
Within Cuba, Castro was often nic kn amed ""El Caballo"" , a label attributed to Cuban entertainer Benny More which alludes to Castro's well known philandering during the 1950s and early 1960s, 13991 and during this period Castro was widely recognized as a sex symbol in Cuba.
He died of suicide in February 2018, over a year after his father's death. r404l Diaz-Balart and Castro divorced in 1955, and she moved to Spain, although allegedly returned to Cuba in 2002 to live with Fidelito.
Fidelito grew up in Cuba; for a time, he ran Cuba's atomic-energy commission before being removed from the post by his father.
Fidel had another daughter, Francisca Pupo (born 1953), the result of a one-night affair.
Castro often engaged in one night stands with women, some of whom were specially selected for him while visiting foreign allies.111 Fidel had five other sons by his second wife, Dalia Soto del Valle Antonio, Alejandro, Alexis, Alexander ""Alex"", and Angel Castro Soto del Yalle.061 His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the United States since the early 1960s, and was an opponent of her brother 's regime.121 While in power, Castro's two closest male friends were the former Mayor of Havana Pepin Naranjo and his own personal physician, Rene Vallejo.
From 1980 until his death in 1995, Naranjo headed Castro's team of advisers.
Castro also had a deep friendship with fellow revolutionary Celia Sanchez , who accompanied him almost everywhere during the 1960s, and controlled almost all access to the leader.
List of awards and honours bestowed upon Fidel Castro , and List of things named after Fidel Castro Within Cuba, Fidel’s domination of every aspect of the government and the society remains total.
His personal needs for absolute control seems to have changed little over the years.
He remains committed to a disciplined society in which he is still determined to remake the Cuban national character, creating work-orientated, socially concerned individuals He wants to increase people’s standard of living, the availability of material goods, and to import the latest technology.
But the economic realities, despite rapid dramatic growth in the gross national product, severely limit what Cuba can buy on the world market. Peter Bourne, Castro Biographer, 1986 1416] One of the most controversial political leaders of his era, Castro both inspired and dismayed people across the world during his lifetime.
The Daily Telegraph noted that across the world he was ""either praised as a brave champion of the people, or derided as a power-mad dictator.
On the island, the Castro government's legitimacy rested on the improvements that it brought to social justice , healthcare, and education.221 The administration also relied heavily on its appeals to nationalistic sentiment, in particular the widespread hostility to the United States government.
In their view, he should be ""applauded"" for his regime's ""substantial improvements"" to healthcare and education, but criticised for its ""ruthless suppression of freedom of expression.
In Cuba Following Castro's death, Cuba’s government announced that it would be passing a law prohibiting the naming of ""institutions, streets, parks or other public sites, or erecting busts, statues or other forms of tribute"" in honor of the late Cuban leader in keeping with his wishes to prevent a cult of personality from developing around him.
Jump up A Bourne 1986 , ;69 Coltman 2003 , ;66 Castro & Ramonet 2009 , .107 51.
Jump up A ""Cuba Once More"", by Walter Lippmann , Newsweek , April 1964 ,27, .23 208.
Cuba's GDP in 1988 is given as $27.46 billion in 2017 dollars, which deflates to $13.08 billion in 1988 dollars 264.
Jump up A ""Fidel Castro speaks on imperialist war drive"" , themilitant.com, Volume 69, Number 39.
Jump up A ""Fidel Castro addresses parliament after four-year gap"" , BBC News, August 2010 ,7.
Jump up A 10 Surprises About Fidel Castro's Extravagant Life Forbes, Nov 2016 ,26 388.
Flow Cuban Leader Built Wealth After 1959 Revolution In Communist Country IBTimes, Nov 2016 ,28 389.
