My name is Marvin Kalb, and I have been privileged today to be asked to introduce this program, and also serve as a kind of Moderator.
Tibet, the CIA, and the Sino-Indian War, and I'm happy to tell you there are copies right outside.
I was, in 1962, Bruce, the CBS Moscow Correspondent, and I hope that you will forgive me, but I was totally absorbed in another crisis that was taking place at that time.
And that is one of the issues that’s going to be raised in our discussion today, the applicability to the degree that there is between what we have learned from the 1962 Sino-Indian War, and ways in which that can be applied to our knowledge of what is going on today.
Also, at that time in 1962, I did have one ear cocked to news about the Sino-Indian War, because my brother who is right here with us today, Bernard Kalb, was a Journalist for CBS covering that war.
Thank you for bringing your brother as well, and thank all of you for coming.
Let me begin by setting the stage for you a little bit about this crisis and this war. th On the 16 of October, 1962, or just about 53 years ago, McGeorge Bundy, John F Kennedy's National Security Aide, came into his office early in the morning, in the West Wing, and opened his top-secret folder.
Every day the National Security Advisor gets a top secret folder put together by the White House Situation Room, of the most important cables, and events that have gone on overnight. th On the 16 of October, McGeorge Bundy had two very, very important cables in that folder.
One was an assessment from the State Department about the situation between India and China, and the State Department warned that the border conflict between India and China was heating up, heating up rapidly, and that it increasingly looked likely that China and India would find themselves in a full-scale border war sometime in that month.
The State Department also told the President that should that come to pass, the Chinese would almost certainly prevail because they were better equipped, they were better led, and they had more experience recently in fighting.
And if they did prevail, India would probably turn to the United States for assistance, requiring a major presidential decision, not just about assistance to India, but also how that would balance with America's very close relationship with Pakistan.
The second memorabilia in McGeorge Bundy's overnight folder was from the Central Intelligence Agency, and it reported that U2 imagery taken 24 hours earlier had found intermediate-range ballistic missiles was being introduced by the Soviet Union into Communist Cuba.
It appeared to be an issue in which the survival of mankind was at stake, and in fact it was an issue in which the survival of mankind was at stake.
We thought back in 1962 many Americans, many Russians, many Europeans, many people around the world thought the world was on the brink of Armageddon.
In fact, it was closer than we thought, at the time for example, the CIA estimated that there were 5 to 8,000 Soviet soldiers in Cuba.
But at the time the CIA thought there were only intermediate-range ballistic missiles.
We now know that the Soviets also brought with them tactical missiles capable of firing nuclear weapons at relatively short ranges and that they had surrounded Guantanamo Bay with a battery of these, and the Battery Commander had preauthorization to start firing nuclear weapons at Guantanamo Bay when the first bombs dropped by the United States on the island.
But that shouldn’t dismiss for our eyes the other crisis, the crisis the State Department was writing about and warning about, and the State Department turned out in this case to be remarkably present.
China did invade India, and it quickly got the upper hand, and within days of the Chinese invasion of India Prime Minister Nehru had to do one of the most difficult things in his entire life.
He had to turn to the Americans, and even worse, to the British for assistance.
And at the end of October, 1962, the United States and the Royall Air Force began an airlift of urgent supplies to India.
That eight Boeing 707s landing every day, each one of them dropping off 20 tons of equipment for the Indian Army, and we had American C-130s flying them to the battlefield to try to stop the Chinese invasion.
They weren’t just members of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization; they were members of the Central Treaty Organization.
We had alliance requirements with them that specially said, we wouldn’t sell arms to India without consulting with them first, and pretty soon in this crisis, the Pakistani leader, Field Marshal Ayub Khan, began complaining to the American Ambassador, and writing to Kennedy and saying, Pakistan deserves some kind of compensation, as he put it, for staying neutral in the war.
In effect, signaling that if it didn’t get what it wanted, and it was pretty clear what it wanted, it wanted Cashmere, it was prepare to open a second a front which was, in the end, the nightmare scenario of both President Kennedy and Prime Minister Nehru.
And when they started their second offensive, they overwhelmed the Indians completely.
It appeared for a brief period of time, in mid-November 1962, that the Chinese would not only take over the border area, but will in fact take over all of Eastern India, the whole part of the country to what is now the east of Bangladesh.
There were even fears in India, and the CIA had the same fears, that the Chinese would open another front, occupy the tiny principality of Sikkim, and then march down the border of what was then East Pakistan to Calcutta. th On the 19 of November, 1962, Nehru wrote two letters to President Kennedy, in the second of those two letters he said, catastrophe was imminent.
We have to have more comprehensive assistance if the Chinese are to be prevented from taking over the whole of Eastern India.
Nehru's request was that the Indian Air Force would bomb into Tibet at the supply lines of the Chinese, and the American Air Force would defend Indian airspace.
Here he is, he is on the one hand, dealing with an issue of the survival of the human race, the most tense moment in this U.S.Soviet Cold War, and at the same time, is now dealing with the request from the world's largest democracy, to the United States, with assistance to fight the world's largest most populous country on the other side the world.
Talk about multi-tasking, this is multitasking at it's probably highest art form.
Fortunately, 36 hours after Nehru's letter was received in the White House, the Chinese unilaterally stopped.
Why they stopped, whether that had always been their intention to stop, are questions we don’t know the answers to.
We have access to a lot of American records, and a good deal of Indian records, but we don’t have access to the Chinese records.
We do know that he had done two immediate things in response to Nehru's letter.
One, he dispatched and American aircraft carrier, the Battle Group, to the Bay of Bengal, as a visible show of American support; and second, he dispatched Averell Harriman, who is one of the wisest, gray-haired statesman in American history.
Now this is a guy that FDR had sent to London during the Battle of the Blitz and then sent to Moscow during the Battle of Moscow.
A year after the crisis would come to a head in November 1962, the United States Air Force, the Royal Air Force, and pilots from the Royal Canadian Air Force, and from the Royal Australia Air Force, carried out a large exercise in India which was exactly what Nehru had requested the year before.
We'll never know the answer to the question, what would Kennedy have done, had the Chinese not stopped.
But I think that the fact that a year later, we carried out exactly the -in an exercise the operation Nehru wanted, it gives you a lot of indication that we probably would have gone to war in 1962 with China.
One of the key lessons, I think, is that the President learned in Cuba, and applied it almost immediately to India, that government by committee is not a good idea.
He also learned to be very careful listening to the experts, listening to the experts you hand-selected for the job, and in this case he listened to his Ambassador in New Delhi, John Kenneth Galbraith, and I think we'll come back to that in a minute.
It's also terribly relevant in another way, because if you put it, oversimplified, and it is oversimplified, but I think it's essentially true, the geopolitics of Asia were set in 1962.
We are now 50-some years later seen this access develop to the point where China is now clearly Pakistan's number one ally in the world investing, this year, $46 billion in Pakistan.
But in an ironic kind of way, 50 years later, we are not back to where Kennedy and Nehru were back in 1960s, so U.S., India, entente, access, relationship, whatever you want to call it, that balances to China and Pakistan.
What we've also done in the last 50 years is seeing this conflict turn into an arms race, an arms race that is gone nuclear, an arms race which is, today, the most dangerous arms race, I think, in the world, because the essential issue at the heart of the 1962 war, the border between India and China is not settled today, it is the longestdisputed border in the world.
Now, while China has a lot of other reasons to develop nuclear weapons and other weapons; one of those reasons is India, and for India, China is its number one threat.
So it's a fascinating piece of history, most of which has been kind of lost over the last 50 years for understandable reasons, and a story that’s very important, very relevant to Asian-American politics today, 53 years later.
That’s a wonderful review, not only of the book, but carrying it from 1962 to 2015.
I would like, with all of your permission, which I'll take anyway, an opportunity to ask you a couple of questions, and then we'll go to the audience for their questions.
I'm trying to put myself in the position of a President who goes before the American people and the world, 7:00m.
Monday night, October 22, 1962, and says, ""Ladies and gentlemen, we are on the edge of something hugely dangerous.
The President set up a special committee, the ExCom, and he taped their deliberations, and they didn’t know he taped their deliberations, and we didn’t know they taped the deliberations until years later.
We don’t have that same abundance of material about how he interacted with his experts in Washington, but it's safe to say that Dean Rusk, Bundy and Bob McNamara, were in the loop also on the Sino-Indian Conflict, but they weren’t meeting day in and day out.
Famous Harvard Professor, wrote some of the most famous books about the American economy in history.
He realized that Washington was going to be consumed with Cuba, he was going to therefore get very little helpful advice, but also very little unhelpful interference in what he did, and he basically ran it, while sending back to Kennedy, eyes-only letters for Kennedy on what he was up to.
He kept Rusk and Bundy and the others in the loop, but he had a direct channel to the President, and he felt that he had authority from the President to do what he thought was the right thing to do.
In addition to that he had built by this point in time a very close relationship with Nehru, and I think it's safe to say that by the middle of this crisis, he was no longer just the American Ambassador to the Prime Minister, he was an advisor to the Prime Minister, and the Prime Minister was now looking to him for advice on what to do next, particularly on very tricky issues like how to deal with Pakistan, and what to say to the Pakistanis, and what not to say to the Pakistanis.
And Nehru was given -Galbraith was giving advice on all of these things.
The last thing I want to say about Galbraith is he wrote a diary, he kept a diary of what was going on, and from a historians perspective a diary written while the crisis is going on is of course the ultimate good source, because this is not a memoir in which you say, oh, yeah, I played -I was the most important person in the room because everyone's memoirs say that.
But that diary, and all the documents that have been declassified, especially the two letters that I referred to, which have only been declassified in the last couple of years, provide us with a very good basis for understanding who was in the loop, Kennedy's centrality to the loop, John Kenneth Galbraith's critical role in all of this, and what was really going on in the White House in those days.
So, who -so if we get to November 19 now, and th November 20 , and the President has before him two letters, one of them explaining the dire situation in India, and in effect, in effect asking the President to get into a war with China to protect India.
Now, I would imagine a decision like that is so enormous because it could lead to a war.
China at that time, in the height of the Cold War, a Communist monolith, was certainly not regarded with any kind of sympathy.
That’s what the record we have, and it stops with the Chinese unilateral announcement takes us.
When he got the letter he convened a meeting of the th National Security Council principals, on the night of the 19 , Bundy, Rusk, McNamara and the Director of Central Intelligence, McCone, were all there, we have the record of the meeting, there was pretty much a consensus that we should support India, but also a consensus that we needed to see what they really needed.
And that’s why I think he picked Averell Harriman, who he had a lot of faith in, and who the other people in that room had enormous faith in, too.
I don't think we have people like Averell Harriman around anymore, who are that distinguished, but there is anyone like it, I'd say it's, you know, either like Brent Scowcroft or Bob Gates.
And sent him out urgently, to go assess the situation and then give the President the bottom line on what he needed to do.
And he did go out, and he did then spend a great deal of time in India over the next few months, and a whole series of initiatives began, one of which I've already highlighted, which was the U.S.-Indian military cooperation leading to this military exercise in 1963.
Another thing it led to was an effort to try to negotiate a Cashmere solution.
But when the war was over, when the ceasefire went into effect, there was strong pressure in Washington, and even stronger pressure in London, to try to address the Cashmere one way or another, that of course in the end failed to work.
Now the interesting question is, what if we fast-forward a week, China is still coming on, it's advancing into Eastern India, at some point the President would have had to do two things.
And secondly, he would have had to go to the Congress with some kind of request.
My suspicion from looking at the Cuban side of the crisis, is that he would have been very reluctant to get the Congress in the loop any earlier than he had to, because if you recall in the Cuban crisis, fairly early on he had gone and brought in some of the distinguished Members of the Senate and the House, and they were all rabid hawks, telling him that this was all his fault, that his weakness had led to this, and that if he'd only listened to them, he would never have been in this position.
I don't want to nail you on this one, but I would like to get it th clearly in my own mind.
I think the cumulative evidence of his strong relationship with India that went back to the 1950s, his belief that India was a democracy and that we needed to help India succeed.
His belief that this was an aggressive act by the Chinese, and his belief that the United States had to show resolve, I think he would have.
He sent a carrier, the Battle Group, a year later he sent a whole exercise.
The Russians and Chinese were coordinating, that I think we can say without question.
Khrushchev and Mao were as much competing with each other as they were trying to confront Kennedy.
And both were trying to look more like the leader of Communist Bloc than the other.
You know, one of the interesting things I discovered in doing this, and I went back and I read the national intelligence estimates prepared during the early 1960s about the Soviet Union, and Communist China; I had always had the impression that well into the Vietnam War, the American Government was obsessed with the idea of monolith.
The other thing I want to highlight, and you alluded to it, in 1962 we thought the Soviet Union was our evil foe.
We thought Communist China was a country of insane fanatics, who were, you know, prepared to do all kinds of things to take over the globe.
They were -if you remember back to movies in the 1960s, that the Russians are always the kind of clever international agent, and the Chinese are this kind of faceless enemy that’s inscrutable to all of us.
We now know that our perceptions of China were most misguided back in the 1960s, but I don’t think that would have -you know, if he had gone to Congress of the United States in 1962, and said, Communist China is on the march, and we have to fight, I think the Congress of the United States would have stood up and sung Star Spangled Banner, and voted yes.
You mentioned earlier, Bruce, that we do have a good bit of documentary evidence, from the United States and from the Indians, but not from the Chinese at all.
There is, and I should say, I'm not a China scholar, I'm working on it, but I'm not a China scholar, but there are several experts on Chinese foreign policy who have recently been looking at this Chinese decision-making process, and I think they’ve helped us to understand it a lot more.
And just to put in the Chinese perspective for a minute, China had just come together after a century of being in a state of civil war and foreign occupation in fighting the Japanese, and before that fighting European imperialism.
The Tibetan people, and the Tibetan leadership, led by the Dalai Lama resisted this; first in a nonviolent way, and then in an increasingly violent way.
From the Chinese perspective, of course, this was all a threat to the territorial integrity in unity of the New China.
When the Dalai Lama famously left Tibet and went into exile in India, a CIA team, not Americans, but American-trained individuals had gone into Tibet and helped exfiltrate him out of the country.
One of many of Allen Dulles' success stories to report to President Eisenhower, was the morning the Dalai Lama got out, he was able to report to the President in the Oval Office that the CIA had helped get the Dalai Lama out of Communist China and into India.
We supported them by, for instance by training them, small numbers, in Colorado, because it was felt that Colorado had the closest geology and geography to Tibet, as you could find in the United States.
The Pakistani Intelligence Services, at the direction of Ayub Khan, let the United States fly missions to drop equipment and personnel into Tibet out of East Pakistan.
You could see that it's a very short distance across Indian airspace, and Nepalese airspace and you are in Chinese airspace.
The Indian Government was probably aware of some of what was going on, the Pakistani Government was fully aware of what was going on, and because a lot of these people were caught the minute they landed, and interrogated/tortured by the Chinese, I mean, the Chinese had a pretty good idea of what was going on.
I think they assumed India was in the loop on this, the poor Tibetans who were being caught, never spent any real time in East Pakistan, so they had no idea where the airbase was, and they were -the way the CIA operates in something like this, you don’t people anything they don't need to know.
Undoubtedly, to some extent, the CIA operation, which had begun in the Eisenhower Administration, probably fueled the conspiracy theories in Mao's inner circle, which was prone to paranoia for good reason.
He lived in a very, very dangerous situation with many, many opponents including the United States, including the Russians, including most of his Cabinet from one time or another.
He saw all of this as an attempt by India and the United States to take Tibet back from China, and he reacted as he did.
The exact play for all these things we done know because we don’t have any archives, I, actually myself having studied this a little bit, I don’t think Mao Tse-tung had an archived system in which his ideas were, you know, put down in any vigor for the sake of history.
If they were put down with any sense of vigor they were probably adjusted whenever he changed his mind, and all the archives were adjusted to go along with whatever he came up with then.
Certainly after the Bay of Pigs, you would have thought that Kennedy would be saying, you know, there's some really air-brained ideas coming from those guys out in Langley, and this may be one of the most air-brained, and Galbraith was completely against it.
He thought it was feckless and dangerous, but Kennedy decided to keep going with it.
It was sexy, it was dramatic, and even after the Bay of Pigs, as I said, he continued to move forward.
Well, he certainly pursued that in those years, in '61, '62 in Vietnam, when he tried to do, essentially that.
I'm going to turn to the audience, but I do have one-and-a-half questions to ask about the book itself.
Nobody gets beheaded in this book; nobody drives airplanes into the World Trade Center, but more than that.
I became interested in this about three years ago, when I was writing a broader book about United States relationships with South Asia, and it dawned on me the coincidence of these two crises.
And once I focused on the coincidence of these two crises, then I began to say, well certainly there is a story here, then I have to admit it, the glamour of the Kennedy, Camelot White House, became intoxicating.
Because it was just so much more interesting than any of the White Houses' I actually worked in.
So much more style, so much more class, and it's not to denigrate anybody, but to recognize that the Kennedys had a very special mystique about them.
And John F Kennedy served only 1,000 days, but go to your local book store, go to your neighborhood library, and there are more books about John F Kennedy than there are about any President except Abraham Lincoln or FDR, he has been very studied President.
And the last thing I'll say there, we haven't talked about this, but we did allude to it in the slides.
Kennedy, the First Lady, played a very, very role in his interaction with South Asia, over the course of those 1,000 days.
She wasn’t necessarily th and advisor on the night of 19 , although who knows what they said to each other at the end of the day.
But she was very much involved in America's engagement with India and Pakistan, and that’s another part of the fascinating story here.
Please do ask a question, if you go into a speech I'll have to cut you off, and I'm really a sweetheart so don’t let me do that.
But I see this hand right here, the gentleman right here, in the middle.
The territorial dispute over these -Can you put the map up for one more second.
There's the Eastern part, the yellow is Indian territory claimed by China, and the Western part, which is the yellow here, is area occupied by Chinese forces but claimed by India.
The obvious solution to this problem, and it's been obvious for 55 years, if not longer, is the trade, except the status quo.
And in the 1950s the Chinese hinted at this over and over again, to Nehru.
It's very hard for a democracy to accept that kind of a trade, and especially a young democracy.
You weren’t actually trading away an unhappy population, but Nehru couldn’t do it.
And the Chinese, over the course of the early '60s increasingly became more and more clear of that, they were going to do something.
And like most democracies, Nehru became more and more entrenched that he wasn’t going to give in, and he began pushing the Indian Army forward into positions which were tactically unsound.
But, Nehru was the father of country, he was the most revered person in the state, and none of his generals were going to come up to him and say, Mr Prime Minister, you are really getting us in a whole lot of trouble.
So, he had surrounded himself with the court of people who told him he was always right, and he ended up paying the price terribly in October and November.
He was already an old man, but this crisis really was devastating for him.
The very fact that he had to go to the imperialists, especially London, it must have just been so humiliating to a man who had spent years and years of his life in prison fighting British imperialism, but he did.
The 1950 example of where American forces moved, despite Chinese warnings.
One, an American Military Commander, Douglas MacArthur, who believed that if he was not God he certainly talked to God every day.
And his Intelligence Chief, a very unusual man, who styled himself like oppression officer, which is really kind of weird in the 1940s since we were just fighting the Nazis, but he styled himself oppression officer, he was a big fan of Franco, who told MacArthur whatever MacArthur wanted to be told.
The Indian Ambassador in Beijing was summoned in the middle of the night to go see Zhou Enlai, and Zhou Enlai said, if the Americans keep coming we are going to intervene.
His warning was brought back to the United States, and Truman and his advisors, and especially MacArthur said, we are not going to listen to this Indian diplomat, he has, you know, obviously been turned, he's probably a pinko, if not a fellow traveler, and all of those kinds of things, that people actually said back in the 1950s and '60s, and they were ignored.
Bruce, I'm going to ask you, because there are a lot of hands up, if you could, shorten up your answers just a bit.
As Marvin indicated, I was with the Indian army at that time, in 1962, and in fact was one of the reporters who was evacuated the night of, th I guess, October 19 , evacuated by the Indian Air Force from Tajpur to New Delhi, only to wake the next morning to read in the Times of India, that the Chinese had declared a unilateral ceasefire.
But at the time of the war, there reports of friction along that border between China and India scraps of incidence.
Because India had reasons too to enjoy the possibility of benefits if the Indians had poked the Chinese a little too much and -and you alluded to it -Marvin, is telling me to keep quiet, but you got the question.
There is a vibrant debate among historians about who was to blame for the China-India War.
You know, the 1962 version for most of the world was India is a good guy; China is a bad guy, as simple as that.
Later, the historical work argued that China was provoked, that it had tried to signal reasonableness, and that the Indian forward policy of moving troops forward had provoked the war.
There is now a -you know, there's always new revisionist wave, there is a revisionist wave now that says all that’s true, but the Chinese also has a broader mind broader interpretation which was to somehow humiliate India, and Nehru in particular, in order to advance their geo-strategic desire to be seen as the leader of the third nonaligned world.
And there's no question that in the Kennedy White House, and in the Galbraith's embassy in New Delhi, while they understood the complexity of the underlying dispute, there was no doubt as to who our side was, and who the other side was.
And that’s particularly true because of the kind of black and white, very stereotyped imagery that American's had in the 1960s about Communist China.
We didn’t try any -we didn’t make any significant effort at trying to look at the world through Chinese eyes.
It's a pleasure to see you on something other than related to terrorism.
As your book suggests the United States doesn’t have very long memories, but the actors in the region do.
It's a good question, and I think one wants to be humble to a certain degree here.
The events I write about are 50 years ago; the world has changed a lot in those 50 years.
One really needs to think about these politics, seeing at least a triangle of quadrilateral.
The U.S.-India access, I would argue is still maturing, it's not as closed in entente, but it's moving in that direction.
If you really want to, say, find an arms control solution to the Pakistani nuclear arsenal, which according to David Ignatius, the White House is now thinking about, you had better think about all of these players, and how you are going to build a consensus of not just Americans and Pakistanis, but Americans and Pakistanis and Indians; and Americans and Pakistanis and Chinese.
That’s complicated, that’s really hard, but if you aren’t playing the chess game, recognizing all of those dimensions, I think you are likely to fail, and I think we've had trouble over the years, I've not participated, I've seen this on the inside.
In getting our South Asia team, and our East Asia team, and our Europe team, and our clandestine team, to all sit down in same arena, it would have to be bigger than Falk, I think, these days, and interact, and recognize that a kind of half-baked CIA program to support Tibetan rebels.
Whatever the wisdom of it as a covert operation, it's going to have ripple effects that you really ought to think about well in advance.
I can't help ruminating about any parallels between the situation you described and the situation in Ukraine now with the Russians invading, however covertly.
It appears that Kennedy had much more freedom of movement, although he didn’t have to exercise it necessarily.
Obama is accused of being a weak leader, but there's a lot more media attention to things.
That goes back to what you were talking about, the role of Congress, potentially in all of this.
If you remember in 1962, congressional oversight of the intelligence community was a complete joke.
One a year, and probably not every year, Allen Dulles went up to The Hill, talked to two or three Senators and a couple of Congressmen, and probably over a large quantity of Bourbon, and told them a couple of war stories, and they said, great, you are doing a great job.
There was no -you can be critical of the current accountability process but there is a process.
As I said, you know, he had begun and airlift of supplies, and there is no record that I found that he ever went to the Congress on this.
It was definitely different in New Delhi but I think in Washington it would have been very hard to get political space to talk about this, particularly in the early days of the crisis, when Americans thought, the end of time was facing them, in the face.
And I'm not saying that Kennedy deliberately took advantage of this, but I think Kennedy was a very, very smart politician, and he didn’t see any particular reason to complicate his life.
In 1962 people thought of Kennedy as the guy who Nikita Khrushchev had kicked all over, around the world.
The Kennedy Administration, for at least the first six months of 1961, had a horrendous start.
Another reason why I think Kennedy is such a fascinating figure to study, is there is a learning curve here.
This President learns from his mistakes, and one of the mistakes that, early on, he said he would never repeat, is he wouldn’t listen to ""the experts"" because he found out that experts, at the end of the day, often had their own agenda, or that if he was going to listen to experts, he was going to listen to the experts that he picked for the job, like his brother, and like John Kenneth Galbraith.
The gentleman right there, and then begin to -We have one, two, three -a cluster of -Oh, my, goodness; many questions, shorter answers.
My question is, during 1962, Sino-Indian War, Ayub Khan was the President of Pakistan, and even in 1965, he was the President of Pakistan, and he started a covert, and insurgency inside to occupy Cashmere, for the deliberation of Cashmere.
The only time the First President's House has ever been used for a State Dinner.
From the beginning Ayub Khan, recognized, what everyone else recognized, which was that Kennedy wanted a better relationship with India, and he feared, understandably that this was going to come at his expense, and in the end he was right on both counts.
We did develop and arms relationship with India, and Kennedy and Galbraith both admitted at the time, that the airlift was not consistent with the promises that they had left with Ayub Khan that no arms would go to India without some prior consultation with Pakistan.
During the war the President was very clear with Ayub Khan that an opening of a second front against India by Pakistan would be regarded as a hostile act to the United States, and that Pakistan would be regarded as an aggressor, just like China.
I think there were other reasons for him to stay neutral as well, but I think that helped.
When the war ended, there was a strong opinion in Washington and in London; that now is the time to try to resolve the Cashmere issue through negotiations.
Galbraith was one of the dissidents, who said this is the wrong time, Nehru is not politically capable of doing a Cashmere deal when he has just been humiliated by the Chinese.
But through 1963, there was a faint hope that perhaps a negotiations process would go somewhere.
I think when Kennedy leaves the scene in 1963, Ayub Khan comes to the conclusion he's going to have to take unilateral means in collaboration with the Chinese.
And I think there's pretty good evidence that the 1965 War -I wouldn’t say it was cooked with the Chinese -but I think the Chinese had seen the menu, and had a pretty good idea of what was coming.
What I'm going to do with three questions in a row that will be asked; the gentleman there, then Bruce and Kerry.
I've been talking to Tom Hughes, he was INR Director at the time, and as I recall, Allen Whiting was the Senior Analyst in INR and the time, and his book, China Crosses the Yalu, was a very significant volume, you can remember that I'm sure, Bruce.
You talk about how Ambassador Galbraith went from just being the United States Ambassador to almost becoming an advisor to Nehru.
I'm going to speculate then, that I'd like to see if you care to comment.
Well, so am I As I listened to the story unfolding, and then as you got to the point about how much fun the writing of this book was, and the fascination with the Kennedy Administration.
I had been thinking all the way through that -and this is a question -I've been thinking all the way through listening to your story and the management of these enormously difficult issues at the same time.
And as you comment on that I couldn’t help but think about the current scenario in Syria, where we now have the entry of Putin, we have the question mark about what Iran will do, and whether there is an opportunity to link hands and arms to deliver some kind of reasonable set of circumstances in Syria.
You’ve got three questions there, and then we'll get three on this side, here.
Allen Whiting also wrote another book which is more particularly towards this crisis.
He undoubtedly was one of the people that helped cook that State Department letter, and you are right.
Kennedy was willing to reach down or help people reach down in the bureaucracy, but I think the real expert he listened to was Galbraith more than anyone else.
And just as a footnote, Galbraith's relationship with his punitive boss, Dean Rusk, was terrible.
Galbraith actually wrote a series of short stories while he was Ambassador, and published them under a pseudonym that ridiculed the State Department.
I mean they are cutting, obviously only a person who the President was protecting could get away with this kind of behavior.
I don’t think though that Galbraith had a role in the writing of the letters, because when you read his diary.
And he's very careful in his diary, because the second letter when his diary came out it was classified top secretary, and would be classified for another 50 years, after his diary came out.
He alludes to it, but there's a sense of kind of shock on his part that he knew Nehru knew he was in trouble, but 12 squadrons of American Fighter Combat Aircraft, I think struck Galbraith's, this is out of proportion, this is too much.
And the trick question, which attempting to get me to say something unkind about the Obama Administration, I see through you Gary.
I think there are other Presidents, a few who've managed multiple crisis as well as Kennedy, I think FDR falls into that category, his handling of the Second World War is magisterial, presidential leadership.
It's hard to see that in the last 50 years, of something quite, of this caliber of decision-making.
And that’s more clear now, that we've had access to the Soviet archives, and it wasn’t even clear then.
The Chinese invasion of India didn’t have that apocalypse character to it.
But these are the two largest countries in the world fighting a war, and while it's now obvious that it was a border war, it was not obvious at the time.
There is a part of Galbraith's memoirs where he says, an Indian politician th th had come to him on about the 18 or 19 and said that; she had just been to the Northeast Frontier Agency, and she was reporting that people up there were being told that all of Eastern India was going to be turned over to Pakistan.
And she -not identified -agrees that yeah, she's probably overwhelmed by events.
She is the only Indian politician who went there at the time, so while he protected her in the diary, you don’t have to be Sherlock Holmes to figure out who he's talking to.
Now that sounds ridiculous today, but there people who were afraid that that could happen.
You know, we ought to point out, since you have spoken so incredibly highly of the efficiency of the Kennedy Administration.
The Kennedy Administration did a number of things in Vietnam that, in retrospect, looks sort of dopey, but let that go.
I'm really glad that you wrote this book, I've been really interested in this topic since I was a child.
My grandfather served in the Indian Army so he has told me a lot about these events, and I think they are very reflective of the geopolitical issues that are going on today.
I was just curious since in your book you focused on United States relations, and I understand this is more looking at the actual events that happen during this time versus what’s going on today.
Because so far there's been a lot of mobilization, but on India's side, compared to China where there's been a lot of mobilization there hasn’t been a significant change, or in policy.
Since they had already given Ayub Khan, this spectacular dinner at Mount Vernon they had to think of something, you know, at least as good if not better, so they took him to Newport, because Mrs.
It's referred to as The Cottage, but if you’ve ever been in Newport you that their ideas of cottages are the same idea as our idea of cottages.
But Nehru was unusually silent and tired, and he did not respond to conversation.
They came to the White House for the State Dinner; somebody forgot to open the flue in the fireplace when they started the fire, the state dining room filled with smoke.
So, Nehru was already passed his peak performance, but I think the 1962 War with China was really a blow to him.
He didn’t give up on being leader of the third world, he still aspired to do that, but now he realized that China was going to be his competition and not his friend in that.
The Indian army was equipped with Lee Enfield rifles, leftover from the First World War, if not from the Third Anglo-Afghan War.
Now they were fighting Chinese troops who were wellequipped with automatic weapons, many of whose officers had fought in the Korean War.
Indian troops were often outnumbered, they were always out-equipped, but they fought very, very bravely.
Jaswant Singh would go on to be Foreign Minister in the first BJP Government, and a real architect of U.S.-Indian rapprochement.
Read his memoirs, he saw the 1962 War as the crucible which shaped modern India.
And for him, China, and the humiliation of 1962, was the critical moment.
I urge you to read Avoiding Armageddon, I tried to write about that in there.
The Nixon Administration on India, like on many things, decided that anything that Kennedy had to be wrong, and therefore they were going to go the other way.
Indira Gandhi was really, really good at figuring out how to snub people, and enjoyed it immensely, and Nixon was one of her favorite targets.
But as I said in an odd kind of way, the journey, as it progresses, has brought us to a situation where in 1962, I think is very relevant to a lot of today.
I don’t think there's going to be another Indo-China War, I think that’s a highly unlikely scenario.
I wouldn’t be surprised by incidence on the India-China border, but I don’t think either one of these countries, sees the territory at stake here as worth going to war over.
South China Sea, the United States, Russia, Japan, but India is part of constellation.
As I said, when China tested nuclear weapons in 1999, Vajpayee's letter to the President was all about China.
Pakistan is a secondary consideration, and a consideration because it is an ally of China.
When India finally in either 2012 or 2003 -2013, I can't remember the exact year, tested its Agn9-5 intermediate-range ballistic missile, which for the first time gave India a missile capable of reaching Beijing.
If you read what Indian leaders said at the time, it's abundantly clear that they see themselves in an arms race with Beijing and that for 50 years they had been the loser in that arms race, and that the Agni-5 finally now was an equalizer.
That they could nuke Beijing just as China could nuke all of their cities.
And if there is another India-Pakistan War in the future, the question of where the Chinese come in and where the Americans come in will determine, I think, an awful part of the future history.
And this might be a naïve question but it's certainly been on my mind for a quite a while.
In 1962 I was a high school student in Calcutta learning how to duck under tables, whenever a plane flew over it.
And one reason was of course the Tibet, the Dalai Lama connection, the other was the leadership of the nonaligned world.
I was wondering whether your book touches on anything internal in the Chinese political structure.
And whether this was one way of Mao and Chou, in particular, to sort of say that, look, we are in charge, and don’t mess with us internally.
Nehru wanted to lift up Mao to be his equal in leading the third world.
He was not Nehru's equal, Nehru, in some of the Chinese literature, in some of the statements they wrote at the time, which we now know were carefully written by Mao himself, or rewritten by Mao himself.
Nehru was portrayed as this Anglified Indian who is trying to rebuild the Raj.
Now, you know, I understand that for Indians, that all seems really cockeyed and worse, but I think to a certain degree, Mao who was an incredibly paranoid man, probably fell into some of these conspiracy theories, and it's was a way to outdo Nehru, weaken his -whatever problems he had at home, secure Tibet, and at the same time, stick it to Kenney and Khrushchev all at the same time.
I think the big reason they didn’t more in 1962 aside from a very, very American warnings was that they didn’t really know China either.
Their relationship with the Chinese as in its very infant stages; and I think as Ayub Khan looked at Mao, he was -he probably was afraid that if he started a second front, the Chinese could stop the first front, and he'd be left hanging out to dry.
By 1965, the relationship is matured enough, that now Ayub Khan thinks that if he starts the war, the Chinese will be there to back him up.
A careful analysis of Pakistan's position in 1965, 1971, and 1999, the Cargo War, is that at the moment of truth, the Chinese usually say, I'm sorry, but I can't hear you, there's something wrong with the line.
They are critical to the development to the Pakistan Nuclear Weapons Arsenal; but China is not going to sacrifice its national interest for Pakistani objectives.
Bruce, thank you very, very much, for taking a story that is more than 50 years old, and making it relevant and interesting.
