In this day of quieter relations with Moscow not even the most talented writer can fully re-create the atmosphere of fear and imminent . danger that pervaded Washington.
All of us who worked in the postwar American administrations were aware that the Soviet leaders had the power to blow America off the face of the earth.
That sense of ever-present doom proved particularly poignant for President John Kennedy, in whose administration I served first as under secretary of state for economic affairs and then as under secretary of state.
Especially during his early weeks in the White House, he felt critically menaced both ’ by enemies abroad and adversaries at home.
V V I recall. fo> example, his excuse Tor inaction when in early 1961 some of us discussed an initiative to normalize relations with Red;China.
He could not seriously consider tjiat project now, he^ ; said, but might yell (Jo so when and he should win election for a second ’ term with a larger majority; In addition to his narrow electoral victory the President was, by twentiethcentury (though not by eighteenth!! ::ii 1 ■ •; I century) standards, far too young to be taken seriously as a statesman.
Although he maintained an outward ap* pearance of aplomb and invulnerabil. ity, he never forgot that the American people were comparing him with Eisenhower, a looming father figure • whose established reputation not only for overwhelming military but also for political victories had given him political self-assurance.
In Congress, his reputation had been more for absenteeism than serious achievement.
He had never belonged to the inner circle of senators; nor was he confident of an always capricious public support. a His major political assets were his good looks and the glamour of a , golden boy.
As Professor Beschloss suggests, Kennedy’s Soviet opponent in the op. posite comer appears also, but to a lesser degree, to have been unsure of himself.
He repeatedly attributes many aspects of Khrushchev’s behavior to constraints similar to those ex-V perienced by Kennedy.
Khrushchev was constantly sensitive to the bitter hatred of the Soviet hard-liners.
At the outset the new administration felt hard-pressed to rectify Kennedy’s feckless campaign charges of a “missile gap” between the United States and the Soviet Union; and Defense Secretary McNamara finally had to acknowledge, that none, existed.
In addition Castro’s Cuba formed an overhanging cloud of public shame and obsession.
I had no part in the highly restricted planning operation that preceded the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
In discussing it at all I ani, * therefore, relying not on my own contemporary observations but rather on accounts that I heard from my colleagues as well as the many books and memoirs that have since emerged. , Kennedy, as is now well known, did not initiate the Bay of Pigs project but received it full-blown from the Eisenhower administration.
The CIA had shared the public preoccupation with Castro and had dreamed up a number of preposterous schemes to eliminate him.
Many were adolescent fantasies, including a plan to have Castro’s shoes dusted with a depilatory that would make his beard fall out, thus depriving him, so the experts said, of the badge of virility thought essential to lead the Cubans.
In addition, what was called “Track Two” of the plan' content plated Castro’s assassination before the Bay of Pigs invasion and even involved the enlistment of known American gangsters to assist in killing him. , During the last year of the Eisenhower presidency the CIA had scoured the Miami community of expatriate Cubans that formed an anti-Cuban underground, and had gathered more than one thousand men in training camps in Guatemala to participate in an attack on Cuba.
High expectations had been built-up at least in intelligence circles, and the press had gained a whiff of these activities.
Had Kennedy been longer in office he might have realized that the plan, depended on large elements of fantasy based on dubious intelligence and reinforced by the prevailing neurosis about Cuba.
Tha; the CIA could be so sure, for example, that the Cuban population would rise against Castro to support such an invasion is merely one more tragic example of wishful intelligence analysis by which our country "" has been repeatedly victimized.
The preliminary planning and preparations had all been made by the ‘ Eisenhower administration, with the active encouragement of the vicepresident, Richard Nixon.
The dilemma in which Kennedy found himself was thus both poignant and, agonizing. , Ever ,, since January I960 substantial effort had gone into organizing the operation.
Some leaks to the press had already occurred, and the plan had become widely known among the Cuban underground in Miami.
Had Kennedy abandoned the project he would thus have been faced with a considerable “disposal problem,’’ as the prospect was referred to by his friends and advisers.
More important, he would have been charged with cowardice and held up to derisory comparison with his warrior predecessor.
No doubt his fear of being criticized as a coward was reinforced by the brash encouragement of his speculator father, Joseph Kennedy, whom he visited just before making the decision to go forward.
When, as the world knows, the operation failed miserably, a crowd of selfappointed experts emerged from the woodwork to assert that the United ' States Air Force should have provided air cover, that, of course, was precisely what Kennedy wished to avpid; it would have given substance to America’s imperialistic reputation throughout Latin America, embarrassed our friends in Europe, and played into the hands of Soviet propagandists.
To me, the disaster merely confirmed a belief I had strongly held for some years— that the United States government should renounce covert operations.
Not only could we not keep them covert, but in cases where interference was fully justified we should visibly employ our own armed forces and not rely on ragtag discontents, such as, in more recent years, the Nicaraguan contras, The use of such surrogates was a source more of embarrassment than of pride. ^ —1 he CIA, Ihave long believed, should be limited to the gathering alid analy* sis of intelligence, and its operational activities chopped off.
More often than not our clandestine services have not only made catastrophic opera5 tional blunders but have failed to assess the probable consequences of their actions.
Thus when the Eisenhower administration succeeded in deposing Arbenz in Guatemala, we blessed the population of that poor country with a succession of dictators.
We overthrew Mosaddegh in Iran and returned the Shah for an extension of • his artificial reign, and thus made way for the Ayatollah Khomeini and Islamic fundamentalism.
We helped to finance a military coup in Chile in 1974 which murdered Allende and left that '^country to the brutal rule of General Pinochet.
In 1979 we helped over. throw the long-term • dictatorship of Somoza in Nicaragua so that he could * ; be replaced by Daniel Ortega and the Sandinistas, whom we then tried to overthrow for the next ten years.
These were not, however, the conclu/ sions that those immediately around the President reached.
According to James :• Heston in his recent memoirs, “Bobby j monkeyed around with amateur plots I to assassinate Castro,” and during the ‘i.
As I recall, p . t; in almost no case did I find any covert operations worthy of an American initiative.
They were based on the improbable assumption that, given money or encouragement, the population of a whole country would rise against its leader.
Aiter Kennedy’s difficult meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna in 1961, from which Kennedy took away the impression that Khrushchev was in an aggressive mood, the principal emphasis of foreign policy was shifted to the repeated Soviet threat to sign a peace treaty with the DDR that would enable the Soviets to control access to Berlin ./ and thus in effect eliminate the NATO forces then stationed there.
This threat, when coupled with the ' , ever-present awareness of the nuclear danger, conditioned Kennedy’s attiV-' tude toward Khrushchev, and it tacitly but persistently restricted the scope of his policies and actions.
The Soviet temptation to cut off Berlin was greatly stimulated by the swelling migration of East Germany’s most talented citizens to the West.
Had that brain drain been permitted to continue, the DDR would, in the Kremlin’s view, have lost most of its technical and managerial leaders.
Thus by halting the flight to the West, building the Berlin Wall relieved pressure on the Soviets to create a new Berlin crisis.
As a result, although Kennedy could never publicly admit it, he was privately relieved that the Wall might reduce that pressure.
That reaction was, of course, a tightly 5 held secret in administration circles, v The President meanwhile had some difficulty in defending himself from domestic political charges of timidity because he did not promptly react with force to remove the Wall.
W ithout doubt the major drama of Kennedy’s presidency was the Cuban missile crisis.
Though Secretary McNamara assured Kennedy that the missiles would make no appreciable effect on the total balance of power, knowledge of their emplacement in Cuba would almost certainly have a devastating effect on American opinion.
After all, America had fought two . world wars without damage to its own territory.
The American people had grown accustomed to thinking that the moat* of two oceans was an effective barrier to external aggression, and -their leaders had made it clear since the Monroe Doctrine that they would not tolerate a European intrusion in the Western Hemisphere, ir tne American public, had painfulb ad* justed to the thought of ICBMs capable of reaching our cities, it was largely beif cause those missiles were still thou-, sands of miles away and the danger “ seemed unreal.
The prospect of Soviet missiles ninety miles off our borders was something altogether different; it ' would be an affront to our history.
The Cuban missile crisis had all the elements of an international detective thriller, a popular genre in America.
It combined secret intrigue about vastly destructive weapons, strong elements of deceit, and the danger that large numbers of innocent people would be killed.
The story of the crisis has been retold so often that the facts need not be rehearsed.
As might be expected, the incident has been approached from diverse points of view by political scientists and historians.
One of the most interesting— though specialized— accounts of the crisis has been written by Mr Dino Brugioni, who served with the CIA between 1948 and 1982 andparticipated in founding the National Photographic Interpretation Center.
He understandably emphasizes the techniques that made aerial reconnaisance effective, and his role in the Cuban missile crisis was no doubt significant.
Without aerial photography, the United States would never have detected the missiles or been able to estimate when they might become usable.
Mr Brugioni’s book should be read as a supplement to Professor Beschloss’s version of the crisis.
His hero is Arthur C Lundahl, who organized the National Photographic Interpretation Center in the mid to late 1950s, and whom I had met during the crisis when he came to brief our small group advising the President on the progress the Soviets were making to bring the f missiles to the point where they could ""be fired.-•*» v l V I found Mr Brugioni’s book fascinating for his disclosure of special information I had not hitherto known on the technical aspects of conducting photographic missions and interpreting their results.
I do not in any way diminish the importance of his very informative work when I say it evoked for me a description of the Battle of Waterloo as it might have been written by a member of Wellington’s staff •charged with the design, improvement, T and maintenance of ordnance.
Perhaps the most coherent brief account of the incident has been written by one of its * principal participants, McGeorge Bundy, in Danger and Survival, a history of nuclear weapons.
Bundy, as national security adviser, was at the President’s side during the whole ordeal.
I had been a director of the United States Strategic Bombing Survey at the # end qf the Second World War and had 5 concluded from the record of Allied $ >«, bombing in Europe that if the medical profession should ever adopt the air ;; force definition of “surgical, ,y anyone •?. ^undergoing an operation for appenA *""■ dicitis might lose his kidneys and lungs A yet find his appendix intact. the President received aerial photographs of work in progress to install missile launchers in Cuba.
He then established the EXCOM, composed of the secretaries of state and defense and other relevant members of his foreign relations hierarchy.
That group promptly convened in a continuous session in my conference room at the State Department.
After careful . consideration the ' members of EXCOM quickly discarded the first two options.
All agreed on the need to force the removal of the mis^ . siles from Cuba; the only question was ;,J how to Achieve it.
At no time in our conversation did "" Kennedy raise the question of the • presence of Soviet missiles in A Cuba; Consequently, there was no .< need for me to say whether there * \ were any there or hot.
Although far from the most assertive participant in the EXCOM meetr ings, the State Department Soviet expert Llewellyn Thompson proved to be the most* useful member of the group.
A He appraised Soviet reactions and the effect of suggested American moves with unfailing accuracy.
Khrushchev ’$ period, and, as Professor Beschloss makes clear, he had developed a more intimate relation with Khrushchev than had any previous < American ambassador.
As a conse-^ quence, Tommy, as we knew him; was reassuringly knowledgeable when we tried to predict the Soviet reaction to ’ Jeach move we might contemplate.
The missiles had been smuggled in surreptitiously and * in contradiction of explicit assurances that the Soviet Union would never re, sort to such a reckless action.
Thus even after we had spotted the missiles, Gromyko had visited the President without mentioning the presence of the ‘ missiles; and when confronted with the facts, Ambassador Dobrynin had denied that they were there.
As we now know, and as Beschloss coiifirms, Ambassador Dobrynin was not > lying to the President when he assured him that he knew of no missiles in Cuba; he had never been told of the event.
Gromyko, however, gave a less perceptive, and skillful in framing his observations.
I can think of no one else I ever met who was so well suited to be the President’s adviser in such a complicated and unnerving period.
The President did not want to open communications with Khrushchev until . he knew what action the Soviet side would take.
He feared that if America blockaded Cuba, the Russians might reply with a blockade of Berlin which would, in turn, require the use of deadly force before it was broken.
But as Bundy points out, a blockade of Cuba would not begin with ‘‘sudden death, and it was a first step, not a last.” * T hose of us who participated in the missile crisis regarded the outcome as a major achievement.
The Soviet missiles were withdrawn; the United States blockade of Soviet ships was ended; the United States promised to withdraw its own outmoded missiles from Turkey and to refrain from invading Cuba.
In Deadline James Reston reflects a widely held x opinion when he writes, Kennedy . . . improved with experience.
He was tested as no other president had been, during the Cuban missile crisis, and his masSpjji terful handling of riiat; crisis was ... • the greatest achievement of his 1 administration.
He is obviously * not happy with the way the missile criJ sis was handled; and, he implies, had he been president it simply would not have occurred.
Beschloss treats the emplacement of , missiles as resulting from Kennedy’s i, failure to understand that his own behavior was provocative and to give Khrushchev adequate advance warning of his possible responses to the installation of missiles.
X which the United States had an; nounced itself willing to go to nu■ v*. • ’ clear war.
Despite Khrushchev’s hints as early sis July 1960 that Soviet nu/ clear missiles, might one day de; fend Cuba, as of the spring of ■>i 1962, Kennedy had yet to issue a single serious warning against them.
In fact, such a possibility was occasionally referred to in their exchanges.
Before the missiles were discovered, , no one I know of in the Kennedy camp n believed that the Soviets would have ■ ' the audacity to risk such a dangerous action.
Had Kennedy explicitly expressed his opposition to the emplacement of * * missiles he would, to be effective, have had to use exactly the kind of language with regard to their forceful removal i i that Beschloss complains about his ‘ i ; using in September.
How different these Cabinet Room ’conversations might have been had Kennedy phrased his September pledge more vaguely or not at all.
Instead of discussing how to it take the missiles out, he and his advisers would now be able to consider the option of explaining | 'to Americans that they had little to fear from the missiles in Cuba.
But in the climate of the time, no president in his right mind would have failed to react incisively to the Soviets’ perfidious move; if he had not reacted, he would have had to face the need to persuade the American people that the missiles were not a threat.
Implicit in Professor Beschloss’s critical comments is his apparent conviction that the missile crisis and the quarantine with which America responded were a reckless adventure in which Kennedy put the whole world af risk for no serious purpose.
What Professor Beschloss could not know at the time he wrote his book is the serious prospect of a nuclear exchange implicit in a fact only recently disclosed at a meeting between Soviet, Cuban, and American representatives in Havana this January.
That meeting made clear that Khrushchev had sent Cuba not only the missiles spotted by our U-2s but shorter range tactical missiles, and had authorized the Soviet general on the spot to use them against any American advancing force if the United States should ever undertake an invasion of the island.
Since the EXCOM was seriously considering such an invasion if other measures failed, the possibility of a nuclear exchange had a troubling 16 What Professor Beschloss repeatedly overlooks, it seems to me, is that a continuing tension between two major military powers is like a high fever.
It may have to reach a crisis before it can subside, and the incident of the Cuban missiles provided that breaking point.
Following that incident, relations between Moscow and Washington gradually diminished in intensity, Khruschev lost his job, and the Soviet leadership recognized that their megalomaniac ambitions would inevitably be checked by effective American countermeasures.
The missiles were not a mere gesture of bravado; they were installed through deceit and treated by Khrushchev as a major move in the ongoing contest.
Nor did the President finally accede to the hard line that several members of the EXCOM demanded.
That minority group advocated a surprise air strike, followed by an invasion.
Still, Beschloss points out that even losing the 1962 elections would have been preferable to the Kafkaesque nightmare that now faced the President— risking nuclear war to eliminate missiles that, in his own opinion and that of the Secretary of Defense, did little to harm American security.
Beschloss’s complaint that the President decided on a quarantine too quickly after the missiles were discovered is not consistent with his further complaint that the President failed to make a prompt decision on what action to take.
According to Beschloss, at the President’s Tuesday cabinet room meeting following the discovery of the missiles, the President was not, as his supporters have claimed, , ; sj , superbly in command of the crisis ’£• from the start.
Obviously we were all shocked a»t the discovery and what we needed was conversation and time to reflect carefully before committing ourselves.
It would, in my view, have been highly irresponsible for the President at the outset to have expressed his own views explicitly; he needed first to have his advisers explore the various implications and possibilities without being influenced by his own wishes.
To my mind, the discussion among members of the EXCOM was conducted at a high intellectual level, and with the somber intensity that the situation required.
Yet, I have since concluded, that was probably the last time such a protracted debate could have been held without becoming public property; the chance to discuss a seri• ous threat for a week before being required to react was a luxury which would not now be possible.
One contributing reason why secrecy was possible was that the White House press corps was engaged in the 1962 political campaign, leaving on Fridays with their bags packed and staying on the road through Saturday and Sunday.
Still, I think it highly doubtful that with the changed attitude pf the press today, we could have. kept the secret for the week needed to , debate all its implications.
The brash and tireless investigative reporter has now become an accepted cult figure in American life and, although great precautions are increasingly being taken to assure secrecy, exposure of inner White House secrets has become irresistible. ;i • Nor would newspaper publishers likely have shown such constraint in handling the story once they had even a whiff of unusual activity.
As I remember the situation three decades after the fact, Reston telephoned me at home late Saturday, October 20, or early Sunday morning, October 21, to inquire about the stories the Times reporters were gathering that the air force was being readied for an attack on Cuba.
According to Reston’s own account Bundy was as ambiguous as I was, but suggested that Reston call the President.
The President assured him that no action would be taken before his announcement due for Monday evening.
For the Times it was a highly contentious issue since the paper had been criticized for holding back on revealing the Bay of Pigs landing.
When I praised the press for its restraint in handling the Cuban missile crisis, Salisbury challenged me vigorously, contending that Reston should not have agreed to withhold the story until after the President’s speech announcing that the missiles had been discovered and the United States would impose a blockade.
The Times , he said, had made a mistake in holding back the story of the landing at the Bay of Pigs, and the paper should immediately, have gone forward with what its reporters had then discovered about the missiles in Cuba.
The late columnist Joseph Kraft, who was present on the occasion, supported my view, but it was certainly not shared by all of. the Times news and editorial staff.
There had, Salisbury suggested, and as Reston implies # in his memoirs, been a noisy row among the Times staff on Tuesday.
I doubt that any president could these days expect such restraint from a responsible journal in the light of sensational subsequent events, including the Watergate scandal.
The risks of backing into a major Asian war by way of SVN are present but . ..not impressive.
On November 4, 1961, I met with General Taylor as well as Secretary McNamara and Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric.
Since McNamara and Giipatric were invariably prompt, I had an opportunity to talk with them before Taylor arrived.
Vietnam was a terrain hostile to American military operations both physically and militarily.
We. must not commit our iorccs r there or we would find ourselves in a protracted conflict far more serious than Korea.
The assertion that America had committed its prestige, read in the light of the “falling domino” theory, was felt sufficient to dispose of my arguments.
Then on the following Tuesday, November 7, 1 raised the question with President Kennedy.
To commit Amer2, ican forces to South Vietnam would, I ;said, be a tragic etror.
Vietnam is the worst possible terrain both from a physical and political point of view.
I have often pondered the meaning of that statement, but I am still not sure what the President had in mind.
Later I was often asked whether, if Kennedy had lived, we would have avoided our deep involvementinthe Vietnam War.
Once Kennedy had over fifteen thousand “advisers” • engaged not only in giving advice but also in giving support on the battlefield, United States power and prestige were thought by many officials in Washington and in the \t Asian capitals to be committed.
No doubt, as president, Johnson was more responsible for commit' ting the United States to that struggle (he eventually had 500,000 , Americans in the war), but in my view Kennedy started the slide.
He tries to < explain the complex events that v marked the Keiinedy-Khrushchev relationship by stating as categorical fact exactly what was in Khrushchev’s or | Kennedy’s mind.
In the latter part of l the book, to be sure, he begins to inject qualifying phrases such as “it might have been” or “probably,” but, ^without the psychic powers which Beschloss does not explicitly claim, no ' r outsider can indulge in mind-reading , with absolute assurance he has got it right.
