No reproduction in any form of this book, in whole or in part (except for brief quotation in critical articles or reviews), may be made without written authorization from the publishers.
The tensions which keep these two countries on the edge of conflict are as dangerous as they are inevitable, not only because they bear directly on the future direction of Asia but because they are part of the potentially even more significant problem of Chinese-Soviet rivalry.
Chinese actions toward India provide a critical index of the extent to which Peking is willing to risk nuclear war in its drive to extend Chinese power in order to fulfill an imagined destiny.
For this reason the history of hostile co-existence which underlies Sino-Indian relations is worth exposing to view.
Implicit in the long record of India-China contact are geopolitical reasons for Communist China’s present hostility toward India.
Unfortunately, however, some of the realities of border policy were lost sight of by independent India’s political philosophers, who sought new formulas more consistent with their urgent desire for world peace and Asian solidarity.
China’s true intentions and the reasons behind them could not, therefore, become fully recognized until the Tibetan revolt in 1959, when the flight to India of the Dalai Lama provoked Peking to come out from behind its fagade of friendship and reveal an openly threatening attitude toward its southern neighbor.
If Red China's intentions and motivations were not at first clear, India can blame Peking for its added deceit in camouflaging them with peaceful pretension.
India naturally wanted to believe that China was sincere in subscribing to Nehru’s Panch Sheela, the five principles of peaceful co-existence.
India also wanted to believe that its 1954 pact with China on the status of Tibet, which established these principles, was sufficient statement of policy toward China.
Nehru could not rely on physical containment; this had been possible for Britain but was impossible for militarily weak, independent India.
Nor could Nehru depend on collective defense artangements without doing violence to the concept of non-alignment ix x INTRODUCTION which he symbolized.
With the options thus limited, India followed a policy of moral containment until Peking’s own actions revealed this policy’s inadequacy.
Through events and necessity there evolved a new policy of containment which involved both Soviet and Westerm aid and a modified stand on non-alignment as required in the interests of national defense.
Whether this policy will work in the long run depends on many factors—not least of which is the ability of India and Pakistan to resolve their festering dispute over Kashmir, or the continuing strong United States and Soviet stake in the safety of India.
Any case study of Chinese aggression must take into consideration certain fundamental drives and constants which have characterized China’s history and have led inexorably to its present position.
India-China relations emerge as a geopolitical rondo, the basic theme of which is the inevitability of conflict at points where the countries come into contact.
It is for this reason that Tibet and the Himalayan border region—from Assam to the Pamirs—are important today.
Tibet may not be the sacred center of the universe which the early Aryan tribes of India believed it to be, but it is the political junction of Asia’s three largest land powers—China, India, and the Soviet Union.
It is also Asia’s ideological watershed dividing democratic South Asia from totalitarian China.
The Tibetan plateau has traditionally served as a no-man’s-land hetween antagonists, while the great Himalayan range has served as a rampart to guard India’s approaches.
Tibet is thus the stage on which the historical drama of China-India relations has been enacted.
The drama begins to an overture of Buddhist scriptures hailing the eightfold path of right beliefs and serving as siren song to the Chinese far beyond.
Lord Buddha’s teachings—an appropriate forerunner of Nehru’s fivefold doctrine of Panch Sheela—filtered through the Himalayan passes to blend with a primitive Tibetan cult of magic to become Lamaism.
However much this philosophy was premised on peace, its sectarianism and corruption led to serious internal political unrest which made Tibet vulnerable to predatory moves of its Mongol and Chinese neighbors.
Against a backdrop of local politico-religious intrigues the first act of China-India relations was climaxed by the invasion of Lhasa by Chinese Emperor K’ang Hsi in 1720.
Successive Mongol invasions of Tibet had made China aware of the vulnerability of its borderlands.
Provoked by fear that Mongol contro] of Lamaism’s See would be the first step toward the unification of the Mongols, the Manchu Emperor installed in the Potala a puppet claimant to the throne of the Seventh Dalai Lama, establishing at the same time China’s first significant claim to Tibet.
Plans of the British East India Company to explore Tibet as a commercial market and find an open back door to China died with the Third Panchen Lama at the court of the Manchus.
Whether British Governor Hastings’ would-be ally, the Panchen, died of smallpox or was murdered by his Chinese hosts to prevent the British from using him to get a foothold in Tibet is not clear.
Imperial Russian expansion eastward inevitably collided with Manchu expansion westward and provoked boundary tensions which still affect Sino-Soviet relations.
While a stronger Russia was able to impose its will by a series of treaties in the nineteenth century, the Chinese people’s concept of greater China has never been abandoned, and today the Russian treaties are attacked by Peking as the products of imperial aggression.
Agents of the Czar also probed southward into the Pamirs, where they engaged the British in a game of imperial intrigue during the last part of the nineteenth century.
Great Britain was, however, unwilling to overextend itself in Tibet and for more far-ranging reasons of policy found a basis for compromise with the Czar.
By an agreement signed in 1907 both rivals agreed to a neutral buffer belt separating the two empires, which extended from Persia to Tibet.
The vast and inhospitable Tibetan plateau provided an ideal buffer for India’s northem frontier.
This was reinforced by an inner line of defense in the form of a belt of Himalayan dependencies flanked xii INTRODUCTION by separately administered security zones.
Russia, too, saw Tibet as an essential buffer with which to protect the outer reaches of its empire, and Sinkiang, on Tibet’s northern border, as a potential inner line of defense corresponding to Britain’s Himalayan barrier.
The formula of Chinese suzerainty but not sovereignty in Tibet suited the purposes of both England and Russia.
It provided a legal Chinese presence and thus avoided the dangers that would result from a vacuum; yet it deprived Peking of any legal excuse to annex Tibet whenever it became strong enough to do so.
Britain, also farsighted enough to anticipate a resurgent China, pressed for an agreement on Tibet which would define a clear boundary between Tibet and Assam and establish a secondary buffer zone called “Inner Tibet” between Tibet proper and China.
But the declining Chinese—ever conscious of their heritage and destiny—refused to ratify such efforts to deprive them of sovereignty over Tibet.
The disintegration of the Chinese Empire and the long humiliation of Japanese occupation before and during World War II temporarily eliminated China as a power in Asia.
But never did the Chinese lose their fundamental conviction that they would ultimately dominate Asia, nor sign away what they conceived to be their legal basis for domination.
With Nehru playing the lead, Act Four began with the Red Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950.
Of course, in the first situation Curzon, then Viceroy of India, had the power to eliminate the incipient Russian threat, while Nehru fifty years later did not have the strength to prevent a Chinese military invasion of Tibet, already underway.
While de facto accommodation thus had to be made with superior force, it was a significant mistake of principle for India to accede formally to China’s absorption of INTRODUCTION xiii Tibet.
Even an enfeebled China had in 1914 refused to ratify Britain’s formula for Tibet when the power position was reversed.
The real tragedy, however, was that Nehru saw fit to use the 1954 treaty with China on Tibet to enunciate Panch Sheela.
The significance was that while China used its basic ideology, revolutionary Communism, to complement and rationalize its geopolitical need to secure Tibet (Tibetan serfs were “liberated” from “reactionary” landlords), India’s new ideology of Panch Sheela was at cross-purposes to its historical need to refuse recognition of Chinese sovereignty in Tibet.
Tibet, which has been absorbed by China, no longer exists as a buffer protecting India.
Symptomatic of its advancing position, China now covets the south slope of the Himalayas—a logical consequence of its obsession with territorial security.
Despite India’s dynamic role since independence as a champion of non-alignment, China paranoiacally persists in branding India a “running dog” of Great Britain and the United States and thus sees the Himalayas as a point of confrontation with the West.
Three disputes—those between the Soviet Union and China, India and China, India and Pakistan—become interlocked in the KashmirPamir knot region at the western extremity of the Himalayas.
Stretching northward from the trijunction of Kashmir, China and the USSR is the disputed Sinkiang-Soviet border, where Sino-Soviet tensions simmer.
In Kashmir itself India and Pakistan face each other uneasily across a cease-fire line after fighting a brief but bloody war in September 1965.
A conference sponsored in Tashkent by the USSR in January 1966 brought the two antagonists to reaffirm the cease-fire line established two decades ago by the United Nations but in the process created new tensions between China and the Soviet Union, whose opposing Kashmir positions reflect their conflict on the India-China border issue.
A vitally needed military supply road leading from Tibet to Western Sinkiang across the disputed Aksai Chin plateau in northem Ladakh holds the key to China’s xiv INTRODUCTION border dispute with India.
Here India and Chinese patrols still snipe at each other as a reminder that more significant hostilities could break out with relatively little provocation.
Western-initiated anti-Communist collective defense systems—the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and the Central Treaty Organization —founder in a morass of political complexities as their linchpin, Pakistan, draws closer to Communist China.
With China’s occupation of Tibet and the extension of a military road network southward to the Himalayas, the buffer zone has shifted to the Himalayan border states, where China now competes with India for primacy.
But seen from New Delhi this area is no substitute for the Tibetan plateau, whose vast distances and impossible terrain for so long barred the way to India.
As seen through Peking’s eyes the relationship between India and the Soviet Union is distressingly reminiscent of Britain’s co-existence with Russia in Central Asia in 1907.
Moreover, the breakdown of the buffer system places Communist China and the Soviet Union in dangerous proximity along the tension-ridden border of Sinkiang, where subversion and ethnic hostilities characterize the disharmony of these one-time allies.
Reduced to its essentials, this confused matrix of intertwined tensions—all manifestations of conflict bred of proximity—can be blamed on the disappearance of a buffer system no longer possible in a modern world of rapid communications.
What has changed is the scope and potential consequences of tension in South and Central Asia.
The flowering of China’s first atomic mushroom on a remote Sinkiang testing range on October 16, 1964 was an event long dreaded by Western, Soviet and uncommitted leaders alike.
Operational perfection of Peking’s nuclear war machine may possibly generate increasing Chinese bellicosity.
Perhaps equally dangerous is China’s population explosion, which neither Marxist planning nor renewed efforts toward birth control seems able to prevent.
There may be ugly logic in the fact that Red China has made faster progress in the art of annihilating life than in preventing it.
Also dangerous is the ideological weaponry implicit in Peking’s role as champion of revolution and enemy of peaceful co-existence.
Peking’s doctrine was described in September 1965 by Defense Minister Lin Piao as a master strategy to encircle North America and Europe by Africa, Asia and Latin America—the so-called revolutionary rural areas of the world.
This is Peking’s bid to gain political strength from the colored and underdeveloped peoples of the world who comprise the majority and to exploit their economic frustrations and racial sensitivity.
Implicit in this plan is Chinese-inspired unrest and instability in Asia and Africa for decades to come.
To what extent Communist China is prepared to risk major nuclear war in fomenting wars of liberation and violent revolution is a critical question.
Certainly China’s actions more than its words will give clues to the answer.
In its border dispute with India, which reached one climax in 1962 and another in 1965, China has tended to prove doctrine by action.
Future developments in Sino-Indian relations must reveal further indications of China’s intentions, and for this reason they must be watched carefully.
But while awaiting the developments of the future, it should be helpful to examine the lessons of the past.
The curtain of history is raised for the first act in a drama which began a long time ago.
The scene is Tibet, where China and India first met and where they have known each other the longest.
Secondly, that the country would be invaded by Tartars of Upper Tartary.
Thirdly, that the latter would sack and ruin the land and send all the spoils to their own country.
Fourthly, that they would murder many religious Lamas, destroy monasteries and convents, profane temples and commit other horrors.
Sixthly and lastly, that China would attack, defeat the tyrannical usurpers and conquer the Kingdom.
Tibet’s book of Lungh-ten, the prophecies of Urgyen The earliest Aryans believed the world to be a lotus floating on an ocean.
In the center, touching the heavens, was a magnificent eruption of snowclad peaks encircling like a flower the heart of the blossom which they called Meru.
It is this 15,000-foot plateau which in modern times has been known as Tibet.
From Tibet flow the great rivers of Asia like an enormous network of veins.
The waters of the Ganges, Brahmaputra, Indus, Salween, Mekong, Yellow and Yangtse all rise in the icy passes of greater Tibet and run for thousands of miles until they escape into the seas.
The Tibetan plateau—cradled between the Himalayas to the south, the Karakorum Range to the west and the Kunlun Range to the north—covers an area nearly twice the size of France.
The vast wastes and jagged outcroppings form a moonscape of indescribable desolation where Hindu gods, Buddhist saints and assorted demons left over from a more ancient time mingle in the bewildering pantheon of Lamaism.
Tibetan folklore tells how the virgin ogress became lost in a Himalayan pass close to the border of India.
Near the point of despair, she was rescued by the monkey who, “with great demonstrations of joy,” wooed her with wild fruits.
This legend of a simian Adam and sinful Eve, set in a Himalayan Garden of Eden, is an ingenious synthesis of Genesis and Darwin.
Thanks to their land’s natural ramparts, forbidding deserts and rarified atmosphere, the Tibetan descendants of Dras-rin-mo and Hulumandju have to some extent been spared unwelcome trespassers.
The peoples of the several lotus petals have historically found Tibet neither a convenient crossroads for trade nor a viable invasion route through which to attack each other.
In the main it has been a successful buffer insofar as it kept apart the historically antagonistic empires of Tartary, China and India, but this role has been a trying one.
Tibet has had to cushion many shocks of aggression, and for varying periods of time—including the present—it has suffered the humiliation of foreign occupation.
Yet in the past it has always been able to throw off its conquerors and ultimately reassert its independence because of its hub position.
No one neighbor, however covetous, could in the past indefinitely hold Tibet in the face of another neighbor's opposition.
Tibet became a nation in the seventh century through the tribal conquests and diplomacy of Song-tsen Gampo, a remarkable chieftain from Ladakh who is credited with having introduced many elements of Indian culture.
Under his banner Tibet invaded western China and after seven years of campaigning forced the Emperor to relinquish his daughter.
The Tibetan leader's prize was a woman who was to have nearly MANCHUS AND MONGOLS 3 as much impact on the land as her husband.
She shared honors in the royal household with another wife—a Nepalese princess.
Both wives in fact collaborated in converting their mutual husband to Buddhism.
While this philosophy had filtered into Tibet nearly two hundred years earlier, it did not gain significant momentum until Song-tsen’s rule.
His Chinese queen not only encouraged the importation of Buddhist scriptures from India, but she provided the impetus for the development of a written Tibetan language based on Indian script with which to propagate the faith.
She also encouraged the establishment of monasteries where a clergy could be trained.
From her astrological studies the Queen had learned that Tibet was “like a female demon lying on her back’—probably a variation of the story of Tibet’s Eve, Dras-rin-mo.
Under the warrior king, Ti-song De-tsen, it became one of the great powers of Asia.
Northern India, Baltistan, Gilgit and Kashgar all fell to Ti-song De-tsen’s armies, and even China was forced to pay tribute.
Recognizing the progressive degeneration of Buddhism in his realm, he set about to purify and invigorate it.
He was particularly influenced by an Indian Tantric Buddhist teacher whom he invited to Tibet, Padma Sambhava—or Urgyen, as he was known by Tibetans.
The lives and transmigrations of Urgyen as recorded in Tibetan scriptures are closely modeled on the life of Lord Buddha.
Perhaps recognizing the strong addiction of the Tibetans to black magic, he incorporated in his doctrine much of the sorcery of the primitive “Bon” religion which predated Buddhism.
He emphasized the union of spiritual and material forces, symbolically representing them as the sexual union of god and goddess.
The sexuality of Urgyen’s teachings appealed to the Tibetan monks and stimulated a trend of increasing licentiousness within the monasteries of the Urgyenist sect, known popularly as the Red Hat sect.
The Jesuit Desideri, who in 1716 studied Urgyen’s scriptures, was astonished by his powers of prophecy.
The first prediction which was to prove unerringly accurate warned that Tartar invaders would conquer Tibet.
What Carpini learned about Tibet was for the most part vague and inaccurate.
It is known that Genghiz Khan conquered the high plateau in 1206 and again in 1226-1227.
The Great Khan recognized the political advantages of a religious link with Tibet.
Kublai Khan invited the Head Lama of the large and influential Sakya monastery near Lhasa to his court and later declared him ruler of Tibet.
Thus began a dynasty of Sakya priest-kings in Tibet MANCHUS AND MONGOLS 5 who, in varying degrees, drew support from the Mongols.
The relationship was more that of patron-priest than suzerain-vassal in the political sense.
Kublai’s armies never penetrated deep into Tibet nor was any effort made to administer it.
In fact, the ecclesiastical influence of the Tibetan Sakya Lamas in Mongolia was far more important than Mongol political influence in Tibet at that time.
The priesthood abandoned celibacy and certain monasteries reveled in sexual orgies which made mockery of the faith they represented.
Doctrinally the Red Hats became lost in the worship of a confusing assortment of goddesses and demons.
Tsong Khapa launched the Gelugpa reform, more commonly known as the Yellow Hat movement because of the yellow miters which the reformist monks wore to distinguish themselves from the supposedly debauched Red Hat monks.
New monasteries were opened in which the purified doctrine was studied.
The Yellow Hats found patrons and protectors among Mongol chieftains to the north.
This title was posthumously awarded also to his two predecessors, believed to have been his pre-incarnations; thus Sonam Gyatso entered history as the Third Dalai Lama.
It was the Fifth Dalai Lama who finally broke the power of the Red Hat sect during the middle of the 17th century.
The Great Fifth, as he is now known in Tibet, allied himself with Gushi Khan, Chief of the Ocelot Mongols of “Lower Tartary’—the Koko Nor region in northeast Tibet.
With the encouragement of the Fifth Dalai, Gushi Khan marched the Oelots into Tibet.
The Panchen in successive reincarnations thereafter exercised ecclesiastical power over 6 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE an area west of Lhasa from his throne in the Tashilhunpo monastery near Shigatse.
The Fifth Dalai Lama selected his beloved teacher (and posthumously, his teacher’s three predecessor incarnations) as Panchen.
The Great Fifth must also have credit for building the Potala—thereafter the traditional See of the Dalai Lama and famous landmark of Lhasa.
In 1652 the Dalai Lama traveled to Peking to visit the first Manchu Emperor of China—an act of diplomacy and good neighborliness which the Chinese have since twisted to allege China’s domination of Tibet.
In fact, it was not until the rule of the second Manchu Emperor, K’ang Hsi, that China exerted any meaningful power over Tibet.
Only after he died was authority restored to the lay monarchy—the institution used by the Mongol proconsuls to exercise power in Tibet.
There is some question as to the exact time of death because Sangve Gyatso, his Grand Vizier (and possibly his bastard son), went to great lengths to conceal it for several years.
By the time it became known that the Fifth Dalai was no longer alive, Sangye Gyatso had firmly established himself as Regent.
This deceit so infuriated the Chinese Emperor that he began plotting with the Mongols against the Vizier.
In 1705 Latsang Khan, a Qosot Mongol prince who had commanded the Grand Vizier’s forces, seized the government in a military coup detat.
Latsang however, was able to consolidate his power only with the strong support of Emperor K’ang Hsi.
This was the first beginning of meaningful Chinese political influence in Tibet.
Kang Hsi reasoned that a Qosot Mongol ally in Tibet would provide a buffer against the hostile Dzungar Mongols from the area now known as Sinkiang who by then were seriously menacing the western reaches of his empire.
Manchu supremacy in China was relatively safe so long as Tibet remained a friendly neighbor or at least a neutral buffer.
If Lhasa, however, were to fall under Dzungar domination and if Tibet were absorbed into a greater Mongolia united by common religion, Manchu rule would be gravely jeopardized.
Latsang needed Manchu support not only to ward off the MANCHUS AND MONGOLS 7 predatory Dzungars but to defend his secular throne against Yellow Hat conspiracies aimed at restoring ecclesiastical power.
The Sixth Dalai Lama was the key to serious discontent, which seethed within the Yellow Hat monasteries and brought them into conspiratorial contact with the Dzungar and Oelot Mongol tribes to the northwest.
A witness to the intrigues in Lhasa and faithful chronicler of them was Ippolito Desideri, whose sympathies were clearly with Latsang Khan.
Less harsh critics describe him as a boy of exceptional intelligence and talent.
Dissolute as he was, the Lama was loved by the Tibetan people and provided a potential rallying point for any uprising.
In 1707 the Qosot Khan sent the doomed Lama on a journey to China— allegedly for ceremonial purposes but actually to dispose of him.
The Tartar escort stopped in Li-tang short of the Chinese border to carry out its sinister design.
In a poignant scene before his death the Dalai Lama asked trusted members of his entourage to tell the Tibetan people not to weep—that he would be reborn on the borders of China near the spot of his execution and here they should search for him.
This enraged the orthodox Tibetans, particularly the Yellow Hat clergy, who refused to recognize the illegal selection.
Even Emperor K’ang Hsi, on whose favor Qosot Mongol rule depended, thought Latsang had gone too far.
The latter shrewdly extracted 8 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE tribute from Latsang as the price for Chinese protection, and it is this act which China believes provides a basis for claiming suzerainty over Tibet.
Although Tibetans, with justice on their side, would later claim that the acts of an alien and imposed Mongol king cannot be considered binding on the Tibetan nation, the Chinese henceforward refused to concede that Tibet was wholly independent of Peking.
Finding themselves unable alone to resist Latsang’s authority, the disgruntled Yellow Hat monks began plotting seriously with the Dzungar and Oelot Mongols, whose leader was Tse-wang Rabden.
This chieftain raised two armies—one of which he commanded personally—and prepared to invade China.
The objective of the first army was to regain the child Seventh Dalai Lama and block the Chinese Emperor from sending reinforcements to Latsang.
Rabden’s ultimate and very ambitious goal was to conquer all of China and seize the throne from the Manchus.
First, however, Tibet had to be wrested from Latsang, and this was the task of the second army—a 6,000-man expeditionary force of combined Mongols and Tibetans led by a warrior monk, Tsering Dundup.
Not only was Tse-wang Rabden unable to “liberate” the child Dalai from the Chinese, but his Dzungar-Oelot force was severely mauled by the Emperor's forces.
In the meantime, Tsering Dundup—following the original strategy—spread the word among the Yellow Hats that his approaching army was accompanied by the true Seventh Dalai.
On December 1, 1717 the invading force attacked Lhasa from four directions.
According to pre-laid plans ladders were let down from Lhasa’s walls, enabling the attackers to scale the ramparts more quickly.
The northern and eastern gates of the city were thrown open by secret sympathizers at a precisely agreed-upon time.
The ravages of the Mongols were terrifying, but no less so were the excesses of their confederate Yellow Hat monks.
No longer restrained by Latsang, the Yellow Hats savagely set upon their Red Hat rivals, massacring all they could find and destroying their monasteries.
MANCHUS AND MONGOLS 9 The Potala, more heavily fortified than the rest of the city, was held until the end by Latsang and a handful of loyal defenders.
The Mongol king escaped through a secret passage just ahead of his pursuers only to be cut down as he tried to flee the town.
This marked the end of the Qosot Mongol dynasty in Tibet and fulfilled with startling accuracy still another prophecy of Urgyen’s.
Urgyen had written that Tibet would be invaded by Tartars of Upper Tartary which was, in fact, the home of the Dzungar Mongols.
He added that the Tartars would sack the land and send home the spoils.
Moreover, he predicted that they would kill lamas, desecrate monasteries and commit many other atrocities.
Rabden’s abortive invasion of China by way of Siling was only a tactical feint in support of the invasion of Tibet, but the Emperor knew that the Mongol’s ultimate goal was seizure of his own throne.
With Latsang dead and Tibet secured, an important buffer against the Mongols was lost, and achievement of the Dzungar goal was now possible.
On the plea of the threatened Latsang Khan, a Chinese army had begun the long and arduous march toward Tibet before Lhasa fell to the Dzungars.
The Emperor, who still had custody of the Seventh Dalai Lama and knew that Tsering Dundup had thus been unable to produce him in Lhasa as promised, estimated that disillusionment with the new Mongol masters must be rising in Lhasa.
Chinese troops by forced march crossed the great desert to Dam, just north of Lhasa.
In preparation for a final attack on Lhasa, the Chinese made the tactical blunder of digging in behind a hastily built stone fort.
The Chinese delay at Dam gave the Dzungar troops time to prepare an attack.
Weakened by the long march, the Chinese were unable to break out of their fortifications and found themselves surrounded and imprisoned by a strong body of Dzingar troops.
When this source of food was exhausted, they ate the bodies of less hardy comrades as the latter succumbed to starvation.
Finally, after enduring a month’s siege, the survivors surrendered only to be massacred to the last 10 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE man as they filed out of the fort.
This was an unbearable humiliation for the Emperor, who vowed he would repay the Mongols.
While many of his ministers were strongly opposed to risking a new campaign in Tibet, which would be enormously expensive and difficult to sustain, K’ang Hsi was determined to crush the Mongols.
He knew that unless he could defeat them they would rapidly become strong enough to threaten his empire.
He particularly sought Mongol mercenaries who were a match for the fierce Dzungars defending Lhasa.
The second expedition, launched in 1720, was commanded by the Emperor's fourteenth son.
The main force was this time sent by way of Tachienlu—a more populated route on which the army could live off the land.
With the Chinese army rode the young Dalai Lama—the Emperor's trump card.
Tibetans along the invasion route were invited to join the crusade under the banners of the true Dalai Lama and to drive from their land the alien Dzungar Mongol rulers.
As the grand army marched toward Lhasa, the Tibetans turned out by the thousands to welcome their Dalai.
Many monks willingly joined the Chinese force, while others who lagged behind were prodded to join.
The huge invading army arrived at the outskirts of Lhasa, where it confronted a weakened garrison of only 4,000 Dzungars who knew that they could expect no reinforcements.
This victory is of considerable historic significance to the Chinese since it provided the first real basis for their claim to Tibet.
Urgyen had foreseen it and had entered it in the record nearly a thousand years before.
This holy city was a religious See for the Mongolian tribes just as much as it was for Tibetans.
The patron-priest formula which had for long kept these two peoples in a unique alliance would now keep Tibet a vassal of the Chinese Emperor instead.
George Bogle, leader of the first English mission to Tibet, 1774-75 Following their invasion of Lhasa in 1720 the Manchu rulers experimented with various approaches to the problem of controlling Tibet.
One of the most practical ways was to prevent the investiture of succeeding Dalai Lamas—by murder if necessary.
Thus, for more than a century after the Manchu invasion Tibet was ruled by regents who were responsive to China.
As the Dalai Lama’s power eroded under the regency system, the Panchen Lama assumed greater importance throughout the country.
One outstanding Panchen, Lobsang Paldan Yeshi, at length dared to defy Peking.
But this was because he had made contact with a new empire fast rising in India to the south—an empire of British merchants.
The way had been opened for British power in South Asia on the last day of the sixteenth century, when Queen Elizabeth affixed her seal and signature to a royal charter establishing the East India Company.
Eight years later the Company’s flagship Hector dropped anchor off Surat on the west coast of India.
Its captain, William Hawkins, rowed ashore on August 24, 1608 to become the first Englishman to reach the Moghul realm.
Thus began an imperial adventure which would make England great and have a profound effect on the course of history.
But Hawkins was concerned with trade, not empire—with money, not glory.
Even more immediately 12 BACKDOOR TO CHINA 13 he was concerned about his own skin.
Despite Portuguese hostility and intrigues Hawkins made his way to the fabled Moghul court at Agra, south of Delhi, where he petitioned Emperor Jehangir for license to trade.
Having succeeded in poisoning the Emperor’s mind against Hawkins, the Portuguese had won the first round against the English.
Clinging tenaciously to its beachhead at Surat, the Company somehow survived despite intense Portuguese hostility.
But not until 1615, when a Portuguese naval squadron was routed off Surat by British men-of-war, was the Company safe.
New trading depots were opened throughout India, and England’s merchant knights grew rich.
Clive’s victory at the Battle of Plassey near Calcutta in 1757 secured Bengal for the Company and marked the real beginning of British power in India.
It was inevitable that the Company would dream of riches beyond the great Himalayan barrier on the north.
Since Herodotus’ time tales of limitless treasures of gold had reached India from Tibet.
Every river which cascaded from the high Tibetan plateau had washed down gold-flecked sand to excite the coastal dwellers of its delta.
The corporate imagination of the East India Company conjured up an El] Dorado which could be had for the taking.
The Company was intrigued by reports received as early as 1644, describing Tibet as an unlimited source of borax.
English merchants traded heavily in this commodity, buying it in India from native traders, who brought it in driblets out of Tibet, and selling it in the world market on a near monopoly.
The English were also, of course, interested in new markets for their manufactured goods.
In March 1768 the Company’s Court of Directors, meeting in London, went on record with a recommendation that Tibet and West China soon be investigated as outlets for English cloth goods.
In 1771 the Directors raised the idea of exploring the Himalayan principality of Bhutan, north of Bengal, and the Assam Valley, as well as Tibet, with an eye to developing new markets.
But it took Warren Hastings—a highly controversial, visionary Governor of Bengal—to carry out this policy.
Moreover, he found a long-sought excuse when he received unexpectedly a letter in March of that year from Lobsang Paldan Yeshe, the Third Panchen Lama of Tibet—or Teshoo Lama, as he was then more commonly known.
The trouble to which he referred had begun when Bhutanese raiders in 1772 had kidnapped the Maharajah of Cooch Behar, a vassal of Tibet who ruled over a small princely state wedged between Bengal and Bhutan.
The kidnapping had provoked Hastings to send a punitive expedition into Bhutan.
Outfought by Company troops, the Rajah of Bhutan sought protection from the Panchen Lama, who was his suzerain, and the latter took the unprecedented step of writing Hastings.
Hastings selected as his emmissary to Tibet, George Bogle—a twenty-eight-year-old Scotsman in the Company, who was smart, personable and well grounded in affairs of Bengal and Bhutan.
It is indicative of the Governor’s confidence in Bogle—or perhaps in his judgment of men—that he gave his young ambassador wide powers.
Hastings’ * Lobsang Paldan Yeshe is customarily known as the Third Panchen Lama, but this formula for numbering does not take into consideration three predecessors to the actual first Panchen Lama, who were awarded the title posthumously.
The latter obviously and particularly included China, but Bogle was also instructed to inquire about the countries which lay between Lhasa and Siberia.
Hastings farsightedly recognized the strategic implications of Tibet’s hub position vis-a-vis India, China and Russia, even though he did not yet have precise enough geographical data with which to refine these implications.
He was accompanied by Alexander Hamilton, a surgeon of the East India Company, and Purangir, an emissary sent by the Panchen Lama to guide them.
As the party passed through Bhutan, it was intercepted by a messenger from the Panchen Lama asking Bogle to postpone his entrance into Tibet.
The Panchen’s letter explained to Bogle that Emperor Ch’ien Lung of China had decreed that no “Moghul, Indian, Pathan or Englishman” should be admitted to Tibet without royal authority; therefore, Bogle must await permission from Peking.
After an appeal delivered by Purangir, the Panchen waived his objections without further reference to China.
Only later did Bogle discover that the trouble had been in Lhasa—not Peking.
The Panchen ultimately confided in Bogle that the Regent of the child Dalai Lama in Lhasa had been the obstruction to his mission.
This puppet of the Chinese had warned that the English objective was to conquer Tibet.
The Panchen Lama did not accept the Chinese stricture and had the political sense to recognize that the English could provide a counterbalance to Manchu power.
He overruled Lhasa and received Bogle at a temporary camp site near the southern Tibetan city of Shigatse.
Bogle described the Panchen Lama as a man about forty years old, “of low stature and, though not corpulent, rather inclined to be fat; his arms as white as those of a European; . . . his whiskers never above a month long.
Almost immediately the Panchen apologized for his Bhutanese vassal—criticizing him for his unnecessary attack on Cooch Behar.
He told Bogle that he had always disapproved of the Rajah of Bhutan’s capture of the Cooch Behar prince and the war with the Fringies.
As their friendship grew, the Panchen Lama confided to Bogle that the Regent—contrary to his advice—had encouraged Bhutan to war on Cooch Behar.
Because the Regent’s judgment was patently wrong, the Panchen had felt strong enough to override him and receive the English emissary.
Convinced that Hastings had acted in good faith by withdrawing from Bhutan and certain that the chances for lasting peace would be greatly improved if Bogle were graciously received, the Lama had disregarded Lhasa.
In effect, he told the Regent to leave relations with the British to him.
Talks with the Panchen Lama began auspiciously and in a spirit of conciliation.
Bengal, he explained, was a place very close to him since he had lived there during two previous incarnations.
Although the Regent sent two emissaries from Lhasa to talk with Bogle, it was clear in the end that they would make no trade agreement.
Pleading the need to gain the Emperor's permission, the Lhasa emissaries refused to act.
The Panchen Lama seemed genuinely sorry that he could not accommodate the British request for trade rights.
Trade relations were not established, nor was he able to convince the Lhasan authorities that British intentions were entirely peaceful.
He gained for England the confidence and friendship of the Panchen Lama, who was to prove a strong champion of the Company’s interests.
He genuinely liked the Panchen Lama; not unnaturally this sentiment was reciprocated.
Bogle had bridged a wide cultural gap to find an enduring personal relationship which gained for England and the Company a valuable friend.
May ye long enjoy the happiness which is denied to more polished nations; and while they are engaged in the endless pursuits of avarice and ambition, defended by your barren mountains, may ye continue to live in peace and contentment, and know no wants but those of nature,” This first embassy to Tibet was also immensely useful for the information Bogle was able to bring back.
His detailed observations revealed the great importance of Tibet in the continental trade of Asia.
He found that Tibet produced gold, musk, yak-tails, wool and salt which Tibetans exchanged for cloth goods, leather and luxury goods, | Most of the trade with China was along the caravan route via Sining.
Usually the caravans were so-called tribute missions, but 18 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE they nevertheless constituted a form of organized trade.
The Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama would send to the Emperor rich “tribute” cargoes of ceremonial scarves, holy relics, amber rosaries, bronze Buddha images and incense.
In exchange, the Emperor would send the Lamas presents of satin, silver goods and gold trinkets, which in many cases exceeded the value of the Tibetan trains.
In fact, the retinue of the tribute caravans included Indian trading pilgrims called gosains, who waxed rich and influential on their lucrative trade.
Whatever its ceremonial origins, tribute had little political meaning in Tibet by the eighteenth century.
Hasting’s intuition had told him that Russia—however far from Lhasa—posed a danger not to be ignored.
His intuition was reinforced by Bogle’s intelligence, which revealed that significant trade between Tibet and Russia did exist.
This trade was for the most part conducted by Kalmuks from Eastern Turkestan and Buriat Mongols from Siberia.
In yearly caravans they brought furs, Russian hides, yak-tails and fresh-water pearls, which they exchanged for cloth, amber, spices and gold.
His interest in her was apparently aroused by stories which filtered through to Lhasa telling of Russia-China boundary quarrels.
Bogle sensed that the Lama was, even then, genuinely concerned about the possibility of a clash between Asia’s two expanding empires as they veered closer to each other in Central Asia.
Bogle’s strategic insight into the Himalayan and trans-Himalayan region proved to be amazingly accurate.
British Himalayan policy was for many years consistent with his conclusions, and it must be assumed that his recommendations to Hastings indeed influenced the early shaping of British policy.
This was equally true for the Chinese, whose routes and supply lines to Tibet were much longer and more hazardous than those from India.
This was why Communist China in mid-twentieth century first built roads before it attempted to consolidate its control over the Tibetan plateau and then extended its road network southward to the Himalayas as a requirement for ultimate control of Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan.
The threat of a new empire rising in India to challenge Imperial China in Asia was ominous enough to the Manchus.
But for emissaries of this empire to visit the court of the Panchen Lama and negotiate behind the backs of the Chinese proconsuls in Lhasa was to give immediacy to the threat.
If Tibet were to fall under the Company’s influence, the Manchu Empire would be flanked by two “barbarians’—the British as well as the Russians.
He could do little about the British, but he could at least try to bring the Panchen to heel.
Ch’ien Lung sent repeated messages inviting the Panchen Lama to Peking during the years 1777 and 1778.
Perhaps he realized that in Peking he would be vulnerable to Chinese pressures.
Or perhaps he was genuinely apprehensive about the smallpox epidemic which raged through China.
Once again the Emperor invited the Panchen Lama in a letter written in 1779, The message—flattering in tone—described elaborate plans which were being made to celebrate the Emperor's seventieth birthday and implored the Panchen to attend the ceremonies.
The Panchen could no longer refuse; when he finally did accept, however, it was with great reluctance.
He confided to a few friends that an inner instinct warned him that he would never return.
Filled with this foreboding the Panchen Lama set forth on his epic visit to China in July 1779.
Five thousand troops were his escort as he marched regally through Tibet.
This journey was a rare spectacle, which brought crowds of his countrymen to pay homage as he swept by.
Whenever he paused, a platform caparisoned with rich brocades and deep cushions was erected.
Enthroned above his people the Panchen sat patiently, his right foot extended and unshod so that the faithful could touch it with their foreheads as they filed by.
Here Purangir, faithful agent of the Company, caught up with the party on a mission for Hastings.
Hastings had arranged a plan for Bogle to go to Canton by sea in the naive hope that a trade agreement with Tibet could be worked out with the Emperor of China.
Purangir was to solicit the Panchen’s approval of the plan, then meet Bogle in Canton and escort him to Peking.
Taking advantage of his friendship with the Panchen Lama, Bogle hoped also to take up with the Emperor the matter of debts owed by Chinese merchants to English sea traders.
Heretofore the English had been unable to gain access to Peking and the Emperor’s court to redress their grievances.
Bogle believed that by riding in on the Panchen’s coattails he could perhaps at least gain a royal hearing.
If satisfaction could not be obtained on the spot, he hoped to set up some permanent channel of communications to the Emperor through which complaints could be heard and adjudicated.
As the Panchen Lama neared the Emperor’s summer palace at Jehol, the receptions became more numerous and progressively more elaborate.
At one place His Holiness was met by the Emperor's first son riding at the head of 10,000 royal troops.
As had been the case when the Great Fifth Dalai Lama visited the Manchu court, the Panchen Lama was not required to kowtow or otherwise signify vassalage to the Emperor.
It was on the fourth day of meetings that the Panchen Lama raised the matter of his relationship with the English.
He asked suspiciously about “the extent of the country” ruled over by this prince and “the number of his forces,” and interrogated Purangir on other details.
His replies were cautious, but we can assume they did nothing to dispel Ch’ien Lung’s fear that the British Empire in Asia would rival his own and eventually absorb Tibet into its realm.
In the autumn the Emperor returned to Peking from Jehol accompanied by his holy guest.
Here the Panchen Lama once again raised with the Emperor the matter of the British.
One can guess that either Purangir exaggerated the sincerity of the Emperor’s response or the response was made simply in an effort to be polite.
Chinese records include no mention of this conversation, but then it is unlikely that they would.
Naturally, the Emperor would not want the Panchen Lama's views a matter of permanent record, and it is unlikely that he seriously considered corresponding with a British trading company.
It is difficult to believe that the Panchen Lama would have been naive enough to think that he could bring the Chinese Emperor to endorse his close relations with the British.
More likely the Panchen Lama raised the matter to impress upon the Emperor that the British could be protectors of Tibet should China attempt to interfere with Tibet’s autonomy.
This was in all probability a political maneuver—part of the Panchen Lama’s strategy of playing the Chinese off against the British.
It would have been interesting to see whether the Emperor allowed Bogle to join 22 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE them in Peking.
He probably would have found excuses to exclude him since to do otherwise would be tantamount to condoning close Tibetan-English ties.
The matter never came to a test, however; the Panchen Lama suddenly sickened and died.
Tibetans historically distrust Chinese motives when a Grand Lama is invited to Peking.
They assume that the Chinese will impose their will on him or, failing this, dispose of him on the assumption that his next incarnation will prove more malleable.
It was natural, therefore, that a large body of opinion in Tibet was convinced that the Panchen Lama was murdered in Peking.
Whether or not the Emperor was guilty of the Panchen’s death, he certainly gained by it.
Power in Tibet reverted to the Dalai Lama in Lhasa and was held in escrow for him by the Regent, who was under the Chinese Ambans’ watchful eyes.
The Regent, long a puppet of the Chinese, strongly opposed relations between Tibet and the British and could be relied upon to follow Peking’s dictates.
Hastings’ Tibet policy had rested heavily on the relationship between Bogle and the Panchen Lama.
With their passing went the Company’s best chances for trade with Tibet.
Although Hastings sent another mission to Tashilhunpo in 1783 under Lieutenant Samuel Turner, the new incarnation of the Panchen Lama was still a child, and his Regent gave Turner no encouragement whatsoever.
The complete collapse of Hastings’ “forward policy” came not long after he was relieved as Governor General.
Lord Charles Cornwallis, who replaced him, stumbled badly on Himalayan policy.
Through ineptitude he lost even the goodwill which Hastings had gained.
A series of petty disputes over currency and trade had BACKDOOR TO CHINA 23 touched off a Gurkha invasion of Tibet from Nepal in 1788, causing the child Panchen’s Regent at Tashilhunpo to turn to the Company for help.
In a pathetic letter to the Governor General the Regent confided that if British help were not forthcoming he must accept Chinese military assistance.
This he did not want since he knew that the Manchus would use the Gurkha invasion as an excuse to tighten Peking’s hold on Tibet.
Cornwallis responded tardily and unimaginatively, claiming that the Company could not afford the cost of war against Nepal, had no reason to attack Nepal and did not want to offend the Chinese Emperor lest it disrupt the Company’s sea trade with China.
The commander to whom the Emperor had first entrusted Tibet's defense actually bought off the Gurkhas with promises of tribute rather than risking battle with them.
This act of cowardice was kept secret from Peking as long as it could be, but when the promised tribute payment to the Gurkhas was not forthcoming the skeleton clattered from its closet.
The Gurkhas, who felt cheated, erupted again in 1791, this time sacking the Panchen Lama’s treasure-laden monastery at Tashilhunpo.
Furious with the cowardly commander who had deceived him, the Emperor sent under forced march a large and remarkably effective army which routed the Gurkhas in a brilliantly conducted campaign over icy passes during the winter of 1792.
While his troops retreated from Tibet in disorder, the desperate Gurkha Rajah of Nepal tried to mend his fences with the British.
He hastily signed a trade pact which the Company had long been seeking, hoping thereby to qualify for defense assistance.
But having already angered the Emperor and failed the Tibetans, Cornwallis now refused to help the beleaguered Nepalese, thus alienating victor and vanquished alike.
Ignoring reality altogether, Cornwallis despatched Captain William Kirkpatrick to Kathmandu to attempt mediation.
Cornwallis’ offer of mediation was unfortunately too late to help Nepal and was resented by the Chinese, whose victory entitled Peking to impose terms on Nepal.
Arriving months after the war was over, Kirkpatrick only served to excite further the Emperor’s suspicion that the British had secretly backed the Gurkhas in their ill-fated adventure in Tibet.
As predicted by the Panchen’s Regent, the Chinese tightened their grip on Tibet.
The Dalai and Panchen Lamas were forbidden to exercise power independently of the Chinese Ambans.
The latter, moreover, were empowered to select puppets of their choosing as Lamas.
It was the intention of the Emperor to absorb Tibet into the Manchu empire and deny it any of its traditional attributes of autonomy.
To impress this upon the Tibetans a tablet describing the new terms of Chinese control was erected in September 1793 in front of the Jo-kang, Lhasa’s holiest place of worship.
Lord Curzon, Viceroy of India, 1898-1905 More than a century passed before the British again made a serious attempt to penetrate Tibet.
When the attempt was finally made, it involved other stakes than commerce.
For the spreading power of Imperial Russia not only threatened British interests in India but endangered the balance of power in the Orient.
Although the Russian Empire had been expanding for four hundred years, it had been confined to the heartland of the Eurasian continent.
This expansion had not troubled the British, but when in the nineteenth century Russia pushed southward toward Britain’s empire and threatened to upset power equilibrium in the East it became of vital concern.
Russia began to extend its rule modestly toward the end of the fourteenth century after the Mongol tide had begun to recede from its highwater mark of conquest.
By the middle of the sixteenth century the Khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan had fallen to the Russians.
A century later found the Russians on the banks of the Amur River in Siberia, where they skirmished with advance units of the Chinese.
A line between Russia and China, awarding the entire Amur Basin to the Manchu Emperor, K’ang Hsi, was finally drawn by the Treaty of Nerchinsk in 1689.
While this agreement remained in force for nearly two centuries, it did not contain Russia's eastward expansion indefinitely.
Two years later by the Treaty of Peking the Manchus relinquished to Russia the land between the right banks of the Ussuri and lower Amur rivers and the Pacific Ocean.
This permitted Russia to build Vladivostock and from this base extend its influence along the northern Pacific coast.
The 1860 treaty and the supplementary protocol of Tarbagatai, signed in 1864, took advantage of the declining Manchu power to realign China’s western boundary in Russia’s favor.
Petersburg (or Treaty of Ili, as it is sometimes known), China regained part of the rich and strategic Ili Valley leading into western Sinkiang, which had earlier been lost through Russian pressure.
But this treaty and subsequent refinements agreed to in 1882, 1883 and 1884, which tended to be disadvantageous to China, are among the protocols which Peking has recently attacked as imperialist-imposed, “unequal” treaties, and which it uses today as a basis to insist on a redefinition of its Central Asian boundary with the Soviet Union.
A sense of Great Russian nationalism overlay a deeper, more instinctive drive to control the Asian hordes which had once conquered the Russian people.
Moreover, in the nineteenth century exploration and imperial conquest were the trend in the Western world.
Cossack horsemen, like adventurers and pioneers everywhere, were irresistably drawn to the next prize over the horizon—then on to the next.
Tashkent was taken in 1864, Samarkand in 1868, Bokhara in 1869, Khokand in 1876, Merve in 1884 and Pendjdeh in 1885.
By 1895 the Russians had reached the Pamirs, overlooking the Indian subcontinent.
This was the time of the “Great Game,” a name invented by Indian Army officer Captain Arthur Conolly to describe BritishRussian political fencing in Central Asia.
Conolly forfeited his own life for the Game when he was beheaded in Bokhara while on a secret mission for the government of India.
Long-range reconnaissance and espionage of this kind served as probing antennae of two THE GREAT GAME 27 empires which veered perilously close to each other as the nineteenth century came to a close.
By the end of the nineteenth century there had developed in Russia a cult of Vostochniki, or “Easterners,” who believed that it was Russia’s mission to conquer continental Asia.
Prjevalskii helped popularize the concept of Central Asian unity with Russia.
In the same year Crown Prince Nicholas toured the Far East, dramatizing Russia’s increased interest in it.
It had been Ukhtomskii who, when war broke out with Japan in 1904, rashly predicted that Russia would defeat Japan and then conquer China.
These were strong words, particularly since they were spoken by a man who served as the Crown Prince’s mentor on Far Eastern affairs.
Nicholas’ adoption of an aggressive policy toward Asia after he became Czar can probably be traced in some measure to Ukhtomskii’s influence.
Also influential was Witte, Russia’s Minister of Finance, who promoted the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway as a means of encouraging industry and marketing Western Siberia’s grain production.
Both men had visions of a Russian empire in Asia, although Witte viewed it more from an economic point of view.
He saw in a Far Eastern rail network a means to compete commercially with England in China.
Russia’s contacts with Tibet had initially been through the Mongols, many of whom were Lamaists.
Catherine the Great had initiated a correspondence with the Mongolian Grand Lama of Urga betraying her more than casual 28 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE interest in Mongolia.
This strangely unsuitable gift for one lama to give another was accompanied by a request for advice on how to meet Catherine's increasingly aggressive moves toward Mongolia.
In Peking, Russia was viewed as another foreign barbarian, whose domination of the Mongols posed a threat in Central Asia more formidable than that of the British traders in India and along the coast.
The British Empire in India was still separated from China by the Himalayas and the endless wastes of Tibet, but the Russian “White Horde” inexorably advanced toward the Chinese across the flat steppes of Central Asia.
The Mongol concept of Tsagan Khan has an ancient parallel in Tibetan mythology.
It was prophesied that Song-tsen Gampo, founder of Tibet’s religion, would one day be reincarnated as a mighty prince and conquer the world in the name of Buddhism.
The prediction specified that the seat of the new empire would bear the name Chang Shambhala and would be located three thousand miles northwest of Lord Buddha’s birthplace in northern India.
At least, such an interpretation of the legend was found useful by a most mysterious Buriat Mongol lama who sought to promote Russian policy in Lhasa.
This extraordinary agent of the Czar—known by various names and aliases but most accurately as Aguan Dorjiev—was the most effective player of them all in the Great Game which swirled around Tibet at the turn of the century.
He had a disturbing effect on the Central Asian balance of power and set in motion a series of moves and countermoves which would ultimately provoke the British to march on Lhasa.
As tutor and confidant of the Dalai Lama, Dorjiev gained enormous influence in Lhasa and was able to convince many Tibetans that Czar Nicholas II was, in fact, the great Prince of Buddhism who ruled from Chang Shambhala.
Lord Curzon, Viceroy of India, was at first not inclined to take the Buriat lama seriously.
London became suspicious of Dorjiev only when Hardinge, then British Chargé d’Affaires in St.
PetersTHE GREAT GAME 29 burg, clipped and sent to the Foreign Office an article in the October 15, 1900 issue of the Journal de Saint Petersbourg which described this mystery-monk’s audience with the Czar at Livadia Palace in Yalta.
Since, however, Dorjiev had been described as a representative of the Dalai Lama and was rumored to have brought a letter to the Czar from His Holiness, Hardinge’s report aroused deep suspicion in both London and Calcutta.
Even if a Russian invasion of India seemed remote, the presence of Russian troop concentrations in Central Asia tied down comparable British forces in India.
This was awkward at a time when the “thin red line” was stretched to the limit against the Boers in Africa.
Also the British Raj could not allow its subjects in India to see nearby a power comparable to British power.
One of Curzon’s first acts as Viceroy was to bring under his personal control the vulnerable borderlands.
He reasoned, for example, that China’s Sinkiang dependency north of Ladakh and Tibet would eventually fall to Russia.
The latter had already stationed in Kashgaria, Sinkiang a consul general guarded by an impressive Cossack escort.
Moreover, there was much talk of a new Russian rail line which would extend to Eastern Sinkiang and make an invasion of that area logistically feasible.
If Tibet came under Russian influence, India would be exposed and vulnerable along its entire 2,500-mile northern boundary.
Sir John Ardagh, who had been Director of British Military Intelligence in 1896, argued for fixing a definite boundary in the Pamirs far enough forward to prevent Russian expansion into Turkestan and Hunza.
He felt that the Sino-Japanese War had revealed serious Chinese weakness and that the consequences of this would be eventual Russian annexation of Kashgaria.
The Czar’s envoys reputedly had dangled before him enticing offers of aid.
Curzon supported Ardagh’s views mainly because the Russians had established a threatening military outpost in the Taghdumbash-Pamir area north of Hunza.
In March 1899 the British government proposed to Peking that China recognize Hunza’s claims to the western end of the Taghdumbash area in return for which the British would agree to negotiate a firm boundary in the Aksai Chin area where Ladakh, Tibet and Sinkiang come together.
So anxious were the British to clear up this festering dispute in Taghdumbash which made Hunza vulnerable to Russian intrigues that they probably would have made major territorial concessions to the Chinese in Aksai Chin had the latter accepted the British offer to negotiate.
London would probably have conceded to the Chinese most of the arid Aksai Chin plateau, which is today the crux of India’s northwest boundary dispute with China.
The Chinese would not agree, however, and missed an opportunity never again to be offered by the British.
With this perspective, it is not surprising that Curzon began to view Dorjiev’s activities as having an important part in Russia’s master plan for Asia.
Petersburg with a line calculated to appeal to the Dalai Lama, Dorjiev argued that China was too weak to protect Tibet from the British and might, in fact, give the country to the British as a sop.
English infidels would then occupy Lhasa and usurp the rule of lama priests.
The Buriat extolled Russia as a powerful military nation which could protect Tibet.
Hinting that Czar Nicholas II had embraced Buddhism, he pointed out that the classic patron-priest relationship would give the Dalai Lama ecclesiastical power over all of the Russian Empire.
Dorjiev also brought a letter to the Dalai Lama from the Czar inviting His Holiness to send an envoy to Russia for further discusTHE GREAT GAME 31 sions.
Swayed by Dorjiev’s influence, the Dalai Lama, without notifying the Tibetan National Council, impulsively sent to St.
Petersburg an ornate cushion to serve as his throne while he talked to the great White Lama.
Tibet’s Prime Minister intervened, however, and made it clear to the Dalai Lama that he had overstepped the bounds of his authority by making plans to visit Russia.
He also reminded the Dalai that the National Council was not yet convinced that Tibet needed Russian protection.
Dissuaded from going to Russia, the Dalai Lama sent instead a mission consisting of eight senior statesmen headed by Dorjiev, whom he accorded the rank of plenipotentiary.
The group made its way secretly across India under the very nose of the British and boarded a ship for Russia.
By June 1901 Dorjiev was back in Russia, much to the consternation of Curzon.
The June 25, 1901 edition of the newspaper Odessa Novosti reported that the city of Odessa would welcome that day an “extraordinary mission from the Dalai Lama which was proceeding to St.
The article added that Dorjiev, leader of the mission, “had letters from the Dalai Lama which would raise the matter of a permanent Tibetan mission in St.
Count Lamsdorff, Russian Foreign Minister, dismissed as “ridiculous” and “utterly unfounded” stories that the Tibetan group had a diplomatic role, and compared the Tibetan mission to similar missions sent by the Pope to the faithful around the world.
Certainly it was the kind of undertaking which would appeal to Nicholas II, who had a somewhat romantic and mystical nature.
Sir Cecil Spring Rice, later British Ambassador to the United States, wrote Sir Charles Hardinge about the atmosphere in St.
One called for stationing in Lhasa a prince of the Russian royal house as ambassador.
The other—more serious—suggested that Russia and Tibet conclude an agreement requiring Russia to come to Tibet’s rescue in the event of attack by the British.
The Dalai Lama was very much in favor of concluding such a treaty; Dorjiev had done his job well.
A little intelligence leaked out to British frontier officers in Darjeeling and Kalimpong.
But it was mainly unreliable hearsay from native travelers; and by the time this type of news reached India it was hopelessly out of date.
The Boxer Rebellion of 1900 provided an occasion for Russian troops to occupy Peking as part of the international rescue mission.
Russia—not yet at war with Japan—had penetrated deeply into Manchuria and Western Turkestan.
The Pamirs were under the Czar’s control, and it was generally accepted that Chinese Turkestan and Mongolia would probably be next.
Moreover, it needed the Czar’s protection against Japan, which posed a serious and immediate threat.
Russia, for its part, would find an understanding with China useful because of a similar imminent threat from Japan.
However plausible this reasoning may have appeared, the rumor of a Sino-Russian accord could not be established as fact, and both Peking and St.
Denials, THE GREAT GAME 33 however, did little to allay the fears and suspicions of Great Britain.
Curzon himself asserted that he was a firm believer in the existence of a secret understanding—if not a secret treaty—between Russia and China about Tibet.
What made reports of Russian success in Lhasa all the more difficult for Curzon to bear was his own painfully obvious lack of success.
Petersburg, Curzon’s efforts to communicate with the Dalai Lama were being rebuffed.
Not only had the Dalai Lama refused to admit British traders under the terms of treaties signed previously with the Chinese—supposedly Tibet’s suzerain—but he refused even to have the matter discussed.
It was now obvious to Curzon that there were influences at work in Lhasa specifically hostile to the British.
Russian players in the Great Game seemed to be outscoring British players.
On June 26, 1902 he sent a representative named White to Giagong in Sikkim to reassert British rights to the territory which had been previously seized by the Tibetans.
This threat of force succeeded, and the Tibetans retreated behind the line recognized by the British.
Just as it had not honored the Chefoo Convention of 1876 in which China permitted Britain to trade in Tibet, Lhasa protested the validity of the 1890 convention between India and China which had defined the Sikkim border with Tibet, claiming that the Tibetan government had never signed it.
But White’s mission at least provoked a response from the Chinese Amban in Lhasa, who promised to produce a high-level Tibetan to begin negotiations.
Curzon—correctly as it turned out—had little faith that the Tibetans would ever get down to negotiations.
Believing that the root of the difficulties with Tibet was 34 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE Russian influence in Lhasa, the Viceroy still saw force as the only solution.
On January 8, 1903 he proposed to London that a mission with armed escort be sent to Lhasa and there settle once and for all India’s relationship with Tibet.
Any move deep into Tibet could be expected to bring a stronger reaction from St.
As a compromise, the Viceroy was given authority to send a mission to Khamba Dzong, the nearest inhabited place inside Tibetan territory easily reached from Giagong.
Curzon chose as leader Major Francis Younghusband, an officer of the India service who had already made a brilliant record along the frontier.
His escort would consist of two hundred rifles, calculated to make his negotiating voice more convincing.
The plan called for Younghusband to meet in Khamba Dzong with a high-level emmissary of the Dalai Lama and a representative from China.
It was hoped that firm agreement on trade and boundary matters could finally be reached with the Tibetans at this meeting.
But if agreement proved impossible, Curzon would have convincing evidence that Lhasa had no intention of abiding by British-Chinese agreements.
The real significance of this would be the confirmation that Tibet had fallen under serious Russian influence.
The Khamba Dzong mission failed since an adequately ranking Tibetan negotiator never appeared.
Smarting under this indignity, Curzon grasped at every shred of evidence which supported his stand that Tibet must be brought to heel by armed invasion.
Younghusband, no less aggressive than Curzon, obliged the Viceroy by sending back all sorts of intelligence which supported the forward policy.
Curzon’s force of will and tenacity more than anything else was responsible for finally wearing down London's resistance.
In October 1903 Younghusband was authorized to advance into Tibet as far as Gyantse.
Prime Minister Balfour’s Conservative government—wobbly and unsure of itself—was proceeding warily lest it risk censure for an adventurous policy in Tibet.
THE GREAT GAME 35 The mission's escort was augmented by nearly three thousand men under Brigadier J Macdonald.
Younghusband—recalled to the summer capital in Simla for final orders—was frank in acknowledging his bewilderment at the instructions which he received.
Obtaining “satisfaction” for real and imagined insults against the Indian government seemed like a strange purpose for a military expedition when at issue were important matters of trade rights which the British had been seeking since 1873.
Younghusband saw little difference between his objective and that of Warren Hastings a century before.
Younghusband and Curzon, of course, both understood that the real issue was British primacy in an area essential to the security of India.
Imperial Russia could not be allowed to enter the vacuum which was being created by the disintegration of the Manchu Empire.
After one brief engagement with Tibetan border troops and another clash along the way, Younghusband’s force reached Gyantse in April 1904.
The Tibetans, however, were no more willing to negotiate here than at Khamba Dzong.
London—already more deeply involved in Tibet than it wanted to be—now had no alternative but to order the mission to advance on Lhasa.
The British column moved quickly to Tibet's capital, meeting only minor opposition along the way.
On August 2 Younghusband came within sight of the Potala and saw the goal which had so long eluded Englishmen.
Soon after entering Lhasa he learned that the Dalai Lama and Dorjiev had fled northward to Urga, Mongolia, where they became political refugees under the protection of the High Lama of Mongolia.
The Grand Lama was also accompanied by his Chief Magician, whose magic now failed but who could at least find some satisfaction in the accuracy of an earlier prophesy which promised that the “Year of the Wood ao would bring disaster to ibet.
Curzon had been withdrawn from India in the midst of the expedition to Lhasa.
This removed the architect of the forward policy and its staunchest defender.
The cautious Balfour government—overwhelmed by the results of a policy which it had backed 36 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE into—wanted to withdraw from Tibet as soon as possible.
Especially worrisome to Whitehall was the treaty Younghusband had negotiated with the defeated Tibetans, which in two respects deviated from his instructions.
One clause specified that the British were to occupy the Chumbi Valley until the indemnity had been paid—a period of seventy-five years.
London wanted neither to occupy Tibet nor place an agent in Lhasa and had earlier gone on record to this effect in correspondence with the Government of India.
Both he and Curzon had argued that there should be a British resident posted permanently in Lhasa.
It is a measure of Younghusband’s convictions that he exceeded his instructions in negotiating a treaty which, if left to stand, would have made Tibet a virtual vassal of England.
Although there was something grand about Younghusband’s march to Lhasa, he treated the political aspects of his mission in a most cavalier fashion.
His actions cannot be condoned even in the light of history, and London certainly did not forgive him at the time.
He was to some extent made scapegoat for a Tibet policy which had never been popular and had in fact become acutely embarassing as Great Britain sought agreement with Russia.
Nevertheless, he must bear a fair share of blame for allowing a myopic view of the Tibetan problem to enable him to conclude a solemn agreement which could never be carried out.
The stationing of a British representative in Lhasa would imply political aims and would thus be unnecessarily provocative to St.
Petersburg, with whom London was then trying to reach an entente cordiale.
The other disturbing fact was that Younghusband had negotiated directly with the Tibetans—pointedly excluding the Chinese Amban.
This could be interpreted to mean that Tibet and Britain no longer recognized China’s suzerain role and, further, that Britain had assumed the position of suzerain in China’s place.
This not only added to Russia’s uneasiness but outraged Peking as well.
London knew that China’s legal presence in Tibet was valuable to prevent a vacuum which the Russians might find inviting.
Clearly a new agreement had to be reached with Peking to rectify the situation.
THE GREAT GAME 37 On April 27, 1906, after eighteen months of negotiations, Great Britain reached agreement with China on Tibet.
Younghusband’s Anglo-Tibetan Convention of 1904 was endorsed by China only after important modifications had been made.
Peking had wanted Great Britain to recognize full Chinese sovereignty over Tibet.
This, of course, was rejected as being inconsistent with Tibet’s buffer role, but the British did agree to preserve Chinese suzerainty and give up any privileged position secured by Younghusband’s agreement.
London stabilized Russian relations in Central Asia by the AngloRussian Convention of 1907.
This important treaty settled competing interests of the two countries in Persia, Afghanistan and Tibet.
Both countries agreed not to station representatives in Lhasa and to negotiate with Tibet only through China.
Tibet, in short, would henceforward serve as a buffer between India and Russia.
With their traditional disregard for Chinese suzerainty and with perhaps more foresight than the British, the Tibetans refused to sign either the Anglo-Chinese Convention of 1906 or the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907.
Nevertheless, the latter agreement ended whatever hopes the Dalai Lama had for Russian support.
The Great Game may have officially ended when Younghusband marched into Lhasa, but the 1907 treaty provided the real framework for a period of British-Russian co-existence in Asia.
Curzon left India before Younghusband’s mission was completed, and with him went an era.
Curzon had a concept of empire which fitted the Victorian period that was ending.
But this did not prevent his own crown from perishing nor his kingdom from waning.
This controversial Viceroy’s forward policy made sense in the context of its time, but times were changing.
Moreover, Curzon had been wrong and London right in one critical respect; Tibet could never appropriately be a British vassal.
Lord Curzon’s Tibet policy, which culminated in the Younghusband expedition and the flight of the Thirteenth Dalai Lama, has been accused of providing China with an opportunity and excuse to reassert power which heretofore had been only a “constitutional fiction”—to use Curzon’s own words.
On the other side of the argument, Balfour's government has been blamed for permitting 38 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE China to regain its position of power in Tibet by insisting on a new treaty which re-established Chinese primacy.
If Curzon could defend himself, he would doubtless argue that London’s diplomacy, by undoing what he had accomplished, was to blame.
Lord Morley, Secretary of State for India, did believe that Chinese control of Tibet was tolerable so long as the border states of Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan remained firmly under British control, but the forwardpolicy adherents argued that abandonment of Tibet to China—even if militarily endurable—set a bad precedent.
Yet it is understandable that London at the turn of the century sought to use Chinese influence as a counterbalance against Russian power—amply demonstrated to be the more dangerous of the two.
The formula which the British were groping for in the early twentieth century was an autonomous Tibet, subject to a weak Chinese suzerain and guaranteed by a British-Russian treaty.
This formula denied Tibet to Russia, provided a buffer for the Indian Empire and enabled India to trade freely with Lhasa.
In refusing to sanction the terms for Tibet which Curzon and Younghusband favored, London could have justified its action by the need to reach accommodation with Russia so that both empires could co-exist peacefully from Persia to the Pamirs, But even without this consideration it would have been folly to push the boundaries of British rule northward beyond the Himalayas and across the Tibetan plateau to the borders of China.
Even if the required British forces had been available, they could never have been supported in far-off Tibet garrisons.
Moreover, for Britain to man a common frontier with China was to invite conflict in an area where China had the advantage.
The British had traditionally viewed Tibet as a lucrative extension of the subcontinent market, but its trade value could never be worth the cost of policing what would surely prove to be a hostile Tibetan population.
The Indian subcontinent, for all its diversity in language, race, color, religion and culture, is a geographic entity with natural boundaries—the seas and the mountains.
Tibetans, however, are not part of the subcontinent any more than they are part of China.
They have always considered themselves separate and independent despite temporary foreign incursions and fluctuating Chinese suzerainty.
The British in 1906 could only have ruled with force—more force than could be spared in view of far-flung imperial commitments.
While the Tibetan plateau was a buffer in the sense that it was a political no-man’s-land, India’s defense was doubly assured by a system of border states or frontier zones under British influence.
The Northwest Frontier Province, the princely states of Kashmir, Bhutan and Sikkim, and the Kingdom of Nepal were turrets astride the Karakorum and Himalayan battlements.
Imperial Russia similarly needed a buffer belt, and this was provided in Northern Persia, Afghanistan and Tibet by the 1907 AngloRussian Convention.
The emirates and khanates of Turkmanistan and Turkestan, Sinkiang and Outer Mongolia thus figured in St.
If Curzon can be accused of cherishing outdated dreams of expanded empire, Nicholas can similarly be criticized for harboring fantasies which led him to grasp at the key to Lamaist power in greater Tibet and Mongolia.
Dorjiev and Younghusband in very different ways were themselves skillful players of the Great Game.
While the instincts of Whitehall rescued England at the eleventh hour from Curzon’s zeal and were able to keep empire doctrine intact, the instincts of the Russian Foreign Office—of Lamsdorff specifically— were not strong enough to check the adventures of the political dilettante Nicholas.
Thus the Dorjiev operation, once revealed, had to be played to its logical but foredoomed end.
China’s frontier policy has had the advantages of long-established tradition and consistency.
The Great Wall defines the limits of the Middle Kingdom—the citadel of the Empire.
While blessed with power—or the “mandate from heaven”—successive dynasties have pushed China’s frontiers deep into the inner Asian borderlands of Manchuria, Mongolia, Sinkiang and Tibet.
During the ebb phase of dynasty the frontiers have contracted as the tribes and vassals reasserted their independence from the Han Middle Kingdom.
These phases of the cycle may have determined China’s de facto 40 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE boundary lines.
But never are the Chinese in any doubt that the real boundary is still the point of greatest thrust during earlier periods of expansion.
In 1907 the Manchu dynasty had nearly reached the end of its life cycle.
By the end of the century Peking’s inability to defend Lhasa—from either Russian intrigues or British invasion—was proof of Manchu impotence.
But the Emperor would make one last effort in Tibet before the “divine mandate” was, at least for a time, withdrawn.
Even in dying, the sinking regime was perhaps conscious of its obligation to some still unknown future dynasty, and the Emperor extremely reluctant to accept an outer limit of the Heavenly Empire in the subcontinent.
Sir Henry McMahon, February 17, 1914 at the Simla Conference The genesis of the “McMahon Line,” India’s Assam boundary, is a story of Great Britain’s efforts to limit Chinese authority in Tibet and to commit the Chinese to accept the Himalayan crest—India’s vital rampart of defense—rather than the Himalayan southern base as the northeast boundary between India and Tibet.
The drawing of this line represents a vital phase in Chinese-Indian relations.
China’s Communist dynasty fifty years later would reap the benefit of its predecessor’s stubbornness and sense of greater Chinese destiny in refusing to accept Britain’s formula.
Independent India, inheritor of Britain’s Indian empire, would suffer the consequences.
The events which led to a tripartite meeting of India, China and Tibet in India’s summer capital of Simla in 1913 on the status of Tibet began with the flight of the Dalai Lama from Lhasa to Mongolia in 1904 to escape Younghusband’s troops.
British forces had chased the Lama from the Potala into ignominious exile, and British diplomacy had foiled his scheme with Dorjiev by concluding the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907.
The Dalai was an exile, whose return to Lhasa required Chinese cooperation.
Although under the Emperor's control, Tibet’s God-King was not without some bargaining power.
The Chinese, who had seen how difficult it was to control Tibet without him, thus found it in their interest as well as his to 41 42 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE reach an accommodation, and the Dalai was allowed to retum.
Before leaving Peking the God-King also made his peace with the British.
Despite earlier promises made to him, it soon became apparent that the Chinese would be content with nothing less than total absorption of Tibet.
An expeditionary force under General Chao Erh-feng moved against Tibet.
Having so recently fled the capital to avoid Younghusband’s invading army, the unfortunate Dalai now found himself forced to appeal to the British to stop Chao Erh-feng.
It was too late, however; an advance column of two thousand Chinese troops under General Chung Ying entered Lhasa in February 1910.
Peking had put a price on the head of each of the Tibetan ministers, and it was clear that they intended to force the Dalai Lama himself to serve under duress as puppet to Chao’s occupation army.
Rather than to endure this, the Dalai decided again to flee— this time to the protection of the British.
Chao Erh-feng had drawn up a new administrative blueprint creating an enlarged province of Sikang and incorporating in it much of eastern Tibet.
Direct Chinese jurisdiction would, in fact, have extended to within sixty miles of Lhasa if this plan had been carried out.
Other ominous clues to Peking’s intentions were attempts in 1910 to press old claims to Nepal, Bhutan and Assam Himalaya.
Provoked by official Chinese announcements describing these areas as being in vassalage to China, London warned Peking in strongest terms that any attempt to make good these false allegations would be resisted.
Chinese designs on the Himalayan foothills of Assam were underscored by the dispatch of troops to seize Poyul—a town just north of Abor tribal territory along the Tsangpo-Brahmaputra River.
More serious were reports that Chao’s agents had convoked a meeting of Mishmi tribal headmen and elicited from them expressions of allegiance to Peking.
McMAHON DRAWS A LINE 43 Such evidence of Chinese pressure in Assam Himalaya—India’s northeast frontier with Tibet—made the British extremely uneasy.
If the Assam hills were to fall under Peking’s control, the rich Assam Valley itself would no longer be tenable.
British coastal trade with China was flourishing and could not be jeopardized.
Petersburg with any excuse to revise or disregard the recently concluded 1907 convention.
Thus, despite repeated warnings from the government of India regarding Chinese moves toward Assam, London found itself in a dilemma which made retaliation difficult.
East of Towang the Himalayan foothills are inhabited by aborigines—the Akas, Daflas, Apo, Manis, Miris, Abors and Mishmis.
There was no governmental structure—no tribal federation—with which the British could negotiate.
The Assam kings traditionally used petty bribery to keep the hill tribes from raiding into the valley; thus when the British acquired Assam in 1826 as a result of the First Burmese War, they simply continued the same system.
Military occupation or civil administration in the usual sense of the word would not only have appeared difficult but, until Chao Erh-feng’s campaign, unnecessary.
Another approach to the hill tribe problem was to create a buffer zone which would reduce contact—and consequently friction—between the civilized valley dwellers and the primitive hill tribes.
The Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation of 1873 described an “inner line” running eastward along the foothills from the Bhutan boundary.
North of the outer line were the tribal areas of Assam Himalaya which the British in 1910 considered part of their sphere of influence and responsibility even though they were not formally administered by the government of India.
As long as tribes existed in a free state and there appeared to be no question of rival foreign influences on them, the British saw no reason to disturb the existing situation.
British tea and lumber interests in Assam eyed the forested Himalayan foothills with undisguised interest and government of India officials longed to explore in depth this uncharted, primitive area.
But official policy—clearly enunciated in the 44 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE Government of India Act of 1858—forbade occupation and discouraged exploration.
The act specified that the revenues of India could not be used to defray the expenses of any military operation carried on beyond the external frontiers.
Since for purposes of this act the external frontier was to be the outer line, there could be no question of British military protection for business ventures or exploration in the tribal areas of the Assam foothills.
Moreover, the political reaction in Great Britain against Younghusband’s expedition to Lhasa had caused the new Liberal government of CampbellBannerman to steer clear of any moves in the Assam hills which could be interpreted as a return to a forward policy.
Noel Williamson, Assistant Political Officer at Sadiya, Assam, proposed in 1911, however, to travel up the Dihang extension of the Brahmaputra toward Tibet into Abor tribal country, to investigate reports that the Chinese were pushing into this territory.
This was followed up with another telegram on March 23 which “assumed” that it would not be necessary for him to go beyond the line.
Calcutta knew its men well and clearly had its wind up about Williamson, so once more he was queried.
Late in March Williamson was in the vicinity of the village of Kebang, whose inhabitants had become frightened by tales that the English party was the vanguard of a British punitive mission.
A band of Kebang Abor warriors, later estimated at more than one hundred, tracked the Englishmen, and first found Williamson's companion, Dr.
Gregorson, at an encampment called Panggi, where he had been left by Williamson to tend some sick porters.
The frenzied Abors fell on the helpless doctor and cut him down with their swords.
The tribesmen, now blooded, continued after Williamson, whom they overtook at a village called Komsing, north of Kebang.
McMAHON DRAWS A LINE 45 While talking with village elders, Williamson noticed that four armed Kebang men had joined the circle.
At this moment one of the warriors flourished his long knife, and on signal the Kebang warriors fell on Williamson and hacked him to death.
Most of his porters were also slaughtered on the spot, although a few managed to escape through the dense forest and make their way back to Sadiya, where they reported the massacre,* It is ironic that only by death was Williamson able to accomplish what he had sought to do in life—bring the Assam Himalayan tribal areas under firm British control.
His tragic death provided an excuse to send a military campaign into the Assam hill tribe areas, including those infiltrated by the Chinese.
Major General Hamilton Bower in 1911 led the Abor Expedition, which was meant to demonstrate control and pre-empt administration of the Himalayan southern slopes before the Chinese could do so.
Chao Erh-feng had occupied Lhasa, but he had not completely subjugated Tibet.
Active resistance to the Chinese continued in the southeast, while in Lhasa the people passively resisted the Chinese in every way they could.
The Panchen Lama, whom the Chinese had wanted to head the government in the place of the Dalai, refused to do so.
The Tibet National Assembly adopted a sullen and sometimes hostile attitude toward the alien occupation force.
From exile in India the Dalai Lama did what he could on a diplomatic level to help his country.
He even secretly solicited Russian aid, only to suffer the humiliation of having his one-time “protector’—now bound by the Anglo-Russian 1907 Convention—reject his plea through official British channels.
Peking ultimately realized that it could not rule Tibet without the God-King unless they deployed a tremendously large army of occupation—a lesson which the Chinese would remember for forty years, when they would next seize an opportunity to occupy Tibet.
But before China could reach an arrangement with the Dalai Lama, the Emperor and the Manchu dynasty were swept away by the Chinese Revolution.
The upheaval, which began in 1911 and made China a republic, was felt almost immediately in Tibet.
The Chinese garrison in Lhasa mutinied and broke up into unrully mobs, which foraged through the countryside, looting as they went.
With a 46 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE vengeance bred of hatred and long frustration, Tibetans rose against the disorganized Chinese and slaughtered thousands of them before the British intervened to rescue survivors.
By January 1918, the Dalai Lama was able to return safely to Lhasa and reassert his authority.
The most meaningful bond between the Manchus and the Dalai Lamas had been the patron-priest relationship.
This cord of religion had been snapped when a secular republic came into being.
The Chinese concept of empire, to the contrary, was not religiously based, and in April 1912 the new Republic proclaimed that Tibet, Mongolia and Sinkiang were equivalent to provinces of China and thus integral parts of the Chinese state.
By no stretch of the imagination could Tibetans recognize the new President of China, Yuan Shih-kai, as a successor to their Manchu patron.
While they may have traditionally recognized that some suzerain authority was vested in the Emperor, they never recognized the suzerainty of the Chinese state.
It is significant that Dorjiev, who understood Tibetan psychology, had felt it necessary to disguise Nicholas II with the robes of a “White Lama” before attempting to project him in the patron’s role.
The Dalai Lama declared Tibet’s independence by publicly refusing to acknowledge that he drew his authority from China’s recognition of him.
With perhaps more symbolic than actual significance, Dorjiev was welcomed back to Lhasa.
But his presence understandably gave rise to speculation that Outer Mongolia had concluded a secret pact with Tibet and—coming on the heels of Russian moves in Mongolia*—this disturbed both the Chinese and the British.
It also resulted in new urgency to settle Tibet’s status and boundaries once and for all.
Neither the Chinese Republic’s policy of considering Tibet a province nor the Dalai Lama’s rejection of Chinese suzerainty suited the British.
London found useful Peking’s “suzerain’ role since it provided China with some legal primacy yet deprived it of effective control.
Its legal presence prevented a vacuum which Britain still feared might be filled by Russia.
Chao Erh-feng’s campaign, particularly his probes into Assam, * The Russo-Mongolian Agreement of October 12, 1912 made Outer Mongolia a virtual protectorate of Russia.
McMAHON DRAWS A LINE 47 had made clear the dangers of an ambiguous status for Tibet.
In August 1912 London proposed to the new Republic that Tibet’s status be negotiated on the basis of the situation which had existed before Younghusband’s mission.
After much reluctance the Chinese agreed not only to negotiate Tibet’s status with the British but to accept a representative of Lhasa as co-equal plenipotentiary in the negotiations.
The inclusion of such a representative was, in fact, an important part of Britain’s diplomatic plan.
It was calculated that Tibet’s full participation in the negotiations would constitute evidence of autonomy, thereby adding substance to whatever agreement on Tibet was finally reached.
The Simla conference began in India’s picturesque summer capital in October 1913.
The host and British delegate was Sir Henry McMahon, Secretary to the Government of India and an impressive Victorian, who officially assumed the role of “mediator” between the other two participants.
This pose was adopted in part for tactical reasons, but it was also meant to circumvent the prohibition against direct negotiations with Tibet contained in the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907.
The Chinese were represented by Ivan Chen, who fought stubbornly for China’s position but seemed, nonetheless, genuinely committed to reaching a settlement based on compromise.
Contrary to later Chinese claims, China was not forced to attend Simla nor did Chen’s performance in any way suggest that he was negotiating under duress.
The main point of contention during the six months of negotiations was the boundary between China and Tibet.
The area which is ethnically Tibetan has always extended further than the area under Lhasa’s political control.
Perhaps influenced by the new Mongolian pattern—in which Outer Mongolia became an autonomous buffer responsive to Russia, while Inner Mongolia remained a province of China—McMahon proposed that an Outer and an Inner Tibet be created.
Outer Tibet—or that area traditionally under Lhasa’s control—would be master of its own internal affairs and could thus serve as a buffer between India and China.
Inner Tibet— an integral part of China—would serve as a buffer between Lhasa’s Tibet and Russian-dominated Outer Mongolia.
He equated “frontier” with “buffer” and defined each as a tract of neutral territory separating two potentially antagonistic neighbors.
He believed that it was the frontier, buffer zone which had greatest importance and considered a boundary line of considerably lesser significance—particularly when it ran through uninhabitable mountain or desert terrain.
Yet it was the inability of China and Tibet to agree on a boundary between Inner and Outer Tibet that prevented China from ratifying the Simla Convention.
In the light of the current China-India boundary dispute it is significant that the India-Tibet boundary itself, proposed at Simla, did not cause the difficulty.
This line, known since as the McMahon Line, runs along the crest of the Himalayan watershed in India’s northeastern frontier area.
By this delimitation McMahon sought to make Assam Himalaya secure and remove any ambiguity about India’s sovereignty over the tribal areas on the mountain’s southern slope.
China raised no objection to McMahon’s formula at Simla in 1914 or in the several years following the conference during which Britain still hoped for Peking’s acceptance of the convention.
But in 1960, during boundary discussions with India, the Communist Chinese negotiators denied that the Tibet-Indian boundary question had ever been formally raised at Simla.
They alleged that the subject had been discussed only “secretly,” behind the back of their delegate.
In 1914 McMahon insisted that the political status of Tibet could not be meaningfully discussed until the limits of the country were defined.
When Ivan Chen explained that he was not yet authorized to join in boundary discussions, McMahon suggested that to save time he discuss it with the Tibetan delegate.
H\\\\ ) ates TUITE ee pe i S Hi MN Ty ry In} Wt aA Palace of Punakka in Bootan.
The Dalai Lama delivering a sermon at the Buddha J] ceremonies in Calcutta during his 1956 visit to India.
High in the Himalayas the Dalai Lama rests with a squad of loyal Khamba tribesmen in his flight from the Red Chinese in March, 1959.
McMAHON DRAWS A LINE 49 these discussions, constitutes the Anglo-Tibetan Boundary Agreement of 1914.
Even before this, on February 17, McMahon had tabled a statement with an explanatory map describing the boundaries of Tibet.
Thus to a significant extent Chen was concerned with the India-Tibet boundary question at Simla, regardless of any subsequent claims to the contrary.
The Chinese government refused to be a party to it even though Chen had initialed the draft agreement—a step which usually connotes informal acceptance.
Subsequent but unsuccessful efforts were made to gain Peking’s adherence to the Convention.
Peking’s main reason for rejecting the Simla Convention stems from China’s basic and traditional unwillingness to relinquish rights to territory which it considers to be eternally part of the “celestial” realm.
It is likely that the idea of negotiating on equal terms with a country which it considered to be a vassal prejudiced China against any reasonable solution from the start.
Yet by a series of other bilateral agreements negotiated by Tibet, and because Tibet’s participation in the Simla conference was at least tolerated by China, Tibet’s right to “settle her own relations with India” has, in fact, been recognized by China, as pointed out by India in 1961.
The door was left open in the event China chose later to accept the Simla agreement.
But Republican Peking’s attitude remained consistent with constant and historical Han assumptions which consider “retreat” a phenomenon of weakness and “advance” an inevitable consequence of regained strength.
China would not sign away what it assumed it could regain at a later date.
As a result there was never again an opportunity to resolve the status of Tibet and establish its boundaries to the satisfaction of all parties.
China, the “sick man of Asia,” was easy prey for Japan, whose imperial ambition included at a minimum all of East Asia, Australasia, and the Western Pacific.
Except for a reconnaissance mission to Lhasa by Tolstoi and Dolan— United States army officers investigating the feasibility of an alternate overland route by which the Allies could supply China—Tibet was completely bypassed by the combatants.
Yet, even before Japan attacked China and well before World War II, a new storm was gathering which would be infinitely more significant for Asia.
With astonishing foresight and political acumen the Thirteenth Dalai Lama saw its implications for Tibet before he died in 1931.
From a government of Tibet telegram to the Secretary General of the United Nations in 1950, protesting Chinese Communist aggression 1950 was a year of crisis in Asia.
It was the year the Korean War began and the year France faced defeat in its exhausting war in Indo-China.
South Asia was troubled by problems which were less only by comparison.
A revolt against the ruling “Rana” aristocracy focused momentary attention on the remote Himalayan kingdom of Nepal.
India’s relations with Pakistan were still tense in the wake of partition, and emotions on both sides ran high as the United Nations Security Council examined the Kashmir dispute.
Communist insurrection wracked Hyderabad State in Central India, while linguistic, religious and sectional antagonisms less dramatically tore at newly independent India’s fragile unity.
For Tibetans it was a cataclysmic year— more ferocious even than its name suggested.
On August 15 the shocks of the fifth worst earthquake in recorded history caused several mountains in Tibet to shift and villages to be buried.
Other eyewitness reports gradually filtered through to the rest of the world and told of landslides which filled valleys and blocked rivers.
It was reported in the Calcutta Statesman on August 16 that the epicenter of the earthquake was a point in the Eastern Himalayas about fifty miles from the northeast border of Assam.
The article added that “holiday crowds in Calcutta celebrating Independence Day ran for shelter as the city rocked,” and the severity of the shocks was such that at the Alipore meteorological office the pen of one of the seismographs was thrown completely off the recording drum.
Tibet’s tragedy was compounded when the Tsangpo River—father of the mighty Brahmaputra—fought its way out of a prison of earth created by the quake and rampaged wildly through Assam, washing out two thousand villages as it went.
The important center of Sadiya in Assam was inundated, while thousands were made homeless in the area surrounding Jorhat.
Landslides had forced the Tsangpo to find a new bed—in some places many miles from the old.
Then, recalling the warnings sounded by the Thirteenth Dalai Lama in his last will and testament, the greatest catastrophy of all befell Tibet.
More than 30,000 troops of Communist China’s so-called People’s Liberation Army invaded eastern Tibet.
This latter thrust, which went unnoticed for several years, is significant because it was Communist China’s first violation of independent Indian territory and because the Red forces traveled a route which later was the site of a secretly constructed Chinese trunk road.
The main attack was aimed at the town of Chamdo, whose defenses crumbled on October 19.
Ngapo Ngawang Jigme, the Commissioner General of Kham Province, who commanded three thousand Tibetan defenders, fled as the Chinese approached but was quickly intercepted by advance columns and forced to surrender the province to the invaders.
It was at this time that Ngabo was persuaded to shift his personal loyalties to the Communists, and he thereafter became prominent as Peking’s most important collaborator.
Soon after the fall of Chamdo, Chinese forces secured control of the Chamdo-Lhasa road and prepared to march on Lhasa itself.
The invasion of Tibet had been loudly heralded by China’s propaganda machine, which tried on one hand to weaken Tibet's will to resist and on the other to intimidate the Government of India and THE YEAR OF THE IRON TIGER 53 prevent it from opposing China’s act.
India was accused of crimes of aggression and expansion which Communist China itself intended to commit; cause was purposely confused with effect in such a way as to reverse blame.
The new Indian nation was challenged by Peking to prove its independence by repudiating the British-India policy toward Tibet and relinquishing residual rights in Lhasa inherited from the British Raj.
According to Communist propaganda, India—“a running dog of the Anglo-American imperialists’—was the aggressor.
Robert Ford had maintained communications at Chamdo for the Tibetan government when the Chinese invaded.
After his capture by the People’s Liberation Army he was brutally interrogated in an effort to force him to confess that he had murdered Geda and had been the instrument of secret British collaboration with Tibet.
The real details of Geda’s death are obscure, but if he was killed by Tibetans, it is certain that his executioners felt it justified.
Geda was a collaborator who had sold out to the Chinese many years before.
Doctrine may, of course, be interpreted or it may evolve, 54 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE providing it is made to do so with enough grace and ingenuity to maintain a semblance of consistency, but it must not be obviously ignored or violated.
The Tibet issue struck close to the heart of Peking’s most dangerous problem—Han dominance over the many ethnic minorities in China.
Stalin had established basic Communist doctrine on _ the nationality and minority question and had specifically defined a “nationality” eligible for full national independence.
The Chinese People’s Republic avoided the problem in its own case by denying that its minorities fulfilled the requirements established in Stalin’s doctrine.
An early statement by Peking on this subject is contained in the Constitution of the Chinese Soviet Republic, drawn up in Kiangsi under Mao Tse-tung’s leadership on November 7, 1931.
Unhappily for the Tibetans, Chinese minority doctrine shifted away from Stalin’s statement and for that matter from China’s own Kiangsi Constitution.
Following an announcement by the Chinese government on January 1, 1950 that the “liberation” of Tibet was one of the main tasks of the People’s Liberation Army, the Nationalities Affairs Committee met in Peking to discuss the Tibet question.
Vice-Chairman Chu Teh directed the meeting and reiterated his government’s determination to “free” the Tibetan people.
He THE YEAR OF THE IRON TIGER 55 explained the newest interpretation of the minority and nationality policy as laid down in the government’s Common Program.
This document, which had been adopted by the People’s Political Consultative Conference in September 1949 and first applied to the Tibetan case, specifies that “All nationalities . . . have equal rights and duties” and declares all nationalities to be equal in status.
The threatening tone of Peking’s propaganda, particularly as contained in repeated announcements promising that Tibet would soon be “liberated,” was the only doctrine with meaning for Tibet.
The Lhasa National Assembly, convening in extraordinary session, recognized the need to seek outside help and made preparations to send friendly delegations to those countries which could reasonably be expected to come to its rescue.
Special envoys were prepared to plead Tibet’s cause in the capitals of India, Nepal, Great Britain and the United States.
It warned that any nation receiving a “friendly delegation” from Lhasa would be considered hostile to the People’s Republic of China.
Panikkar, India’s new Ambassador to China, was determined to reach a peaceful settlement of the Tibet issue.
He also claimed that Nehru “in general” agreed with his convictions that the BritishIndian policy of claiming special political interest in Tibet could not be continued by independent India.
Hope was fast running out for Tibet, and in Lhasa it was becoming clear that if any autonomy were to be retained it would have to be the result of direct negotiations with Peking.
Finding no alternative course, Tibet succumbed to Communist pressure and agreed to sending a mission to negotiate agreement on their future relationship.
But the 56 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE mission delegates were held up in India en route to Hong Kong because British authorities procrastinated in issuing visas to them.
They perhaps did not want Crown territory to be involved in any settlement in which the Tibetan delegation’s mandate to negotiate or the propriety of its negotiating at all were in doubt.
Since there were bound to be elements of duress implicit in the negotiations, the British were also understandably hesitant to provide good offices for an agreement which would not have world acceptance.
Talks began in New Delhi with the newly arrived Chinese Ambassador to India in September 1950, but almost immediately the Chinese insisted that they be moved to Peking.
At first the unhappy Tibetans agreed since Peking’s propaganda was threatening, but new reports of Red troop movements toward the capital caused the government to stop its delegation in transit to Peking.
Tibet was willing to negotiate an honorable settlement but was not yet willing to negotiate as puppets of a Chinese-controlled regime in Lhasa.
New Delhi reacted officially to Chinese military action in Tibet on October 21 when Indian Ambassador Panikkar was instructed to present the Chinese with an aide memoire of concern.
The approach was most revealing; India appealed mainly to China’s self-interest rather than showing concern for its own well-established rights in Tibet.
The need for a peaceful solution was emphasized in terms of Chinese self-interest, not in terms of the principle of world peace which India professed to hold as the main pillar of its foreign policy.
On October 26 another Indian note pled for a peaceful approach to the Tibet problem and urged China to cease hostilities lest the Tibetan delegation feel that it was negotiation under duress.
Still there was no reference to the rights of the Tibetans nor to the fact that Chinese action represented an affront and danger to India.
During an interview with a Reuters correspondent in Kashmir on October 30, Nehru made a curious effort to excuse China’s actions by blaming the Soviet Union for misguiding China with inaccurate intelligence.
In this connection Nehru recalled recent Moscow releases which alleged that Anglo-American intrigues in Tibet were aimed at bringing Tibet into an anti-Communist bloc.
He wondered THE YEAR OF THE IRON TIGER 57 whether China might not have thus been influenced in its decision to move into Tibet.
While Nehru was attributing Chinese sins to Soviet misadvice, Peking, with considerably more candor, presented its own case in a note to India.
New Delhi’s argument that Peking’s actions in Tibet jeopardized China’s admission to the United Nations was dismissed as irrelevant, which indeed it was.
New Delhi realized it must take a stronger line, and on October 81, for the first time in this crisis, it officially recognized that India’s interests were at stake.
This was a move toward realism, though its tardy introduction perhaps prejudiced the case.
It was acknowledged in a note to Peking that Tibetan rights should have been considered.
From a legalistic point of view it is significant that the word “suzerainty” was used to describe China’s relationship with Tibet.
This suggests that India at this date still held to the British position on Tibet.
New Delhi’s note also claimed definite commercial and communication rights in Tibet—rights inherited from the British.
The note doubtless meant to convey to the Chinese government that the latter had no right to abrogate unilaterally a long-standing agreement which had the force of custom as well as law; but because most of the rights referred to had been the fruits of British imperialism, this passage probably only strengthened Peking’s conviction that India still fronted for the British Empire.
On the same day a Chinese Communist delegation, which had been invited to the United Nations to present a complaint against alleged United States aggression in the Taiwan area, presented their credentials to the United Nations The presence of the delegation headed by General Wu Hsueh ch’uan® gave the United Nations a discreet opportunity to negotiate informally with China on the issue of Chinese participation in the Korean war, but it distracted attention from the Tibetan problem.
The first official indication of India’s position had been revealed by Mr N Gopalaswami Ayyangar, Railway Minister and member of the Foreign Affairs Sub-committee of the Indian Cabinet.
Presiding over the Indian News Chronicle foreign policy forum in New Delhi, he had said, “We are prepared to support Tibet's case to the extent that China should have solved this question by peaceful means.
THE YEAR OF THE IRON TIGER 59 E] Salvador’s request until a better idea could be formed of the possibilities of a peaceful settlement.
Malik, the USSR delegate, agreed with the United Kingdom proposal but added that Tibet aflairs were the exclusive concern of the Chinese government.
Nationalist China expressed shock at the Communist Chinese militant approach and the fact that it endangered peace in Asia, but Taiwan made very clear that Tibet had been part of China for seven hundred years.
Tibet protested the postponement and reiterated that it would accept any decision which the United Nations would render.
The Tibetan delegation, having been stopped in India and told not to proceed, had not even reached China.
The Dalai Lama had instead appointed a three-man delegation to present his country’s appeal directly to the United Nations The group had reached India on its journey to Lake Success by the time the Steering Committee had taken its action.
The lesson was still pertinent nine years later when Communist China administered the coup de grace to Tibet and the Dalai Lama again appealed to the U.N.—this time from his place of refuge in Mussoorie, India.
In 1950 sympathy from the non-Communist world was abundant, but the willingness and ability of the free world to support its convictions with tangible acts of assistance were very limited.
The Tibetan people felt they had been let down by India and the United Nations They could not easily grasp why the United Nations was unable to censure Communist China and at least marshal world opinion behind their cause.
It was very difficult to understand why the U.N., which was at war with the Chinese-supported forces in North Korea, could not apply the same standards of aggression to the Tibet case.
World attention was indeed focused on the war in Korea to the exclusion of lesser crises.
It is likely that China timed its invasion of Tibet to coincide with this event.
India was genuinely concerned about the threat to peace posed by China’s role in the war and, in its first major debut as honest broker for peace between East and West, India believed it important to retain Communist China’s 60 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE confidence.
Yet Peking—far from appreciating India’s forebearance on the Tibetan question—continued to criticize New Delhi's role.
The Chinese People’s Liberation Army must enter Tibet, liberate the Tibetan people, and defend the frontiers of China.
The conscientiousness with which Peking provided itself with a new doctrinal basis for its actions was certainly motivated by the threat which the regional autonomy thesis presented to China in the handling of several other national minority groups.
Finally, to justify its aggression, India was linked with “imperialist aggressors” who were interfering with China’s domestic affairs.
When Nehru discussed the Tibetan situation in Parliament on December 6, he strangely made no mention of China’s entry into the Korean War.
It was not far enough to help Tibet, which had to rely on its own efforts to appease the iron tiger which held it tight.
Mao Tse-tung to Edgar Snow, Red Star Over China The Red Chinese invaders knew that the Fourteenth Dalai Lama was the key to control in Tibet.
Every other formula for control tried in the past had simply reinforced Peking’s conclusion that effective suzerain authority depended on some cooperation by the Dalai Lama.
The Chinese had tried to bypass the Dalai by substituting for him the authority of the Panchen Lama or by ruling directly through Chinese military power, but neither of these methods had worked.
Only when some viable relationship had been established between the Chinese patron and the Tibetan God-King or his regent were they able to make their suzerain authority felt in any meaningful manner.
Rather than risk the investiture of a Dalai Lama who might prove intractable, the Chinese for many years encouraged rule by a regent even if it meant arranging for the child Dalai to be murdered before he came of age.
A regent, lacking divine authority and public worship, was infinitely easier to manipulate.
Pure military force such as that wielded by Chao Erh-feng could accomplish short-range objectives, but so long as a large army could not be easily moved and supplied, military rule in the face of a rebellious Tibetan population was out of the question.
In 1950 Chinese Communist strategy based on centuries of experience required an accommodation with the Dalai Lama so that Tibet could be controlled and administered through the existing monastic structure without the need for an enormous military presence.
But before direct rule could be achieved, roads and airfields had to be constructed so than an army of occupation large enough to enforce it could be supported.
Simultaneously the Panchen Lama’s authority and power had to be increased so that he could be used as a counterweight to the Dalai in the critical interim period before the Red army could take over.
The Chinese plan also called for large-scale programs to indoctrinate and educate Tibetan youths—to wean them from Lamaism so that the Dalai Lama’s influence on the new generation would be lessened.
Then to insure a docile population Peking planned to dilute the population by mass importation of Chinese laborers and farmers.
In an effort to reach the Dalai Lama and gain his cooperation the invaders made a clumsy effort to subvert his eldest brother, Thubten Jigme Norbu.
As Chief Lama of Kumbun Monastery in northern Tibet, Norbu was readily accessible to the Chinese; and when the invasion began he was immediately taken into custody and subjected to severe pressure.
Either through innate arrogance or colossal insensitivity the approach to Norbu was astonishingly crude.
They described to him their plan to absorb and communize Tibet and dangled before him the prize of the governorship of Tibet if he could successfully bring his brother into camp.
As the Chinese approach became more threatening he realized that he would probably be held hostage and used as a lever to force the Dalai Lama to accept Chinese demands.
Reasoning also that his brother would be better served if warned of the Chinese plan, Norbu feigned willingness to cooperate.
Traveling with two other lamas from Kumbun, Norbu reached Lhasa on December 8, 1950, where he warned the Dalai Lama against permitting Chinese forces to enter the capital.
It was clear from the efforts made to subvert Norbu that the Dalai figured prominently in Peking’s strategy to control Tibet.
They recognized that the only way that the Dalai Lama’s flexibility of action could 64 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE be assured was for him to leave Lhasa and seek refuge in a safe area where easy flight to Indian sanctuary would be possible.
The Chinese had requested an early response to their terms conveyed by Norbu.
According to these terms the Tibetans were to send a negotiating delegation to China overland through Kham Province.
This route was specified because the delegation which had been sent earlier was held up in India.
Although the earlier delegation to Peking was originally stopped on orders from Lhasa, the Chinese persisted in believing that the Indian government was influencing them to procrastinate.
On the morning of December 18, His Holiness reluctantly left Lhasa for Yatung in the Chumbi Valley near Sikkim where he could wait in safety.
The Dalai Lama was then only sixteen years old—by tradition two years too young to assume power from the Regent.
But the National Assembly, on advice from state oracles and lamas, hastily staged the investiture ceremony in November so as to provide Tibet in this hour of national emergency with a ruling pontiff.
This would deprive the Chinese of any opportunity to bypass the God-King or replace him with the Panchen Lama in their efforts to gain political control.
The investiture would also serve to unite the country in crisis and minimize the importance of any factionalism within the government.
Tibetans were also haunted by the prophecy that the line of Dalai Lamas would end with the Thirteenth.
If two years were allowed to pass before the Fourteenth was enthroned, this worrisome prediction might well come true.
Only by moving up the investiture and holding it before the Dalai left Lhasa could such a catastrophe be averted.
The British Tibet scholar, Sir Charles Bell, had dismissed this prophecy as a fabrication of some mischievous * This belief was clearly reflected in the Chinese notes to India and, for that matter, the Government of India’s note of October 31 was not drafted in such a way as to persuade the Chinese to believe otherwise.
Yet the events of 1950 must have seemed to Tibetans as an unhappy fulfillment of this persistent prediction, and it is understandable that the National Assembly was moved to take the precedent-breaking step of enthroning the Dalai at so young an age.
As he had done in his Thirteenth reincarnation, the Dalai Lama sought sanctuary from Chinese invaders in the shadow of India.
This time China’s traditional expansionist stimulus had been revitalized by the doctrine of Communism but the centrifugal force generated was essentially the same as that which had thrust Chao Erh-feng’s troops into Lhasa in 1911.
Sixteen days after his departure from Lhasa he set up headquarters on Tibetan soil in Yatung within easy reach of India should negotiations with Peking break down.
The Lhasa bureaucracy was left practically intact, and the two Prime ministers, Lukhangwa and Losang Tashi, exercised control in the capital.
Assuming a legalistic approach which best suited its purposes, Peking ignored the Dalai Lama’s investiture, which had taken place in Lhasa on November 17, on the grounds that he had not yet attained the legal age of eighteen.
Thus, according to this view, the legal Tibet government remained in Lhasa under the Regent, Ta Dra.
In an historical account of Tibet’s relations with China, Peking’s Nationalities Research does not admit that he assumed power from the Regent until the spring of 1951—that is, until after he had returned to Lhasa from Yatung and after a Chinese representative had been reinstalled in Lhasa.
In this way the Chinese technically sustained the precedent in which the Chinese Ambans—or High Commissioners in the Court of the Dalai Lama—must be in attendance at the investiture ceremony.
It was important to prevent the Dalai from leaving his country and thus placing himself beyond Chinese control.
Toward this end Peking’s threatening propaganda exerted considerable pressure on India, leaving it in no doubt that Peking would consider admittance of the Dalai Lama a hostile act.
But should these threats have failed, Peking would have found some solace in its legal position that the Dalai Lama had not yet come of age and could therefore not have legally assumed power.
While the government of India was never put in the position of having to refuse the Dalai Lama political asylum in 1951, the government made clear that it would not welcome him nor support him in exile against the Chinese.
For the Dalai this was an important sign that New Delhi's policy toward Tibet and China had departed from the traditional policies of British India; circumstances had changed since his Thirteenth reincarnation.
Peking dates the Dalai Lama’s assumption of power and the resignation of the Regent from February 1951.
The Chinese had to recognize the Dalai Lama’s new position by February if they were to accept the credentials of the negotiating group which departed Lhasa in February.
Ngapo Ngawang Jigme, Tibet’s Quisling, was named leader of the new Tibetan delegation.
He was already in Peking when other members of the delegation, traveling overland via Kham and Chungking, arrived in Peking.
The Panchen Lama—also slated to play an important role for the Chinese in Tibet—arrived to be on hand for the peace negotiations.
Talks began on April 29 between Ngapo Ngawang Jigme and Li Wei-han, Chairman of the Commission of Nationalities Affairs for the Chinese People’s Republic.
Members of the Tibet delegation were subjected to intense pressure to meet Communist terms.
The Chinese presented the delegation upon arrival with a ten-point draft agreement and insisted that they agree to it.
Only after strong resistance by certain members of the Tibet delegation did the Chinese substitute for this a relatively more moderate 17-article draft.
This too was based on the same objectionable thesis that Tibet is an integral part of China.
Although still unacceptable to the Tibetans, the draft was this time presented NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 67 as an ultimatum and accompanied by unmistakable threats.
Moreover the delegation was forbidden to request instructions from its government and was told that failure to accept the draft would bring further military action against their people.
The original, authentic seal had been kept in Lhasa as a precaution against just this type of coercion.
Without the courtesy of prior notification of the Dalai Lama, Peking announced that a resolution called Agreement on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet between the Central People’s Government and the Tibet Local Government had been signed on May 23, 1951.
The outrage which had been perpetrated by the forced imposition of the 17-Point Agreement was not revealed publicly until the Dalai Lama reached Indian sanctuary eight years later.
He claimed that his representatives were compelled to sign the agreement under the threat of further military operations against Tibet.
The 17-Point Agreement is a significant document since it not only provides a false front for the Chinese absorption of Tibet but an indication of China’s true nationalities doctrine.
As stated in a preamble, the agreement is in accordance with the “Common Program,” but the next eight years in Tibet would see the discrepancy between theoretical doctrine and actual practice, as well as the role of doctrine in masking the discrepancy through the ingenious application of Communist semantics.
Violations of the agreement, which became fully apparent after the Dalai Lama’s flight in 1959, exposed the Chinese doctrine of nationalities as a screen behind 68 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE which the Han Chinese could make good their consolidation of the greater China mainland.
The opening statements of the 17-Point Agreement humiliated the Tibetans.
This latter point clearly violated instructions given Ngapo by Lhasa that agreement should not be given for Chinese forces to advance further into Tibet.
In fact, it had been the Dalai Lama’s main hope that his country could be spared Chinese militatry occupation, and this had led him in the first place to agree to negotiations.
This is a critical clause which shows Peking’s intention to work ostensibly through the existing institutions and the monastic system of Tibet—the policy which China was to abandon after 1956 when it felt itself strong enough to rule directly.
Thus “Mao’s Panchen,” heretofore never recognized by the Tibetan government as the true reincarnation of the Ninth, was readmitted to Tibet and accorded full status.
This was a major concession by Lhasa and one of the most damaging ones.
Although Peking had accepted the existing religious and political framework, NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 69 it had insinuated its creature, the Panchen, into a key position of this framework.
He was intended as a control on the Dalai—a reminder of the alternative figurehead available to the Chinese if the Dalai Lama should refuse to cooperate.
Peking in this way sought to revive the classic rivalry between the two lamas and split the Tibetans into hostile camps in order to facilitate Chinese control of a hostile population.
Point 8 calls for the integration of the Tibetan armed forces into those of the People’s Liberation Army.
These clauses gave Peking an opening wedge with which to indoctrinate Tibet, militarize it and convert it ultimately to a Chinese province—culturally as well as politically.
It was the abuse of these points which more than anything else finally incited the Tibetans to revolt.
Point 14 was of interest to the Government of India, concerned with its traditional trading rights and privileges.
Three clauses of the agreement deal with the role of the People’s Liberation Army.
Indicative of how these clauses would make regional autonomy a farce is the fact that they were not announced for several months.
Point 15, for example, calls for the establishment of a “Military and Administrative Committee and a Military Area Headquarters in Tibet” to ensure the implementation of the 17Point Agreement.
This clause was a tip-off that Peking intended a military occupation upon which China’s control would be based.
This served later to justify the Chinese expropriation and depletion 70 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE of Tibet’s stockpiled grain supply.
The Dalai Lama came very close to leaving Tibet for sanctuary in India rather than return to govern in the context of this agreement.
On one hand he did not want to be a party to Communist administration in Lhasa.
On the other hand he had an obligation to return to his people and do what he could to lessen the impact of Chinese occupation.
Peking exerted maximum pressure on the Government of India to refuse him asylum.
A Chinese Communist “Advisory Delegation” under Chang Ching-wu—newly appointed Chinese “Commissioner and Administrator of Civil and Military Affairs in Tibet”—was flown quickly to Calcutta and sought feverishly to find Norbu whom they suspected of arranging asylum details for his brother.
The Chinese Ambassador in New Delhi also came to Calcutta, where he managed to track down Norbu and appeal to him with a combination of threats and promises.
What finally convinced the Dalai Lama to return was a delegation of three abbots from Sera, Drepung and Ganden monasteries in Lhasa who pled with him to seek guidance from the State Oracle.
It is likely that the Dalai found a mirror for his own conscience in the pleadings of the abbots and the verdict of the State Oracle, and that this more than the mystical response of the Oracle caused him to return.
The God-King returned to Lhasa on August 17, 1951, but not before he had met General Chang Ching-wu in Yatung to discuss their future relationship in Lhasa.
Chang was Peking’s first instrument to convert Tibet into a wholly subservient province of China.
On October 26, units of the so-called People’s Liberation Army totalling three thousand troops entered Lhasa under the command of General Chang Kuo-hua.
A second contingent of about equal size NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 71 reached Lhasa on December 1, having entered from the northwest.
Tibet’s second largest city, Shigatse, was garrisoned by the Chinese on November 24, while the army reached Gyantse on N ovember 29.
Thus by the end of 1952 the Communist Chinese army was in effective occupation of Tibet.
The 17-Point Agreement had promised that the army would not take a “needle or thread,” yet its demands increased daily.
Two successive forced loans of barley demanded of the Tibetans threatened Lhasa with famine.
Yet it had to be carried out subtly so it would not appear that the traditional monastic system was being tampered with or that the 17-Point Agreement was being ignored.
Early in 1952 the Chinese forced the Dalai Lama to remove his two co-ruling Prime Ministers, Lukhangwa and Losang Tashi,’ on the grounds that they were uncooperative and were inciting the people to disobey the occupation agreement.
He did not replace them because, as he later observed, “it was no use having Prime Ministers Upon returning to Lhasa the Dalai Lama had named Lukhangwa Special Secular State Councillor in charge of the Cabinet while Losang Tashi, the Grand Steward, was elevated to the same rank for ecclesiastical matters.
Their departure, however, faced him with two troublesome alternatives— either to contact and guide the Cabinet directly or allow the Cabinet to rule without his close supervision.
In the first instance, by entering more directly into administration and becoming more accessible, he would lose some of his divine aura.
In the second instance he would relinquish lay authority to the Chinese.
Either alternative suited Peking, which was intent upon lessening his authority.
For the first time the Panchen was equipped with a private armed force with which to police his seat of rule so that for all practical purposes the Dalai’s lay power and authority was confined to Lhasa Province, where he was closely observed and controlled by a large Chinese garrison.
In October 1951 the Chinese proclaimed monetary and economic reforms enabling them to confiscate properties belonging to Tibetan nobles.
A cultural department was established which acted as the medium through which propaganda was disseminated and Marxist doctrine taught.
This was augmented by several front organizations similarly designed to indoctrinate Tibetans in Marxo-Buddhism—a hybrid version of Marxism developed for Tibetan consumption.
For example, a Tibetan branch of the New Democratic Youth Federation of China was opened in Lhasa on May 4, 1952, and a Cultural Association of Patriotic Youth founded a few months later.
Long realizing the inequity of Tibet’s land tenure system, the Dalai Lama, upon assuming office, began to work on a land reform plan.
He decreed the cancellation of agricultural debts and made provisions for seed loans to the peasants.
Unfortunately the Chinese, who were anxious to gain mass support and thus isolate Tibet’s ruling aristocracy, sought to divert credit to themselves by providing tax and debt relief and by taking over the Dalai Lama’s seed NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 73 loan program.
Anti-landlord propaganda was disseminated in a complementary effort to sharpen the class cleavage.
Tibetans, regardless of class, clung to their traditional ways and resented Chinese innovations—even those few which benefited them.
Near-famine conditions caused by the seizure of Lhasa’s grain reserves was fanning public opposition to the Chinese.
Peking’s propaganda, obviously at variance with visible facts, angered rather than impressed Tibet’s highly religious population, which resented an alien ruler.
Rumors from the north that Chinese farmers were being given Tibetan land alarmed peasants and landlords alike.
Although the 17-Point Agreement solemnly promised that the People’s Liberation Army would not take a “needle or thread,” it gradually dawned on the Tibetans that a whole way of life might be taken from them.
As early as 1952 the embryo of organized resistance began to form in defiance to the alien master.
The events of 1950 and 1951 are entirely consistent with China’s historical approach to its border lands—an approach which combined an obsession with the security of the Middle Kingdom and an urge for territorial aggrandizement.
The vast Tibetan-Sinkiang area could not be allowed to slip from China’s control and be divided between the Indians—still considered by Peking to be Western dominated—and the Russians, with whom China still competed for power and territory in Central Asia.
With free access to Tibet India could dominate trade and sow dissension between the Tibetans and the Chinese.
Sinkiang, which still seethed with anti-Chinese sentiment, was flanked by Tibet.
Moreover, Lhasa, the Holy See of Lamaism, had influence over Mongolians as well as Tibetans.
With Peking’s historical perspective it was possible to conclude that the Soviet Union had at least residual interest in Tibet.
The Tibetan highlands not only represented a base for political action throughout the Central Asian borderlands but in the nuclear age it had a dangerous potential as a strategic base for bomber squadrons and missile launching pads aimed at China.
To achieve this, 74 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE Peking would have to proceed in three stages, all of which—scarcely veiled—were provided for in the 17-Point Agreement.
First, road and air communication facilities between China and Tibet would have to be built.
These facilities, according to Peking’s plan, would orient Tibetan trade toward China rather than India.
But, more important, they would facilitate mass Chinese immigration into Tibet, thus diluting the hostile Tibetan population.
Such facilities would also permit China to support strong military forces in Tibet whose defensive function would be to protect Chinese immigrants, Chinese rule and the newly built supply routes.
The second stage of control would be the imposition of direct military rule in place of indirect rule through the Dalai Lama and the traditional theocratic machinery of government.
This stage not only required a powerful military presence but it required a softening of the Tibet population through propaganda, education and weakening of the powerful Lamaist religion.
A study of the 17-Point Agreement reveals the framework within which such a program could be legitimized and carried out under a variety of guises.
The Han saw as the ultimate solution to the ethnic problem of Tibet the eradication of the Tibetans.
The evidence amassed by the International Commission of Jurists in 1959 and 1960 to support the charge that acts of genocide have been committed in Tibet by the Chinese is impressive.
It could provide a belt of land—or a frontier in depth as Curzon described it—which could not be crossed without sounding the alarm of invasion.
But while Curzon saw the Himalayan regions of Kashmir, Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan and Assam Himalaya as an inner line of defense for India protected by a Tibetan buffer region, Communist China today views Himalaya as its outer line of defense, necessary for the protection of Tibet.
Peking, which sees the Himalayan states as irredentist regions to be regained as soon as possible, NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 75 also assigns to them an offensive role.
But before China’s real Tibetan and Himalayan policies could be realized there was much to be done.
India and the rest of Asia would have to be lulled into accepting Peking’s peaceful pretensions while the wounds of Tibet healed.
In international politics when a buffer state is abolished by a powerful nation that nation is considered to have aggressive designs on its neighbors.
Acharya Kripalani, Indian Parliamentary Deputy, 1954 China’s occupation of Lhasa upset India’s traditional relationship with Tibet.
New Delhi recognized that it must be satisfied with some new kind of relationship with its northern neighbor.
Moreover, it was obvious that China would dictate the terms of this relationship.
Peking was quick to inform the Government of India that “problems relating to Sino-Indian diplomatic, commercial and cultural relationships with respect to Tibet may be solved properly . . . through normal diplomatic channels”'—that is, through Peking, not Lhasa.
Adjusting to the new situation, the Indian Foreign Office announced in September, 1952, that its representative in Lhasa would henceforward hold only consular rank and its trade missions would be considered extensions of the Lhasa Consulate General.
The status of India’s traditional trade and communication rights was nevertheless ambiguous.
Certainly Peking had made it clear that it would no longer be bound by “unequal treaties” imposed on Tibet by “imperialists,” yet it had not made clear to India what its new relationship with Tibet must be.
It had to determine what its attitude and policy toward China itself would be.
From England, India had not only inherited specific treaties governing its relationship with Tibet but it had inherited a 76 ENTER PANCH SHEELA 11 fundamental geopolitical situation which neither the independence of India nor the Communist revolution in China had changed.
In the traditional British view the Himalayan range was of strategic value as a defense barrier only if the Tibetan plateau behind it was kept from hostile hands.
The security of the subcontinent thus required Tibet as a neutral buffer zone.
Britain had gone to great lengths to prevent Tibet from falling under the control of Russia at the beginning of the century in the fear that the high plateau would be used as an invasion route to India.
Lord Curzon may have exaggerated this threat, but few then denied that there was a line beyond which Russia could not advance in Central Asia without India being in jeopardy.
That line ran along the northern borders of Iran, Afghanistan and Tibet, and as shown by Younghusband’s expedition, Britain had been prepared to defend it with force of arms.
The failing Manchu dynasty and the disintegration of the Chinese Empire had raised the specter of a central Asian power vacuum which Russia seemed eager to fill.
Sinkiang on Tibet’s northern border was a particularly tempting target for the Czar.
But if both Sinkiang and Tibet remained under the suzerainty of a weak China the subcontinent would be safe.
The expansion eastward of the Russian Empire and the rise of the British Raj in India did nothing to change Peking’s historical assumption that Tibet is part of China.
The Anglo-Chinese Treaty of 1906 and the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907 had paid proper lip service to Chinese supremacy in Tibet, but Peking still sought to define more satisfactorily the ambiguous term “suzerainty” through Chao Erh-feng’s military occupation of the Tibetan plateau.
Chao’s ruthless campaigns had temporarily brought eastern Tibet under control while at the same time Chang Yin-tang, an aggressive Chinese Amban, had tried to re-establish Chinese authority in Lhasa.
Chang blocked British trade into Tibet by forbidding English traders or their Indian agents to have contact with Tibetans and by denying them the right to acquire property.
But, even worse, he provoked the British by intriguing in Nepal and Bhutan.
Communist China’s attitude toward Tibet and India is basically the same as that of the Imperial Manchus—a fact which should have provided independent India with a body of experience with which to judge Chinese actions after 1950.
To describe the acts of Chang 78 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE Yin-tang more than fifty years ago is to describe Chinese Communist actions during the last several years.
Moreover, the reaction of British India to Chinese political action in Lhasa from 1906 to 1911 is strikingly similar to the reaction of Nehru’s India to Chinese actions between 1950 and 1954.
In 1909 Peking had favored the return of the Dalai Lama after five years of exile in Mongolia, but it had been intended that he must henceforward remain under firm Chinese control and exercise his authority only with Chinese sufferance.
As was to be the case in 1950, Peking saw the importance of not interfering with the monastic structure of society and realized that the God-King was the indispensable keystone to this system.
Control over the Dalai Lama, of course, must be guaranteed by military force.
When General Chao Erh-feng’s army moved toward Lhasa, the Dalai Lama asked Great Britain to intervene militarily and stop the Chinese advance.
But these pleas went unheeded and, just as in 1950, India would not go beyond protesting China’s actions.
A parallel can also be seen in the efforts of the Chinese to bring back the Thirteenth Dalai Lama from Indian exile following Chao Erh-feng’s entry into Lhasa in 1910 and their efforts to bring back the Fourteenth Dalai Lama from Yatung on the Indian border following the “People’s Liberation Army’s” invasion in 1950-1951.
In 1910 the Chinese had first turned to the Panchen Lama to rule in the Dalai’s stead but this proved to be no solution.
The Panchen had had the wisdom to decline the offer, realizing that he could not hope to work with an antagonistic Tibetan National Assembly.
Similarly in 1956 Peking realized that the Panchen Lama—popularly disdained as “Mao’s Panchen”—was no substitute for the Dalai Lama.
Despite repeated Chinese violations of the 1904 Anglo-Tibetan Convention and the 1908 Trade Regulations—even despite the exiled Dalai Lama’s pleas for help—the British government had refused to intervene in 1910.
London’s reaction to the military occupation of Tibet was expressed by Lord Morley, Secretary of State for India, who rationalized that China was only trying to make effective its recognized suzerainty.
ENTER PANCH SHEELA 79 Still another parallel exists between Great Britain’s need to clarify the status of Tibet in 1918 and independent India’s need to reach agreement with China over Tibet in 1953.
Yet the circumstances and objectives were totally different and here the parallel diverges.
In 1913 China had been weakened by the Republican revolution and was harassed by Russian pressure in Mongolia.
Tibet had regained its freedom from Peking’s control and found itself in a relatively strong position.
In 1953, regenerated by an aggressive Communist regime and implicitly protected by the Soviet Union, China enjoyed military supremacy on the Asian mainland.
Tibet had been overrun by Chinese forces and—unable to attract either United Nations or Indian help —was forced to cede complete power in a bilateral agreement with China.
Independent India, still beset with a multitude of internal problems and faced on two frontiers with hostile Pakistan forces, was powerless to defend its northern neighbor.
In 1913 British India had sought formal agreement to its de facto power position in the Himalayas.
In 1953 India took the initiative to formalize the status of Tibet, yet India’s relative power position had weakened radically from the days of the British Raj.
It is difficult to see what India stood to gain by negotiating from weakness.
It is thus at this point that India swerved abruptly from the traditional Himalayan policy empirically tested by Britain.
There was indeed nothing India could have done to save Tibet in 1950 and 1951.
But other reasons must be found to explain India’s decision to press for a new treaty on Tibet.
These reasons are traceable to the ideology of the new Indian government—not to its geopolitical, power position.
The role Nehru’s advisers played in molding India’s policies and attitudes toward Red China are important though not definitive.
India’s Ambassador to China, Sardar Panikkar, was among the first to justify Peking’s actions in Tibet.
Panikkar’s influence on Nehru in 1950 cannot be ignored, but the exag80 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE gerated adulation of New China which shone through the dispatches from Peking perhaps did more to sour Nehru on Panikkar than sweeten him on China.
If Panikkar was intent on improving China-India relations, Krishna Menon was playing for larger and more meaningful stakes.
As co-architect with Nehru of neutralism as a positive force in international affairs, Krishna Menon saw in Tibet an irritant which could not be allowed to spoil India’s function as bridge between West and East.
India’s Governor General Rajagopalachari and Deputy Prime Minister Sardar Patel saw the Tibet crisis in a more realistic way.
Panikkar confessed he was nervous lest his government “take some hasty step”® against China.
The Indian Ambassador had little cause for fear on this score, however.
Many Indian intellectuals—probably Nehru himself—have held a somewhat idealized image of China.
Much has been made of alleged Chinese-Indian cultural affinity and common colonial experience.
The two peoples are supposed to be bound together by the common heritage of Buddhism.
In 1944 Nehru wrote of the “commerce of scholars” between the two countries during the Buddhist period.
After being cut off from each other for many centuries, India and China were brought by some strange fate under the influence of the British East India Company.
India had to endure this for long; in China the contact was brief, but even so, it brought opium and war.
Too often overlooked as the critical factors of peace were the most forbidding geography in the world and the buffer role performed by Tibet.
In Nehru’s eyes the Communist revolution in China was an historically correct development.
It was yet another stage in a long effort to be free from Western influence and the corrupt practices of a feudal system.
Unseen were the true meanings and objectives of the ideological doctrine which China now preached.
Nehru always believed that the Communist overlay in China had not fundamentally changed the basic drives of Han nationalism or the influences of an ancient, deep-rooted culture.
There is much truth in this analysis, but he perhaps could not then fully appreciate that the expansionist tendencies of international Communism were agpravated rather than muted by Han nationalism.
Unheard were voices of dissent which said that “Asianism” had limitations and India’s political and cultural heritage was equally rooted in Western ideals and principles.
India’s leaders found too much comfort in the fact that China faced domestic problems as formidable as India’s.
Logically both countries needed to devote all of their energies to solving terrible economic problems, to adjusting to rapid social change and to defending themselves from external enemies.
It was reasonable to assume that neither country in their common predicament could afford to be antagonistic toward the other.
India’s posture as arbitrator between East and West and Nehru’s role as champion of peace obscured the true dimensions of the Chinese threat.
New Delhi followed a super policy which can be briefly described as the effort to preserve world peace and to enhance India’s international prestige as a force for peace and for prestige’s sake itself.
The role of international arbitrator for peace appealed to Nehru’s ego and by extension to India’s national ego.
Moreover, an emotional rejection of the Western world which had so long been associated with colonialism and an attraction for the Utopian world of Fabian socialism made it difficult for Nehru to view the Communist world objectively.
Nehru seemed to have sensed early the competitive complications of the two countries’ relations.
He realized that two entirely different economic systems were on trial.
The uncommitted countries of Asia were watching to see which system would prosper and which would fail.
But Nehru did not fully recognize that conflict is inherent in this kind of competition.
He accepted at face value the Communist slogan “competitive co-existence” and did not fully appreciate the purely tactical significance given it by China.
There were unmistakable clues to Peking’s real policy and plans from the outset, but they are of course clearer in hindsight.
India sought tirelessly to mediate between China and the United Nations forces in Korea and took the leading role in trying to seat Communist China in the U.N., where it believed peace could be found through negotiation.
The imbalance in India’s neutrality became apparent during this period when India bought China’s goodwill at the cost of opposing nearly all Western positions in the Far East.
India opposed the United ENTER PANCH SHEELA 83 Nations resolution branding China an aggressor in the Korean War, criticized United States actions to neutralize Taiwan in 1950 and attacked the peace treaty with Japan because it had been negotiated by the United States without reference to China.
Moreover India was to be highly critical of United States policy and actions in Southeast Asia during the Indo-China War and to show sympathy for the Chinese-backed Vietminh forces.
Only after the Korean truce talks began did Peking’s policies begin to shift toward a more conciliatory line.
But this shift was not a response to India’s policy of conciliation toward China.
Instead it reflected a general shift in international Communist tactics.
This line, which called for “competitive co-existence,” gained its real momentum after Stalin’s death.
Goodwill gestures such as the exchange of cultural delegations were useful as mood-setters, but only serious negotiations could resolve the differences between the two countries raised by the Tibet situation.
Another factor which may have specifically influenced New Delhi to seek a treaty agreement with China at this time was knowledge that the United States was planning to extend military assistance to Pakistan.
From November 1953 IndiaUnited States relations deteriorated in anticipation of the Pakistan military program, although the latter was not formally announced until February 25, 1954.
Since the Chinese occupation in 1950 traditional border trade had drastically fallen off.
It was clear that Peking was determined to divert Tibet trade from India to China.
New roads being built into Tibet would not only permit military equipment to be brought into Tibet but would make overland trading between Tibet and China economically feasible.
With the completion of the Lhasa-Chamdo road 84 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE goods could reach China within a matter of days rather than the customary five weeks which it usually took the caravans to reach Chamdo.
And by virtue of its control of Lhasa’s administration, Peking could and did impose currency restrictions and state trading methods which favored trade with China.
Before the Communists had extended their revolution to Sinkiang and forbidden Indian trade into that area, New Delhi had traditionally maintained a Consulate General in Kashgar.
India had hoped to reopen trade routes between Kashmir and Sinkiang through Ladakh.
But on December 8, 1953 Nehru stated in Parliament that the Kashgar Consulate would not be on the agenda of the forthcoming negotiations with China because the latter considered Sinkiang a closed area.
As the negotiations were to reveal, China not only refused India permission to reopen its Kashgar office but demanded the right to open three new Chinese trade missions in India.
Only later would it become clear that traditional Sino-Soviet competition for control of Sinkiang was again entering a dangerous phase and that this was an important reason to keep India out of the area.
It is significant that no representative from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry was included in the negotiating group which India sent to Peking.
Not only was there little likelihood that India could have regained its previous trade through negotiations, but it was certain that India would have had to relinquish many of the old treaty privileges enjoyed by the British.
In sum, negotiations could result in only one thing—formal compliance with the new status of Tibet imposed by China.
There was nothing of a material nature or nothing in India’s traditional self-interest to be gained.
Although quick agreement was expected, the negotiations dragged on for four months.
One point of contention concerned the number and location of Chinese trade agencies to be permitted in India.
Specifically China insisted on matching India’s trade agencies in Gartok, Gyantse and Yatung ENTER PANCH SHEELA 85 with Chinese agencies in Simla and Almora as well as the existing one in Kalimpong.
But unwilling to see Chinese installations in these strategic western hill stations, India confined China to trade offices in New Delhi and Calcutta, where Chinese personnel could be better watched.
Foreshadowing the boundary dispute with India was an argument over the ownership of several border passes.
Vice-Foreign Minister Chang Han-fu, Chinese representative at the 1954 negotiations, is alleged to have told Indian Ambassador Raghavan that the Chinese did not wish to touch on the boundary question.
Nevertheless, it is likely that not only the specific issue of the border passes but the larger and more crucial problem of the boundary delimitation at least came up for discussion.
In fact, it was probably a point of contention that China refused to incorporate into the agreement an acceptance of the Indian-claimed alignment.
It took four months for agreement to be reached, and apparently the chances of total failure were great enough for Nehru publicly to minimize the importance of the negotiations until they were successfully concluded on April 29, 1954.
The Eastern Economist of Bombay speculated that the signing of the accord was timed by the Chinese to coincide with the Colombo Conference in Ceylon, while the Hindusthan Times linked the sudden successful conclusion of negotiations with the opening of the Geneva Conference on Indo-China.
Certainly the Geneva Conference began at a moment when China could benefit from Indian goodwill and the euphoric atmosphere created by the accord.
The formal title of the Sino-Indian pact on Tibet is Agreement between the Republic of India and the People’s Republic of China on Trade and Intercourse between the Tibet Region of China and India.
By acceding to this agreement India formally abandoned its traditional position that Tibet should be an autonomous buffer zone.
But the most important feature of the agreement is its preamble, which enunciates the now well-known “five principles of coexistence, or Panch Sheela, as they are called in the Hindi language.
Mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty 2.
Mutual non-interference in each other’s internal affairs 4, Equality and mutual benefit 5.
Co-existence Describing the agreement in Parliament, Nehru pointed to the preamble as being of utmost significance.
Nehru’s critics in Parliament were outspoken in condemnation of the agreement.
Nehru was given credit by Amrita Bazar Patrika for “getting a tacit Chinese approval of the McMahon Line,”” while reference in the agreement to “territorial integrity” was hopefully interpreted by the Times of India to mean that China respected the boundary.
The wishful thinking of the Indian press bespoke the government’s official view—later to be revealed more directly during the 1960 Sino-Indian boundary discussions.
Mindful of comparisons being made with the 1914 Simla Convention which had last fixed Sino-Indian relations as they pertained to Tibet, Nehru replied in Parliament to one critic saying, “As to the treaties and maps which Dr.
This was an unfortunate denigration of the very maps upon which India must a few years later defend its boundary against Chinese claims and intrusions.
Nehru also failed to see then the importance of the 1914 Simla Convention in delimiting the eastern sector of the India-Tibet boundary, known since that treaty as the McMahon Line.
What seemed to have intrigued the Indian Prime Minister was the awesome spectacle of China on the move.
His admiration for this phenomenon made it difficult for him to see the immediate threat to India.
China’s occupation of Tibet could thus be excused as part of the awakening process.
Parliament ratified the Sino-Indian Agreement on June 3, 1954, but the public debate continued.
Chinese control over Tibet was a fact beyond India’s ability to change.
The pact— together with an accompanying exchange of notes—formally eliminated the extra-territoriality which India had enjoyed as inheritor of British treaty rights.
For example, the military escorts stationed at Yatung and Gyantse were no longer to be permitted, and the Indian telephone and telegraph link into Tibet was to be sold to China.
Treaty guarantees which protected Indian traders against Chinese trade monopolies could not of course be retained in the 1954 agreement.
Under the terms of the Anglo-Tibetan Trade Regulations of 1914, most of these rights would have terminated unilaterally anyway by January 3, 1955.
India was able to retain its trade agencies at Yatung, Gyantse and Gartok in exchange for Chinese agencies at Kalimpong, Calcutta and New Delhi, but this did not provide Indian traders with trade protection or favorable treatment.
While the 1954 agreement did recognize an existing situation, Nehru did not make clear why treaty formalization was required, particularly since nothing significant seemed to have been gained for India by it.
China achieved formal recognition of its right to absorb Tibet; India gained no discernible quid pro quo.
The 1954 agreement was not a non-aggression pact, and the platitudes contained in the Panch Sheela preamble are meaningless without clear agreement on the delimitation of the boundary.
Many Indians may have been heartened by an absence of Chinese comment on the boundaries and may have interpreted this as acquiescence to the Indian-claimed boundary, but subsequent events proved all too well that this interpretation was wrong.
What cannot be calculated accurately is the effect which the 1954 agreement had on other countries bordering China.
Nepal, for example, must have been influenced by India’s posture toward China, and subsequent Nepal-China relations doubtless reflect this influence.
Burma too was affected, and its willingness to enter into boundary negotiations on Peking’s terms can probably be traced in part to the 1954 Sino-Indian Agreement.
New Delhi’s rationale for this pact certainly included the belief that Panch Sheela was a major step forward in international morality and gained for India greater stature in the international community.
But Peking’s words and actions consistently indicated that China had no intention of being contained, morally or otherwise.
Chinese claims and intrusions continued without interruption from this time until such incidents escalated into a full-scale boundary war in 1962.
There is no particular reason why we should be coaxed into pulling Peking’s chestnuts out of the fire for the doubtful benefit of getting our fingers burnt.
The Lucknow Pioneer, April 26, 1955 Although the aggressive tactics of the Chinese in Korea and Tibet were followed by a series of provocative violations of Indian soil, this facet of Chinese policy was not then visible to the rest of the world.
Clearly evident, instead, were the meaningless rituals of Panch Sheela, particularly Chou En-lai’s visit to New Delhi and Nehru’s return visit to Peking.
With the problem of Tibet apparently eliminated as an irritant in Chinese-India relations, there seemed no reason why Peking’s “peace offensive,” launched under the slogans of “peaceful co-existence” and “Asian solidarity,” should not succeed in India.
Indeed, Peking’s adoption of peaceful co-existence was particularly welcome in New Delhi since it seemed to vindicate Nehru’s stance of nonalignment and to rationalize India’s sponsoring of China for membership in the United Nations.
Above all a peaceful China would provide the tranquillity necessary for India’s economic development.
This theme as inspired by India was a noble dream, but used as an instrument of Chinese policy it was suspect.
Nehru had always recognized that India’s and China’s political-economic systems were competitive in the sense that whichever proved most successful 91 92 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE would be emulated by other Asian nations.
But during this period he must have begun to realize that China was a more direct rival for ideological and even political leadership of Asia.
While addressing the Geneva Conference on April 28, 1954, Chou En-lai had made a highly significant plea for solidarity.
While Nehru himself had earlier proposed a series of bilateral non-aggression pacts among non-aligned nations, he was definitely opposed to China’s concepts of solidarity.
The Lucknow Pioneer commented on the difference between India’s belief in co-existence and China’s broader ambition.
A joint communiqué issued on June 28 at the conclusion of discussions in New Delhi between Nehru and Chou En-lai stressed the theme of peaceful co-existence.
Asian solidarity, in the sense of specific Asian collective action and cooperation, was pointedly omitted.
THE BANDUNG SPIRIT 93 The rights of the people of each nation to national independence and self-determination must be respected.
The people of each nation should have the right to choose their own state system and way of life, without interference from other nations.
It is inconceivable that peaceful co-existence can be achieved without a struggle.
In reality they are substituting class collaboration for class struggle . . . advocating a fusion of the socialist and capitalist systems.
This was unmistakable by 1959 when serious border incidents betrayed China’s fundamental hostility toward India; but not until 1963— while indicting the Soviet Union’s “soft line” of peaceful co-existence—did Peking formally uncover its real doctrine.
Thus what seemed to Nehru in 1954 to be a genuine pledge of peace and non-aggression was in reality an act of deception.
Neither the Times of India nor Nehru then realized that despite pronouncements to the contrary Peking believed profoundly in the thesis that mutual hostilities between states * The statement was formally entitled “The Difference Between Comrade Togliatti and Us” and first appeared in the Peking People’s Daily on December 31, 1962.
Moreover Nehru may not yet have realized that Chou En-lai’s definitions of “sovereignty” and “territorial integrity” were very different from his own.
Gorwala warned prophetically that the freedom of countries lies not in talk of peaceful co-existence but in having sufficient strength confronting the Communists to deter them from launching aggression.
The Geneva Conference was at the moment close to achieving agreement on peace terms for Indo-China.
While negotiating behind the scenes in Geneva, Krishna Menon had thoroughly committed New Delhi's prestige to underwriting China's faithful observance of the peace terms in the Southeast Asian crisis.
Indeed, on July 18 the delegates at Geneva had agreed to name India chairman of an International Supervisory Commission made up of Indian, Canadian and Polish representatives to police the settlement in Indo-China.
This was perhaps the highwater mark of New Delhi’s prestige and success, but Nehru looked forward to a greater triumph—the acceptance of Panch Sheela by all nations in Asia and Africa and the resultant creation of a vast area of peace whose ideological center would be New Delhi.
This would hopefully be accomplished at the forthcoming conference of Asian and African nations to be held in Bandung, Indonesia.
Nehru in an address to Parliament predicted that the conference would be a “striking example of co-existence” and described Panch Sheela as a guide for the conduct of nations.
But even before Bandung Nehru made a state visit to Peking, and he must have been increasingly concerned by areas of friction with China which were already becoming apparent.
But the buildup for Bandung could not THE BANDUNG SPIRIT 95 lose its momentum—Nehru’s Peking visit must be made to appear as another step toward Asian peace.
In reality peace was still a long way off for in September the Chinese Communists began heavy bombardment of the Nationalist-held offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu and thus precipitated still a new crisis in the Far East.
No complete record of Nehru’s visit to China in October 1954 has yet been made public.
One such problem was certainly China’s cartographic claims against Indian territory.
Since 1950 Nehru had been troubled that the new Communist regime persisted in publishing official maps showing large areas of his country as belonging to China.
According to another official Indian record of the conversation which appeared in the 1960 report on Sino-Indian boundary discussions Chou stated that similar alignment errors appeared in the depiction on Chinese maps of the frontiers with the Soviet Union and Outer Mongolia.
This argument did not appear until 1960 and it is thus likely that Nehru was not left with the impression that China intended to press its cartographic claims.
There is also evidence to suggest that during their discussions in Peking Chou and Nehru again disagreed on the concept of collective action in Asia, the latter privately fearing that China would dominate any organized Asian grouping.
The Indian leader soon thereafter did in fact deny publicly any intention of creating a new Asian military alliance.
Nepal was still another point of contention which the two leaders discussed.
In public the Prime Minister would only admit that India’s “special position” in Nepal received attention during the talks, but it is likely that Peking’s desire to establish a diplomatic mission in Nepal introduced a substantial element of friction.
A Kathmandu announcement that Nepal intended to renegotiate its relationship with China was in itself enough to make Nehru publicly re-assert for Chou’s benefit India’s paramount claim in Nepal.
Despite well-staged mass rallies of welcome the Indian Prime Minister must have left with a feeling of apprehension.
Not only were there probably nagging fears that China had designs on Indian territory and intended to usurp India’s special position in Nepal, but there was Chou’s proprietary approach to Asian solidarity, which labeled him a serious rival for Asian leadership.
The Bandung Conference would be a critical indication of Chou’s role in Asia.
In an effort to sell non-alignment and co-existence to Asia and Africa he was in effect sponsoring Chou En-lai at Bandung and presenting Communist China as a peaceful member of the Asian community.
The Asian-African Conference convened by the five “Colombo Powers”* brought twenty-nine nations together at Bandung.
The announced purposes of the conference were to promote goodwill and cooperation; to consider social, economic and cultural problems of special interest to Asian and African peoples; and to view the position of Asia and Africa in the world today and the contribution they could make to the promotion of world peace and cooperation.
He announced before the Indian Parliament, “Panch Sheela is the challenge of Asia to the rest of the world,” and he hoped “this question * India, Burma, Indonesia, Pakistan and Ceylon.
Nehru’s dream of Afro-Asian cooperation perhaps begun in 1927 when he attended a meeting in Brussels of the Congress of Oppressed Nationalities.
As the delegate representing the Indian National Congress he exchanged ideas with a variety of leftist and Communist political exiles from the colonial world.
The Brussels congress was thus an early example of Latin America’s identification with the Afro-Asian anti-colonial cause.
He thereafter was a devout believer in the role of Indian leadership in Asia and frequently took the initiative in organizing other conclaves devoted to the cause of Asian independence.
His early sense of destiny—national and personal—has been justified by history.
Yet the Bandung Conference—a culmination of his efforts to create an Afro-Asian influence for peace in a troubled world— would reveal that not only were the areas of agreement small but the competition for leadership great.
The delegates to Bandung from India, Egypt, Burma and Communist China had met in Rangoon en route to Indonesia.
If, as the Hindusthan Times editorialized, “Nehru, U Nu and Nasser were at Bandung to sell China to the rest of the Asian-African fraternity and the Western World” it was natural that they felt the need to caucus before the conference began.
It tended to dramatize the rivalry between the non-aligned group which sponsored China and the other delega* Middle East.
If the flood of general statements made by several leaders at the beginning of the conference raised the ideological disputes with China and thus irritated the Indian delegation, Nehru must accept some of the blame himself.
Many delegates came to Bandung determined to prevent domination of the conference by either China or India.
The representatives from Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq, Iran, Thailand, Pakistan, Ceylon and the Philippine Islands were particularly outspoken and forceful in defending their positions.
This group fought hard, for example, to have the Soviet satellite system specified as one type of colonialism opposed by the conference.
The compromise phraseology in the final communique which called for opposition to “colonialism in all its manifestations” represented only a partial victory, but at least the issue had been aired.
The five principles as specifically phrased and itemized in Panch Sheela had come to symbolize Indian—and by extension neutralist—collaboration with Communist China and were unacceptable to those who opposed Peking.
The conference finally adopted a ten-point declaration which incorporated the points of Panch Sheela but avoided the endorsement of an objectionable doctrine born of China and India on the occasion of Tibet’s loss of independence.
Ironically, Chou En-lai, whose posture throughout the conference was characterized by reasonableness and moderation, suggested the alternate slogan, “living together in peace,” which he had borrowed from the United Nations Charter.
The concept of collective defense became still another troublesome issue at the conference, although a formula was finally found to meet the obviously divergent views of the delegates.
Specifically, THE BANDUNG SPIRIT 99 Article 5 respects the right of each nation to “defend itself singly or collectively in conformity with the charter of the United Nations,” while Article 6A calls for abstention from the use of collective defense to serve the particular interests of any big powers.
In reporting to Parliament Nehru emphasized that the collective defense clauses were consistent with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, but it is likely he realized that the compromise was an expression of opposition to Indian and neutralist policy on this score.
Bandung provided Asian and African countries with a forum for self-expression and made them more aware of their own emergence.
It proved that the underdeveloped countries could exert an important influence on world affairs, not only in this kind of regional conclave but in the United Nations itself.
It is significant that the Bandung Declaration was careful to recognize the position of the United Nations and the need to subordinate Afro-Asian consciousness to a consciousness of belonging to the world community of nations.
The countries represented at Bandung did find common cause on a variety of issues, but it was apparent that the areas of actual and potential disagreement were greater than the areas of agreement.
The pre-conference meeting in Rangoon with Chou En-lai, Nasser and U Nu was one.
Another was his attempt to impose a conference agenda at a time when the heads of several important delegations were absent.
His unsuccessful effort to prevent opening speeches by heads of delegations also antagonized many of them and provoked them to more aggressive opposition to India.
Frustrated by opposition, Nehru was frequently irritable and occasionally lost his temper, which only reduced his effectiveness even more.
Chou En-lai by contrast was able to project a new and entirely favorable image of himself.
Constantly emphasizing the theme of peace, Chou conveyed to the delegates China’s desire to cooperate with its Asian neighbors.
He was, for example, able to lay the groundwork for a new relationship with Nepal.
The Chinese leader also took advantage of Bandung to reach agreement with Indonesia on the question of overseas Chinese.
But the most dramatic gesture of Chou’s peace offensive at Bandung was his offer to negotiate with the United States on relaxing tensions in the Taiwan area.
This announcement stole the spotlight from the concluding declaration of the conference and earned for Chou the laurels of the hour as peacemaker.
Nehru confided to Parliament that before Bandung he had held several conversations with Chou En-lai relating to the Formosan problem.
Moreover, Krishna Menon had, on Nehru’s instructions, held exploratory conversations in Peking, Washington, London and Ottawa in an effort to find a formula for easing the Formosan crisis.
Bandung provided another opportunity for backstage talks with Chou on this subject.
Nehru had come to Bandung prepared with certain suggestions on Formosa which had been discussed earlier in London between Krishna Menon and Britain’s Foreign Minister, Anthony Eden.
But if Nehru found satisfaction in his and Krishna Menon’s behind-the-scenes role at Bandung, there were others in India who were not so sure it was useful.
Still another editorial which was accurate in its prediction of Peking’s independence of Moscow but which was wrong in estimating China’s devotion to peace appeared in the Times of India.
Aside from the obvious exhibition of Chinese militancy in the offshore island crisis (which Asians were prone to blame on the United States), there were even then increasing signs of Chinese hostility toward India.
That these signs were kept from the Indian people and Parliament until 1959 makes them no less significant.
In 1955—the very year of Bandung—Chinese troops violated Indian territory in two places, Bara Hoti and Damzan, in the state of Uttar Pradesh.
In September 1958—shortly after Nehru announced India’s support of Peking’s claims to the offshore islands—Chinese soldiers arrested an Indian police patrol in the Aksai Chin corner of Northeastern Ladakh.
The tone of this correspondence, which was certainly out of phase with the spirit of Bandung, grew steadily more hostile.
Peking’s diplomacy in Nepal from 1954 onward must also have been disturbing to India’s leaders.
The 1956 agreement with Kathmandu permitting China to open a consulate and three trade missions, as well as a subsequent Chinese aid agreement, seriously challenged India’s traditional supremacy in Nepal.
Yet it was Tibet which provided the issue on which India and China broke.
The anti-Chinese Tibetan underground and Khamba tribal insurgency in eastern Tibet had by 1958 reached dangerous proportions.
After going to considerable lengths to dissuade the Dalai Lama from accepting the Indian government's invitation to visit New Delhi for the ceremonies (including at first failing to tell him that the invitation had arrived), Peking reluctantly permitted him to go.
His arrival also focused Indian attention and sympathy once again on the Tibetan situation.
Sorely troubled by the growing opposition to China in Tibet, the Dalai Lama earnestly sought Nehru’s advice.
Tibet’s leader was torn between a sense of duty which beckoned him back to Lhasa where his presence might avoid bloodshed and the exhortations of Tibetan exile leaders in India who feared for his safety if he returned to Tibet.
Moreover, the resistance leaders realized that if he returned the Chinese would exert intolerable pressure on him to use his influence against the resistance movement.
Chou En-lai, who found it prudent to visit India at the same time, met with the Dalai Lama and reassured him that their agreement would be honored.
The Dalai later recounted in his memoirs how Chou had described the deteriorating situation in Tibet and had threatened forceful suppression of any popular uprising should it occur.
His visit to India to honor the 2,500th anniversary of one of the world’s greatest disciples of peace had in fact ignited sparks of conflict.
His visit had made Peking realize that he could not be relied upon to front for the Chinese subjection of Tibet and that when the inevitable test of strength came, Indian sympathies would be on the side of the Tibetans.
The “Bandung Spirit,” as hopefully expressed by Asians and Africans after their memorable conference, was wholly illusory; it was a product of Chinese deception.
Following the fateful visit of the Dalai Lama to India, China’s collision course with India was charted.
Old Tibetan Proverb Although guerrilla resistance had been fought in southeast Tibet for more than five years with casualties estimated as high as 80,000, neither Peking nor New Delhi was prepared for the events which were to take place in Lhasa in March 1959.
Nehru hinted on March 17 that there were disturbances in Lhasa, but he had then minimized their importance.
There had been a large influx of Khamba tribesmen from eastern Tibet into Lhasa during the summer of 1958, Estimates ran into the thousands.
Many had simply been displaced by the chronic fighting in their home area, but some were semi-organized guerrillas who had secretly infiltrated Lhasa as part of the resistance strategy.
The Chinese were well aware of this activity and, in prudence, could not tolerate for long the tribesmen’s presence in Lhasa.
The Chinese garrison had in fact put considerable pressure on the Dalai Lama to denounce the resistance and order Tibetan army units to move against the Khambas.
By thus pitting Tibetan against Tibetan and reviving the traditional antagonism between U and Kham provinces, Peking hoped to break the militant aspects of the revolt without using military force.
The Dalai Lama steadfastly refused to move against his own people and this, of course, strengthened a growing Chinese realization that he would not serve as puppet.
But before this decision could be implemented, Chinese garrisons had to be greatly increased.
Peking by then knew that direct rule would precipitate a showdown with the Tibetan people as well as with the Dalai Lama.
Through painful experience the Chinese had become aware that their existing garrisons were inadequate to suppress the Khamba irregulars, much less cope with an all-out popular uprising, which would surely be set off if the Dalai Lama were removed.
This time was bought by promises to live up to the 17-Point Agreement and leave the Tibetan way of life unchanged.
This conciliatory message was accompanied by an official assertion that troops were being withdrawn from Tibet—but in fact reinforcements were steadily coming in.
Despite the military force which Peking could maintain on this inhospitable plateau, the person of the Dalai Lama was still the main obstacle to direct rule.
The obvious and classic solution would have been to keep him under secure control in China where his sanction for Chinese rule in Tibet could be extracted under pressure or if necessary forged.
Since his return from India in early 1957 the occupation authorities in Lhasa had put pressure on him to pay another “visit” to Peking, They specifically wanted him to attend the Chinese National Assembly to dramatize the solidarity of minority groups.
Fearing detention in China he evaded Chinese “invitations’ by pleading special religious duties which demanded his presence in Lhasa.
But by January 1959 it was becoming more difficult to stall and he found himself in the position of having to make an outright refusal to leave Tibet.
The pressure was such that the Dalai and his closest advisers finally concluded that the Chinese, on one pretense or another, would force him to travel to Peking.
It had, in fact, been publicly announced that His Holiness would attend the National Assembly even though he had not given his consent.
The city was jammed with monks, who customarily flock to the capital from all over Tibet for the celebrations, and there was still a large concentration of Khamba refugees.
Khamba partisans were reported to be active in the Yamdrok Lake area and by March they controlled the entire region from the Brahmaputra River southward to the Bhutan-Indian frontier east of Shigatse and Gyantse.
This was the setting when the Chinese authorities in Lhasa suddenly and curiously made plans for a “theatrical program” which it was seemingly important for the Dalai Lama to attend.
The formal invitation, issued the day before the performance was scheduled, specifically excluded the ministers and the contingent of ceremonial bodyguards which customarily accompany the God-King on such occasions.
The Dalai Lama similarly stated in his memoirs that four high lamas had been invited to parties by Chinese military commanders and had never been seen again.
Furthermore, these mysterious disappearances were widely known throughout Tibet.
It is thus understandable how rumors of a Chinese plot to seize the Dalai Lama at the “theatrical performance” could sweep through the city so quickly.
On March 10 thousands of Lhasans surged toward the Norbulingka summer palace.
The crowds were in a state of turbulent excitement and in a fury against the Chinese.
Although the Dalai Lama announced that he no longer intended to go to the “theatrical performance,” the crowds would not be dispersed.
Mass rallies were held that day throughout the city denouncing the 17-Point Agreement and calling for a complete withdrawal of the Chinese.
The Dalai recalled in his memoirs that about seventy members of his government met within Norbulingka later the same afternoon and endorsed the public declarations repudiating the 17-Point Agreement.
On March 12 a mass meeting of thousands of Lhasans was held below the Potala to celebrate Tibet’s newly-declared total independence—a brave but futile performance.
Independence Day was documented and a letter was sent by courier to the exile leaders in India requesting that the decision of the Tibetan people to declare themselves fully sovereign be announced to the world.
On the same day an estimated five thousand Tibetan women marched to the Indian Consulate General to enlist India’s backing for Tibetan sovereignty.
From here they marched on the Chinese Foreign Bureau where they screamed their demands.
The first intimation that the Chinese meant to meet public opposition with all-out force came to the Dalai Lama in a letter from the Quisling Ngapo who had remained under Chinese protection throughout the disturbances.
He asked him to inform General Tan Kuan-san® exactly which building he planned to occupy so that it would not be damaged by the Chinese.
Three mortar shells were initially fired, two of which were duds, but the third exploded very close to the palace walls.
All possibility of conciliation between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese had passed.
Open warfare between Tibetan citizens—now joined by Khamba guerrillas—and the alien occupiers was taking place in the streets of Lhasa.
The Chinese version of the main outbreak which erupted on the 20th was given by Ngapo Ngawang Jigme in a speech at the National People’s Congress in Peking on the 22nd.
At 3:45 before dawn on March 20 the rebels launched armed attacks against the People’s Liberation Army units stationed in Lhasa and the offices of the central government agencies in Tibet.
In order to safeguard the unification of the motherland and the security of the Tibetan people, the People’s Liberation Army could not but begin to counterattack at 10:00.
Neighboring monasteries were attacked by the Chinese, particularly the famous monastery of Sera, which was badly damaged, and the Sera Medical College, which was razed.
Peking estimated that two thousand Tibetans were killed, but is likely that, in an effort to minimize the extent of their brutality, they underestimated the casualties just as they had underestimated the number of participants in the revolt.
It was Nehru’s March 23 statement in Parliament which provided India and the world with the first apparently accurate and relatively full statement of events in Lhasa.
Thirteen days had elapsed between the time disturbances first began in Lhasa on March 10 and Nehru’s official announcement on the subject.
Tight Chinese control conspired to keep all news of Tibet from the world press and the government of India had been cautious about making statements before it had all the necessary facts.
Indian Consul General Chibber in Lhasa had been able to maintain uninterrupted wireless contact with his government, so New Delhi had information from Lhasa within hours after the first signs of trouble on March 10.
Neither Chibber nor New Delhi could thus be expected to evaluate immediately the extent and significance of the uprising or, for that matter, decide when it had become an uprising rather than a minor disturbance.
It also wanted to have the benefit of Peking’s official attitude toward the uprising before announcing its own.
It is likely that he felt an emotional response to the plight of the Tibetans which he had not felt with the same intensity in the case of Hungary.
And Tibet, as India’s northern neighbor along a 2,500mile frontier, brought reality closer than ever before.
China, which officially claimed considerable areas of India’s northern territory and had total control of a militarized Tibet, presented India with a very serious threat.
Nehru’s first major statement on the Lhasa crisis—on March 23— was made one day after receiving Peking’s note.
It is to his credit that he made a public announcement before Chou En-lai took the initiative to do so.
Consistent with India’s policy of keeping news of its chronic dispute with China from its own people as well as from the world in general and probably in an effort to keep public tempers cool at this critical moment, Nehru made no direct mention of Peking’s belligerent note nor of the extent of his own very grave concern.
The Speaker of the House ruled the motion out on the grounds that it was improper to discuss the internal affairs of a “friendly” state.
This was a stand soon to be ignored by an angry parliament which did not consider China’s actions friendly and which felt the pressure of public sympathy for Tibet and public outrage toward Peking.
In fact, the right of the Indian Parliament to discuss anything it pleased was to become a principle which Nehru, himself, was soon to support publicly.
This was broadcast over the NCNA domestic and international services as well as the Peking home service.
Broadcast at the same time over the same services was the text of a document called “State Council Order,” which officially abolished the Tibet government.
Also released and transmitted was a proclamation issued by the Chinese “People’s Liberation Army,”""° calling on Tibetans to assist in the suppression of “reactionary” Tibetan resistance and warning those who didn’t.
These first statements by Peking to the world provided the basis for Peking’s subsequent propaganda barrage.
On March 29 the Tibetan language transmissions beamed at Lhasa broke silence and carried in full the communiqué, the People’s Liberation Army proclamation and the State Council Order.
No signals of any type had been sent from the Chinesecontrolled Lhasa broadcasting station between March 19 and March 27.
The phrasing of this message was such as to indicate that the Dalai Lama was not in Chinese hands.
Thus the world was provided with its first clue that the God-King was in flight and still safe from capture.
The shelling of the Dalai Lama’s residence on March 17 had convinced the Tibetan Cabinet that the only alternative to flight was imprisonment by the Chinese.
The Cabinet was also convinced that it was necessary for the God-King to leave quickly if his escape were to be successful.
As the Dalai later recounted, there was no certainty that escape was physically possible.
The Dalai Lama certainly recognized the gravity of his decision to leave.
His refusal to accept exile on two previous occasions—1951 and 1956—despite the danger implicit in his remaining in Tibet is proof enough that he considered flight a last resort.
Disguised as a humble Lhasan, the Dalai Lama with his mother, sister and younger brother had slipped out of Norbulingka Palace on March 17.
Accompanied by certain key officials who were a party to the escape plan, the members of the family cautiously picked their way through Chinese lines and forded the Kyi Chi River, where they were met by an armed escort of loyal Tibetan troops.
Only after interrogating and in some cases hideously torturing remaining attendants of the Dalai Lama were the Chinese finally convinced that the God-King had slipped through their hands.
Although the Chinese did not know which route the escape party had taken they could assume that his destination was India.
Immediately before his escape from Norbulingka on the 17th the Dalai had, in fact, left instructions with a trusted official to inform Indian Consul General Chibber of his escape and through him to request asylum from the Government of India.
The Dalai Lama and his party reached Lhuntse Dzong, a village near the Indian border, after a week of hard traveling.
This stop had significance since it was here that a free Tibetan government was formally established.
This government's existence in Tibet—brief as it was—had symbolic value to the Tibetan resistance and assured the people that their God-King had not abandoned his countrymen.
The Dalai Lama’s party left behind its armed bodyguards and crossed into Indian territory on March 81 at an obscure location just south of the Tibetan village of Mangmang where he had received Indian permission to enter as a political exile.
China was the first to announce the Dalai’s entry into India—a phenomenon which did not go unnoticed by the Indian press, which credited this scoop to the efficiency of Peking’s espionage.
The Indian government's tardiness was generally attributed to a conscientious effort to protect the security of the escape party.
On April 6 the Dalai Lama was welcomed by the monks of Towang Monastery—the largest monastery outside of Tibet—where the relics of the mother of the Sixth Dalai Lama are enshrined.
No official Indian spokesman directly took note of the fact that the party traveled for nineteen days through Indian territory south of the McMahon Line which is claimed by China (and which in 1962 was occupied by China) before he safely reached Tezpur in Assam.
The drama and excitement of the God-King’s entry into India obscured the political risks implicit in his pursuit by Red troops through territory claimed by Peking.
Tezpur—normally an obscure and sleepy tea planters’ town in Assam—suddenly found itself host to a platoon of high Indian officials and nearly two hundred newsmen.
Aside from two small official rest houses given over to the visiting bureaucrats, hotels were non-existent.
The Tezpur Station Club, once the private reserve of British tea planters, opened its doors to as many visitors as could be packed into its club rooms.
Newsmen were obliged to curl up on chairs, sofas and billiard tables to catch fitful rest and to rely on the badly stretched food stocks of hospitable local planters and missionaries.
An engraving of Napoleon’s surrender to Britain hung over the bar, by all odds the most popular spot in town.
During the several-day wait for the Dalai Lama’s arrival newsmen passed the time filing stories of local color and jockeying for position at Tezpur’s hopelessly overtaxed telegraph facilities.
Abortive efforts were made to charter aircraft with which to overfly the Dalai Lama’s party as it traveled down from the last pass before Tezpur.
Tezpur’s only two taxis were hired on standby at exorbitant rates by the first two newsmen to discover their existence.
The Dalai Lama entered Tezpur on April 25, climaxing the drama begun weeks before when he stole out of Lhasa.
The exodus of Tibet’s God-King had the stuff of a religious epic as well as being politically momentous.
No more dramatic way of bringing SinoIndian tensions to a head or announcing the bankruptcy of Panch Sheela can be imagined.
Tezpur in its one moment of glory had a carnival air about it, yet throughout India there was a sense of impending disaster.
Rumors had been heard that thousands of Tibetan guerrillas, whose ranks had been swollen by monks from Lhasa’s beleaguered monasteries, were being pushed toward India’s borders by a Chinese punitive drive bent on finally eliminating Tibet's resistance.
But with the escape to India of the Dalai Lama the cold war of words began in earnest.
China’s first communiqué of March 28 revealed careful drafting intended to establish the basis for its case on Tibet and provide the line for its subsequent propaganda.
It absolved the Dalai Lama of guilt, portraying him instead a prisoner of the “upper strata reactionary clique,” henceforward the official Chinese euphemism for Tibetan resistance leaders in Communist semantics.
The “Order of the State Council,” issued by China on the same day as the communiqué, dissolved the Tibet local government and placed the Panchen Lama in charge of the Preparatory Committee.
This officially ended whatever semblance of autonomy Tibet had enjoyed under Chinese rule.
The third official document was a proclamation of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army, dated March 20.
It announced that the army was charged with putting down the rebellion.
The People’s Liberation Army release was clearly intended for Tibetan and domestic consumption.
It is understandable that the People’s Liberation Army proclamation, unlike the other two documents, was omitted from radio transmissions in the Asian languages.
Peking certainly realized that public opinion in the Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia would react adversely to news revealing widespread military action against unarmed Tibetan people.
But for the peoples of the Chinese People’s Republic—particularly the minority groups—a stern object lesson was necessary.
The pivotal figure throughout the Tibetan crisis had been the Dalai Lama.
It was his presence in Tibet which required the Chinese to work cautiously through the monastic system, and it was his exalted image which prevented them from ignoring his wishes or bypassing his authority.
His escape created for the Chinese an internal security crisis not only in Tibet but among all minority and nationality groups in China.
The propaganda theme that the Dalai Lama had been abducted appeared ridiculous to the outside world once the Dalai Lama had safely reached India.
But as unbelievable as it may have seemed outside of China, the line had to be defended by Peking if a total upheaval in Tibet was to be prevented and if serious unrest in adjacent areas of China, particularly Sinkiang, was to be avoided.
Peking’s March 29 release of the alleged exchange of correspondence between the Dalai Lama and General Tan Kuan-san was meant to provide proof and substance to Peking’s charge that His Holiness had been abducted by resistance leaders.
In the letters the Dalai sounded a conciliatory note and implied that he had not been able to carry out Chinese instructions because of obstruction by his Tibetan advisers.
Giving the refugee Dalai as his source, the Indian leader acknowledged that the letters were authentic.
The Dalai Lama’s own straightforward explanation of the letters, given in his memoirs My Land and My People, is more enlightening.
As it happened, the Dalai Lama was able to escape only because he had the benefit of complete secrecy.
The best proof that the Dalai Lama had not been abducted or spirited away to India against his will was his unfettered presence in India—fully visible to all who would behold him.
Not only was China concerned about internal reaction to the Dalai Lama’s flight but, for the sake of plans not yet revealed, India had to be shown guilty of conspiring with reactionary Tibetans to cause the Tibetan revolt and abduct the Dalai Lama.
India had to be proved guilty of violating Panch Sheela, the five pillars of co-existence.
This homely parable, quoted by a Chinese spokesman in April 1959, refers to alleged interference by a “reactionary” India in the internal affairs of China.
It summarizes in a phrase the propaganda line fed to Asia by Peking to meet the problem created by the flight of the Dalai Lama to India.
It was a line clearly meant to brand India the aggressor and portray China as victim.
The United States and Nationalist China, normally Communist China’s prime enemies in the Far Eastern cold war, were lesser accessories to the crime.
This left the door open for his return and provided a means for him to save face if he did.
The epithet “expansionist” was invented by Chinese propagandists perhaps because no other term quite applied to the Indian case.
To use “imperialist” would be stretching credulity because of Nehru’s image as champion of colonized countries.
The new term also had to support the subsequent charge that China’s frontier had been violated, a charge which was later to prove so important.
No epithet in Communist semantics adequately described the special crime for which India had to be condemned and found guilty.
In this case the initial momentum was generated by pre-independence British imperialism.
According to Peking’s reasoning, an expansionist India, however innocent as prime mover, was guilty of not arresting the imperialist momentum set in motion by the British Raj.
In Communist semantics “expansionism” describes a fault which can be cured by policy change, while “imperialism” connotes a fundamental ideology which cannot be changed without proletariat revolution.
Peking perhaps did not yet consider Nehru to be among the incurables, but it sternly put him on notice that he must take the cure.
By April 1959 the specifics of China’s approach to the Tibetan crisis were clear.
As the Sino-Indian Agreement of 1954 on Tibet had inspired the five principles of peaceful co-existence, the Lhasa uprising and the Dalai Lama’s flight to India inspired five major charges by China against India of violating these principles.
The first four provided the basis of Peking’s propaganda campaign to neutralize the damaging effects of the Dalai Lama’s escape and his condemnation of China.
The Dalai Lama was abducted and held under duress by reactionary Tibetan elements acting in collaboration with India.
The Indian government was interfering in the internal affairs of China by allowing widespread press comment and public demOnstrations against China and by allowing anti-Chinese criticism in its parliament.
By aiding and sympathizing with the reactionary, feudal resistance elements in Tibet, the Indian government revealed its own reactionary nature.
The fifth charge, which did not emerge until August 1959, brought into the open China’s longstanding boundary dispute with India.
To accuse India publicly in 1959 of aggressive acts against China when no hint of such accusations had been contained in the 1958 exchange of notes or in the 1956 informal Nehru-Chou En-lai talks, was to engage in propaganda with all the nuances of falsehood which this word implies.
Even though the Indian press and Parliament were, in April 1959, as yet unaware of the note exchange and the discrepancy between truth and hypocrisy which this exchange revealed, they reacted fiercely to Peking’s charge that India was responsible for harboring the Tibetan resistance command center.
It was during the spring of 1959 that Indian public disapproval of the alien-directed Communist government of Kerala was beginning to erupt in angry public demonstrations throughout that South Indian state.
The President of India was to dismiss Kerala’s government within a few weeks and to call for new elections because of the Communists’ inability to maintain order in the face of widespread popular opposition.
Indians could understandably wonder about the location of the command center for Kerala’s Communists.
Nehru himself criticized Indian Communists for their implicit disloyalty to India.
The Dalai Lama’s dramatic arrival in India occurred the week before he had been scheduled to participate in the Second National People’s Congress in Peking.
Having attacked the Indian Parliament for using its floor to make statements hostile to China and thus “interfering in Chinese affairs,” China now apparently felt that it had license to use the People’s Congress to reciprocate.
In the keynote speech Chou En-lai expressed his “deep concern” over the Dalai Lama.
Deploring the Chinese failure to live up to the terms of the 17-Point Agreement and describing the growing resistance to the Chinese by the Tibetan people, the God-King explained why he had fled.
He unequivocally denied Chinese charges of abduction and stated categorically that he had left Lhasa and Tibet and come to India of his own free will.
The definitive Chinese criticism of Nehru and India was reserved for an editorial appearing in the May 12, 1949 edition of the Peking Review.
The article, entitled “The Revolution in Tibet and Nehru’s Philosophy,” authored by the editorial department of the People’s Daily, summed up Peking’s propaganda case against India in general and against Nehru in particular.
After a lengthy justification of its own action and policy in Tibet, the editorial answered Nehru’s detailed statement on Tibet given before Parliament on April 27 and explained how India had, by its reaction to events in Tibet, interfered in internal Chinese affairs.
The editorial specifically attacked Nehru, blaming him personally for India’s attitude.
It also made clear that China believed India had not yet rid itself of a British colonial attitude toward Tibet.
The conviction that New Delhi was still dominated by Western “imperialism” was at the heart of China’s fear and makes more understandable the importance China placed on defining its minority doctrine for Tibet.
True, Tibet is not a province but an autonomous region of the People’s Republic of China, with greater powers and functions than a province as laid down in the constitution . . . but it is definitely no protectorate . . . the big bourgeoisie of India maintains innumerable links with imperialism and is, to a certain extent, dependent on foreign capital.
Moreover, by its class nature, the big bourgeoisie has a certain urge for outward expansion.
This is why, while it opposes the imperialists’ policy of intervention, it more or less reflects consciously or unconsciously certain influences of imperialist policy of intervention.
But it was parliamentary reaction to the Tibetan crisis—particularly statements by Nehru and other government spokesmen—which provoked Peking to accuse India of adopting a hostile attitude contrary to the spirit of Panch Sheela.
A March 30 speech before Parliament describing his government’s attitude toward granting political asylum to the Dalai Lama had been full of vague circumlocutions.
He tried on one hand to appease an angry parliament and on the other to avoid provoking an angry China.
The previous Government of India took an expedition to Lhasa under Colonel Younghusband fifty-five years ago.
With variations we inherited these special . . . privileges when India became independent.
What I am venturing to say is that the policy we adopted toward Tibet would have been adopted regardless of what China did .. . we could not do anything in Tibet either in law, constitutionally or practically.
Had Nehru been there his presence would have exerted a pacifying influence, but he was out of New Delhi that day and Parliament indulged itself in a rare orgy of emotion.
An adjournment motion—a procedure frequently used to attack the government, criticized the Chinese Embassy for having distributed copies of an offensive editorial from the People’s Daily accusing India of harboring the Tibetan resistance headquarters.
Lakshmi Menon, Deputy Minister of External Affairs, spoke for the Indian government in the absence of Nehru.
She added that a memorandum denying the charge had been sent to Peking on August 2.
This, incidently, was Parliament’s first intimation that the Indian government and the Chinese People’s Republic had officially corresponded on this subject eight months before.
The deeper significance of the debate was that Parliament made clear that India would tolerate neither Peking’s charges nor Chinese aggression against India.
Parliament’s expression also gave Nehru a clear mandate to take a strong stand against the Chinese.
Peking’s cold war language had succeeded in arousing India’s people and legislators.
The positions of the antagonists were clear; the battle lines were drawn.
The months ahead would see a different kind of cold war—one which only incidentally involved the EastWest issue.
It would be a cold war between the founding partners of Panch Sheela, who had so long hidden their serious and inevitable incompatibility.
The war of words was but an angry accompaniment to more sinister harassment of India which began soon after the Dalai Lama’s flight from Lhasa.
China’s first objective was to eliminate Indian rights in Tibet which had been guaranteed by the 1954 Agreement on Trade and Intercourse.
That agreement, incorporating the famous five principles of peaceful co-existence, had ostensibly been reached because India and China wanted to promote trade and cultural intercourse between Tibet and India and to facilitate pilgrimage travel between the two countries.
New Delhi also complained that transport facilities were denied and unfair restrictions were placed on the movement of Indian Trade Agency personnel.
In July 1959, for example, the Chinese imposed new currency regulations in Tibet which made illegal the traditional acceptance of Indian currency and pegged the value of Tibetan currency 25 percent lower than it had been.
This was a mortal blow to Indo-Tibetan trade, and overnight many Indian traders were ruined.
There also arose a problem of citizenship for many Indians, long resident in Tibet.
After the 1959 Lhasa uprising such expatriates were anxious to register as Indians and gain some measure of protection from the hostile Chinese administration.
They were, however, not even allowed to see the Indian Consul in Lhasa, and in many cases extreme pressure was exerted on them to renounce their Indian citizenship.
Harassment of Indian trade and traders caused Indo-Tibet commerce to wither and die.
But more serious were subsequent acts of aggression which destroyed the whole concept of co-existence enunciated in the 1954 agreement and thus destroyed the basis of * The formal name of this office is Alien Affairs Bureau of the Tibet Autonomous Region Preparatory Committee.
Panch Sheela called for “mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty,” but a series of Chinese-instigated border incidents created a crescendo of tension which in the end made a sorry shambles of this doctrine.
These incidents brought down the whole flimsy facade which had hidden for so long two incompatible ideologies—two irreconcilable points of view—and a fierce rivalry for Asian leadership.
The Indian government had been puzzled and annoyed by Communist China’s publication of maps showing large areas of Indian territory within China.
Even though Nehru had been assured personally by Chou En-lai in 1954 that these were simply reproductions of old maps which had not yet been revised, Peking’s motives were clearly suspect.
More disquieting had been the Bara Hoti incidents which culminated in Chinese forces establishing a camp on Indian territory in the boundary regions of Uttar Pradesh and the Khurnak Fort incident in July 1958 which heralded a succession of Chinese intrusions in the Ladakh region of Kashmir.
On July 28, 1959 an Indian police detachment carrying out border reconnaissance near Spanggur in the western Pangong Lake area of Ladakh, encountered a force of 25 Chinese soldiers within Indian territory.
Replying to a note of protest sent by India when the scouting party did not return, the Chinese Foreign Office accused the Indians of intruding into Chinese territory and alleged that the patrol refused to heed warnings to withdraw.
India officially claimed knowledge of this road in October 1958"" but probably knew of it earlier.
Clearly implicit in all incidents were major Chinese claims to Indian territory.
The Lhasa revolt and the flight of the Dalai Lama to India had introduced a new and dynamic element into Sino-Indian relations.
Boundary incidents and cartographic claims must henceforward be viewed by New Delhi in a more serious context.
These were the questions which confronted Indian leaders in August 1959, when trouble struck at the opposite end of the border.
A strong detachment of Chinese troops crossed into India on August 25, at a spot south of Migyitun in the border region of India’s Northeast Frontier Agency.
According to India, the Chinese force fired without notice on an Indian picket.
The Chinese detachment then probed deeper and attacked an outpost at Longiju, two miles south of the boundary line.
By the following day the Indian defenders were forced to abandon their outpost in the face of a stronger Chinese force.
This incident is significant, not only because the first blood was shed in defense of Indian soil, but because it provoked Nehru to admit to his people for the first time that China had violated Indian territory.
Not only was “fuss and shouting” ruled out for the moment, but so was parliamentary debate.
India’s official policy toward China was nevertheless hardening behind the scenes.
In view of the Migyitun-Longju incident and lesser incidents at Khinzemane, located at the western end of the Northeast boundary, the entire Northeast Frontier Agency was placed under military rule.
Previously it had been administered by the Ministry of External Affairs and policed by the Assam Rifles which that ministry—not the army—controlled.
He made clear his country’s view that the Sino-Indian boundary had never been formally delimited, and he described China’s position on the different sectors of the boundary in dispute.
The full significance of nearly ten years of cartographic aggression and five years of sporadic border violations became clear.
China was claiming thousands of square miles of territory long considered part of India and would clearly not hesitate to occupy key parts of its claim by force.
Chou’s letter not only made claim to Indian soil but by strong implication questioned India’s treaty rights and position in Sikkim and Bhutan.
But this hint that China questioned the legitimacy of India’s treaty relationships with these two stra128 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE tegically-located border states served as adequate warning.
Nehru felt it necessary to establish that the subject of Sikkim and Bhutan did very much fall within the scope of future discussions.
The Bari Hoti border incident of 1954 re-awakened fears which may have been momentarily stilled by the Panch Sheela agreement on Tibet.
Unmistakably, the events following the Lhasa uprising and flight of the Dalai Lama placed SinoIndian relations on trial.
But Chou En-lai’s words, contained in his September 8 letter, unequivocably marked the end of Panch Sheela or “peaceful co-existence” as a basis for Sino-Indian relations.
It was probably at this point—if not before—that a more realistic estimate of China must have crystallized in Nehru’s mind.
This struck an apparent note of conciliation, but words are cheap and Chou’s message had no such significance.
Karam Singh, an Indian officer of the Tibet Border Force, and a party of constables on border patrol near Kongka Pass in Ladakh became witnesses and victims of a new level of ferocity in Chinese aggression against India.
A reconstruction of a serious incident in which they took part shows the very low extent to which China “valued India’s friendship” and explains why the already aroused Indian public reacted as violently as it did.
Moreover, China’s handling of the Kongka Pass incident provides a further glimpse of Communist China’s cold war techniques, particularly its effort to * Nehru’s remarks were made on September 12, 1959 in reply to a debate on India-China relations in the Lok Sabha.
Kongka Pass lies forty to fifty miles within Indian territory at the southern end of the disputed Aksai Chin bulge of Ladakh which China claims and through which China had earlier constructed a motorable road.
A force of about sixty constables, commanded by Karam Singh and belonging to the India-Tibet Border Force, set out on October 21, 1959 to investigate the disappearance of a patrol which had been reported missing in this sensitive area.
On the assumption that they belonged to the horses of Chinese intruders, Karam Singh and a detachment of twenty men followed them while the main party remained behind.
Suddenly a Chinese soldier was spotted on a hill above the party signaling the group to surrender.
Shouts of protest from Karam Singh were met by a volley of fire, forcing the patrol to scramble for cover and fire in self-defense.
Ali Raza, one of the Indian constables, made good his escape and notified the main force left behind.
Toward evening heavier Chinese fire killed some of the beleaguered Indians and Karam Singh surrendered to the Chinese rather than risk further casualties.
Five of us were made to carry the dead body of a Chinese soldier who had been killed.
From this place I and Constable Rudra Man were made to carry heavy loads.
We were completely exhausted and were finding it difficult to walk with this heavy load but we were repeatedly prodded by rifle butts to move on.
We reached the Chinese Kongka La post at about 2:00 A.M., on the 22nd of October 1959.
We were all put together in a pit six feet deep, seven feet wide and fifteen feet long, normally used for storing vegetables.
It was covered with a tarpaulin which left several openings through which ice-cold breezes penetrated.
The intensity of the cold and our conditions of living were more than sufficient torture to demoralize us.
By then I and three constables were suffering from frostbite and our repeated requests for medical attention and hot water were disregarded.
On October 24 Karam Singh was shown the corpses of the nine Indian constables killed by Chinese fire and was asked to identify them.
On the following day the Chinese began a twelve-day course of intensive interrogation in an effort to make him admit that the Indians had fired first and provoked the incident.
As soon as I came to the point that firing was opened by the Chinese, their senior officer present became wild and shouted back that it was incorrect and that I must confess that the Indians fired first.
I refused to accept this despite repeated and constant threats that I would be shot dead.
Ultimately, they made me say that I could not judge at that time as to who fired first.
The Chinese also tried to make Singh and others among the Indian prisoners admit that they had known before the incident took place that they had intruded into Chinese territory.
The Patrol Leader was then pressured to acknowledge that the Indian Border Force had never before patrolled this particular area.
This later became more understandable when, during the 1960 SinoIndian boundary discussions, China attempted to prove its ownership of the disputed area by showing that India had never patrolled nor otherwise exercised authority in it.
Karam Singh reported that during the interrogation “the Chinese officer lost his temper and threatened to take out his pistol and shoot ” for refusing to admit that the gesticulating Chinese soldier had tried to warn the Indian party to leave during the first encounter.
The Chinese were of course anxious to frame the testimony in such a way as to make it appear that the Indians—not the Chinese—had provoked the incident.
By this time I was almost frozen and mentally and physically exhausted because of cold, persistent interrogation, intimidation, threats, angry shoutings and lack of sleep.
In this condition I was compelled to sign the statement recorded by the Chinese.
At the end of this interrogation the Chinese then brought all the other captured personnel before me and read out the statement and several photographs were taken.
The interrogation continued on October 27 and 28 when the Chinese extracted order of battle information concerning the Indian border forces.
On October 28 all of the Indian prisoners were taken to the Chang Chenmo River where photos were taken by their captors as they washed the bodies of dead colleagues in accordance with Indian custom.
Photos were taken also of the prisoners being issued with warm clothing, padded in the Chinese style.
Karam Singh stated that on the 29th he and others among the prisoners were taken to the original scene of the incident and there forced to re-enact the events which had taken place.
The incident was staged according to the Chinese version of events while photographs were taken which could be used as evidence in support of the Chinese allegations that the Indian patrol had provoked the incident.
A capsule summation of India’s ideological errors was included in an indoctrination lecture delivered to the Indian prisoners on November 7.
This little talk, delivered in the biting cold of the high Karakorums to a huddle of miserable Indian policemen, speaks volumes for Peking’s attitude toward India.
While the Western world has fretted over Indian neutralism with its occasional bias in favor of Communist positions, Peking—blinded by a rigid and doctrinaire ideology—has totally rejected India’s bona fides as a neutral.
When China branded India a “running dog of Anglo-American imperialism” it was expressing a real conviction, not simply mouthing propaganda calculated to shame India into drawing closer to its orbit.
Constable Makhan Lal—last seen by Karam Singh in Chinese custody lying wounded on the banks of the Chang Chenmo River—was never returned nor accounted for.
China rejected India’s strong and carefully documented protests on the Kongka Pass episode.
Producing the forced and fabricated confessions of the captured Indians and boasting that “the Chinese People’s Liberation Army has a tradition of treating prisoners magnanimously,” Red China had the evidence it needed to prove that India, not China, was guilty of scrapping Panch Sheela.
Chou En-lai The Kongka Pass incident brought Indian fury and frustration to a new pitch of intensity.
China’s callous disregard for Indian life at Kongka Pass aroused the people to a greater extent than the more ominous political significance of the act ever could have.
The frustration of being helpless to oppose China’s aggression was vented in increased press attacks against Nehru and Defense Minister Krishna Menon.
Certain Indian leaders suggested breaking relations with China while Rajagopalachari, India’s respected elder statesman, was among those who urged outright alignment with the West.
Confronted with strong public, press and parliamentary criticism, Nehru was forced to defend his government's policy.
He found vindication of peaceful co-existence in a momentary lessening of international tensions.
Unfortunately the U-2 incident, which was soon to occur and be used by Khrushchev to wreck the Paris conference, would make Nehru’s optimism premature.
On October 23, the two countries had reached final agreement on a long-pending boundary dispute in East Pakistan, and Nehru mentioned that Pakistan’s new President, Ayub Khan, had expressed a desire to find peaceful solutions to as many disagreements as possible.
In Ayub Khan’s opinion it would simply mean defending their respective frontiers and the frontiers of each other in the case of aggression.
Even with the new stimulus of Chinese belligerency the two countries could not find common cause.
Realistically, no common defense agreement could be reached until India and Pakistan solved the badly-festering Kashmir dispute.
Ayub Khan admitted in October that joint defense would have application against Afghanistan and the USSR as well as China.
Because of New Delhi’s need for Soviet friendship as a protection from China, this would obviously be unacceptable, but the problem was even more basic.
Nehru could not join in a military alliance with Pakistan or any other country without repudiating his ideological opposition to collective security.
The Prime Minister was not yet ready to accept a doctrine to which he was so totally opposed.
Nehru still hoped that China would withdraw and negotiate an honorable settlement on terms acceptable to India.
He believed that Khrushchev would ultimately bring pressure on China to abandon its aggressive policy toward the subcontinent.
Nehru found solace in continuing Soviet cordiality and could rationalize from it that Panch Sheela was still a valid policy toward the Communist world despite Peking’s maverick performance.
Chinese activities on our border have nothing to do with world strategy of communism or communism itself or Chinese Communism.
Nehru thus believed China to be simply a periodically delinquent nation and not currently the product of a compelling ideology.
Perhaps a measure of Moscow's embarrassment over increased Sino-Indian tension was a delay of nine days before the Kongka Pass incident was mentioned in the Russian press.
On October 29, Tass finally broke the story, printing side by side the Indian and Chinese versions without comment.
Two days later Soviet Premier Khrushchev, speaking before the Soviet Parliament, called for a peaceful solution.
While it may have had little strategic value for India, it was enormously valuable for China as it helped secure the vital route from western Tibet to Sinkiang.
For this reason, if no other, it should also have been of considerable interest to the Soviet Union, whose relationship with China in Sinkiang was still unsteady.
There had been previous occasions when the Soviet Union showed displeasure with Chinese actions by a lack of comment and support, but this was the first time that Moscow volunteered neutral commentary on a situation involving another Communist country.
A Soviet diplomat in Switzerland was more explicit in a news interview on December 18.
He referred to Chinese activity along the Indian boundary as “more than just untimely” and added that the Soviet government was not very happy about the situation.
But if Nehru counted on the Soviet Union to exercise influence on China in India’s favor, he ignored the possibility of just the opposite occurring.
Peking was resentful that Khrushchev planned to meet President Eisenhower at Camp David in October and was probably determined to deprive Khrushchev of any mandate to discuss Far Eastern affairs.
The Soviet leader’s objective in seeing Eisenhower had been to lessen East-West tensions aggravated by the highly charged Berlin crisis.
But more alarming to Peking than the doctrinal heresy implicit in Khrushchev’s retreat on Berlin at Camp David was the fear that the Soviet leader and the American President had made important decisions pertaining to Far Eastern problems without prior reference to Peking.
China was later to complain that Khrushchev, upon his arrival in Peking following the Camp David meetings, had unashamedly sought Chinese acceptance of the “two China” thesis and the removal of Taiwan as a point of East-West tension.
Even more provocative was the Soviet Union’s unilateral abrogation of its nuclear assistance treaty with China soon after the Camp David talks.
Peking could reason that the price of Khrushchev’s policy of reducing tensions was a reduction of Chinese power.
President Eisenhower’s genuine concern for India and his sympathetic reaction to India’s need for massive economic assistance must have iven Nehru comfort in this time of crisis.
China suddenly came forward with a plan for easing the tension which it had created.
In November Chou En-lai proposed that the armed forces of China and India each withdraw twenty kilometers from the McMahon Line in the east and from the line “up to which each side exercises actual control” in the west; and that both sides refrain from again sending armed personnel into the zones from which they had been evacuated.
This signaled a shift of tactics by Peking; a pretense of conciliation and negotiation would replace border intimidation.
But it was to be negotiation from strength and negotiation with the benefit of possession.
Nehru recognized and commented informally that the proposal by Peking for demilitarizing the Indian-Chinese frontier would not be advantageous to India.
In fact, Chou’s formula would have made India’s defense of Ladakh more difficult and would have ceded the strategic area of Aksai Chin to China.
In the Northeast the Indian Prime Minister proposed a suspension of border patrols by both sides.
The Indian Prime Minister also rejected Chou’s suggestion that they meet together to discuss their differences.
As part of its new tactic, China began talks with Nepal, Burma and later with Pakistan aimed at settling by negotiation long-standing boundary disputes with these countries.
An important reason for Peking’s actions and the particular timing of them was to isolate India from its neighbors and portray it as the only neighboring country unwilling to negotiate its differences.
Agreement was reached with Nepal to negotiate its boundary of more than five hundred miles on October 28 and Nepal’s Minister of Development, Dr.
Tulsi Giri, obtained as sweetener promises of further economic assistance for Nepal.
Three months later Burma— reversing an earlier refusal—signed a treaty of non-aggression as well as a boundary agreement.
In the case both of Nepal and of Burma the Chinese had exerted strong pressure for agreements which neither country could indefinitely resist.
Like India, both countries had long been victims of border incidents and Burma, two years earlier, had suffered major incursions by China not unlike those which took place on Indian soil in 1959.
Peking saw in its new pact with Burma “a stunning blow to the United States” and may also have believed that the agreement helped to counteract the effects in Asia of the American-Japanese Mutual Security Pact.
But more importantly, China saw in its treaty with Burma a means of encouraging India to negotiate.
The arrival in New Delhi on January 20, 1960 of Marshal Voroshilov, heading a high-ranking Soviet delegation to participate in India’s Tenth Anniversary celebration, introduced an impressive and significant Soviet presence at this critical time.
Nehru, who pointedly hailed the Soviet Union’s “striving for peace,” certainly found the visit helpful and timely.
But of much greater significance was an informal visit to India by Premier Khrushchev three weeks later.
This was interpreted by most Indians as a direct reaction to Chinese pressure on India, and it was widely hoped and expected that the Soviet Premier would exercise a moderating influence on Chou.
It thus came as a great disappointment when Nehru, after his first talks with Khrushchev, announced in Parliament on February 12, “I see no bridge between the Chinese position and ours.
In the face of widespread public criticism of this step the Indian Prime Minister denied that there had been a reversal of his stand against negotiating India’s boundary.
They found it difficult to accept Nehru’s differentiation between a “meeting” with Chou and “negotiations” with him.
The government denied emphatically that Khrushchev had anything to do with Nehru’s change of mind.
It was officially pointed out that the letter inviting Chou was drafted and signed six days before the Soviet Premier had arrived, while the delivery and thus the announcement was delayed (until a date after Khrushchev’s departure ) only because Nehru wanted the letter handed personally to Chou by the Indian Ambassador to China.
Despite this nimble explanation there was still a temptation to conclude that—far from being used by Nehru to exert pressure on Peking—Khrushchev was used by Chou to influence Nehru.
Nehru could ill afford to resist Khrushchev’s entreaties to negotiate—assuming they were made-—since he still believed the Soviet leader to be his main lever against Peking.
Regardless of fine distinctions between “meetings” and “negotiations,” Chou had won his objective— a summit conference which would serve as a propaganda forum for China to posture in a falsely conciliatory light.
Before Chou En-lai’s visit the stage had been set by recently concluded Chinese boundary agreements with Burma and Nepal.
The implications to India were clear; by reaching pacts with India’s neighbors China could more easily place on India the onus of intransigence.
Peking’s prerequisites for negotiations were unacceptable and prejudiced India’s case from the start, but this could be obscured by Red propaganda and Chou could proceed with the summit gesture in an aura of right and reasonableness.
China had everything to gain and nothing to lose by the forthcoming New Delhi talks.
At the time of the Nehru-Chou meeting Peking set forth definitively and with clarity its true doctrinal position on peaceful coexistence.
This made a mockery of any Chinese effort to talk out its differences with India.
In a series of newspaper articles—two of which appeared in the theoretical journal, Hung Chi and one in Jen Min Jih Pao —Communist China served notice that it would support and foster Communist revolutions throughout the world by armed uprisings where necessary.
The public atmosphere in New Delhi was as chilling as Peking’s doctrinal pronouncement.
On April 17 an estimated five thousand Indians, chanting in parody “Chou En-lai—hai, hai,”* marched to Nehru’s residence to protest the imminent meeting of the two leaders.
At a mass rally organized by the political opposition Nehru was warned to be firm in his discussions with Chou and the press still railed at the Government for going ahead with talks before China relinquished the Indian territory which it had seized.
Neither side would modify its stand to a point acceptable to the other.
It is also a parody of the earlier slogan “Hindi-Chini, bai, bai,” which means “Chinese and Indians are brothers,” a slogan used during the period of good relations between India and China, particularly at the time of Chou En-lai’s first visit to New Delhi.
The resulting boundary discussions of 1960 represented an effort to find firm enough ground on which to begin serious negotiations toward a settlement.
It was an act of good faith even though India never had much hope that it would succeed.
As it turned out, India’s pessimism was justified; firm ground was not found.
But, more discouragingly, the boundary discussions and the sum of diplomatic correspondence which preceded them revealed that bilateral discussion in the hands of China is but another propaganda technique, a cynical tactic in its cold war with India.
The discussions provided China with still another medium by which to publicize its spurious case.
In the judicious and objective atmosphere of the 1960 boundary discussions China gained all too much legitimacy for irrelevant, pseudo-legal or completely fallacious arguments in support of its claims.
Peking had its reasons for claiming more than 50,000 square miles of Indian territory.
But the reasons, based partly on Communist doctrine and partly on more traditional Han expansionist tendencies, bear little relationship to the pseudo-legal case argued with India.
Only a small part could serve as a legitimate basis for meaningful boundary negotiations with India.
Chinese negotiators tried to influence the very structure of debate so as to favor its side.
Recognizing that its own claimed alignment could not be supported, the discussions were framed in such a way that the burden of proof fell on India.
Whereas China sought principally to prove that no valid boundary delimitation exists, India was made to prove its boundary alignment, inch by inch.
Peking’s logic—distorted and wholly inequitable— seemed to insist that until India was willing to negotiate a settlement formally delimiting a common boundary, it would have to respect China’s unilaterally determined boundary.
A serious and very significant disagreement took place between the Chinese and Indian representatives in determining which sectors of the boundary should be discussed.
India, which has responsibility for the foreign relations of both countries and which had specifically been asked by Bhutan to represent it on matters pertaining to its interests in Tibet, submitted data on this sector anyway even though China refused to acknowledge the competence of the officials to discuss it.
This area is currently beyond India’s de facto jurisdiction since it falls within Pakistan-held territory north of the Pakistan-Indian cease-fire line in Kashmir.
For China to have discussed it with India would have been to acknowledge the latter's claim as the more valid one in the chronic India-Pakistan dispute over Kashmir.
Clearly China did not want to do this lest it lose its option to use the Kashmir dispute for its own purposes in its quarrel with India.
Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkhim, Ladakh and the Northeast Frontier Agency of Assam are the five fingers.
Now that the palm has been restored to China, the fingers should go with it.
Chinese Communist propaganda Using alternately pressure and largess, Communist China has sought to exploit Nepal as a weapon against India.
Traditionally a shield of protection against intrusion from the north, Nepal has instead become a vulnerable flank.
It is an irredentist territory, one of the “five fingers” which should be attached to the Tibet “palm” according to Chinese propaganda.
Should Nepal fall under Chinese control the entire Gangetic plain of India would be exposed and what little meaning the Himalayan barrier has left in the jet age would be lost.
Nepal's precarious existence between two giants is once again threatened, but this time by a modern colossus whose compelling ideology is aggression; and, unhappily, there is no counterbalancing power strong enough to protect it.
A century of safety in the protective shadow of Great Britain came to an end with Indian independence.
While India inherited from Britain the same need for a buffer area along the southern slopes of the Himalayas it did not inherit the circumstances permitting continued control of Nepal's external affairs.
As a result there exists a weak but independent country, chronically resentful of Indian half-measures to influence it and unable to resist indefinitely full measures which China will certainly take to do so.
Nepal's history is that of a secluded, inaccessible kingdom which until recently has enjoyed the luxury of isolation.
Nehru addresses Indian troops during the 1962 Chinese invasion of India.
Certainly nothing in its little-known history would have prepared it for this experience.
Ruthless in his drive for power, he is said to have massacred fifty-five nobles on a single occasion to eliminate opposition.
Several attempts were made on his life, but an uncanny sense of survival saved him in each instance.
According to one story he had the foresight to stuff mattresses in the village well so, when henchmen of the royal heir sought to murder him in the traditional way by throwing him down it, he landed softly and unbruised.
By 1846 Jang Bahadur had consolidated his power in Nepal and had begun a new dynasty of hereditary “Rana” prime ministers who thereafter kept the royal line of kings in the background as powerless figureheads.
Realizing the necessity of being on friendly terms with his powerful southern neighbor, Jang Bahadur sought to improve NepaleseBritish relations, which had been bad since the rise of the Gurkha dynasty under Prithvi Narayan Shah in the 1760’s.
As a peace gesture he offered the British six regiments of Gurkha troops for use against the Sikhs who had been harassing them both.
Although the offer was declined, his gesture accomplished its purpose and a period of close Nepal-India relations began.
In 1854 Gurkha soldiers from Nepal—always warlike and aggressive—again attacked Tibet.
Peace was finally restored with a treaty signed in 1856, which provided the basis of Tibet-Nepal relations for the next century.
According to the terms of this agreement, Tibet was required to pay annual tribute to Kathmandu.
As recently as 1908 the Chinese Amban in Lhasa reasserted China’s claim of suzerainty over Nepal on the basis of the preamble.
If a true state of suzerainty existed at all, it had no practical validity after 1912, by which time Chinese troops had been driven from Tibet.
Like Tibet, Nepal viewed its special relationship as a phenomenon relating only to the Manchu emperors—not to China.
Nepal’s leadership, which has been Hindu—not Buddhist—never felt the same religious link with the Manchus nor had a patronpriest relationship, but for a while recognized a Manchu suzerain on the basis of political expediency.
It found the Chinese Emperor to be a useful control on British domination.
Nevertheless, the parallel between Nepal's status and that of Tibet was close enough to make the government in Kathmandu apprehensive when it found a strong and modern Chinese army permanently encamped along its northern border.
In order to discourage Chinese aggression and to forestall Peking’s claims, India and Nepal hurriedly concluded two new pacts.
The first, signed on July 31, 1950, was a treaty of friendship guaranteeing Nepal’s sovereignty and calling for consultations in the event either country was threatened.
The second was a trade agreement concluded in October which guaranteed free transit through India of goods whose destination was Nepal.
With the introduction of freedom and democracy in India the autocratic rule of the hereditary Rana prime ministers in Kathmandu had become an anachronism in the subcontinent.
The anti-feudal propaganda which seeped through the passes from Tibet further nourished the discontent of the Nepalese.
But, perhaps most important of all, New Delhi had become convinced that the continuance of reactionary Rana rule made Nepal dangerously vulnerable to Chinese Communist influence.
If it does not come, forces that will ultimately disrupt freedom itself will be created and encouraged.
He found sanctuary in the Indian Embassy in Kathmandu until he could be safely evacuated to New Delhi by air.
Pressed hard by the insurgents, the Rana government was forced to relinquish power and negotiate a peace.
The Government of India, which clearly favored the insurgents and whose backing of the King had been obvious, acted as mediator.
With the full blessing of the Indian government, King Tribhuvan returned victoriously to Kathmandu on February 15, 1950 to preside over a Council of Ministers of his choosing.
New Delhi could rationalize its only slightly disguised intervention in Nepalese affairs by its compelling need to deny Nepal to the Chinese.
Claiming that Nepal’s revolution had been betrayed, Singh refused to abandon his insurrection and with a group of armed followers continued to defy the new government in Kathmandu until he was finally subdued with the help of Indian troops.
During this very brief interlude Singh became something of a legendary figure in Nepal.
He captured the imagination of a newly liberated people hungry for heroes.
His personality was dynamic and his nationalist fervor—real or feigned—found response in a people who disliked Indian paternalism as much as Rana autocracy.
Singh was thus not forgotten when he escaped into Tibet with his band of followers and, to the discomfort of India, found political asylum in Red China.
The Indian Panch Sheela agreement with China on Tibet concluded in 1954 made Nepal’s need to renegotiate its own relationship with China more urgent.
He acknowledged that until 1912 Nepal had considered Tibet as being under Chinese suzerainty and that even after 1912 the treaty negotiated under Chinese auspices still regulated Nepal’s relationships with Tibet.
It was reported that Chou En-lai had agreed to continued Indian paramountcy in Nepal but had made clear China's intention to establish diplomatic relations with Kathmandu.
Koirala certainly had the full benefit of Nehru’s private as well as public views on this question since he met with the Indian Prime Minister both before and after the latter’s trip to Peking.
Direct discussions were held in Kathmandu between Nepalese and Chinese government representatives during July 1955.
This was but a few months after King Tribhuvan had died and been succeeded by his son, Mahendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev.
On August 1, 1955, an agreement was signed providing for the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Nepal and specifying that a treaty would be negotiated based on Panch Sheela—the five principles of co-existence.
Actually, it is likely that India—perhaps Nehru during his trip to China—played the mediator’s role in arranging for the return of Nepal’s “hero” rather than to see him exposed to continuing Chinese influence in Peking or exploited by the Chinese for further adventures in Nepal.
But he was still an enigma to Indian observers, who could not be sure of the extent—if any—of China’s secret backing.
The appointment of Tanka Prasad Acharya as Prime Minister in 1956 ushered in a period characterized by a highly defensive attitude toward India.
Acharya’s party newspaper Samaj, for example, ran a series of editorials critical of India.
Another went so far as to impugn India’s allegiance to peaceful co-existence, claiming that India at least did not practice this doctrine in its relationship with Nepal.
While the need for Nepal and China to determine anew their relationship in Tibet had been recognized as a logical corollary of the Sino-Indian agreement of 1954, the specter of Chinese representation throughout Nepal was a disturbing one.
The agreement also specified that direct telegraphic communications would be established between Kathmandu and Lhasa.
This meant that, henceforward, New Delhi need not serve as way station in the conduct of Nepal-China relations.
Prime Minister Tanka Prasad Acharya returned from a visit to China in October 1956 with a promise of substantial aid.
To New Delhi’s consternation Nepal was to receive 60,000,000 rupees (approximately $12,000,000) in budgetary assistance and machinery with “no strings” attached.
With Nepal’s first national elections scheduled to be held in less than a year, the cash grant (approximately one-third of the total) particularly disturbed the Indian officials, who feared that the funds might be used for strictly party purposes to perpetuate a regime antagonistic to India.
New Delhi reacted by sending President Rajendra Prasad on a state visit to Kathmandu in October.
Singh’s visit to New Delhi and the surprisingly cordial reception given him there.
The timing was also significant since Singh arrived while Prime Minister Tanka Prasad Acharya was still negotiating in Peking.
There was much speculation in New Delhi as to the meaning of highly partisan political speeches critical of Acharya given by Singh and how they related to his private talks with high Indian government officials.
In a public address he declared that Nepal’s role was that of a neutral which should help tie the bonds of friendship between India and China.
This was a euphemistic way of saying that Nepal would profit by China’s new propinquity and use it to lessen Indian influence.
Doubtless conscious of the importance of timing, Chou En-lai visited Nepal during the last week in January 1957.
He called the Nepalese “blood brothers” of the Chinese—a reference to the fact that many of the Nepalese are racially akin to the Tibetans.
This could be interpreted as a pointed reminder to India that friendship and forbearance toward China was the wisest policy.
Chou’s emphasis on Afro-Asian solidarity could also have been calculated to deprecate the United States aid efforts in Nepal.
The United States aid mission—first sent to Nepal in 1951—had brought the American presence to China’s border.
It is likely that Peking took advantage of this program to justify its own program and rationalize for India’s benefit China’s economic penetration of Nepal.
Upon replacing Tanka Prasad Acharya as Prime Minister in 1957, he made it clear that he disapproved of the recently concluded SinoNepalese agreement on Tibet and gave his blessing to the continued recruitment of Gurkha soldiers in Nepal by both the Indian and British armies.
But Chinese influence continued to infiltrate across the long common border.
Many of the Nepalese in the frontier areas found access to Tibetan market places easier than those in Nepal and in certain of the more remote areas the authority of the central government had traditionally been weak.
Episodes such as the petty revolt by the Raja of Mustang in May 1957 were symptomatic of the control problems faced in Kathmandu.
The Tibetan uprising in 1959 created a situation dangerous to Nepal as well as to India.
Widespread press reports that China was massing troops along the Nepal border may have been exaggerated in the confusion of the times, but they increased the tension in both Kathmandu and New Delhi.
On November 27, 1959 Nehru climaxed a long foreign policy debate in Parliament by a dramatic pledge to defend Nepal against aggression.
Singh as Prime Minister, asserted that Nepal would seek help from the United Nations rather than from India in the event of an attack by China.
Ignoring reports of Chinese border violations, Koirala described India and China as both good friends of his country.
In midDecember a Nepalese parliamentary delegation toured India as a goodwill gesture, and a month later Prime Minister Koirala himself visited New Delhi at Nehru’s invitation.
The joint communiqué issued at the conclusion of the visit was significantly devoid of any reference to joint defense but, despite his refusal to side with India in the latter’s dispute with China, Koirala received from India at this time 180,000,000 rupees for development programs.
Chinese officials on this occasion assured him that China had only the friendliest intentions toward Nepal.
Of more substance than such platitudes were two agreements, the first of which called for a scientific demarcation of the China-Nepal boundary.
Peking assured Nepal that the latter’s traditional border would not be disturbed.
In this agreement both parties also promised to keep armed personnel out of a frontier zone extending twelve and a half miles on each side of the traditional boundary.
China's motive in reaching an agreement to delimit its boundary with Nepal on the eve of Chou En-lai’s “summit” meeting with Nehru on the Sino-Indian boundary question was clearly to keep the pressure on India to negotiate.
This sum is nearly as much as that which India granted Nepal two and a half months earlier.
Koirala’s spring tours had been very profitable and for the moment at least neutralism seemed to pay.
Koirala stopped short of signing a non-aggression pact despite Chinese efforts to promote one.
Such an agreement would have been redundant in view of the Sino-Nepal treaty of 1956 which included “mutual non-aggression” as one of the five points of co-existence.
But the principal reason behind Koirala’s refusal to sign a new non-aggression pact was a disagreement over the ownership of Mount Everest.
By claiming the world’s highest peak, Chou generated a highly emotion-charged reaction in Kathmandu.
Soon thereafter he was flown to a remote palace in the Pokhara Valley where public hostility was not visible.
Dramatizing Peking’s claim to half the summit was an announcement on May 19 that a Chinese-Soviet mountaineering expedition— heretofore unpublicized—had reached the top of Everest by way of the difficult north slope.
Contributing to the Sino-Nepalese tension created by the Everest issue were reports in June 1960 that one border patrol officer had been killed and fifteen soldiers captured by the Chinese in the troublesome Mustang border area.
Kathmandu sent a strongly worded protest to Peking demanding release of the captured Nepalese and withdrawal of Chinese troops to the agreed-upon distance from the border.
China was simultaneously exhibiting an equally aggressive attitude toward Bhutan.
This too may have been provoked by lingering Tibetan resistance fighting which the Chinese were finding difficult to mop up.
But Peking soon disclosed that it had serious claims to Bhutan’s territory just as it had to Indian territory.
China was reported to have used the cultural, religious and economic ties between Tibet and Bhutan as an excuse to serve an ultimatum demanding that Bhutan break its special treaty ties with India.
A Nepalese spokesman assumed that it must incline southward toward Nepal since this was the direction from which it had always been climbed.
This was played up by Chinese propaganda as being in contrast to India’s attitude of intransigence, blamed for the impasse in the China-India boundary dispute.
By this agreement Nepal gained Chinese acceptance of its traditional boundary.
The troublesome issue of Mount Everest was resolved to the satisfaction of both parties by vague wording which simply included Everest as one of the Himalayan mountains through which the boundary runs.
The only comfort which New Delhi could find in the new boundary treaty was that it tended to uphold the “watershed principle” which has provided an important basis for India’s own boundary case.
But this was small compensation for an otherwise direct assault by China on Indian primacy in Nepal.
It called for Chinese help in constructing and financing a road from the Tibetan border to Kathmandu which would link Nepal’s capital with Lhasa.
Equally obvious is its significance in diverting Nepal’s trade from India to China and reducing Nepal’s economic dependence on India.
In the joint communiqué signed by King Mahendra and Chou En-lai, China upheld the rights of small nations and, as an oblique slap at India, promised not to assume an attitude of “great nation chauvinism” toward Nepal.
Mahendra and some of his principle advisers believed with bitterness that the Indian government had done nothing to stop Nepalese rebel action and might even have encouraged it.
He was also dissatisfied with the scale of military assistance provided by India.
Because the Nepalese government lost patience with Indian foot-dragging on this score, it bought military equipment from the USSR in early 1962 and—more pointedly—accepted from China in May 1962 three single-engine transport planes.
Later Nepal acquired more significant quantities of military aid from the United Kingdom and the United States.
Upon his return to Kathmandu the King did in fact reshuffle his ministers in what appeared to be an effort to jettison those who were particularly objectionable to India.
But Nepal otherwise made no compromise with his policy of “neutrality” between India and China.
Its leaders meant to oppose Indian paternalism and continue to encourage Chinese assistance as a counterbalance.
CROSSROAD OF CRISES The future danger for Russia from this empire of 400,000,000 is beyond all doubt.
General Kuropatkin, Russian Governor General of Russian Turkestan in 1916 The “Pamir Knot”—a jumble of high peaks which tower over the junction of Chinese Sinkiang, Soviet Kirghizistan, Afghanistan and Kashmir—has long been an area of critical importance in Asia.
Today it is still an uneasy area where three major territorial disputes—those between India and Pakistan, India and China, and China and the USSR—-overlap, one with another, to create and compound serious tensions.
Probably the most significant of these disputes from a global point of view is that between the Soviet Union and Communist China.
Obscured until recently by the inaccessibility of the area and the secrecy which shrouds all events in Communist Central Asia, this bitter territorial quarrel provides a geopolitical rationale for the ideological crisis which has split the Communist world into two antagonistic camps.
Less obvious has been the impact of SovietChinese tensions—particularly in Sinkiang—on China-India relations.
The massive Pamir peaks and tributary ranges nearby now create a cockpit of conflict, but during most of the nineteenth century the Pamirs provided British India a certain illusion of security.
It was not until the last decade of the nineteenth century that Britain fully awoke to the Russian threat in the Pamirs.
Russian flirtation in 1890 with Safar Ali, the Mir of a sliver-like frontier principality known as Hunza, led to a bloody showdown between Imperial Britain and the Mir.
Safar Ali was forced to flee, but the Hunza sector of India’s frontier with Sinkiang remained unsettled.
The Great Game of secret reconnaissance and tribal intrigue by both Britain and Russia kept the area in chronic ferment.
In 1896 Russia—always alert for an opportunity to win points against Britain in the Great Game—provoked local Chinese officials in Sinkiang to protest British maps which showed the Aksai Chin plateau as part of British-held Ladakh.
The British did not make an issue out of the protest, fearing that to do so might provoke a Russian invasion of Kashgaria.
This would upset the delicate balance of power which required Sinkiang, like Tibet, to remain a nominal vassal of a harmless China.
The Chinese Revolution in 1911 and the subsequent weakening of the Empire held all the ingredients for renewed competition between Britain and Russia in Sinkiang.
But General Kuropatkin, Russian Governor General of Russian Turkestan in 1916, had the foresight to point out a more basic fear—one that has become progressively more serious through the decades.
The future danger for Russia from this empire of 400,000,000 people is beyond all doubt.
But it was not until after World War I and the Russian Revolution that a serious bid for Sinkiang was made by Russia.
Two nationalist revolts—one in 1936 and another in 1937— were suppressed only after much bloodshed by Soviet troops garrisoned in Sinkiang.
Moscow’s bid for primacy in Sinkiang came during the rule of Sheng Shih-ts’ai, a Chinese warlord who held power through force of arms.
In the thirties and forties Sheng encouraged increasing Soviet economic and political penetration of the province with the result that his policies bred frequent clashes with Sinkiang nationalist groups and encouraged competitive intrigues stimulated by China , Japan and Britain.
A meeting in Moscow between Sheng and Stalin in August 1938 provided a rare glimpse of pre-World War II power competition in Sinkiang.
In Sheng’s account of his audience with Stalin the latter seemed greatly concerned by revolts in this remote region and the foreign influences behind them.
As a measure of Moscow’s concern with the military dimensions of the problem, Marshal Voroshilov joined the discussion of the defense of Sinkiang against the Japanese.
At a second meeting Sheng pressed Stalin to speed deliveries of goods needed under his country’s Three-Year Economic Plan.
Sheng then posed the knotty problem of his own relationship with the Chinese Communist insurgents holding Yunan Province.
Stalin volunteered the opinion that it was easier to deal with imperialists than fascists.
During the war against Japan, Sinkiang’s position is vital . . . to guard the International communication line for attack.
The present war situation is unfavorable to China but Japan will not be able to conquer China alone.
If China can get help from allied countries Japanese forces will be ousted.
A considerable period of “peaceful co-existence” between the Chinese Communists and Nationalists will follow their victory over Japan.
By drawing off most of the Soviet Union’s energies and resources to the German front, World War II caused a power vacuum in Sinkiang.
This enabled Sheng—by then disillusioned with Communism and Moscow’s methods—to break with Stalin.
It is historically interesting that one issue which brought them to the breaking point was the arrest and eventual execution of Mao Tse-min, brother of Mao Tse-tung and a leading Chinese Communist agent, whom Sheng believed was plotting against him.
By late 1942 Sheng, taking advantage of Moscow’s preoccupation with the war, had demanded the withdrawal of Soviet military and technical personnel from Sinkiang because of what he later described as a “dreary record of plots and uprisings” against him by the Russians.
In this way Chiang Kai-shek gained temporary control of the area for the first time since the early thirties and soon was able to replace Sheng with a governor of his own choosing.
But with the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1944, the Soviet Union could again turn its attention to the Central Asian problem and Chiang—by this time occupied by his dual struggle against Japan and Chinese Communist forces— could not oppose a reassertion of Soviet influence in Sinkiang’s capital.
Soviet domination of Sinkiang inevitably came to an end following the victory of Communist forces in China, although Moscow did seem to make one last attempt to hold the province, according to Allen S Whiting, General Sheng’s collaborator in writing a record of Soviet power politics in Sinkiang during this period.
If Whiting’s and Sheng’s evidence can be accepted as an accurate reflection of Soviet policy, Stalin placed great importance on retaining Sinkiang in the face of Communist victory on the China mainland.
Just as in the case of Tibet, it was inconceivable for any Chinese regime, however weak, to deed away the destiny of China.
On September 26, 1949 the Chinese Nationalist Governor, recognizing the strength of the Communist armies and the inevitability of their victory, declared Sinkiang part of the new Communist state of China.
Less than a month later Red Chinese army units occupied the province, and China ostensibly began a new era of amity and cooperation there with the Soviet Union by signing an agreement in March 1960 calling for joint exploration of mineral resources.
Yet, in fact, the traditional rivalry in the border lands was essentially unchanged.
Soviet experts helped China explore new oil fields, build pipelines and erect refineries.
During the next five years a steel plant, a thorium factory and hydroelectric facilities were constructed.
A rail line to the Soviet border was also begun and significant new coal discoveries were made.
With Soviet assistance, Communist China was well on the way to industrializing the province.
Still Peking was distrustful of Moscow’s intentions and nervous about continuing Soviet influence in Sinkiang.
Like Tibet and all other regions peopled by non-Han nationalities, Sinkiang was vulnerable to antiChinese agitation.
Through education, propaganda and the importation of Chinese laborers Peking sought to place the Chinese stamp on the region—now called the Sinkiang-Uighur Autonomous Region.
There was more concrete evidence of Sino-Soviet tension in Sinkiang by 1955.
The Sino-Soviet joint companies, for example, were taken over entirely by the Chinese.
Other efforts at Sinocizing the province stirred up rebellion among the native Uighurs.
Serious outbreaks of violence were reported in June 1957 at the time of the “100 Flowers” episode and again in 1958 when Mandarin Chinese replaced the Uighur language in higher schools.
Although firm evidence is lacking, there are many indications that the Soviet hand was behind the rebellion or, at least, encouraged ethnic unrest which led to rebellion. 1959 and 1960 brought serious deterioration in Sino-Soviet relations.
Beginning in 1959, Moscow had made serious overtures of peaceful co-existence to the United States.
Kremlin policy also sought closer relations with both India and Indonesia.
Coming on the heels of China’s crisis with India over Tibet, Khrushchev’s orgy of personal diplomacy in South and Southeast Asia was viewed with anger in Peking.
Peking fired an ideological salvo at Moscow in a Red Flag article in April 1960, entitled “Long Live Leninism,” in which Mao openly challenged the Soviet Union as the leader of Communism and the guardian of doctrinal orthodoxy.
This led to an escalation of the doctrinal war with added emphasis provided by a withdrawal of a large number of Soviet technicians from China.
A massive Chinese purge of pro-Soviet elements in Sinkiang also took place in 1960.
Although the Soviet consulates in Urumchi and Kuldja remained open, most of the Soviet technicians were withdrawn that year.
Satyanarayan Sinha, Indian diplomat, Member of Parliament and outspoken critic of China’s Himalayan policy, claimed to have had early information of Soviet-Chinese tensions in Sinkiang.
In a book by Sinha entitled The Chinese Aggression, a shadowy Kazakh called Askaroff alleges that the Soviet Union foiled Chinese plans to invade India from Tibet in the spring of 1960.
Askaroff, who supposedly played a major role for the Soviets in instigating antiChinese revolts in the Altai region of Sinkiang in March 1960, told Sinha that Soviet intelligence had come upon the Chinese plan for the invasion of India.
Playing on ethnic abhorrence of Han domination in Sinkiang, a major technique of the Soviets has been to lure across the border into Soviet Kazakhstan as many people as possible.
A Kuldja refugee provided details of Soviet agitation in Sinkiang in 1961 in which thousands of Soviet passports were clandestinely distributed to dissident Sinkiangese, enabling them to emigrate to Soviet territory.
Some 50,000 escaped Chinese rule in this way until Peking took steps to stop the flow in the spring of 1962.
This could only have had an inflammatory effect on Peking and must certainly have helped shape China’s decision to expel Soviet consular officials believed to be implicated in the riots.
A convincing indication that China was alarmed and greatly influenced by Soviet subversion in Sinkiang during the spring of 1962 was the mention of it in Peking’s definitive statement on SinoSoviet tensions which appeared September 6, 1963.
Moscow’s counteraccusation that more than five thousand Chinese border violations against the Soviet Union occurred in 1962"" may have been an exaggeration, but it adds to the evidence that the Sino-Soviet borders were no less troubled than those of India.
These issues created growing tensions during the summer of 1962 and led finally to the October crisis in relationships set off by China’s invasion of India and Soviet brinkmanship in Cuba.
Despite an outward appearance of relative calm in early 1962, both Peking and Moscow continued to take actions which drove them further apart.
Discussions held by Chinese and Soviet representatives made it apparent to both countries that the price for rapprochement would be impossibly high.
Khrushchev, for example, could not come to terms with Albania and still win back Yugoslavia.
Nor could he agree to accept and institutionalize China’s separate formula for Communist revolution and repudiate peaceful co-existence as a basis for his relationship with the United States.
Similarly, Khrushchev’s efforts to reach rapprochement with Tito and use Yugoslavia as a center for creating a pro-Soviet “socialist camp” was provocative and totally unacceptable to Peking.
In an August interview with the American columnist Drew Pearson, Tito needled Peking on its India policy, thereby advertising the growing identity of views between Moscow and Belgrade and the hardening of their opposition to Peking’s belligerency in the Himalayas.
Khrushchev’s decision to send Soviet President Brezhnev on a state visit to Belgrade in September was, however, unforgivable.
Peking was also seriously concerned by Moscow’s promise to equip the Indian air force with jet fighter aircraft.
The gap dividing the two Communist capitals became wider with each salvo of vituperation.
Attacks provoked counterattacks, and substantive charges became entwined with doctrinal dispute.
The war of editorials waged by Moscow and Peking—either directly or through their respective surrogates, Yugoslavia and Albania—was matched by secret discussions in which more damaging charges were made.
The Soviet leader was later to deny that he had been forewarned, but if the Chinese account of his acquiescence is in fact true, it is understandable that he was being cautious about his relations with the Chinese on the eve of the Cuban missile crisis.
Simultaneously, as if to show contempt for Moscow's doctrinally impure world of peaceful co-existence, Chinese. troops in Tibet attacked India.
Jawaharlal Nehru Twenty thousand Red Chinese troops poured into India over snowbound Thagla Ridge at dawn on October 20, 1962.
The Dhola outpost, which straddles the ridge three miles high, was the first to fall.
The final destruction of India’s dream of peace and co-existence thus occurred in a place unknown to most of the world, where India, Bhutan and Tibet come together in a knot of Himalayan peaks.
The nearby outposts of Khinzemane and Tsangle also bore the brunt of China’s first wave and were hastily abandoned for more defensible positions five miles to the rear.
Khinzemane had been the site of a serious border incident three years earlier and had recently again come under Chinese harassment.
But this was no incident nor was it only a “border conflict” as initially described by both the Chinese Communist and Indian governments.
It was a full-scale and obviously well-planned attack, launched skillfully across the world’s highest mountain range.
The northernmost strike was aimed at Daulat Beg Oldi, an Indian post guarding the Karakorum approaches from Chinese Sinkiang, and the Chip Chap River valley west of the disputed Aksai Chin bulge.
Eleven posts in this sector were simultaneously assaulted during the first few hours of fighting.
Four of them were overrun immediately while troops of the remaining posts fell back to less exposed positions in the face of withering Chinese firepower.
In this salient the Chinese drove to within seven miles of the important Indian garrison at Chushul.
On the second day of undeclared war China opened a third front, attacking Kibitoo post in the Lohit Valley near the Burmese border.
Within twenty-four hours five Indian outposts in this area had fallen to the Chinese.
Tanks were used in this salient also, giving some indication of the logistical preparations which must have preceded the Red offensive.
China accused India of preparing a “massive invasion” of Chinese territory.
As the line of control had been pushed deep into Indian territory by four days of steady Chinese advance, the terms were obviously not acceptable to New Delhi.
India rejected them and insisted that negotiations could not be held unless China withdrew to positions held before September 8.
Despite the mauling which Indian forces had endured, New Delhi looked for help, not terms—especially not terms of capitulation offered by China.
India’s leaders, particularly Defense Minister Krishna Menon, had cherished the illusion that friendship with the Soviet Union was insurance against Chinese hostility.
According to this reasoning, the Soviet Union would never allow China to make war on India.
Khrushchev wrote Nehru on the very day of China’s assault, urging him to enter into negotiations with Peking.
What Krishna Menon could not foresee was the eruption of the Cuban crisis which brought the United States and the USSR to the brink of war.
Coinciding as it did with the Chinese invasion of India, this critical situation forced the USSR to side initially with China lest it alienate a needed ally in its moment of danger.
The Chinese were later to allege that Khrushchev had promised Chou En-lai on October 13, 1962—only a few days before the Chinese invasion—that the USSR would remain neutral in the Sino-Indian dispute.
The Soviet leader probably knew by then that he would need Chinese support for the Cuban crisis which loomed and actually broke out only one week later.
Similarly Chou needed Soviet support for the crisis he knew would be created by China’s imminent invasion of India.
Moscow, caught in an embarrassing dilemma as a result of ChinaIndia hostilities, became suddenly ambiguous about an earlier promise to provide India with MIG-2] jet fighter aircraft.
At this stage of Sino-Soviet relations the USSR obviously could not rush in with aircraft or arms with which Indians would kill Chinese.
India looked for moral, if not material, support from the nonaligned countries.
Only a year earlier the principal uncommitted nations had met in Belgrade and pledged mutual solidarity.
But New Delhi found to its dismay that non-alignment could apply to the Sino-Indian hot war as well as to the East-West cold war.
Even Tito, long an antagonist of China, reacted to India’s suffering with weeks of deafening silence.
Six days after the invasion Nehru wrote to most of the governments of the world, explaining India’s position and asking for sympathy.
Later New Delhi sent two missions to plead India’s case throughout Africa and Asia.
The most useful response came from the West; the United States, Great Britain and Canada promised material aid as well as sympathy.
The capture of this important post would knock out a vital airstrip and put the Chinese on the road to Ladakh’s capital of Leh, one hundred miles to the east.
Towang, seventeen miles south of Thagla Ridge on the northeast frontier, had fallen to the Chinese one day before the cutting off of an entire Indian brigade.
This placed the Chinese astride a jeepable track leading to the important Assam railhead and military headquarters at Tezpur, just two hundred miles away.
It was this very route that the Dalai Lama had traveled in his flight from the Chinese in March 1959.
Ironically, the declaration of national emergency and the disastrous loss of a full brigade coincided with Indian efforts once again to have China admitted to the United Nations.
India had found disillusioning the slow response of the Afro-Asian nations to its call for support; yet many of these countries must have found such a rationale difficult to understand at this particular moment.
On October 29 the Indian government first announced casualty statistics.
The Indian people were appalled to learn that between 2,000 and 2,500 soldiers had been killed during the first week of fighting.
The United States responded immediately with a promise of supplies on a “no strings” basis.
New Delhi would not yet expose the unwillingness of the Soviet Union to respond to India’s pleas for help.
These developments were nevertheless having a profound effect on the Indian government.
Non-alignment was personified in India’s controversial Defense Minister who had outraged the Western world by his all too consistent support of Communist bloc policies.
It had been Krishna Menon who theorized that the Soviet Union would protect India from Chinese invasion, so it was inevitable that his star must fall when the policy with which he was identified was repudiated by events.
Never popular in India, he now became the whipping boy for the Indian public, which felt that incompetence and negligence lay behind the rout of Indian forces.
As Minister of Defense he had neither foreseen nor prepared Indian forces for a major campaign in the Himalayan passes.
But more fundamentally, Krishna Menon was assailed for being the architect of a national policy which had been proven tragically inadequate, a policy which made military unpreparedness inevitable.
Nehru tried to defend his Defense Minister, but by October 31 the pressure—public and private—was more than even the Prime Minister could resist.
Although deprived of the important Defense portfolio, Krishna Menon remained for a few days in the newly created post of Minister of Defense Production, an ironic assignment considering his failure in this field.
But soon the Prime Minister’s own advisers demanded his removal from the Cabinet altogether.
On November 8 China offered a new cease-fire plan which called for both sides to withdraw their troops twelve and a half miles behind the positions held on November 7, 1959.
Timed to coincide with this announcement was a renewed offensive aimed at Walong in the westernmost corner of Assam.
If this heavily defended post were overcome, Chinese troops could romp through the Lohit valley to the vital Digboi oil fields in Assam.
Also apparent was an ominous Chinese buildup near Chushul, the key defense post in Ladakh.
Beginning November 3, the United States Air Force began airlifting military supplies to New Delhi.
On the basis of this, the Indian government could not expect new Soviet military assistance, but for psychological as well as political reasons it was vitally important to India for the USSR at least to make good its earlier commitment to sell the Indian Air Force MIG-21 fighter aircraft.
Nehru clung to the hope that some such gesture from the Soviet Union would force the Chinese to halt an alarmingly rapid offensive since no Indian military buildup—regardless of how fast western arms arrived—could be completed in time to stop the Chinese.
These hopes were realized; on November 10 Nehru was able to announce that the Soviet Union had promised to stand by an agreement to sell MIG-21’s to India.
The note of relief and triumph struck by Nehru’s statement is understandable.
The events of October had indeed suggested that China’s objective in India was total conquest of the subcontinent.
After nearly one month of fighting the Chinese army broke through on three fronts.
The Indian stronghold of Walong fell on November 18, trapping an entire battalion.
Those Indian soldiers able to retreat could not find another line to hold for eighty miles.
The Chinese simultaneously outflanked the Indian 4th Division on the 14,000-foot Se pass near Jang in a major offensive aimed at Tezpur.
The Indian supply base at Bomdi La was captured, which signaled a hasty evacuation of the army headquarters from Tezpur.
India’s entire defense strategy in the Northeast Frontier area had to be revised since it then looked doubtful if Assam could be held.
Chou En-lai, in fact, had warned twenty Afro-Asian heads of state that United States aid to India would enlarge the area of conflict.
But suddenly, in a dramatic and completely surprising move on November 21, the Communists announced a unilateral cease-fire along the entire Indian border and promised to begin pulling back troops on December 1.
If adopted it would leave China in possession of the Aksai Chin area including the strategic road linking Sinkiang and Tibet which China finds so important to the defense and control of Tibet.
In return, India would gain only clear title to the McMahon Line in the northeast, which it considered a fixed and legal boundary anyway.
The Chinese announcement added that if the Indian government agreed to take corresponding measures, Indian and Chinese officials could meet to discuss troop withdrawal.
With monumental relief the world could conclude that, for the time being, China's objectives in India were limited ones.
But the momentary relaxation of tensions could not long obscure the far-reaching effects which the SinoIndian war has had both inside India and in the world at large.
The rapidity with which Chinese forces could knife into India over mountains once thought impregnable was frightening.
In understanding the enormity of the act, it should be noted that China had succeeded in occupying an area in India equal in size to England.
But the act is dwarfed in significance by the changes which it caused and the forces which it set in motion.
The October crisis had an immediate and dramatic impact on the Indian people.
Those in the large cities felt. an excitement which for the moment lifted them out of the slough of daily routine.
Even the great mass of rural dwellers, whose timeless existence is remote from the world beyond their village limits, must have felt some of the tension of the national emergency.
Indians—divided and subdivided into a maze of mutually antagonistic groups based on caste, color and cultural, communal, linguistic and sectional differences—found common cause during October and November 1962.
The immediacy of the Chinese threat evoked a spirit of national sacrifice rarely seen in India.
There were stories of Calcutta ricksha coolies volunteering for military duty, New Delhi housewives offering their gold dowry bangles to the government and retired maharajahs contributing jewel collections to finance India’s defense effort.
They were manifestations of the mass adrenaline flow caused by war’s stimulus.
After the initial excitement wears off, a nation begins to feel the real consequences of war and search for a way to accommodate itself to the new world it finds.
At least cause must be established before consequences can be fully understood and intelligently faced.
Perhaps the world situation might appear to be relaxed a little bit, but in reality the struggle would become more violent.
Bulletin of activities, General Political Department, Chinese People’s Liberation Army International crime, like any crime, usually has a motive.
If, at first glance, Chinese violation of Indian soil—an act which made a mockery of peaceful co-existence—seemed inconsistent or irrational, it was because it was not judged against the background of Chinese history.
The underlying motive for Red China’s hostility toward India derived from a national psychology based on an ancient heritage.
The Great Wall of China is a symbol of the Chinese people's struggle against an outer world presumed to be hostile.
The “Middle Kingdom” which is bounded by the Wall is, in the egocentric world of the Chinese people, the core of civilization.
The guardians of this civilization have alternately been the harassed and the harassers of the “barbarians” beyond the pale.
Those neighboring peoples which accepted Chinese suzerainty could enjoy to a limited extent the fruits of its culture.
Those which did not were to be conquered if possible or otherwise ignored.
During periods of weakness China would be forced to admit its conquerors, but they would eventually be assimilated by a vastly more numerous people and absorbed by the quicksand of a superior culture.
The cycle would begin when a strong military leader emerged, unified the country and in so doing created a new ruling dynasty.
Inevitably there followed a period of territorial expansion through vigorous military action, then an era of enforced peace.
It was during these periods of relative tranquillity that culture flowered.
The conservative policies of a dynasty intent upon preserving the status quo discouraged new enterprises and initiative.
As culture and intellect prospered, military strength and civil administration decayed.
Eventually the dynasty would crumble as the “mandate of heaven,” which the Chinese believed was responsible for a prosperous regime, was withdrawn.
The last phase of the cycle would be the fragmentation of China and sometimes the domination of all or part of it by an alien ruler.
Before the nineteenth century the historical cycles revolved on the same foundation, and the fundamental social order and economy remained unchanged.
The Chinese people stayed close to the familiar earth of the “Middle Kingdom,” whether the tides of conquest were high or receding.
But the nineteenth century brought totally new “barbarians” to China’s frontiers—Caucasian seaborne invaders from Europe and America.
Interested mainly in trade, they brought industry and technology which set in motion changes destined to revolutionize the traditional structure of society.
A new Chinese aristocracy arose, made rich and powerful by its willingness to seek accommodation with Western enterprisers.
This aristocracy was a mutation of the traditional, privileged mandarin class.
While the new class formed an urban bourgeoisie, the mandarins retained control of the land, clung to the machinery of power and resisted Western influence.
Since the old mandarinate could not exert control over the Western traders along the coast, it pushed its influence in the direction of the more familiar “barbarians” beyond the Wall.
As the Manchu Dynasty lay dying, wracked by its own corruption and the virus of social change brought by Western imperialism, warlords waged petty campaigns against the nonChinese peoples of the interior.
The products of Western industry—particularly the railroad—accelerated the dispersal of population and made possible its movement.
As China’s population outgrew the “Middle Kingdom,” it overflowed first into Manchuria.
The subsequent population shifts toward Mongolia and Central Asia were on a much smaller scale since these areas were less attractive and access was more difficult.
Yet there was some movement of permanent settlers into these areas which had until then seen only Chinese military conquerors.
The present Communist dynasty in China, in the tradition of its predecessors, came to power through strong military leadership and conquest.
Like their predecessors, the Communists are dedicated to uniting China and expanding its frontiers to include all irredentist areas; but by the time they had gained control of mainland China there were clearly fixed limits beyond which they could not expand without colliding with the Soviet Union.
The power of the United States simultaneously blocked expansion seaward.
But there now existed a reason for expansion more compelling than the historical, cyclical urges of a waxing new dynasty; China’s exploding population needed new lands.
In November 1954 a Peking announcement revealed that China’s mainland population was approximately 583,000,000.
These statistics, reached after a countrywide census conducted by the Communist government in 1953, provided the basis for Peking’s economic planning.
They caused planners to experiment with birth control as one method of solving the obvious problem of too many mouths and too little production.
Before 1953 the concept of birth control was considered to be a product of capitalist, “neo-Malthusian” thinking, thus doctrinally sinful.
According to orthodox Marxism, there can be no such thing as overpopulation in a properly planned socialist society, but in view of the shocking statistics revealed by the 1953 census, Peking flew in the face of doctrine and encouraged birth control.
By 1957 there were clinics for this purpose throughout China, and the government * The total figure given was 602,000,000 persons, but this included LOO Chinese in Formosa and 11,700,000 overseas Chinese in other areas.
In 1958 Communist China began its “great leap forward” toward industrialization.
One apparent casualty of the new program was the Malthusian approach to population.
Mao Tse-tung announced suddenly that “China’s big population is a good thing”; more labor meant faster industrialization.
The people had been more irritated than influenced by the blatant birth control propaganda, which in most cases was phrased in overgraphic and offending language.
The second FiveYear Plan was failing, and China faced the possibility of mass starvation.
In an effort to play down the inconsistency of this policy with Marxist doctrine, Peking first justified birth control on the grounds that it was in the interest of public health, encouraged better parental care and made possible greater educational opportunity.
The fact that a runaway population was outstripping production was glossed over.
But the food crisis of 1961 and 1962 was more serious than the outside world imagined.
It was a dramatic warning to Chinese planners that there were too many mouths to feed.
It proved that there was no shortcut to industrialization and that extreme agrarian regimentation, typified by the dreaded “communes,” was not a practical solution.
In June 1963 a mass birth control campaign was launched in Shanghai—this time with an emphasis on male sterilization—while somewhat later, China introduced the birth control pill.
Despite the doctrinaire mentality of Chinese leaders, whose faith in their brand of Communism seems boundless, it must be clear that economic planning and population control alone will not achieve a socialist heaven in time to satisfy the demands of a chronically hungry population.
If China cannot stem the population growth and if this growth continues to outstrip production, the inevitable results will be accelerated colonization and the development of the more sparsely populated border areas.
Tibet has been viewed by Peking as an area into which Chinese population can expand.
But Britain’s withdrawal from the subcontinent after World War II made colonization possible.
Only lacking were roads into Tibet over which settlers as well as military supplies could travel.
These were built with the aid of forced Tibetan labor in a remarkably short time—much more quickly than Western observers had thought possible.
By 1954 the completion of two motorable roads from China to Lhasa made Chinese immigration into Tibet practical, and Peking officially announced its intention to settle a large number of Chinese farmers.
Ringed by two hostile powers—the Soviet Union landward and the United States seaward—Communist China views India in terms of the latter’s relationships with them.
By direct aggression, insurgency or subversion China has fought United States influence in the Far East, but South Asia poses security problems of no less importance to Peking.
This conclusion must be accepted if the motives for Communist China’s India policy are to be fully understood.
Being accustomed to considering India an imbalanced “neutralist” whose United Nations voting record and sometimes unnecessary judgments on world issues have frequently favored the Communist point of view, it is not easy for an American to see the logic in China’s image of India.
And only by making allowances for the historical distortions of doctrinaire Communism is there any logic to it.
Peking is convinced that the Indian independence movement fell under the control of the Indian bourgeoisie and landlord class.
Both classes—described by Red China as having a “blood relationship with the British bourgeoisie’—compromised the movement in the interest of protecting their economic positions.
An analysis of India’s economy since 1948, as distorted by Peking, proves that India has not freed itself from bondage.
In documenting this conclusion Peking called attention to a sevenfold increase in United States investments in India from 1948 to 1959, as contrasted with only a twofold increase in British investments for the same period.
But what seems to have impressed Peking the most is that India’s economy has had to rely progressively more on United States aid.
The consequence of India’s economic “dependency” on the United States is, in China’s distorted perspective, New Delhi's alignment with American “imperialist” political policies.
Communist China’s charges against India have, of course, been intensified since 1959 and can to some extent be discounted as propaganda, But the consistency with which Peking has reviled India as an accomplice of “imperialism” and the media in which these charges have been printed strongly indicates that the Chinese government genuinely believes them.
Peking will probably continue to consider India part of the “imperialist” camp regardless of expedient or even strategic collaboration with the USSR, and shape China’s policies and actions accordingly.
China’s leaders reason (not * King Faisal of Iraq was assassinated on July 14, 1958 by a military junta led by Abdul Karim Qassem.
By humiliating India—the leading practitioner of non-alignment—the validity of this doctrine is subjected to doubt.
Another basic motive underlying Communist China's actions is the quest for world power.
China’s first objective in the pursuit of its destiny is to become undisputed leader of Asia.
This requires the besting and eventual elimination of its prime rivals—the USSR, the U.S.A., and India—as power rivals in Asia.
The United States can be attacked through its Asian friends and allies.
But it is India which represents simultaneously a rival to China of major proportions and a very vulnerable target of opportunity.
India and China stand for two fundamentally opposed systems of government guided by radically different political and economic philosophies.
Both have been conscious that other newly independent nations of Asia have been watching them closely to determine which has the better system to emulate.
Since the Bandung Conference of Afro-Asian nations in 1955, the Indian government has recognized Communist China’s ambition to dominate Asia, while Peking has seen in India a competitor for Asia’s soul, if not its body.
India has realized that a failure of its democratic system could not only spell national catastrophe, but would deprive the Asian-African world of a prototype for workable democracy in underdeveloped countries.
Red China, by contrast, was still recovering from the folly of its “great leap” effort to industrialize too rapidly and collectivize too radically.
From 1959 to 1962 serious food shortages, which sent thousands of Chinese fleeing to Hong Kong, also gave evidence that Communist planning was far from infallible.
A restoration of limited private incentive for farmers in 1960-1961 was proof that pure Communism would not work.
Furthermore, the purges of 1958, which followed Mao Tse-tung’s shortlived political liberalization, gave testimony that Communism and individual freedom were incompatible.
Finding itself faltering in the race with India and recognizing that there existed much dissatisfaction within China, Peking found it tempting to take action which would both distract the Chinese people and impede India’s progress.
And recognizing the ideological appeal of co-existence, Peking must also have seen merit in action calculated to discredit the “Pied Piper” of Panch Sheela.
The invasion of India forced New Delhi to devote a much larger proportion of its already inadequate resources to military defense needs and thus has impeded economic progress.
It has also provoked India to seek large-scale military cooperation and assistance, thereby compromising Panch Sheela.
Peking’s Indian policy, characterized by an attitude of hostility and aggression, is a logical corollary to its Tibet and Himalayan policies.
These policies are all strongly motivated by strategic considerations which flow from Peking’s assumption that India is fundamentally in the “imperialist” camp, however willing it may be to arrange pacts with the Soviet Union or pretend non-alignment.
Efforts by the Dalai Lama in 1956 to seek Indian assistance against China and the Lhasa revolt in 1959 proved to Peking that China could not rule Tibet indirectly through its indigenous theocracy.
It had to be controlled through military force and Han-controlled civil administration.
By December 1964 even the puppet Panchen Lama was denounced and stripped of power to make way in September 1965 for a purely lay regime under quisling, Ngapo Ngawang Jigme, in a newly created Tibet Autonomous Region of China.
Tibet's culture and religion—both incompatible with Communism and hostile to the Han—had to be eradicated, and an environment had to be created which would encourage large-scale Chinese settlement in the arable parts of the high plateau.
India, which China accused of aiding Tibetan insurgents, has been made painfully aware of the seriousness with which Peking views its Himalayan security.
While the 1959 Tibet revolt precipitated Peking’s decision to press more strongly its boundary claims against India, China’s determination to reach a settlement on its own terms and thus to fulfill its minimum security requirements has been a constant factor underlying its Tibet and Himalayan policy.
To facilitate control, Peking pressed to early completion a road network linking Lhasa and China.
From Lhasa roads have been built southward to Yatung near the Sikkim frontier and westward to Gartok and Rudok near the Ladakh frontier.
The Gartok road is met by a road leading into western Tibet from Kashgar and Yehcheng in Chinese Sinkiang.
It is the latter road—secretly constructed on Indian territory in the Aksai Chin region—which provides the most important strategic reason behind China’s boundary dispute with India.
Western Tibet could be made secure only if Chinese military forces and supplies could quickly reach the area by road.
Because of the terrain the only feasible western route from China is through Aksai Chin.
Therefore, Peking built the since-disputed road and established military outposts along it before agreeing to negotiate the ownership of the area.
China did not want to take the chance that India would interfere with the road’s construction; nor would Peking accept agreement with India which denied to China this vital link.
Peking continued to suggest this sort of settlement after the March 1959 crisis.
In correspondence leading up to Chou En-lai’s meeting with Nehru in April 1960, the Chinese left the door open for such an agreement, but India was in no mood to negotiate a compromise.
If Peking wanted a settlement, stronger persuasion was clearly necessary, and it is likely that China’s invasion of India was intended to provide such persuasion.
The ceasefire proposal, which China finallv carried out unilaterally after its sudden withdrawal on November 21, 1942, called for a no-man’sland twelve and a half miles on each side of what China claimed was the actual line of control on November 7, 1959.
The fact that this line runs along the Indian-claimed McMahon Line in the east and along the boundary line which China claims in the Ladakh sector certainly suggests that the latter boundary, including the Aksai Chin road, was China’s main concern.
However much Peking may have been and may still be willing to bargain away its claims south of the McMahon Line, it has clearly discernible intentions to project its influence beyond the Himalayan watershed by other means.
To protect the Tibetan highlands, China believes it must gain enough control of the border states—Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan—to eliminate all Indian political influence and create Chinese-controlled buffer zones.
Just as Imperial Britain believed that it needed Tibet as a buffer zone for India, China believes it needs the Himalayan border states as buffers for Tibet.
For the time being, Peking’s techniques will probably be political, diplomatic and subversive, but military action can be mounted at any time if necessary as shown by Peking’s threat to attack India border installations in Sikkim in September 1965.
China’s policies toward the border states to date are clearly aggressive and suggest only too clearly the nature of things to come.
China has excused its acts of hostility toward India on grounds of self-defense; India has consistently been portrayed as the aggressor.
But it is likely that Peking was genuinely concerned by India’s “forward” policy along the border and could reason that New Delhi would eventually attempt to retake territory which Chinese forces had occupied.
The Indian army had, in fact, made several moves in Ladakh to outflank Chinese positions, so Peking was faced with the necessity to defend its newly occupied border outposts one by one.
Only after decisive defeat would the Indian army abandon its offensive posture along the border and return to a purely defensive stance.
However justified India’s actions may have been, it is clear that a mistake had been made in attempting to regain lost boundary positions without adequate military means to do so.
But to conclude that India started it all and that Communist China was justified in defending itself is to fall victim to Peking’s propaganda.
China's October attack was designed to put an end to Indian hopes that it could find a solution to the boundary problem through military action and to force India to negotiate the boundary on China's terms.
At stake in Communist China’s ideological war with the Soviet Union is the content of Communist doctrine and the leadership of the Communist world.
For that reason China’s actions must be analyzed in the context of this struggle.
Lenin, who originally formulated the doctrine, said that it is possible for the socialist countries to practice peaceful co-existence with the capitalist countries.
In its policy toward India, and particularly in its hostile actions, China has acted out its contempt for peaceful co-existence.
In the attack it was asked, “Is it possible that the only way that China could prove itself ‘reasonable’ and not ‘absurd’ was to submit to the unreasonable demands and the armed attacks of * Peking’s reference to “heaven” is curiously un-Marxist.
It is tempting to theorize that it reveals the lasting power of the historical concept of the “mandate from heaven” which successful Chinese dynasties were believed to have received.
That Moscow chose the former is a measure of the importance which it places on its doctrine and the need to meet rather than avoid the challenge posed by the Chinese.
The keynote of the Soviet attitude was enunciated as early as January 15, 1963 by East German Communist leader Walter Ulbricht.
He castigated Peking for not abiding by the principle of settlement through negotiations which is a basic tenet of peaceful co-existence.
There is one theory that China’s attack on India was calculated to force the Soviet Union to repudiate peaceful co-existence and abandon its neutral stance in the Sino-Indian dispute.
Whatever merits this theory has, the attack did not accomplish either objective.
It is probably not true that China’s India action was designed to cause the Soviet Union to abandon peaceful co-existence or its neutral posture on the Sino-Indian boundary dispute; Peking must have known that this was not possible.
China’s invasion of India as a means of pressing its territorial claims must also have been intended as a warning to the Soviet Union, with which China also shares a long, disputed frontier.
The point that China was willing to go to war in order to retake irredentist land could not have been lost on Moscow.
Sovietprovoked uprisings in Sinkiang could have been intended simply to force China to withdraw from India, but they could also have served the defensive purpose of preventing similar Chinese moves into Soviet territory adjacent to Sinkiang.
It brands as bourgeois “illusion” the hope that there can be a world without weapons, without armed forces and without wars.
Peking seeks not only to pit class against class, the colonized against the colonizer but race against race.
The Chinese are dedicated to propagating an ideology of world revolution in which war remains an acceptable instrument.
With the power of this ideology, with a nuclear capability and with a vast population which can absorb the mass annihilation of nuclear warfare, Communist China has set forth militantly to dominate the world.
But it is consistent with the eternal struggle of Han versus “barbarian” which has characterized Chinese history and Chinese psychology.
But, because history has seen fit to make India the battleground for a three-way ideological war between Western Democracy, Soviet Communism—characterized by competitive co-existence—and MaoMarxist hostile co-existence, India will inevitably find itself continuously involved in a struggle more complex than the East-West cold war which it has so carefully sought to avoid.
INDIA’S TROUBLESOME FLANK In event of war with India, Pakistan would not be alone.
Pakistan Foreign Minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, in the Pakistan National Assembly, July 17, 1963 The Chronicle of Kings, an early Sanskrit history discovered by Akbar the Great when he invaded Srinagar in 1588, alleged that Kashmir in the beginning was a great lake ringed by towering mountains.
This mythological saga credits Kasyapa, grandson of the Hindu God Brahma, with creating the rich valley by trenching Baramulla Pass so that the waters of the lake flowed into the sea.
Kasyapa thus provided his descendants with a sanctuary of indescribable splendor.
The conquering Moghuls in more recent times also saw the Vale as a place of inspiring beauty and called it Behesht, or paradise.
Its tragic history since the partition of the subcontinent has been scarred by the conflicting desires of Indians, Pakistanis and the Kashmiri people themselves.
Since the Hindu Maharajah of the predominantly Moslem state hastily joined his realm to India in 1948 rather than see it overrun by Moslem tribesmen from Pakistan, the trials of this paradise on earth have frequently threatened the peace of the subcontinent.
The fighting, which the two newly born nations could ill afford, was finally stopped toward the end of 1948 by a cease-fire agreement negotiated through the United Nations.
While most of Kashmir, including the coveted Vale and the capital of Srinagar, remained on the Indian side of the cease-fire line, both antagonists accepted a United Nations proposal for a plebiscite to determine the state’s permanent status.
Since then this troubled state has remained divided, with heavy concentrations of troops on both sides, facing each other in a state of perpetual alert.
An uneasy truce, monitored by United Nations observers, has all too often been broken by premeditated fire.
Repeated efforts to bring India and Pakistan to the conference table have brought the Kashmir dispute no closer to solution.
India has used the intervening years to solidify its position, while Pakistan has sought unsuccessfully to have the United Nations plebescite resolution fairly implemented.
New Delhi's reluctance to hold a plebescite has been based on the fear that the Moslem majority would choose Pakistan.
This fear became even more pronounced in February 1954, when Pakistan accepted United States military assistance—ostensible, at least, to defend itself against Communist aggression.
Recognizing the danger of a strengthened Pakistan astride India’s northern passes, New Delhi backed off from its plebescite commitment.
Coinciding with Pakistan’s acceptance of United States military assistance, the Indian-influenced Kashmir Constituent Assembly ratified without reference to Pakistan the state’s original accession to India.
China’s 1962 invasion of Ladakh in Eastern Kashmir was a dramatic reminder that the India-Pakistan dispute over Kashmir was inexorably connected with the India-China boundary dispute.
The situation has been further complicated by Chinese-Soviet tensions, symptoms of which are the opposite positions on Kashmir taken by the two Communist nations.
Moscow’s motive at that time in backing India’s position on Kashmir is understandable; no less so was Peking’s decision to take Pakistan’s side.
While Red China had been similarly incensed by Pakistan’s affiliation with the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, it became apparent that the threat was more theoretical than real.
In the long term it is probably the Soviet Union which China considers its main antagonist.
However serious doctrinal differences may be, it is the deep-rooted tensions in the borderlands where these two land giants meet that will most likely ignite conflict one day.
China must thus fear linkage between the USSR and India in the Pamirs, as this would dangerously flank both Sinkiang and Tibet.
Since China must therefore prevent Soviet-India physical contiguity, it has been in Peking’s interest to recognize Pakistan's right to claim and occupy northern Kashmir.
Of specific importance is the frontier strip which runs for about two hundred miles in a northwesterly direction from the Karakorum Pass through the principality of Gilgit to the trijunction of Sinkiang, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Gilgit had been awarded to the Maharajah of Kashmir by the British Indian government shortly before the partition of the subcontinent into independent India and Pakistan.
Being part of the Maharajah’s domain, Gilgit also became involved in the contest between the two countries for control of Kashmir.
While the Hindu Maharajah elected to join India at the time of partition, Moslem Gilgit, seized by local military forces, elected to join Pakistan.
The tulers of Hunza and Nagir—two princely states within the Gilgit Agency near the Sinkiang border—were in no position to protest accession to Pakistan and so also came under Karachi’s control.
Since then Pakistan has directly administered the former Gilgit Agency area rather than join it to the Azad Kashmir puppet regime created to administer the rest of Pakistan-held Kashmir.
Armed Chinese patrols raided into Hunza as early as 1954, probably to discourage herdsmen from grazing on Chinese-claimed land west of the Shimshal Pass on the ill-defined Sinkiang side of the border.
The controversy, which became acute in 1955, was settled for the moment by local negotiations; but these incidents served to remind Karachi that the boundary could be a source of continuing friction with China.
Boundary ambiguity west of the Karakorum Pass became of more concern to the Pakistan government following the 1959 Tibet crisis when China began pressing its territorial claims against India and occupying many of the areas in dispute.
By 1961 the shoe was on the other foot; it was Pakistan which declared its intention to negotiate a boundary with China in disputed Kashmir.
Less than a month after India and China had concluded their unsuccessful border talks, Pakistan Foreign Minister Qadir announced that Peking was willing in principle to have its “border” with Pakistan demarcated.
Pakistan was, of course, quick to see the advantages of reaching boundary agreement in Kashmir since this would simultaneously eliminate a source of potential friction with China and, from a political point of view, counterbalance Soviet sympathy with India on the Kashmir issue.
China’s underlying concern was a strategic one, but a boundary agreement with Pakistan must also have seemed useful to underscore India’s obduracy in not being similarly willing to negotiate.
And, insofar as Peking’s willingness to negotiate with Pakistan implied rejection of the Indian position on Kashmir, there may have been an element of spite and retaliation in China’s action.
Still, it was more than a year until actual negotiations began, and it is likely that Peking wanted as much time as possible to exert pressure on India.
Only when it was clear that New Delhi would not give in and was in fact building up its military forces in Ladakh, did China proceed to negotiate.
He could recall Peking’s reluctance to discuss that section of the boundary during the 1960 SinoIndian boundary discussions.
The Chinese representative had then stated that it was not appropriate for the officials of the two countries to discuss the boundary alignment west of the Karakorum Pass.
Certainly, if this refusal in 1960 made China seem to prefer Pakistan's side of the Kashmir dispute, Peking’s decision to demarcate the boundary with Pakistan removed any doubt about it.
But by championing Pakistan, China placed itself in direct opposition to the Soviet Union, which then sided with India in the Kashmir dispute.
But in January 1952 Soviet United Nations delegate Malik adopted new tactics and launched a scathing attack against the United States and the United Kingdom, accusing both of interfering in the Kashmir settlement and seeking to convert the region into a military base.
A less obvious but perhaps more important reason behind Moscow’s action was Chinese Communist boundary policy, which began to emerge in 1954 with Peking’s publication of new maps, the first maps to be issued by the Communist regime.
Russia, whose border with China was questioned in these maps, could find common complaint with India.
The 1954 Chinese maps, showing certain areas of Soviet Asia as Chinese territory and describing part of the boundary as still “indefinite,” sounded a sour note in Sino-Soviet relations.
In his meeting with Nehru in October 1954, Chou En-lai made passing reference to “errors” on Chinese maps depicting not only India’s boundary with China but that of the Soviet Union.
But, as subsequent events have shown, Red China was deadly serious in its territorial claims and aspirations and it is unlikely that Khrushchev was put off by Mao as easily as Nehru was.
The offending maps, which first appeared in a new Chinese history book, show China’s boundaries as they were claimed by China in 1840.
The 1954 maps incorporate within China parts of Hunza, Gilgit and Ladakh as well as Indian border territory which Peking believes British “imperialist” treaties took away from China.
Chinese-Pakistan relations had become badly strained during the Suhrawardy government, essentially as a result of Karachi’s close ties with Washington.
This was typical of the Pakistani official attitude, which lasted through the Lhasa uprising and flight of the Dalai Lama in the spring of 1959.
President Ayub Khan’s proposal of a joint defense policy with India in April 1959 was perhaps the low point in China-Pakistan relations.
But the very events which prompted Ayub’s offer had set in motion a very basic shift of attitudes in South Asia which would bring Pakistan and China closer to each other.
India’s trials with China, which then took the form of more frequent and more serious border clashes, brought a correspondingly closer relationship between the United States and India.
This, in turn, excited Pakistani suspicions that United States policy in South Asia was veering away from reliance on SEATO to contain the Communist threat to South Asia and turning toward India as a new ally against China.
As a result Pakistan began gradually to re-evaluate its policy toward the United States and seek closer ties with Peking.
Following Secretary of State Dulles’ death in the summer of 1959, it was particularly tempting for Pakistanis to leap to the conclusion that SEATO would wither away without the personal patronage of its architect.
While the government of Pakistan carefully avoided any action which could be considered hostile by India, the average Pakistani was less charitable; there were many voices urging Ayub to exploit India’s anguish and settle accounts in Kashmir.
Both countries agreed in late November 1962 to try once again to reach a settlement on Kashmir; but it soon became apparent that the exhortations of the United States and the United Kingdom, rather than recognition of mutual self-interest, was behind the new effort.
Something less than a sincere determination to reach accord was shown by the Pakistan government when it permitted Peking to announce the Sinkiang-Azad Kashmir boundary agreement just as Kashmir talks were being held with India.
Nehru’s dismay turned to fury when Pakistan’s Foreign Minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, flew to Peking on March 2 to sign the border agreement and be feted with calculated cordiality.
Pakistan was not interested in finding a compromise solution on Kashmir so long as the United States and the U.K. armed India.
No amount of logic or reason could convince the Pakistanis that India genuinely needed a greatly increased defense machine to withstand Chinese pressures.
Foreign Minister Bhutto, while addressing Parliament on July 17, 1963, stated flatly that India was not augmenting its military strength because of China but because it sought to threaten Pakistan.
He cautioned that the Kashmir dispute could be solved only if Western powers made settlement of it a condition for giving arms to India.
Heretofore, Peking, while clearly sympathetic to Pakistan, had remained technically correct in insisting that the Kashmir problem be mutually settled by India and Pakistan.
Chou En-lai, in return, secured Pakistan’s support for a second Bandung conference.
Pakistan, like China, had been excluded from the Belgrade non-aligned nations meeting in which India and Yugoslavia played the leading roles.
Thus, it was not difficult for Ayub to follow Chou’s path toward a new Bandung.
In December 1963 a sacred Moslem relic—a single strand of the Prophet Mohammed’s hair—was stolen from a mosque in Srinagar.
This touched off anti-Indian riots in Kashmir’s capital, which soon incited similar communal disturbances in India and Pakistan.
New Delhi's deep concern that communal unrest might jeopardize India’s hold on Kashmir became obvious in April 1964 when Kashmir’s nationalist hero and onetime leader, Sheikh Abdullah, was released from long Indian detention.
It was hoped that this gesture would appease the aroused Kashmiri Moslems.
Hopes for a settlement rose slightly when Nehru agreed to meet once again with Ayub Khan.
There were many who felt that settlement would be easier with Nehru’s passing since it was commonly believed that the Prime Minister's emotional attachment to the land of his ancestors had aggravated the problem.
But despite initial optimism, it soon became evident that his successor, Lal Bahadur Shastri, could not control Indian extremists, who forced through several constitutional moves which tied Kashmir all the more closely to India.
In December 1964, for example, India proclaimed Kashmir to be an integral part of the Indian state.
Sheikh Abdullah went to Pakistan after his release and predict196 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE ably appealed publicly for Kashmiri self-determination.
Adding to New Delhi’s uneasiness was a meeting in March 1965 between Sheikh Abdullah and Chou En-lai in Algiers.
The Chinese Premier promised the Kashmir leader his support and invited him to Peking, For his short-lived adventures abroad Sheikh Abdullah was again taken into custody when he returned to Kashmir in May.
His detention in South India set off angry demonstrations in Srinagar which served once again to remind India that the feelings of the Kashmiris themselves had to be taken into consideration before a lasting solution could be found.
It also provided a cue for Pakistan’s Foreign Minister to rattle the saber.
Bhutto’s remark had added significance in view of the serious fighting which had broken out in April between Indian and Pakistani forces in the long-disputed border area known as the Rann of Kutch.
This region is a marshy flat on the coast of the Arabian Sea, through which the India-Pakistan border runs.
Rawalpindi disputed India’s contention that the border line should follow the northern rim of the periodically flooded marshland and believed instead that it should run through the middle.
Fighting began when Pakistan tried to fortify Kanjarkot, which India considered to be on its side of the line.
Because of the intrinsic unimportance of the Rann, the skirmishes were more a symptom than a cause of tensions.
They were symptomatic of the heightened hostility felt by New Delhi since Pakistan and China first began their rapprochement.
The Kutch episode, while minor in terms of the military forces committed to it, was of considerable significance to New Delhi.
Before the Kutch hostilities India’s leaders had been extremely uneasy and bitter about Pakistan’s military establishment but had, at least, found some solace in Washington’s assurances that U.S.provided equipment would not be used against India.
The Kutch incident, in which India captured United States equipment while overrunning Pakistani positions, proved to New Delhi’s satisfaction that such guarantees could be difficult to enforce.
The more militant faction of the Indian government could and did use the Kutch experience to support its position that Pakistan was an enemy with whom no peaceful accommodation was possible.
By then tempers were raw, and a war psychology had gripped both peoples.
Sometime during the first week of August 1965—most probably August 5, when Indian patrols killed six Azad Kashmiris within Indian lines and found on them what New Delhi considered compromising literature and equipment—India became alert to a new threat from Pakistan.
It was apparent that large numbers of armed Kashmiri Moslems from the Pakistan puppet state of Azad Kashmir were infiltrating the Vale.
India claimed that they were an organized, irregular force under Pakistan army orders, and were instructed to perform sabotage and other acts of terrorism in Kashmir.
The angry crowd demanded that Shastri take strong action in retaliation against Pakistan.
Indians saw in the marauding Azad Kashmiris a guerrilla force intent upon harassing Indian authority in the Vale and inciting a Moslem uprising.
It was tempting to compare the new tactics in Kashmir with Mao’s doctrine of guerrilla warfare and conclude that direct Peking influence was involved.
This was not the case, but the increasingly close consultation between Rawalpindi and Peking must at least be credited with giving Pakistan greater self-confidence.
In April Avub Khan had negotiated in Moscow three agreements concerning trade, economic cooperation and cultural exchanges.
Rawalpindi wanted to regularize relations between the two countries as part of an evolving new policy of non-alignment.
Moscow, for its part, wanted more flexibility in the complicated subcontinent situation than its close alignment with India had heretofore permitted.
India realized this and found confirmation in Moscow’s refusal to include any mention of Kashmir in the joint communiqué concluding Shastri’s state visit to Moscow in May.
Conversely, Ayub Khan, whose own visit to Moscow preceeded Shastri’s, must have found this omission heartening.
Pravda’s silence for three weeks on the new Kashmir crisis was interpreted by Rawalpindi as still another encouraging sign which gave rise to hopes that India could be isolated, not only from United States military support during the crisis, but from Russian as well.
Pravda’s first words on the Kashmir fighting did not appear until August 24.
Soon afterward it became clear that Moscow not only would remain neutral but would underscore its neutrality by offering to mediate the dispute in the Russian Central Asia city of Tashkent.
This maneuver, calculated to provide Moscow with a stronger position in subcontinent affairs, helps to explain Peking’s subsequent effort to keep the conflict alive.
China could not afford to see the Soviet Union take honors as peacemaker and emerge as a stronger force in the subcontinent.
This was particularly important because of the continuing rebellion in Tibet.
China’s announcement on August 23, that Tibet had become an “autonomous region” meant, in fact, that the last vestiges of autonomy had been swept aside.
Whatever trappings of home rule were permitted or even encouraged for sake of appearances, Peking would henceforward rule with an iron grip.
The Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, established nine years earlier with the Dalai Lama at its head, would no longer exist.
More significantly, the Panchen Lama—long considered Peking’s puppet—had been removed in December, marking the end of anv pretence of theocratic power.
In the meantime guerrilla terrorism in Kashmir provoked Indian counteraction.
This secured the vital route to India’s China front along the Ladakh-Tibet border.
New Delhi, of course, dreaded the prospect of Chinese action in Ladakh which would draw Indian troops away from the Pakistan front.
Even more serious would be a Chinese-Pakistan linkup in the region of the Karakorum Pass, crushing India’s Kashmir forces in a pincer.
On August 25 Indian troops captured additional Pakistan posts in the Tithwal area, then probed across the cease-fire line between Uri and Poonch.
The next move was Pakistan’s; an infantry brigade with tank support struck toward Chhamb near the important city of Jammu on September 1.
Pakistan abandoned any pretense that only Azad Kashmir irregulars were engaged and admitted that the Pakistan regular army intended to take Akhnur just north of Jammu and thereby cut India’s vital supply line to Srinagar.
By this time Pakistan’s objective was clear—the military seizure and retention of Kashmir.
The war spilled over into the Punjab plain when India launched offensives aimed at Lahore and Sialkot.
Aircraft was being used by both sides in support of troops, and scare flights ranged deep into both Indian and Pakistan territory.
The presence of Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yi in Pakistan at this time gave a third dimension to the drama as seen from New Delhi.
The announcement added that “India’s aggression against any of its neighbors concerns all of its neighbors,” and warned against a “chain of consequences” which could follow.
Speaking at a rally celebrating the twentieth anniversary of Japan’s surrender, General Lo Jui-ching braced the Chinese people for a possible conflict with the United States arising out of hostilities in South Vietnam.
India was accused of “military aggression and provocation” along the Chinese-Indian border.
While Pakistan’s Ambassador to Peking, Mohammed Raza, met with China’s President Liu Shao-chi in Peking to discuss “the question of India’s aggression against Pakistan,” the Chinese government delivered a formal note to India demanding withdrawal of Indian troops from contested posts on the Sikkim border.
India was also accused of violating China’s borders in July and August in conjunction with “aggression” against Pakistan.
In keeping with its technique of speaking through surrogates, Peking used Indonesia to make more explicit its own motives in entering the India-Pakistan crisis.
Aidit added significantly that Peking also hoped to win Pakistan’s endorsement of its claim to Aksai Chin in Ladakh.
Such a move would also make less tempting an Indian invasion of lightly guarded East Pakistan.
It is difficult to determine the extent to which Peking’s bellicosity served to encourage Pakistan at first to respond negatively to the U.N.’s call for a cease-fire agreement.
Secretary-General U Thant, who made a flying visit to the subcontinent, received Shastri’s promise to order a cease-fire providing Pakistan would also agree.
But he was not able to move Ayub Khan, who insisted that a cease-fire be contingent upon a solution to the Kashmir problem by a plebiscite as originally called for by the United Nations in 1948.
The United States viewed Red China’s intervention in the South Asian conflict with deep concern.
China would not easily be deterred from its course, which was obviously calculated to keep South Asian tensions raw.
Red troops massed at several frontier points, giving substance to the ultimatum.
Shastri reported to a worried Parliament that he had no hesitation in agreeing with China’s demand that India destroy all its fortifications on Tibetan soil since, in fact, there were none.
Hoping that some concession would provide China with a face-saving avenue of diplomatic retreat, he also announced India’s agreement to a long-standing Chinese proposal for joint inspection of Indian installations along the border.
The need for a cease-fire—now even more urgent because of China’s ultimatum—provoked U Thant to propose that the Security Council threaten immediate economic and military reprisals against the combatants.
New Delhi simultaneously appealed to the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union for urgent aid against aggression by China.
India may also have hoped that United States air power would retaliate against Chinese bases in Tibet if China launched a full-scale invasion.
The introduction of China into the South Asian crisis forced the USSR to edge cautiously away from its neutral stance toward support of India.
What additional pressure, if any, was exerted by Moscow was not made public, but Peking’s shrill cry of protest could be heard loudly.
Then on September 22 Peking announced that India had satisfactorily compiled with its demands.
Peking’s retreat could only mean that Rawalpindi had already reached the decision to meet United Nations cease-fire terms and did not want a Chinese move against India which, in all likelihood, would provoke large-scale United States military assistance to New Delhi.
Pakistan’s Foreign Minister announced in a tense pre-dawn session of the Security Council that Pakistan accepted the Council’s terms for halting the fighting.
President Ayub went on the air to describe the United Nations cease-fire order as “inadequate and unsatisfactory’”* because it did not include a specific solution for the Kashmir problem; but he announced that in the interests of peace he had accepted it.
Men had died and quantities of costly war machinery had been expended for no gain.
The acceptance of a cease-fire surely gave Pakistani extremists an excuse to attack Ayub Khan.
China, however, by its own act of intervention emerged the greatest loser from the September war.
Its exhibition of belligerency before an Afro-Asian world tired and afraid of war further tarnished its image and prejudiced certain of its important objectives.
China’s loss of face was a major reason for its backing out of the “Bandung II” Conference of Afro-Asian Nations which had been rescheduled to take place November 5, 1965.
The importance of this should not be minimized in view of earlier indications that Peking had staked much on the Algiers meeting.
Peking’s pressure on India did not militarily help Pakistan, as presumably it was intended to do.
It simply increased tension to a point where both the United States and the Soviet Union redoubled their efforts within the United Nations to negotiate a cease-fire, and provided justification for both to exert the strongest possible pressures to bring this about.
Peking’s precipitous action also presented, at least for the moment, a tableau in which the United States and the USSR were revealed in alignment for peace while Communist China, in sharp contrast, beat the drums of battle.
While this may have served Peking’s purpose of discrediting its Communist rival as a collaborator of the “imperialists,” it also reminded the uncommitted, underdeveloped nations whose very existence depends on peace that China’s ideology and influence could be dangerous.
The Soviet Union’s strong stand against China’s entry into the subcontinent crisis brought the tensions between these two Communist antagonists to a new pitch of intensity.
Peking could blame the Soviet Union as well as the United States for its diplomatic defeat in South Asia.
Peking’s bitter denunciation of Moscow on November 10, 1965 for “acting in tacit agreement and close collaboration with Lyndon B Johnson” in the Vietnam situation must have been influenced by U.S.-Soviet parallel action during the India-Pakistan crisis in September.
By taking the initiative in bringing India and Pakistan together at the conference table and achieving agreement to withdraw all forces to the original Kashmir cease-fire line, Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin committed his country to a policy of preserving peace in South Asia.
This was the first occasion in history that the USSR had arbitrated between two non-Communist antagonists and committed its prestige to achieving at least limited settlement.
That Kosygin’s effort was successful despite opposition from China must have added considerably to Peking’s discomfort.
The Tashkent meeting also provided the Soviet Union with a long-sought opportunity to repair its relationship with Pakistan.
Ultimately, Rawalpindi may judge the worth of its Soviet relationship by whether Pakistan receives active support for its Kashmir claim, but for the time being Soviet neutrality on this issue is of sufficient benefit to cause Pakistan to welcome it.
And implicit in neutrality is a Soviet obligation to deter India from aggression against Pakistan.
With real improvement in the relations between India and Pakistan the latter would become less dependent on Peking, and the Soviet Union would benefit accordingly by reduced Chinese influence on its southern flank.
But, even immediately, Moscow gained greater flexibility by its more neutral posture in the subcontinent.
By viewing Tashkent in the context of other coordinated acts of Soviet diplomacy which occurred at almost the same time, it again became clear that Moscow’s main target in Asia was Peking.
Renewed Chinese outbursts accusing the Soviet Union of collusion with the United States gave unmistakable testimony to Peking’s ire and concern.
To expect lasting peace between India and Pakistan—much less a mutually acceptable, final solution to the Kashmir problem—demands more optimism than the realities of South Asian politics permit.
While the Soviet Union and the West both have important stakes in subcontinent stability and both Indian and Pakistani selfinterest demand peace, a heritage of intense communal antagonism cannot be easily eliminated.
Extremists in both India and Pakistan cried “sell out” after Tashkent and can be expected to incite hate whenever permitted to do so.
Pakistan too has its extremists, who were not permitted in September 1965 to see the severe supply problem facing their army in Kashmir and could not know all the other factors which caused Ayub Khan to sign the Tashkent accord.
But the greatest threat to South Asian peace remains China, which can at any time exercise its option to harass India in the Himalayas, setting in motion the same forces of conflict which have twice already brought the subcontinent perilously close to major war.
Political thrusts at the Himalayan border states and military maneuvers near the frontier may have been intended only as tactical pressures.
But they may have deeper significance as indices of future Chinese intentions.
The choice of Sikkim, where the border is not in dispute, as pressure point on India during the September 1965 crisis with Pakistan had military logic, but it may also have had sinister political significance when viewed in the context of remarks made at a press conference by Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yi, questioning India’s historical right to speak for Sikkim.
Moreover, Chinese forces then reoccupied Thagla Ridge and Longju, two border passes in the Northeast Frontier Agency which had figured prominently in China’s 1962 invasion of India and which had subsequently been neutralized as no-man’sland.
We stand at the crest of this change, looking at it, and a tremendous drama is unravelling before our eyes.
Jawaharlal Nehru, January 17, 1960, Bangalore, India Every nation’s problems and prospects are significantly determined by history, heritage and its location on the globe.
The dream of Nehru’s new India was to break out of the limitations imposed by heritage and emerge full-blown from its colonial cocoon as a prototype for independent Asian nations.
There are complex reasons why the dream has not been fully realized and may yet be spoiled altogether.
But much blame can be fixed on environment since India has no choice but to co-exist along a 2,500-mile border with an aggressive, hostile China.
Communist China has mocked India’s political philosophy of peace and non-alignment.
It has undermined India’s national security, not only directly along its northern border, but indirectly by encouraging tensions with Pakistan and by inciting subversion and separatism within the Indian federation.
China, by its harassment, has also placed in jeopardy India’s precarious economy.
New Delhi’s domestic policies, which are concerned mainly with economic development, internal security and national union, are tragically vulnerable to China’s weaponry of subversion and external pressure.
Moreover, India’s foreign policy, founded in the beginning on ideology and hope, has been rudely wrenched back to reality by its Chinese neighbor, whose own ideology has been linked more effectively with geopolitical reality.
It is perhaps China’s assault on new India’s ideology which has hurt the most.
Peaceful co-existence, non-alignment, Asian solidarity—all related concepts which India reflected in its Panch Sheela credo—have been casualties of Peking’s aggression against India.
Red China’s hostility toward India, more than any other single cause, wrecked the “Bandung spirit” of Afro-Asian solidarity, so hopefully enunciated in April 1955 at the Conference of Asian and African Countries held at Bandung, Indonesia.
There was thus something symbolic in the fact that a second “Bandung” meeting, scheduled a decade later in Algiers, was cancelled largely as a result of Chinese pressure.
Peking, the principal promoter of the second conference, had originally intended to exploit it as a forum for asserting leadership of the Afro-Asian world.
But China’s abortive intrusion into the India-Pakistan crisis in September 1965 and the misfired pro-Peking Communist coup attempt in Indonesia, which also took place on the eve of the conference, created an atmosphere hardly conducive to achieving Chinese objectives.
Moreover, the likelihood that the Soviet Union would be invited and would exploit to the utmost China’s misfortunes caused Peking to reverse its position and sabotage the meeting at the eleventh hour.
More basically, Bandung II’s failure to take place could be attributed to divisions within the Afro-Asian world which were even more pronounced in 1965 than they had been a decade before.
The emerging nations of the former colonial area were caught up in big power competition, including competition between Moscow and Peking.
The latter’s contempt for peaceful co-existence and its doctrinal break with Moscow on the issue of revolution had confused the meaning of non-alignment.
At least to this extent China was succeeding in its objective to prove that non-alignment is a fallacy, that there is no middle way between Communism and capitalism or between violence and peace.
India’s first time of acute peril in October/November 1962 exposed those Asian and African leaders who considered non-alignment an instrument, not an ideology.
It was, therefore, not surprising that many of the same nations failed to condemn China for its aggression against India in 1962.
Even Yugoslavia’s Tito, the host of the 1961 Belgrade conference of non-aligned nations and normally a champion of anti-Chinese sentiment, had been equivocal.
As he was in the midst of delicate negotiations to narrow the ideological gap between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, it was perhaps understandable that he found it politic to let Moscow take the lead in determining the line to be followed with regard to China’s new aggression and did not immediately criticize China for its attack on India.
Ghana’s Nkrumah, however, not only refrained from expressing sympathy for its Commonwealth brother in 1962 but, by implication, took China’s side and condemned Great Britain for rushing arms to India.
The third conference of the Afro-Asian Solidarity Organization, held that same year at Moshi, Tanganyika, failed to condemn China; instead, with Chinese prodding it passed a resolution which by implication assumed India to have been no less guilty of hostilities than China.
Similarly, when China threatened to attack India again in September 1965, the members of the Afro-Asian world once more reacted on the basis of parochial interest and expediency—not on the basis of the Bandung principles of preserving peace and condemning aggression.
India’s experience in two acute crises with China should be proof enough that China does not admit the validity of non-alignment as a policy.
There was clearly no place for non-alignment; the countries of the world must either have gone through the revolutionary stage or endure the hostility of those which had.
While defending non-alignment before his death, Nehru argued that China’s aggression was the act of an international outlaw forced to live outside the community of nations because its admission to the United Nations had been blocked.
India’s close relationship with the USSR is, to a large extent, a consequence of Chinese hostility, not simply an abstract expression of non-alignment in the East-West cold war sense of the word.
New Delhi's policy toward the USSR is also recognition that India’s economic and military needs require very large foreign contributions—more than can be provided exclusively by either the democratic consortium, called the “aid-to-India club”® or the Soviet Union.
Additionally, the nonalignment label provides entrée to Afro-Asian forums and reassures India’s electorate that there has been no backsliding toward colonial subservience.
But here again India is guided by practical politics, not abstract principle.
Basically, India’s existence as a unified, independent nation depends not on its rigid adherence to principle, but on its ability to deter from aggression those nations—particularly China—which threaten it, and its ability to achieve a rate of economic progress which will satisfy the expectations of an exploding population.
New Delhi realizes that India’s national security will demand a vastly greater defense effort to back up its diplomatic and political policies.
It also recognizes that this will be enormously expensive, particularly if an effort is made to provide a nuclear capability to match China’s.
For these reasons Indian leaders and planners are concerned that an increased national defense effort will have an adverse effect on the country’s already precarious economy.
Considering the staggering costs of maintaining a modern military machine, India may have to conclude that economic reality dictates a defense solution other than complete military selfsufficiency.
The defense of the subcontinent against China must depend on the readiness of the West—particularly the United States—or the Soviet Union to intervene if requested to do so.
Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, United Kingdom, United States, the United States Export-Import Bank, the World Bank and the International Development Association.
The elimination of the Pakistan threat could, of course, be achieved if the Kashmir problem were resolved.
Both India’s and Pakistan’s defense problem would be simplified and some form of a mutual defense plan could be worked out which would relieve both countries of the enormous arms burden they now bear.
True peace between India and Pakistan would also eliminate the inhibitions of Western suppliers to provide India with the type and volume of military equipment which it needs for defense against China.
But unfortunately, despite the Tashkent agreement, lasting peace in the subcontinent is not assured; the currents of hate still run too fast.
Alarm at increased Western military aid to India following China’s 1962 invasion was one factor which drove Pakistan closer to Peking.
And because of the lesson learned in September 1965, when the inadequacy of ammunition stocks and spare parts for U.S.-supplied equipment was a factor in causing Rawalpindi to accept a cease-fire, it would be dangerous to assume that Pakistan will refrain from concluding formal defense arrangements with China if the West fails to replenish and supply Pakistan armories.
While it was obvious in September 1965 that Peking’s threatening posture served only to provoke irresistible United States and USSR pressures for a cease-fire and thus became more of an embarrassment than a help, China still appears to Pakistanis to be an important protector to which they can turn should India in the future threaten attack.
Most Pakistani leaders genuinely believe that there is basic military and political logic in drawing closer to India’s enemy, although there is a considerable range of opinion as to how close.
Rawalpindi is not willing to acknowledge that China represents an ultimate threat to the whole of South Asia, including Pakistan.
Peking’s aggressive acts against India in October 1962 were -dismissed as simply tactical retaliation against Indian army action to clear its borders of the intruding Chinese.
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, in his capacity as Pakistan’s Foreign Minister, expressed the view that serious Chinese expansion, if any, would more rationally be directed toward Southeast Asia since it is there where food can be found and there that large overseas Chinese colonies could facilitate aggression.
As recently as February 1966 he again denied that China represented a threat to the subcontinent.
But Peking’s doctrinal espousal of revolution, so eloquently reiterated, cannot indefinitely be ignored by Pakistan’s bourgeois leaders, who are ideologically no more acceptable to Chinese Communism than are India’s leaders.
One of the greatest dangers to India of continuing friction with Pakistan is a worsening of internal communal tensions.
India’s large Moslem minority, acutely responsive to co-religionists in Pakistan, teeters dangerously on the brink of violence.
Since Nehru's death India can no longer rely on the personal charisma of a unique leader to preserve national unity, and the possibilities of communal explosions are for this reason greater than ever before.
While the causes of Moslem dissidence in India are complex and derive from the age of the Moghul rulers, modern tensions between India and Pakistan, dating from partition, seriously aggravate the problem.
New Delhi is acutely conscious that there are more than 50 million Moslems within its borders.
Were there to be a major communal uprising, India would find itself faced with a frighteningly dangerous security problem.
India’s relationship with the Himalayan border state of Nepal is also vital.
Nepal’s traditional role as buffer became even more important when Tibet was absorbed by China.
With considerable geopolitical reality, New Delhi believes that it must maintain a position of paramountcy in Nepal if the latter’s buffer role is to be preserved, Yet the Indian government finds itself in a serious dilemma.
To abandon its special position in Nepal would be to create a vacuum which could be exploited by the Chinese through infiltration, political intrigue and economic penetration.
Yet to insist on a position of primacy which must be maintained by constant pressure, is to alienate the Nepalese and drive them further into the arms of the Chinese.
Aware of India’s dilemma, China uses fear, favor and subversion as complementary influences on Nepal with the object of pushing India and Nepal farther apart.
Because of India’s very limited ability to defend Nepal against Chinese aggression, Kathmandu believes it must reach tolerable accommodation with Peking.
Such aid, given either as grants or loans, is not only helpful to Nepal in its economic development, but serves as pressure on India to be more generous.
It also lessens Nepal’s dependence on India and thus gratifies a traditionally strong spirit of nationalism in the mountain kingdom.
Perhaps more than any other single factor, overland communication determines the orientation of mountain lands such as Nepal which have traditionally relied on human transportation.
With the completion of the road from Kathmandu to Lhasa, Nepal’s trade links with China will become progressively stronger.
The Soviet Union’s sudden establishment of an embassy in Kathmandu during the 1959 Tibet crisis suggests that Moscow also saw with clarity the implications of Chinese influence in the Himalayan borderlands.
Yet it would be unrealistic to expect Moscow to compete with China in Nepal and the other border states.
The Soviet Union is and must be primarily concerned with its relationship with India so cannot be too aggressive in the Himalayan states where New Delhi has special interests and responsibilities.
While China may find renewed direct aggression against India difficult, particularly if the Soviet Union makes clear its intention to exert retaliatory pressure in places where China is vulnerable, such as in Sinkiang, or if the West supplies critically needed air support, aggression in Nepal is a very real possibility.
Should Peking disguise its actions in Nepal through indigenous subversion or if the legal issues are otherwise clouded, it would be difficult for any country to justify intervention in Kathmandu’s defense unless requested to do so.
Because of traditional resentment against Indian efforts to dominate it, Nepal would probably be disinclined to seek New Delhi's support against Peking’s subversion until too late.
And unsolicited Indian initiatives could be misinterpreted or resented by the Nepalese, causing them to draw even closer to the Chinese.
All this adds up to the gloomy conclusion that Nepal is extremely vulnerable to Chinese influence and cannot be easily defended by foreign assistance.
A Communist-dominated Nepal would put China on the southern slopes of the Himalayas, contiguous with the rich Gangetic plain, with all that implies for Indian security.
The existence of many Nepalese immigrants in Bhutan and Sikkim gives some reality to the scheme.
The non-Nepalese people of Sikkim and Bhutan—mainly the “Bhutias” who are closely akin to the Tibetans—do not relish being dominated by Nepalese but are inclined to believe that Nepal would be less overpowering—thus more acceptable—than India.
It is no simple coincidence that China threatened India specifically on the Sikkim border during the September 1965 crisis.
It is significant that Communist China favors the Pan-Himalayan concept.
Peking may see Nepal as a cat’s paw with which to create such a federation and by so doing weaken Sikkim’s and Bhutan’s treaty ties with India.
Indirect aggression of this kind against the mountain principalities would be less likely to invoke foreign backing for Indian military defense of its strategic buffer areas.
Yet the assassination of Bhutan’s pro-Indian Prime Minister, Jigme Dorje, in April 1964 and the attempted assassination of King Jigme Dorji Wangchuk in July 1965 are ominous events and suggest that a more direct approach to Himalayan conquest by China cannot be ruled out.
There certainly exists a body of Bhutanese who are opposed to their country’s Indian ties and who may ultimately become powerful enough to challenge the moderate leadership now ruling the country.
The seizure of power in Bhutan by an anti-Indian cabal would reverberate in Kathmandu just as Chinese moves in Nepal are felt in Bhutan.
The Chinese invasion of India in 1962 accentuated serious factional tensions among Indian Communists which have since been aggravated by the Sino-Soviet doctrinal schism.
By early 1963, soon after the Chinese assault, a climax was reached in the long struggle for control between the pro-Soviet faction, which condemned China while staunchly advocating peaceful co-existence, and the proPeking faction, which condoned Chinese aggression along the border.
This represented a total victory for the pro-Soviet faction, which at the same time voted unqualified support for Moscow’s position on Cuba and backed India in its dispute with China.
Dange’s statement—timed and phrased as it was—appears to have had major significance beyond the Sino-Indian border dispute.
It was probably meant to be an indirect warning by Moscow that the USSR would not tolerate Peking’s current actions and claims along the Soviet-Chinese border.
But it more obviously set the definitive party line that direct Chinese aggression against India was doctrinally inadmissable and made reconciliation between the proSoviet and pro-Chinese wings of the party more difficult.
Soviet policy requires a unified India which Moscow hopes to influence politically, diplomatically and economically through its relations with New Delhi.
Conversely, Peking—doctrinally dedicated to bringing about revolution by the masses—is determined to splinter the nation so as to assist the revolutionary objective.
Without being untrue to its doctrinal fundamentalism, Communist China cannot have anything but contempt for India’s bourgeois central government.
This did not work, but of more importance was the death of Stalin and the subsequent shift to parliamentary tactics in Moscow’s doctrine.
By 1954 Soviet foreign policy, following the dictates of peaceful co-existence, sought accommodation with Nehru.
Peking was the inheritor of the militants and hard-liners who refused to abandon insurrection and linguistic separatism.
It is understandable that this faction is strongest in the non-Hindi-speaking states of India such as West Bengal, Andhra and Kerala.
Encouraged by the strains on Indian unity caused by Chinese aggression, the militants have fought the adoption of Hindi as India’s national language and on a variety of other counts have been proponents of total autonomy for India’s linguistic groups, even the tribal aborigines.
It is here that one can see one of the greatest dangers of China’s hostility toward India and another convincing logic of China’s actions along the border.
Faced then with the likelihood of a pro-Peking Communist regime taking power in Kerala State, New Delhi moved decisively against Peking’s agents throughout the country.
This is the kind of forceful approach to the internal Communist problem which India probably feels it must continue to pursue if its defenses against Red China are to be effective.
With an appreciation of the causes and consequences of China's actions and recognizing India’s vulnerability to communal and linguistic disintegration, New Delhi has to be continually on guard.
Chinese aggression and threats have humiliated India and created a defense requirement certain to strain India’s economy.
Peking’s actions have convinced the Himalayan border states, Nepal and Bhutan, that they must respond to the realities of strength—that India, unable to protect itself, cannot protect them.
This in turn has deprived India of its traditional northern buffer protection and has provided China with a foothold of influence on the southern slopes of the Himalayas overlooking the Gangetic heartland of Indian strength.
Peking’s actions have aggravated India-Pakistan relations, making much more remote any possibility of cooperation between them for the mutual defense of the subcontinent.
The invasion of India in 1962 and the threatened attack in 1965 were, above all, dramatic demonstrations of China’s willingness to use aggression as an instrument of foreign policy in a world which hopes for peace.
Viewed now in the context of China’s nuclear capability, this has awesome meaning in a world which fears but respects power.
The avalanche of publications which pour from Peking’s presses preaching violent revolution as the only road to freedom, and aggression as the only solution to disagreement, have been translated from theory into reality in China’s relationship with India.
Samuel Turner, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet , xiii.
Turner, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet, 457—473.
George Alexander Lensen , Russia’s Eastward Expansion , Chap., “The Ideology of Russian Expansion,” by Andrew Malozemoff, 92.
Samuel Turner, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet , 273.
Tzu-yuan, “Historical Relations between the Tibet Region and the Motherland,” Min-tsu Yen-chiu, 19.
All quotations from the 17-Point Agreement are from The Question of Tibet and the Rule of Law.
This publication in turn took its quotations from the New China News Agency.
The International Commission of Jurists, Legal Inquiry Committee on Tibet, 1960), 204.
Report of the Officials of the Governments of India and the People’s Republic of China on the Boundary Question, 112.
Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, 1954-1959 , 49.
The Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1961), 277.
Chinese Communist World Outlook (Bureau of Intelligence and Research, United States Department of State, Publication 7379 [Far Eastern Series 112] ), 84.
Bureau of Intelligence and Research, United States Department of State, June 1962), 67.
Ibid., November 10, 1959 (Reuters, Hong Kong, dated November 9, 1959, quoting NCNA release.
The Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1954), 147.
BIBLIOGRAPHY BOOKS, ARTICLES, AND DOCUMENTS “A Study of Sino-Tibetan Relations, 1949-56,” United Asia (special Tibet ed., 1959), Bombay.
Fisher, M W., Rose, L E., and Huttenback, Robert, Himalayan Battleground, Sino-Indian Rivalry in Ladakh.
Huc, E., Souvenirs of a Journey Through Tartary, Tibet and China. vols.
Jenkins, William M., Jr. and Karan, Pradyumna, The Himalayan Kingdoms, Bhutan, Sikkim and Nepal.
Derek Verschoyle in Association with the Institute of Pacific Relations, 1954.
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1961. , Jawaharlal Nehru Speeches, 1949-53.
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1954.
Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, September-November, 1959.
Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, November, 1959March, 1960.
Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, March, 1960-November, 1960.
Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, November, 1960November, 1961.
Official Correspondence between the Central Government of India and the Chinese People’s Republic Relevant to the Subject of the Sino-Indian Border.
External Publicity Division, Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, 1959.
Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, 1961. de Riencourt, Amaury, Roof of the World.
Turner, Samuel, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet.
Letter, dated November 17, 1950 from the Chairman of the Delegation of E] Salvador addressed to the President of the General Assembly,” November 17, 1950.
Winnington, Alan, “Statement Of Dalai Lama Is Suspect,” New China News Agency , April 22, 1959.
