The fact that this nuclear tragedy did not eventually occur is a reflection upon the actions of the key individuals involved.
Both Kennedy and the Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev played major roles in averting a nuclear war which was seen at the time as quite possible.
However, in light of evidence acquired by historians, there is doubt about how much credit Kennedy can take for the results of the crisis in 1962, in being classed as a hero.
The roles of the major politicians involved in the crisis, both American and Soviet are fairly well documented as well as the actions of Kennedy himself.
English:Thus it is questionable as to whether Kennedy was given credit for the actions taken by others, simply because he was the President.
However, sources show the contrasting views over the actual consequences of the crisis.
These contrasting views ultimately effect the way in which Kennedy is perceived as a hero.
In August 1962, there was evidence that the Soviet Union had begun to install missile sites in Cuba, perhaps to protect Cuba from invasion.
Good support of theis, well written. out of 6 people found this comment useful.
Very descriptive by skierdude1000 on 27/Feb/2005I liked reading it and it had a lot of interesting points and facts.
Great support and good explanations3 out of 3 people found this comment useful.
With a little work... by tdesando86 on 30/Apr/2007With a little work this could be an excellent essay.
There is no way a single gunman could have fired all the bullets that hit Kennedy and Connnally in that short period of time.
BILL CLINTON 48% Clinton attempted to launch his political career when ... used the anger of the teachers' union as a political asset.
Soon after turning towards his own religious doctrine, Franklin began to strive towards moral perfection.
When an historian looks at the present, he sees the effects of many events and many profound people.
Madison ... federal judges and Justices of Peace, and it reduced the number of Supreme Court justices ... 1 pages 14 Sep/2007 0.0Franklin Delano Roosevelt ... number of justices to fifteen, to free up the court.
Thomas Jefferson was one of ... 2 pages 16 Oct/2008 0.0Thomas Jefferson ... a ""court"" of his own.
