This is my first note to you as the new Editor-In-Chief, and I must give a big thank you to Jasmin Bath, who ran the Journal last year wonderfully.
The Journal team would also like to give a big thank you to all the students that contributed to the journal by submitting in their essays for this theme.
Our editors worked hard to narrow these essays into just six essays which will be published in this essay.
I would like to thank every member of the QMUL History Journal, without whom the Journal could not survive and flourish.
Thank you to all those who worked on the committee, your had work is inspiring and it shows in the wonderful Journals that you have put out these past two years.
You can find us on Twitter @QMULHJ, Facebook under ‘Queen Mary History Journal’ and by email at qmhistoryjournal@gmail.com.
Should you have pieces that you wish to submit, or any general enquiries, please contact us.
America and Russia; omitting the role of smaller powers such as Britain in Kennedy’s management of the crisis.
As a result, less attention has been paid to the role of other nations, including Britain.
There was truly little Macmillan could do to influence the course of events and discussions within the White House, primarily due to various internal pressures within the administration over the establishment of a naval blockade in Cuba.
However, Macmillan was still able to voice his concern over what Khrushchev may do in Berlin if the United States were to invade Cuba, and advise Kennedy to favour the blockade over an invasion of Cuba, providing Kennedy with the affirmation he desired.
Turner has even suggested that the fundamental decisions over the crisis had already been made by the time information was conveyed to Macmillan, and the fact that Kennedy contacted Macmillan and asked his opinion on the situation highlights the value of the relationship between the two countries, whilst also reinforcing the idea that Kennedy was a man who needed reassurance.
It was feared that if Kennedy authorised an invasion of Cuba Khrushchev might use it as a bargaining counter to get the western powers out of Berlin.
Macmillan’s anxieties over this are especially apparent in the telephone call between him and Kennedy on the 26 th October.
This is telling of the fatherly figure Kennedy saw in the Prime Minister, and the overall role Britain played in assuring Kennedy that he was acting correctly.
Furthermore, Rusk also states that Kennedy would not have been swayed by European voices, but the fact that Kennedy contacted Macmillan is of high importance, as it ultimately supports the view that the President was looking for affirmation on his Cuban policy, from this ‘father figure’ that he saw in Macmillan.
However, this view of Macmillan and Britain as the father figure to Kennedy and the USA tends to romanticise the relationship between Kennedy and ~6~ Superpowers Macmillan, and the influence the Prime Minister had over the President’s management of the crisis.
Specifically, Richard Lamb maintains that Kennedy and United States policy makers were influenced by Macmillan and altered their views to accommodate the PM’s opinions.
Despite this romanticism, it is clear that the role Britain and Macmillan played was just to reassure Kennedy, and did not have as clear-cut of an effect on United States policy as Lamb would suggest.
This can specifically be seen within one of the many telephone calls between Kennedy and Macmillan which occurred during the crisis when Macmillan makes a suggestion to Kennedy on matters of immobilising the Thor missiles which were present in England at the time.
Later in the conversation, when Macmillan agrees on actions made by Kennedy, the President is more cooperative with the Prime Minister, reasserting the view that Britain’s role was to simply support and reassure.
In this context it is useful to consider the Camelot school of thought, and their effect on historiography, as they especially bolster the view that Britain had little influence on Kennedy’s management of the Cuban Missile crisis as a direct result of their creation of a mythicised history of the Kennedy administration.
The Camelot school have established this ‘hero like’ image of Kennedy as the only arbiter of peace in the face of this unprecedented global nuclear threat, thus diminishing the role Macmillan and his government played in order to uphold this independent view of Kennedy.
The issues raised by this historiographical school are particularly intriguing and can tell us a lot about the special relationship, especially when considering why they have chosen to diminish Britain’s role in the Kennedy’s management of the crisis.
Britain did indeed play a role in the management of the crisis; a role which is often forgotten by Camelot historians and popular media as it does not fit in with their romanticised view of the Kennedy presidency.
Nigel Fisher has also suggested that Kennedy put a high premium on Macmillan’s advice and that the daily telephone calls and correspondence went far beyond the requirements of co-operation between allies.
Furthermore, Kennedy himself even told Lord Home that he ‘valued being able to talk to Mr Macmillan’, therefore supporting the claim that he was a leader who needed reassurance.
The romanticised view of Kennedy presented by the Camelot school omits the role Britain, and Macmillan especially, played as a figure to reassure Kennedy of the decisions he made during the crisis.
The frequency of meetings, ~ 10 ~ Superpowers telephone calls and public presentation of the almost family-like relationship essentially painted an image of interdependence between the two countries, which, when considering the wider trend of the Anglo-American relationship, is far from the truth as the relationship between the two was indeed highly unbalanced at times.
This ‘special relationship’, from its beginning in 1945 through Winston Churchill’s efforts, although special, was not natural, requiring nurture and negotiation in order for it to survive.
His appointment as ambassador to Washington in 1960 was highly influenced by his close personal links to John F Kennedy, a relationship that granted him an exceptionally privileged position during Kennedy’s presidency.
Due to his close relationship with Kennedy, Ormsby-Gore was often co-opted into many of the key meetings during the crisis, and it was this that provided Macmillan with the opportunity to use Ormsby-Gore as a conduit for his own views.
This allowed Britain to have a more definite role and consult ~ 12 ~ Superpowers Kennedy, rather than merely advising and reassuring him over decisions that had already been made.
It was important to paint this picture of interdependence between Britain and the United States, and propagandise it to their benefit.
The role of individuals like Macmillan and Ormsby-Gore had a clear influence over Britain’s role during the Crisis and, arguably if not for their personalities and close relationships with Kennedy, ~ 14 ~ Superpowers Britain would not have had as definite of a role in Kennedy’s management of the situation in Cuba.
Although the role Britain played in reassuring Kennedy was inherently small, to such an extent that it has been omitted by some American scholars (especially the Camelot school), the fact that they even played a role is telling of the respect Kennedy had for the British, and the gravity of their opinions was not lost on the American president.
Olivia Martin Britain and America have maintained a particularly close relationship for many decades now which began to be most strongly emphasized when the two countries formed an allegiance during World War Two and has continued since then.
This essay will discuss the relationship in various areas,e. military, economic, political and linguistic, and analyse its nature and benefits, mutual or not, of the alliance in these different spheres.
This essay will also seek to determine, via the aforementioned factors, whether the ‘special relationship’ between Britain and America was a marriage of convenience, concluding that it was a marriage of convenience, particularly for America.
One element of the ‘special relationship’ that this essay will discuss is the military aspect.
Many historians, including John Dumbrell and Axel Schäfer, argue that the basis of the relationship is rooted in ‘military and intelligence cooperation’ that took off during the Second World War.
Both during and after the war, both ~ 24 ~ Superpowers countries saw each other as their primary ally, with the United States stating that they considered Britain their ‘principle partner and ally…from the military point of view’, and Britain, in return, sought ‘military guarantees from the United States’, especially as the war was significantly longer than had been anticipated by either party.
Britain wanting the support of the wealthy and powerful United States and America, perhaps, looking to capitalise on Britain’s historically iconic naval forces and military prestige.
This also sets up the argument outlined in the introduction that the relationship was unequal with Britain wanting to hold onto the coattails of the next great power and America allowing them to do so relatively amicably.
This argument is proposed by Leigh-Phippard, who states that ‘there can be little doubt that the British Government chose … to pursue an interdependent relationship with the United States’ once the war was over.
This British attitude also implies that the relationship had been a military marriage of convenience during the war without a set plan to continue the alliance in the longer term.
If there had been a longterm agreement, Britain would surely not have felt the need to chase America for a partnership at the close of the war.
The ‘special relationship’ can also be examined in regard to the economic links between the two countries as both had the ~ 25 ~ Olivia Martin Special Relationship opportunity to gain financially from the other, if they were to maintain their alliance long-term.
However, this ‘moneyhungry’ attitude was not entirely one-sided as Britain looked to America for significant financial aid to rebuild its infrastructure and economy after the war.
Leigh-Phippard argues that ‘Britain was reliant on American financial help to restore its economy’, which is supported by the fact that the American aid program, that became known as the Marshall Plan, intended to give Britain and its European allies a vast $13. billion.
This does imply that the United States treated its relationship with Britain as a marriage of convenience as they could see the advantages of aligning themselves with Britain and its international economic network, although America did not necessarily need this alliance, it was definitely an easier way to build on its existing economic standing.
For Britain, however, the economic element of the alliance was not a convenience but a necessity.
As has already been mentioned, Britain’s economy was ruined by the war to the extent that it could not have survived without the significant aid that Britain received from the United States in the following years.
America believed it to be a marriage of convenience that they didn’t necessarily need but preferred to have; whereas, Britain believed it to be a lifeline which was imperative to the nation’s economic survival.
This essay will now focus on another element of the ‘special relationship’, the political alliance.
Historians such as David Reynolds argue that Britain latched onto the United States so strongly in order to maintain its political prowess on the global stage, describing the relationship as ‘a device used by a declining power … trying to harness a rising power to serve its own ends’.53 This implies that Britain was manipulating the relationship to its advantage by aligning itself with a new, large power, America, in an attempt to maintain its own relevance.
This is supported by the fact that, although the strength of the political alliance has ebbed and flowed with the changes in Prime Ministers and Presidents, it is usually the British that pulls the two back together.
A prime example of this being the ~ 27 ~ Olivia Martin Special Relationship friendship between Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and President Ronald Reagan, great personal friends with one friend of Reagan stating that they ‘literally loved one another’, who also recognised the benefits of a positive political relationship.
Richard Aldous states that Thatcher realised that a political allegiance with the United States allowed her ‘to power in the furtherance of British interests’, which supports Reynolds’s argument that Britain’s long-term goal in this relationship was political, an attempt to maintain world influence.
In this respect, it does not seem as though Britain absolutely needed the United States by their side to remain relevant and globally influential.
However, maintaining the ‘special relationship’ was an easier way to achieve the same goal than going it alone, making the partnership a marriage of convenience.
The ‘special relationship’ can also be considered in terms of the shared primary language of the two countries.
The military, economic and political factors discussed earlier in this essay are not constants and not necessarily a basis for a long-term union of two nations.
However, in the modern era, when many high-profile politicians speak multiple languages and there are many excellent and reliable translators, a language barrier does not seem like so difficult an issue as to prioritise a relationship with a shared-language country on this basis alone.
In addition to this, the fact that British and American English are not exactly identical could sometimes cause more confusion than translating from a different language entirely, with the ‘diametrically opposite British and US usages’ of some words causing difficulty at conferences.
The correlation of the two nations sharing a primary language does not necessarily cause a strong alliance to be made.
Therefore, the shared language on its own does not strongly indicate that the ‘special relationship’ between Britain and the United States was a marriage of convenience; instead it seems to have been an added bonus to an already mutually beneficial partnership.
In conclusion, the ‘special relationship’ can be considered a marriage of convenience on all fronts from the perspective of the United States.
This is because they did not have to come to Britain’s ~ 29 ~ Olivia Martin Special Relationship aid with military power during the war or economic support after it, nor did they desperately need Britain’s shoulder to stand on in order to gain and exert global political influence.
They most likely did the aforementioned as they felt a partnership with Britain would be a relatively easier way to gain and maintain a higher global standing than they had had before the Second World War, compared to doing it alone.
For Britain, on the other hand, the ‘special relationship’ was not a marriage of convenience but a partnership of necessity.
They started to lose steam towards the end of the war, were financially ruined by it and were facing a gradual decline in influence in the global arena, which was difficult to come to terms with for a nation which had once had an Empire on which the sun never set.
Therefore, they desperately needed and wanted the wealth and power that the United States was gaining.
Although the relationship could be seen to have been started by Britain as a military marriage of convenience, it was quickly realised that Britain could gain a lot more from maintaining the relationship than they could achieve on their own thus the partnership became a lifeline for them.
To summarise, the ‘special relationship’ was a marriage of convenience to the United States but an essential support system for Great Britain.
America, Britain and the International Order Since the Second World War”, International Affairs, 62/1 , 3.
President Reagan’s administration approached the Falklands with what can at best be described as ambivalence, which was a far cry from the support that Margaret Thatcher sought from her principle ally.
The difficult position that the United States government found itself in arose from differing views on the Falklands within the administration itself, ranging from the sympathies of Caspar Weinberger to the hostility of Jeane Kirkpatrick.
Thus the Anglo-American relationship could not play a central role in the conflict, and this is not to mention the complicating factor of the US’s Cold War alliance with Argentina at the time.
These difficulties were hardly met with sympathy from Thatcher, who was nothing short of outraged that the Americans attempted to carve out an honest broker role with complete neutrality on the issue of sovereignty over the islands.
However, the role of the AngloAmerican relationship was far from static and indeed Reagan became increasingly supportive as the war waged on.
Furthermore, it would ~ 35 ~ Dominique Pope Falklands War be misleading to imply that the Anglo-American relationship played too limited a role during the Falklands, as from the beginning the Americans provided vital assistance in terms of logistics and intelligence through unregulated backchannels.
As such the relationship did play some part in the conflict, although this was largely kept from the public.
The fact that the Falklands is held in public memory as a British war with much of the media coverage and public perception centring on Thatcher herself speaks volumes about the significance of the Anglo-American relationship in the conflict.
Whilst it was undoubtedly present, it was not central much to Thatcher’s dismay.
To her, if the Falklands conflict was a test of American commitment to its UK ally on an exclusive level, ultimately the United States failed.
It is first important to contextualise the Falklands within the existing framework of Thatcher and Reagan’s relationship.
Both were established leaders by the spring of 1982 and had met each other on numerous occasions with correspondences dating back to the mid1970s.
The two had a shared affinity in that they had both been continually underestimated throughout their careers; Thatcher primarily because of her lower middle-class origins and her gender, and Reagan because of his acting career leading to questions about his capacity to run a country.
Despite concerns about the president in Britain – perhaps best epitomised by Spitting Image’s regular ‘the President’s brain is missing’ segment – Reagan had surprisingly ~ 36 ~ Superpowers considerable anti-communist credentials stemming from his time as president of the Screen Actors Guild where he worked to root out communist influence.
Thatcher too had shown herself to be an uncompromising figure in her handling of the Brixton riots and the Irish hunger strikes in 1981.
In Reagan the British prime minister found an ideological soulmate, and the Anglo-American relationship was afforded a “special sanctity” under Thatcher.
The two were from the right of their respective parties and both pursued policies such as lowering income tax and reducing the size of the state with their mutual assistance perhaps strengthening each other’s resolve.
This shared ideology of neoliberalism was altogether unprecedented on this level in the history of Anglo-American relations.
However, it was in the cause of anti-communism that Thatcher and Reagan were most obviously united on the international stage, though ironically it was the United States’ approach to the Cold War that would prove to be the point of contention in the Falklands that would ultimately limit the role that the Anglo-American relationship had to play.
As with many aspects of Thatcher's premiership, it is difficult to examine her relationship with Reagan as it has come to be shrouded by myth; the popular perception of a romantic and at times flirtatious relationship between the two holds elements of truth, but it glazes over events such as the Falklands wherein tensions between the two countries arose, and trust was damaged on a personal level.
Just as the British perhaps did not perceive the threat of Castro in Cuba in the same way that the Americans did, so the latter did not view Galtieri in the same way as the British.
It is perhaps understandable that the Americans could not quite comprehend Thatcher’s uncompromising position when it came to negotiating sovereignty of the Falklands; every indicator that Britain gave prior to the invasion taking place seemed to suggest a lack of interest in South America.
John Nott had been orchestrating serious spending cuts as Defence Secretary in order to reorient Britain’s military strength from conventional weaponry – with most cuts targeting the Navy – towards nuclear technology to adapt to the challenges of the Cold War.
At the same time, Thatcher had shown herself to have little attachment to British imperial legacies with her policy on her colonial possessions being one of leaseback, as had just been the case with Hong Kong.
Confronting a right-wing, anti-communist regime seemed nonsensical within the broader context of the Cold War for someone with the aforementioned anti-communist credentials.
Thus to the ~ 38 ~ Superpowers Americans the decision to send a task force seemed antithetical to the Thatcher government’s outlook, and this fundamental divergence meant that the balance of involvement in the Falklands was undoubtedly tipped towards the British.
The Americans also had their own interests to pursue in foreign affairs which dictated the role they chose to play far more than any historic loyalty to Britain could ever hope to.
Since the Second World War the Americans had had a somewhat uneasy alliance with the Argentinians, something that some in the Reagan administration were keen to maintain.
Jeane Kirkpatrick, the US Ambassador at the United Nations, was most hostile to Britain and made her own position clear by keeping a dinner appointment at the Argentine Embassy on the evening of the invasion.
Her distinction between ‘bad’ totalitarian communist states and ‘sometimes tolerable’ authoritarian regimes meant that she did not share Thatcher’s outrage at Argentina’s invasion and similarly did not wish to pursue Secretary of State Al Haig’s suggestion of a more pro-British policy on the Falklands.
Thus the United States took on an arbiter role sending Haig between Britain and the Falklands to attempt to negotiate some form of sovereignty settlement; it was in United States interests to diffuse tensions between two important allies in the struggle against communism.
Whilst this is partially due to the fact that Britain simply did not have the same resources as the States it is also due to Thatcher’s staunch adherence to international law and her belief in national self-determination.
This was seen clearly in the dispute over Grenada, but it was also seen in the Falklands with the USA’s policy of ‘the enemy of my enemy is my friend’ towards Argentina leaving them unable to condemn the Falklands invasion in such stark terms.
The lack of common purpose which had historically brought the two nations together meant that the Anglo-American role did not feature greatly in the conflict.
However, this is not to say that the Americans completely abandoned the British for the sake of neutrality.
From the outset vital assistance was offered by the anglophile Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger at a speed that was altogether unprecedented in the Pentagon’s bureaucracy.
This assistance also included ammunition and invaluable intelligence which was only set to increase as American opinion came down on the side of the British at the end of April 1982.
Thus although the Americans did not offer the uninhibited support that Thatcher desired, there was a definite propensity to lean towards the British in the conflict.
The Anglo-American relationship certainly did not take centre stage in the Falklands, especially not publicly in the international arena, but American assistance proved vital to Britain’s war effort and it is doubtful that victory would have been reached if it had not been for the use of United States intelligence or Ascension Island, for instance.
Beyond this the very fact that Reagan essentially allowed a European power to intervene in the western hemisphere to repossess a colony was a measure of how significant the Anglo-American relationship was, as it is difficult to imagine the same favour being extended to other allies.
The implications of the Argentine invasion were not considered in a vacuum and one memory that loomed large was that of the 1957 Suez Crisis wherein Britain and France invaded Egypt without United States backing, leading to a humiliating retreat several days later.
Whilst historians have debated the degree to which this was a ~ 41 ~ Dominique Pope Falklands War watershed moment in Anglo-American relations, the crisis resulted in the balance of the alliance tipping irreversibly towards the Americans, and Britain’s role in the world was damaged on a symbolic level epitomising the nation’s decline which had been taking place over the past decades.
It was recognised in the USA that Britain could not be left humiliated on the world stage in having a country such as Argentina successfully invading an island with a population of just under 2000 people.
As such it was somewhat imperative that the Anglo-American relationship should play some part in helping the British to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past which might jeopardise the western alliance at a critical point in the Cold War.
Concerns about the cost of the conflict did not just centre on the issue of prestige; ironically just as Germany won the 1982 Eurovision Song Contest with the song ‘Ein bißchen Frieden’ or ‘A Little Peace’, the first British casualty in the Falklands took place, raising questions about the human costs Britain was willing to pay as the death toll was only set to increase.
In terms of military capacity, Britain was clearly the dominant force in the conflict, but it was unthinkable that Thatcher would employ sophisticated and expensive weaponry on Argentina, certainly not nuclear.
The American position was thus neutral on the issue of sovereignty over the Falklands, but not over the issue of Argentine aggression, and as such once the fighting on the ground began, Reagan used a more condemnatory tone towards the Argentines.
With American backing, the British could hope to ~ 42 ~ Superpowers maintain their international prestige and mitigate the costs of the conflict, both in terms of military resources and in human casualties, giving the so-called ‘special relationship’ a considerable role in the Falklands.
It is important to consider the role that the Anglo-American alliance played in public perceptions of the conflict as it informs our understanding as to how the British and American peoples saw themselves, each other and their relationship.
Despite some degree of assistance from the US, it is worth noting that the Falklands endeavour was essentially viewed as a British conflict that echoed the First and Second World War concepts of fighting alone.
There were of course some opponents of the war in Britain with the likes of Elvis Costello’s ‘Shipbuilding’, and Billy Bragg’s claim that the Falklands was his political awakening – something for which Britain was undoubtedly grateful – with his song ‘Island of No Return’.16 However, dissenters were a vast minority, as for many the Falklands had become a straightforward narrative of British servicemen laying down their lives for the cause of freedom – and Thatcher was perfectly in tune with the attitude of the mob.
Certainly there was a large degree of romanticism surrounding the conflict in Britain, with some viewing it as a moment of national renewal that the country had desperately needed since Suez.
The public was consumed by a jingoistic fervour that was simply not matched in the USA perhaps best epitomised by The Sun’s infamous headline after the dubious ~ 43 ~ Dominique Pope Falklands War sinking of the Belgrano which simply read ‘Gotcha!’.18 Whilst the sinking of the Belgrano in itself was not necessarily popular, there was still a sense of collective purpose within Britain during the Falklands, and thus there was not necessarily a role for the United States to play in this narrative.
The role of the Anglo-American relationship was further minimised in this way as the Falklands became increasingly centred on Thatcher herself.
Indeed, Enoch Powell claimed that this was an opportunity for the so-called Iron Lady to show the world from which metal she was really made.
It was slightly ironic that stronger support for the Falklands endeavour was offered from the Opposition benches than from the Americans; Michael Foot, who had made a name for himself in his anti-appeasement writings during the Second World War, agreed that “the people of the Falkland Islands have the absolute right to look at us at this moment of their desperate plight”, with commentators at the time dubbing this speech as his finest hour.
Thus the fact that the Falklands took on this narrative as a British war led by a determined prime minister meant that the Anglo-American relationship could not be featured heavily as it would take away from the sense of national purpose that had been whipped up.
However, this is not to suggest that the Reagan administration were entirely unaware of Britain’s domestic situation.
Though perhaps not a leading principle, doubtless in Thatcher’s mind it was recognised that victory in the Falklands could give her a much-needed popularity boost on the back of newfound patriotism at home.
The aforementioned Foot speech was therefore not simply a matter of a strong performance in the House of Commons in so much as it was evidence that Foot could be a credible electoral force.
Reagan too recognised this, and thus to some degree the Americans took on a so-called ‘save Maggie’ mission to help her achieve victory at home, meaning that the AngloAmerican relationship played an implicit role in terms of the domestic repercussions of the Falklands.
In a broader sense the role that the Anglo-American relationship played during the Falklands was indicative of a rift between the two countries in what would become the final phase of the Cold War.
As was touched upon, Britain and the United States had fundamentally different approaches to the Cold War with the Americans sometimes acting unpredictably and even unnecessarily aggressive at times.
The unreliability of the USA in backing Britain during the Falklands illustrates this tension within the AngloAmerican relationship and how it only worked up to the point that it ceased to serve their respective national interests.
The fact that the Americans would almost turn a blind eye to Argentine aggression for ~ 45 ~ Dominique Pope Falklands War the sake of maintaining an anti-Soviet alliance in the Cold War was something that could lead to their principles being questioned; Reagan’s support for Galtieri, albeit half-hearted, was unfathomable to Thatcher who strongly resented the fact that Britain was essentially being compared to an aggressive, fascist junta in Argentina.
This was against the backdrop of the United States already losing a considerable amount of their moral high ground during the Cold War, most notably with Vietnam.
Episodes such as the Falklands may illustrate that there was nothing constant about the Anglo-American relationship, although it should be noted that the very fact that Thatcher approached Reagan with such high expectations and was subsequently wounded when he did not deliver speaks of a strong affinity between Britain and the United States.
There was something natural in the way in which Thatcher turned to Reagan in her hour of need, suggesting that this was a relationship that transcended the usual diplomatic niceties alliances usually conjured up.
Indeed, Thatcher received stronger support for the Falklands from the French president Mitterrand, in part due to their shared colonial histories, and yet Thatcher consistently misspelled his name – a far cry from the familiar, sentimental ‘Ron’ that she used to address the American president.
Despite a rosy image of the Anglo-American relationship under Thatcher and Reagan, the Falklands is evidence that this was not always the case.
As Richard Aldous argues fervently there were ~ 46 ~ Superpowers deep, fundamental differences between Thatcher and Reagan that should not be overlooked.
Whilst on one level of course the experience of the Falklands conflict may illustrate small diplomatic misunderstandings that would explain why the Anglo-American relationship did not take on a central role, on another it illustrates larger features of the somewhat uneasy alliance.
The US’s support came altogether too late in Thatcher’s mind, and though there had been a considerable degree of assistance from the outset of the conflict which proved essential, the general reluctance and lack of understanding on America’s part frustrated the prime minister, and as such the Anglo-American relationship never took centre stage in the Falklands.
However, the very fact that Thatcher had such high expectations of the United States shows the significance of the relationship in itself.
Beyond individuals there is something implicit in the events of the Falklands which convey something about the nature of the Anglo-American relationship.
The fact that the United States Defense department was able to quickly provide such support illustrates the historical channels between the two nations that were wholly unique.
The fact that the Reagan administration felt any sense of obligation towards Britain at all considering the issue of the Falklands was essentially colonial illustrates how there was a certain gravitational pull between Britain and America that was inescapable.
Certainly this was exacerbated by the ideological kindship of Thatcher and Reagan, but it is worth noting that even under the Eurocentric Heath ~ 47 ~ Dominique Pope Falklands War administration, the Anglo-American relationship was never completely ignored.
Thus although the alliance did not play a key role in the Falklands, that Thatcher and Reagan were both able to bounce back from a dip in the alliance speaks volumes about its durability and strength.
Reflections on Foreign Policy under Margaret Thatcher and John Major , 51.
Anglo-American Relations from the Cold War to Iraq, second edition (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006), 106.
The Relationship Between Britain and America in the Twentieth Century (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1988), 314.
The Music and Politics of Rock Against Racism, 2 Tone and Red Wedge, 1976-1992 (London: Macmillan, 2016), xxiii.
Freddie Stoker The Spanish-American War was a significant event in the history of the United States; it was a key step in placing itself firmly among the great world powers.
The motivations of the public support and of the McKinley administration are complex and intertwined.
This essay will argue that it was primarily imperialism that drove the U.S. into war.
There was a general and widespread desire for expansionism and imperialism among influential Americans and policy makers, a desire driven by economic factors but most importantly driven by a competition with European states.
This essay will start by looking at the short term factors that were important in breaking down Spanish-American relations; it will then ask whether the media had a part to play in provoking a response from the public and the government.
The last section will address imperialism as the main factor leading to war, looking at the reasons why America was imperialistic and arguing that competition with European states was the most important one.
Spain was blamed for the disaster and after this war seemed likely; Roosevelt claimed that ‘war became inevitable’ with many other contemporaries claiming that, if the Maine hadn’t blown up, war might have been avoided.
Diplomatic relations were harmed; however, the United States was already receptive to the idea of war, for example among United States officials there was a rejection of information contrary to the view that Spain was responsible for blowing the Maine up.
There were factors leading to these diplomatic crises that created an atmosphere ready for war.
Some suggest that the media were responsible for creating the atmosphere which led to United States involvement.
Although the impact of the press was limited, they merely compounded a feeling that the public had already.
Small notes that the press sold similar stories during the Ten Years’ War but that it did not lead to United States intervention.
The public and politicians were now receptive to this due to imperialism, resulting largely from increased competition with European states.
There was a general desire for some kind of empire, control, and domination over other states.
Economic factors but most importantly a desire for world power resulted in competition with Europe which led to imperialism and therefore to war with Spain.
It is, however, possible to suggest that United States imperialism and a desire to interfere was influenced by humanitarian imperialism as war was portrayed as the liberation of Cuba and the Philippines from Spanish exploitation but also as the civilisation of them as ‘backward’ nations.
Those who signed up to fight were clearly influenced by the idea of it being a noble cause and were genuinely moved by the atrocities and had a desire to help Cubans; Perez cites the diaries of men who fought and the reason most had for signing up was to help Cubans.
However, the element of domination and control suggests it was more of a power game than truly humanitarian; the treatment of the Philippines and Cuba after the war highlights that it was more of a quest for power than humane.
The denial of true sovereignty and the essentially autocratic rule of the United States in the two countries illustrate this; the suppression of the Philippine revolution led to 18,000 Filipino casualties and McKinley and the United States cut Cuba out of negotiations after the war.
United States interests in challenging European power were more important in explaining imperialism and were higher on the agenda than a liberating or civilising mission.
Economic factors partly explain the imperialist impulse; some historians argue that the United States was more motivated by the acquisition of markets than of territory and that the domestic economic situation was responsible for its desire to expand.
Towards the end of the 1900s when the United States experienced depression, McKinley declared that his primary motive when he came into power was to lead America out of it.
The general belief among businesses and economists was that supply exceeded demand and the solution to depression laid in offsetting surplus in overseas markets, suggesting that the domestic economic situation led to imperial impulse and war.
McCormick has pointed to a desire to dominate the China market, citing a partnership between government and business in leading to war.
McCormick argued that the United States wanted to create an informal empire by dominating the world markets as to do this they needed Spanish territory in the Pacific to use as coaling stations on route to China.
Indeed, the fact that they annexed Hawaii as well as Spanish territory indicated their desire for a route to China as a kind of market imperialism was at work in leading to war.
McCormick shows that plans to create outposts were formulated before the war, the McKinley administration saw Manila and Guam primarily as coaling stations to the Orient.
Although, economic factors were important, there was a genuine belief that offsetting the surplus would solve depression and China was seen as a valuable market in this.
Even if the extent of trade the United States had wanted didn’t materialise immediately, the intent to dominate it was still there in the lead up to war.
The Monroe Doctrine and its principles were key to United States foreign policy leading up to and following the war; it opposed European presence in the Western hemisphere and stated that it would harm United States interests.
Indeed, the desire to obtain outposts to China and to monopolize the world economic market can also be seen to be competitive and aimed at increasing United States world power.
Powerful politicians and citizens advocated an increasing presence around the world, largely in response to European powers.
Three such men—Roosevelt, Lodge and Hearst—supported an expansionist and Weltpolitik foreign policy to compete with other world powers.
Lodge claimed that ‘the great nations rapidly absorbing for their future expansion and their present defence all the waste places of the earth much not fall out of the line of march’ so the imperialism was motivated by a wish to counter to European power.
Furthermore, Mahan, in the widely read book The Influence of Sea Power upon History, claimed that global power was desirable, especially in achieving great naval power.
Indeed, many in the United States took on these ideas and used them to condone imperialist expansion and therefore the war with Spain.
The denial of sovereignty to Cuba and the Philippines can be seen as an attempt to prevent it being transferred from Spain to anyone else.
America imposed a protectorate, legislated by the Platt amendment, over Cuba which meant, among other things, that they could not enter into treaties with other powers.
This paternalistic control over Cuba and the Philippines as well as the annexation of territories not under Spanish control in years following the war were attempts to challenge European power and increase their own.
In conclusion, imperialism led to the United States decision to go to war and was caused partly by economic factors and a desire to dominate world markets.
The most important cause of this yearning for increased world power status and hegemony was a competition with European states.
It was this that made the Maine disaster and the De Lome letter so damaging for Spanish-American relations.
The humanitarian imperial argument is limited; American self-interest was the priority in deciding to go to war and in determining U.S. actions after it.
Thomas Chadwick Britain's entry to the European Economic Community was a remarkable feat of both persistence and international diplomacy.
After the 1963 and 1967 vetoes to entry, the Heath government's decision to apply for a third time was politically courageous and became the most lasting legacy of the 1970-1974 government.
The eventual success of this bid was in large part due to the dedicated 'Europeanism' of Edward Heath who saw entry as being central to his vision of a modernised and restructured Britain.
Heath's personal agency in setting this key pillar of government policy was bolstered by a number of other government ministers including the very capable and ever-dependable Alec Douglas-Home at the Foreign Office and Geoffrey Rippon leading the negotiations in Brussels.
Whilst Heath's persistence was central to the government's decision to apply for entry, it would substantially distort the reality and ~ 68 ~ Superpowers complexity of government policy-making to attribute entry only to the actions of the Prime Minister.
Before considering the application itself and Heath's role in it, it is important to briefly consider the dominance of any Prime Minister.
Whilst the Prime Minister is unable to completely direct and routinely intervene in the entirety of government policy, he is able to set its tone.
With Heath's renowned Europeanism, dating at least from his maiden speech of 1950, he was able to set the direction for the government's negotiations despite being unable to manage its day-to-day business.
Yet despite this, there is a historiographical consensus which has personally attributed entry to Heath's personal agency.
Peter Hennessy identifies 1 January 1973 as a moment unparalleled in British history and which is directly attributable to Heath's own agency.
Heath's biographer, Philip Ziegler, attributes Heath's insistence on entry, both in opposition and government, to the 'wounding rebuff' in 1963 of de Gaulle's veto.
Peter Hennessy has situated Heath’s support for the cold douche theory in the context of the postwar consensus.
It was as a result of Heath’s personal agency that the Conservatives did not choose to trawl for anti-Europe votes whilst in opposition as Labour sought to in 1970-1974 and throughout the 1980s.
As Prime Minister, Heath exerted particular influence on the Cabinet in moving the government towards European entry.
Whilst his appointment of senior ministers is of central importance to his involvement with the application, his use of Cabinet and Cabinet committees can be seen as a tool of prime ministerial influence.
Peter Hennessy’s theory of Cabinet overload throughout the 1960s and 1970s is of particular importance in understanding how Heath used his time in Cabinet.
Heath's use of the Europe Committee allowed ministers the opportunity to extensively discuss items of European business without risking a split in full Cabinet.
Although delegating these items to a Cabinet committee appears to inhibit his personal agency, by preventing a split in the Cabinet Heath enhanced the unity of his government and therefore his own authority.
This was coupled with the creation of a Europe Unit in the Cabinet Office, reporting to Heath and the Cabinet Secretary, Burke Trend.
The creation of the Europe Unit allowed Heath to harness the full weight of official advice whilst enabling him to exert a considerable level of control over the briefing work done by officials for the negotiations.
Heath’s dependence on senior civil servants including William Armstrong, Burke Trend and Robert Armstrong can be seen in the structure of the Europe Unit, which was headed by a second Permanent Secretary and staffed entirely by civil servants.
Heath’s particularly close relationship with William Armstrong (Head of the Home Civil Service) is noteworthy as he particularly valued Armstrong’s advice and shared a great deal of his politics, including ~ 73 ~ Thomas Chadwick European Community those on Europe.
Whilst Heath’s relationship with Burke Trend was not as warm, he valued his integrity, as shown by Philip Ziegler’s view of him as ‘the epitome of the correct civil servant’ in contrast to Heath’s unofficial ‘Deputy Prime Minister’ William Armstrong.
Heath’s comfort with and dependence on senior civil servants makes his concentration of the Europe Unit in the Cabinet Office particularly understandable.
By placing this key unit in the Cabinet Office, the Prime Minister’s domain, rather than the Foreign Office, Heath manipulated their Whitehall struggle for influence to enhance his own agency as Prime Minister.
Geoffrey Rippon’s appointment as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster is revealing in its reflection on Heath's personal agency.
In the biggest foreign policy decision of the decade, and one which the Foreign Office largely agreed with, Rippon’s requirement to report directly to the Prime Minister is telling as an exercise in Number10’s dominance of the negotiations.
Although unintentional on the part of Edward Heath, the relative absence of Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home throughout the negotiations prevented the kind of tensions that Geoffrey Howe thought were bound to develop between a Prime Minister and Foreign Minister.
Douglas-Home’s involvement in the European negotiations and discussions in Cabinet were coupled with his management of the rest of the UK’s foreign relations.
His ~ 74 ~ Superpowers extensive experience of foreign affairs and reputation for competence and stability allowed Heath to leave the majority of foreign affairs to Douglas-Home whilst he himself concentrated the full force of Number 10’s energies on the European negotiations.
Richard Thorpe briefly commented on the Heath-Home dimension in his seminal biography of Alec Douglas-Home published in 1997, highlighting how the Heath-Home relationship was one of ‘fruitful harmony’ with Heath being able to build on Douglas-Home’s commitment to entry as Foreign Secretary and opposition leader.
One of Heath's biographers, Philip Ziegler, highlights the importance of Rippon reporting to the Prime Minister in ensuring the success of personal diplomacy.
In this separation of responsibilities, Ziegler argues that Rippon was responsible for handling the negotiations with the Six as a whole whilst Heath took closer control of the negotiations that would have to occur with France alone.
Ziegler also argues that Heath’s experience of Foreign Office negotiations in the Macmillan bid encouraged him to overrule the Foreign Office’s traditional ‘divide and rule strategy’ in favour of a personal negotiation with President Pompidou.
It was this personal diplomacy between the Prime Minister and the French President that facilitated the lifting of General de Gaulle’s veto which had hung over British membership since 1963.
Whilst this crucial meeting was in large part made possible by negotiations between Christopher Soames and Michael Jobert , it is also important to consider the change in French attitudes towards EEC expansion since Pompidou’s election in 1969.
The importance of the change in French government attitudes was recognised by Number 10 in minutes of a meeting between Heath and Jack Marshall (Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand) in May 1971.
The French government’s realisation of the need to end Sterling's global reserve status and encourage Britain to adapt to EEC market conditions allowed Pompidou to justify British entry on France’s terms.
Young argues convincingly, albeit somewhat cynically, that this was part of a clever strategy by Pompidou to convince Britain to pay a substantial contribution to the Common Agricultural Policy as the price of entry.
It was not until the deadlock had crystallized at the multilateral level, not in other words until France had made clear that it was in her power to insist on conditions which no British government was likely to be willing to accept, that Georges Pompidou could reckon to obtain the maximum advantage from a direct approach by Edward Heath.
A great deal of the bargaining manoeuvres in the early part of 1971 could thus in a sense be construed as signals to ""come up and see me some time"".26 By agreeing to a summit on the terms that France demanded 'as a precursor to the resolution of the major issues at Brussels' as Daniel Furby and Kitzinger highlight, the Heath government reaffirmed France's dominance of proceedings and the self-proclaimed French leadership of Europe.
As Heath squared British entry with Pompidou, Germany’s willingness to accept British entry was more easily achieved because of Willy Brandt’s willingness to expand the Community.
John Young argues that Brandt’s decision not to attempt to force France to agree to British membership was part of a consistent trend in German foreign policy not to create a Franco-German rift over European enlargement.
Heath wrote in his memoirs that Brandt’s Ostpolitik ~ 77 ~ Thomas Chadwick European Community was coupled with a determination to enlarge the European Community to include Britain with the aim of creating a common European foreign policy.
Philip Ziegler is in agreement with John Young about Germany’s reluctance to push France towards British entry and emphasised the need to use German influence in Paris with great discretion.
Ziegler also argues that the Federal Republic’s growing strength was a cause of alarm for the French government and its acceptance of British entry was, as Kitzinger argues, designed to reinforce French leadership.
Therefore, Germany’s willingness to allow Britain entry to the Community also satisfied France’s desire to curtail growing German dominance, thus clearing both major geopolitical obstacles to British entry.
This clearly points toward wider geopolitical factors being of greater significance than the personal agency of Edward Heath, but it does demonstrate the growing accord to British entry, which Heath recognised when applying.
Once Britain’s entry to the Community had been agreed by the Six in late June 1971, the actions of the Heath government domestically on Europe were particularly agentic in moving towards the signature of the Treaty of Accession on 22 January 1972.
Heath’s decision not to offer a referendum, at this time still a largely alien constitutional device, reinforced the supremacy of Parliament to decide Britain’s future in relation to Europe.
Despite the possibility of losing the vote because of the opposition of Harold Wilson and the ~ 78 ~ Superpowers Powellite anti-Europe wing of his own party, Heath’s decision not to take the issue to the country gave him a greater control over events than Wilson had in 1975 after the Callaghan-led renegotiations.
Young highlights the commitment that Heath gave to only take Britain into Europe with the ‘full-hearted consent’ of both Parliament and people, suggesting that Heath reneged on a commitment to a referendum.
Whilst Heath participated in the 1975 referendum, it seems more than likely that Heath’s aversion to referenda meant that his references to the consent of the people were most likely to be referring to the House of Commons and Heath’s notion of the consenting Europeanism of ‘rational’ people.
Young does, however, recognise that by delaying the parliamentary vote until after the recess, Heath allowed the Conservative whips time to put pressure on Conservative ‘anti’ MPs to support the government.
Heath’s decision not to call a referendum on entry greatly reinforced his ability to encourage entry, unlike Norway which had rejected membership by ~ 79 ~ Thomas Chadwick European Community referendum simultaneously to events in Westminster.
Had Heath followed Tony Benn’s proposal for a national binary referendum on entry, as Wilson did in 1975, and lost, both Heath’s personal agency and that of any Prime Minister would be severely, perhaps irrevocably, damaged on constitutional matters.
As Prime Minister, Edward Heath achieved a considerable level of personal agency in relation to Europe.
His personal knowledge of and deep commitment to the ideals of European union allowed him to exert considerable influence over his colleagues in Cabinet and over the direction of negotiations in Brussels.
The structure of his government, including his choice of Alec DouglasHome as Foreign Secretary, and his close relationship with senior officials allowed him to best manage his time to have a close involvement in entry.
Whilst Heath has rightly received the credit for initiating the move to entry at a domestic level, international geopolitical shifts including the post-de Gaulle political climate in France and Germany’s willingness to widen European integration coalesced to facilitate British accession.
Key to his idea of the inevitability of embracing Britain’s European destiny.
With the advent of industrialization, which aided in expanding the city, the family production system of the preindustrial era was replaced by a system of wage labour which would reign supreme for decades to follow.
However, not only did this have extreme effects on the economic development of the city, it also significantly altered the social and economic relations of the city’s working classes.
As this essay will prove, by altering their economic role, urban expansion significantly affected the social relations between working-men and women and also between women of different classes.
By escaping the traditional realm of the ‘private’ sphere, working-class women not only threatened men’s place within the labour market but also threatened the status of womanhood itself.
Within this will be interwoven discussion of how the working-classes developed and started to be affected by this economic change.
Finally, this essay will end by focusing specifically on working-class women and how they were affected by this expansion.
Urban expansion or urbanisation began at the end of the eighteenth century.
As the rest of main land Europe became engrossed in wars, America was able to capture European international trade.
For example, the NY port managed to increase the value of its imports by $6. million between the 1790s and 1807, which created important financial growth for the creation of infrastructure and urban development of the city which continued throughout the nineteenth century.
Although economic growth is important in the expansion of the city, it was also the growth in the city’s population which was crucial to its urban expansion.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, NYC had become a ~ 90 ~ Superpowers hub for immigration both from abroad and within the boundary of the United States itself.
By drawing people to NYC, urban expansion, industrialisation and the development of capitalism are all intimately combined.
Consequently, throughout this essay the effects of industrialisation and capitalism are often treated as the effects of urban expansion also.
Thus, by drawing people to the city, urban expansion was incredibly important in creating an entire class of workers in NY which had not existed beforehand.
As a result, the first effect of urban expansion was the creation of working-class communities, in which all other effects of urban expansion would be based.
Throughout the eighteenth century and until the late 1810s, the main source of revenue for working families was income made by male labourers in traditional crafts such as tailoring and shoe-making.
These male labourers would have been trained by skilled artisans as young apprentices, developing their skills alongside their employers, being paid not in wages but in shelter, food and training.
However, if women did need to work to supplement the earnings of their husband, they would have undertaken traditionally female jobs such as domestic service, street selling, and work within the ‘putting-out’ system.
The ‘putting-out’ system, beginning in the colonial era, saw women produce cheap but low-quality shirts and trousers that would then be given to a tailor to sell on.
Although this did little to drastically alter the NYC economy and male prospects in the labour market, it was very beginning of a process which would include women in the labour market.
Therefore, in the first two decades of the nineteenth century, there was a clear gender division in which women were, in the most part, spatially constrained to the home and more domestic settings.
Dating right back to the colonial era, even women saw themselves as having a “narrow sphere” in “domestick affairs” as one pre-revolutionary female writes.
This illustrates the pervasiveness of the separation of genders into different spatial areas, both metaphorically and literally with women being dependent on their husbands, fathers and brothers to provide incomes.
Women were not expected to have economic independence in the form of paid work; their biggest role, especially after the American Revolution, was to be good wives and educate their children on civic virtues, all things they could do from ~ 92 ~ Superpowers within the home.
However, as urban expansion began, both working-class men and women had to cope with the changing economic realities of industrialisation, urbanisation and the early development of capitalism.
Working-class women could no longer just exist within the ‘private sphere’ as status and spatial restrictions started to be questioned.
By 1820, the artisanal labour system which dominated NYC’s economy at the beginning of the nineteenth century had begun to decline.
As the city expanded with the expansion of markets, better transportation systems and easier access to labour, NYC became a hub for mass immigration.
It became clear to artisanal entrepreneurs and merchants that more profit could be made than the current labour system provided.
Furthermore, given that the industrial revolution in Britain meant that there was an influx of cheap goods, there were further incentives for merchants to reform the labour process by minimising their outgoing costs.
Therefore, there was a turn away from artisanal labour and towards waged labour which allowed for a maximisation of profit.
This new economic system, however, was far from stable and the new class of wage labourers could not always guarantee that work would be there for them, a situation that was made worse by the constant supply of poor immigrant workers and, within a short amount of time, women.
Merchant bosses, for example, looked towards the ‘putting-out’ system for low paid workers to produce a vast amount of cheap goods.
This created a whole new system of labour in which women began to be more dominate.
This new system was known as the ‘Outside’ system and would become notorious for its poor pay and working conditions.
The ‘Outside’ system allowed women to work in their own households for wages and gave employers the ability to expand outside of their workshops given the limited space the city had for industrial factories.
By allowing women to be wage labourers from within their home, there was an illusion that the traditional role of women was being retained in this new economy.
Domesticity now became ‘practical necessity of industrial capitalism’; however, the public and private spheres became blurred for working-class women in a way they had not been before.
Moreover, this stark transition from the artisan system of labour to that of wage labour reordered the social relations in which the working-class existed.
However, given that this work paid less and was unstable, it meant that more women had to enter ~ 94 ~ Superpowers 13 the workforce in order to ensure that they could survive.
This increased importance on the labour of women affected relations between workingclass men and women.
As Stansell has demonstrated the deterioration of male independence and complete control over the household as women gained wage saw men try to enforce the subservience of women by force.
Even Trade Unions, instead of advocating for better conditions for workingclass women, started to suggest that men should be paid enough so that women did not have to work and could go back to their traditional role as domestic housewife and mother.
By allowing women in to the work place—what was historically a male dominated sphere—it threatened working-class notions of what it meant to be a man in this period.
Consequently, as urban expansion led to the altering of women’s economic role within society, it led to a complete re-evaluation between both working-class men and women and even led to a crisis about where working-class men stood in this new system of labour.
Wage labour created the very foundation of the working classes in NYC and thus this was the first and perhaps most significant effect of urban expansion.
Thus, urban expansion became incredibly important by changing the labour system in the city, and creating the conditions in which a new class could be created.
It was the very creation of this class after 1820 on which all other effects felt by the working-class would be based.
Historian Sean Wilentz has followed a very similar argument in his book Chants Democratic.
However, there is a lack of meaningful analysis into the lives of working-class women and how wage labour, urban expansion and capitalism affected their lives specifically.
This is not only a weakness of Wilentz’s work but the wider historiography around capitalism and urban development.
As Amy Dru Stanley has argued, ‘problems of sex appear to lie outside the optic of a new history of capitalism’.19 As a result, this essay will show the importance of women and gender to understanding the effects of urban development on the working-classes.
It is women’s relationship to the urban space and the industrial setting, which was growing within it, which would change labour relationships and give women a sense of independence on one hand, and oppressing them in another.
Therefore, there was an unprecedented emphasis on trying to keep women as moral guardians, uncorrected by the effects of urban expansion.
This was done, not only to ensure the saviour of women, but also of men.
Although Welter specifically looks at middle-class women in New England, the ‘Cult of True Womanhood’ extended along both class and regional lines.
The nature of working-class women’s lives would come to be defined by the expectations of womanhood.
The Outside System which dominated female wage labour was accepted because it placed women inside the home, where their job as wife and mother could be retained as well providing cheap labour to capitalist bosses.
Therefore, the ideas of true womanhood, domesticity and women’s place within the private sphere all strengthened as the city expanded and women’s role within the economy started to question the strict gender divisions of societal obligation.
Middle-class ‘urban ladies’ saw it as their duty to ‘reform’ the lives of ‘poor but industrious’ women who had fallen morally from the virtuous pedestal on which middle-class women sat.
This is clear from the copious amounts of charity work which was carried out by these urban ladies in the first half of the nineteenth century which made an emphasis on working with the worthy, deserving poor women.
They required seeing evidence, such as marriage certificates and character references from each person seeking their help before they decided to help them.
The possibility of being unable to feed, clothe and provide shelter for your family was everpresent, a consequence of the new capitalist system which had developed by 1840.26 ~ 98 ~ Superpowers However to suggest that urban expansion only had negative effects on the lives of workingclass women would be incorrect.
NYC became a place of migration for single young women looking for work where they departed from the dependence of their family homes to move to boarding houses in the city in which they had wages all of their own.
Therefore, single women in particular embraced some of the things the city had to offer, defying middle-class standards of domesticity to fight for their own sense of freedom within an already ideologically restrictive world.
Nowhere was this new sense of freedom and independence seen more than on the Bowery.
The Bowery, located in the fifteenth ward, was a promenade which was home to various shops, amusement and entertainment outlets at a price which working-class communities could enjoy.
Working-class women would use the little disposable wages they had left in order to engage in the Bowery life and do what they could to reject middle-class notions of bourgeois female respectability.
Bowery girls had an ‘exhilarating appearance’ as they dressed in a combination of colours and patterns [see figure 1], with clothing becoming a way to express pride in their class and sex.
This open display through their bright clothing rejected middle-class notions of ‘True Womanhood’, working-class women would not remain submissive, they would use their new-found independence to express rather than hide themselves.
As a result, despite the problems that came with urban expansion and the oppression that industrialisation brought workingclass women in the form of poor working conditions and poor pay, urban expansion also brought more positive opportunities.
Consequently, urban expansion allowed single working-class women to escape the bonds of the patriarchal family and live their own lives dictated by their own small sense of independence which wages gave them.
The impact of expansion, industrialisation and capitalism changed labour systems and labour relations, which would alter not only the economic development of the city but the social development of those labouring within that system.
As a result, this essay goes a long way in proving the important of understanding the effect urban development had on the lives of the working-classes and particular working-class women.
This essay proves beyond anything the importance of marrying these two fields.
Consequently, urban expansion radically affected the lives of working-class men and women with gender and sex being just as important to the development of urban expansion, class and capitalism as any other historical lens.
Selected Writings In the History of American Feminism, Norton, Mary Beth.
The Rhetoric of Women’s History”, The Journal of American History, 75:1, Lasser, Carol.
The Ford Motor Company and The Five Dollar a Day” in Nancy Cott , History of Women In the United States: The Intersection of Work and Family Life, 5:2 Stansell, Christine.
