John F Kennedy Worksheets John F Kennedy Facts John F Kennedy was the 35th President of the United States of America.
He was a known civil rights activist and charismatic political leader who led both the naval blockade in Cuba and Space Race against the Soviets.
EARLY AND PERSONAL LIFE ❖ John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917 in Brookline, Massachusetts.
Both of his parents were from the clan of wealthy Irish Catholic Boston families.
His grandparents’ professions included banker, liquor trader, and politician.
He was the son of Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald, a socialite, and Joseph Kennedy Sr., a successful banker.
KIDSKONNECT.COM John F Kennedy Facts ❖ The Kennedy children were raised in the political eye.
His brother Robert became an Attorney General while his sister Eunice founded the Special Olympics.
He also enrolled in Choate Preparatory school where he manifested his interest in sports, English, and History.
He continued to be an average student, yet handsome and charming to a lot of women.
A year later, Why England Slept was published with more than Image of the Kennedy siblings, 80,000 copies being sold.28 ❖ Upon graduating from Harvard, Jack joined the U.S Navy and was shortly assigned to the South Pacific.
His heroic act of leading the survivors on an island was awarded with the Navy and Marine Corps Medal and a Purple Heart.
KIDSKONNECT.COM John F Kennedy Facts ❖ After his discharge from the United States Navy, Kennedy worked for the Hearst Newspaper.
He died in the field leaving the family’s political ambition and responsibilities to Jack.
His heroic image after the war, together with his father’s money and influence, made winning easier for Kennedy.
JFK PRESIDENCY AND DEATH ❖ On November 8, 1960, John F Kennedy was elected as the 35th President of the United States after he defeated the incumbent Vice President Richard Nixon.
Inauguration of JFK as the 35th President of the United States KIDSKONNECT.COM John F Kennedy Facts ❖ On January 20, 1961, he took his oath of office at the East Portico, United States Capitol.
This declaration was made after a Russian astronaut, Yuri Gagarin, became the first man in space on April 12, 1961.
Image of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and US President John F Kennedy , 1961 ❖ On October 22, 1962, Kennedy declared the naval blockade of Cuba after the information of missile installations by the Russians.
KIDSKONNECT.COM John F Kennedy Facts ❖ In July, Kennedy initiated the nuclear test ban treaty between the United States, Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom.
He was rushed to Parkland Hospital and was declared dead minutes later.
Shortly after, Lyndon B Johnson took his oath as the new president of the United States.
JFK during his motorcade in Dallas, Texas, 1963 KIDSKONNECT.COM John F Kennedy Facts ★ On November 25, his state funeral was attended by diplomats from 90 countries and former presidents Eisenhower and Truman.
JFK became known to the world by winning the presidency of the United States of America in 1961.
On February 20, 1962, __________ became the first American to orbit Earth.
Kennedy delivered one of his most famous lines that marked American political speeches.
Choose at least three of JFK’s quotable quotes and annotate what they mean.
Featured below are photos of two of the most influential leaders during JFK’s term.
Write a historical timeline that will link them to the United States in the 1960s.
