After a week of deliberation with a group of close advisers that would later become known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or “ExComm,” President John F Kennedy announced the discovery to the world in a televised address at 7m. on 22 October.
Stressing that the deployment had been undertaken secretly and in flagrant violation of his own warnings against such a move, Kennedy demanded that the missiles be withdrawn, and he announced his intention to impose a naval “quarantine” on shipments of “offensive” weapons to Cuba.
He warned Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev that any missile launched from Cuban territory against any nation of the Western Hemisphere would be considered an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union.
To back up his threat, Kennedy ordered a massive redeployment of forces to the Caribbean and placed the Strategic Air Command on heightened alert.
Furious, Khrushchev immediately ordered construction at the missile sites accelerated, and he denounced the quarantine as piracy—a flagrant interference with Soviet freedom of navigation and a gross violation of the Soviet Union's right to enter into military arrangements with friendly sovereign states.
By the time the quarantine took effect on the morning of Wednesday, 24 October, however—after a unanimous vote of support from the Organization of American States—Khrushchev had ordered Soviet ships carrying suspect cargo not to challenge the United States blockade.
Still, for several days, a settlement of the dispute eluded United States and Soviet diplomats.
As the crisis dragged on, pressure began to build on both sides for more decisive action.
Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev was prepared to risk nuclear war over the issue, and both became increasingly preoccupied with the danger that an accident or inadvertent military action might push them over the brink.
An apparent break came on Friday, 26 October, when, in a long and emotional letter, Khrushchev vaguely offered to withdraw the missiles in return for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
The president decided to ignore Khrushchev's latest demand and to “accept” his “offer” of 26 October.
As the ExComm deliberated on Saturday, 27 October, word reached the White House that an American U-2 reconnaissance plane had been shot down over Cuba and that another had inadvertently strayed over Siberian airspace, narrowly avoiding a similar fate.
At this point, Kennedy evidently resolved to bring the crisis to an end.
Ignoring the ExComm's advice, he secretly instructed Secretary of State Dean Rusk to lay the groundwork for a contingency by which the secretary general of the UN would propose the Cuba-Turkey missile swap.
Knowing this to be acceptable to Khrushchev, Kennedy therefore knew that it would provide a quick resolution to the crisis should events get out of hand.
Kennedy was saved from having to decide whether to execute his demarche by Khrushchev's sudden agreement on 28 October to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in return for a noninvasion pledge.
While Khrushchev's agreement proved to be the decisive break in the crisis, it did not immediately resolve the confrontation.
Khrushchev had failed to consult Fidel Castro on the matter, and Castro understandably felt betrayed by his Soviet patron.
He therefore refused to allow UN inspectors to examine the missile sites to verify the withdrawal, forcing the United States Navy to make do by inspecting outbound Soviet ships from the air.
Kennedy also insisted that the Soviets withdraw a handful of Il-28 light bombers, because these were believed to have a nuclear capability.
The Il-28s, however, had been supplied to Cuba for coastal defense purposes wholly independent of the missile deployment, and it would take Khrushchev's special envoy, Anastas Mikoyan, a full three weeks to persuade Castro to comply.
On 19 November, Castro finally relented, and on 21 November, Kennedy issued a proclamation terminating the quarantine.
Evidence and testimony currently available indicate that Khrushchev decided on the deployment in the late spring of 1962, after a hasty and uncritical decisionmaking process involving only a small group of advisers.
One of his main motivations seems to have been to deter a United States invasion of Cuba, which seemed inevitable to the Soviets and Cubans given the United States role in the Bay of Pigs invasion the previous year and in light of Operation Mongoose, the Central Intelligence Agency's energetic covert campaign to topple the Castro regime.
Another important goal was to counterbalance the United States’ massive superiority in strategic nuclear weapons, publicly revealed to the world by Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric in an October 1961 speech exploding the myth of a “missile gap” favoring the Soviet Union.
It is impossible to know which of these was the more important motivation—they were mutually reinforcing, and there is no evidence to suggest that Khrushchev asked the question of himself.
A third and evidently subsidiary consideration was the desire to counterbalance the United States deployment of Jupiter missiles on the Soviet periphery, for reasons of prestige.
The Cuban missile crisis is considered by many a classic case of prudent crisis management.
Kennedy and Khrushchev managed to prevent the conflict from escalating while they sought and eventually found a solution satisfactory to both.
They did so by avoiding irreversible steps, curtailing unwarranted bluster, and refraining from ultimatums.
Others, however, have criticized their handling of the crisis for being too timid or too bold.
Kennedy's critics on the Right lament his unwillingness to seize the opportunity provided by the pretext of the Soviet deployment to deal decisively with Castro once and for all, while the United States enjoyed a massive advantage in strategic nuclear weapons and unquestioned local conventional superiority.
His critics on the Left condemn his willingness to risk nuclear war merely to delay the inevitable—the vulnerability of the United States to Soviet nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev's handling of the crisis has been largely criticized by hard-liners who condemn his willingness to yield to United States pressure.
Others in the Soviet Union applaud his cautious handling of the situation and his willingness to compromise while condemning him for recklessly provoking the crisis in the first place.
Almost paradoxically, the Cuban missile crisis was the immediate cause of a considerable improvement in US-Soviet relations.
A series of agreements intended to restrain the arms race and improve crisis stability followed closely on its heels, of which perhaps the most important were 1963's Limited Test Ban Treaty and the Hot-Line Agreement, which established a “hotline” between the United States and Soviet leaders.
The crisis severely strained, but did not disrupt, Soviet-Cuban relations.
Sources close to Kennedy insist that if he had won a second term as president, as seems likely given his popularity after the crisis itself, he would have ventured a reconciliation with Cuba.
Kennedy's assassination in November 1963 and his succession by Lyndon Johnson, and Khrushchev's ouster in 1964 by Leonid Brezhnev, marked the end of their two countries’ brief détente and forestalled any improvement in US-Cuban relations.
No treaty was ever concluded governing the settlement, and the exchange of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev formalizing the terms of their agreement has not been made public.
It is questionable whether they contain the firm guarantees against an invasion of Cuba that the Soviet Union trumpeted publicly as Kennedy's major concession.
Indeed, while in office, one United States president, Ronald Reagan, publicly denied being bound by any such obligation.
Nevertheless, the United States and the Soviet Union crafted and scrupulously followed a modus vivendi in which the purported terms on which the crisis was resolved played a pivotal role.
The Soviet Union refrained from deploying military equipment with offensive capabilities to Cuba, and the United States acquiesced in a Communist-controlled Cuba with close ties to the Soviet Union.
Even more important, the United States and the Soviet Union worked out rules of the road, limiting provocative initiatives in areas each regarded as being within its sphere of vital interest.
