Its primary purpose is to provide a preliminary reference aid for future research.
Soviet piopaganda on the crisis from 23 through 30 October is reviewed in Radio Propaganda Report CD.2m of 30 October 1962.
Peking's rebuffs to the Soviet Union became more pointed on 31 October and blatant on 1 November, when the U.N, role was openly denounced.
The pattern at this writing indicates an intensification of polemical propaganda designed to associate Khrushchev's approach with that of ""imperialism"" and to equate it to betrayal of the communist revolutionary cause.
The broadcast said nothing about the President's speech or the measures he announced.
An NCNA report a short time later, in the same vein ,. created the impression that the United States was preparing for an attack on Cuba and that the Cuban people were making a heroic effort to repulse an invasion.
It went on to assert pointedly that the Chinese, for their part, ""have always stood staunchly on the side of the Cuban people""— and to reiterate that Cuba and its ""great leader"" would be backed up by ""all"" peaceloving countries and peoples, NCNA's account of the editorial did not mention the Soviet Union.
In the face of such plots, ""it is entirely necessary for Cuba to strengthen its defense,"" the statement said.
TREATMENT OF THE The CPR Government statement referred briefly to SOVIET GOVERNthe statement issued by the Soviet Government the MEMT STATEMENT preceding day.
The Government of the Soviet Union issued a statement on 23 October, pointing out that this act of aggression of the United States against Cuba entails extremely grave consequences, and declaring that the Soviet Union will do its best to smash the aggressive schemes of the United States imperialist bloc and defend and strengthen world peace.
PRAVDA' s editorial, entitled ""In the Interests of the Peoples, in the Wane of Universal Peace,"" declared that continued Sino-Indian antagonism would benefit only imperialism and endorsed the latest CPR statement offering a three-point program as the basis for a negotiated settlement of the controversy.
An NCNA review of the Peking press described the statements issued by governments of East European bloc countries only as ""condemning the U„S„ Government,"" not as supporting the Soviet position.
NCNA reviewed a KWANGMING DAILY editorial which went even further than the CPR Government statement in minimizing attention to the Soviet stand.
KWnNGMING DAILY noted merely that a Soviet statement had been issued and added that ""the Chinese Government and people"" would support ""the Cuban people,"" TA KUNG PAO's 25 October editorial, dilating on the ""recklessness of U,S, imperialism,"" declared that the most urgent task before the people of the world is to discard any illusions about U„S, imperialism, heighten their vigilance, and strengthen their unity to struggle more staunchly against the IKS. imperialist policy of ag~ gression and war.
The paper spoke of Cuba—as Peking commentators continued to do through^ out the crisis — as symbolic of ""oppressed nations and oppressed peoples of the world,"" It reiterated the CPR concept of imperialism as ""a paper tiger"" whose ""arrogance today"" is a sign of ""inward weakness,"" not strength.
And it pledged Cuba the support of the CPR and all peaceloving peoples in a struggle that was ""an important part of the worldwide antiimperialist struggle,"" KWANGMING DAILY pursued the theme that imperialism was ""the most vicious enemy of world peace, of all the oppressed nations, and of the people be satisfied before border discusions are initiated—a position India has taken— PRAVDA did not attack India specifically.
The article's assertion that the ""imperialists"" are attempting to bring India and China ""at loggerheads"" and undermine ""the friendship of the Soviet Union with fraternal China as well as friendly India"" underscored the dilemma posed for the USSR by the Sino-Indian conflict.
KHRUSHCHEV REPLY NCNA carried a summary of Khrushchev's message to TO RUSSELL Bctrand Russell pledging to do everything possible to prevent thermonuclear war.
Peking broadcast media gave Khrushchev's 28 October letter about the same publicity, A brief report of the decision to withdraw the missiles from Cuba appeared in PEOPLE'S DAILY of 29 October under the texts of the 2 7 October message exchange, and Radio Peking's domestic audiences were given short summaries of the decision or. the same day.
On 30 October the text was printed in PEOPLE'S DAILY, along with the President's reply, at the bottom of page three.
NCNA and the domestic service subsequently carried items citing Cuban press and popular support for Castro's five points, and PEOPLE'S DAILY editorially supported them as ""fully justified"" and ""absolutely necessary,"" NCNA noted that Raul Castro's speech in Santiago urging Cubans to be increasingly viligant was also ""prominently reported"" in the Chinese central press, PENG CHEN RALLY On 28 October, the Peking domestic service broadSPEECH cast a speech by Politburo member Peng Chen giving authoritative expression to Communist China's ^attitude toward Soviet handling of the crisis.
The big pro-Cuba rally at which Peng spoke was attended by Premier Chou En-lai, CCP Central Committee OFFICIAL USE ONLY OFFICIAL USE ONLY PROPAGANDA REPORT 2 NOVEMBER 1962 Secretary General Teng Hsiao-ping, Foreign Minister Chen I, PLA chief of staff Lo Jui-ching, and other members of the leadership.
The 28 October PEOPLE'S DAILY editorial had said that the ""Cuban people"" would surely be able to defeat any new "" United States aggression,"" and TA KUNG PAO's 29 October editorial stressed the Chinese people's conviction that the Cuban people, who have won their revolution by relying on their own resources, will certainly be able to safeguard their revolutionary gains by relying on themselves.
In this context, the paper commended the Chinese example to the Cubans, pointing out that the CPR itself had successfully withstood a United States blockade.
Peking continued pointedly to omit mention of Soviet support for Cuba in picturing massive worldwide backing of the Cuban people.
PEOPLE'S DAILY of 30 October rounded up worldwide protests against United States ""war provocations,"" while other papers noted support for the Cubans in Algeria, East Germany, Cambodia, Mongolia, Uruguay, and Brazil.
Thus a 30 October NCNA dispatch said that in some countries the fight against U.S., aggression had been closely linked with the struggle against the rule of pro-American reactionary forces, and added that 30,000 people demonstrated in Montevideo ""against the United States blockade, »» and the Uruguayan Government. , .decision to support the anti-Cuban policy"" of the United States.
NCNA, pointing to reservations against United States ""armed intervention"" in Cuba voiced by such governments as Brazil, Mexico, Bolivia, and Uruguay, stated that ""threats and bribery"" were factors which must be taken into consideration when assessing the attitude of Latin American coun Tics toward Washington.
Similarly, Brazil was said by NCNA to have been threatened with a reduction in its coffee export quota unless its policy of nonintervention in Cuba was altered.
The editorial began by noting that after Khrushchev announced the decision to withdraw ""the so-called 'offensive weapons' from Cuba,"" the ""chief of United States imperialism"" indicated that the United States would agree to remove the blockade immediately and give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
It declared that the United States and its ""mouthpieces"" were ""declaring boastfully that by his 'firmness' Kennedy had scored a 'major triumph'"" — precisely the claims Soviet propaganda was making in regard to Khrushchev's actions.
It lauded the people of Cuba for ""defending ttie honor of being a socialist country""— another unqualified crediting of ""socialist"" status to Cuba — and concluded with a portrayal of militant CPR support for a Cuban stand that epitomized ""revolutionary struggle"" worldwide.
PEOPLE'S DAILY on the 31st frontpaged Havana-datelined reports on unanimous Cuban endorsement of Castro's 28 October statement and on Castro's inspection of combat-ready Cuban military units.
NCNA supplemented this picture with reportage of newspaper support for Cuba in Burma and Pakistan, popular support in Ceylon, and a denunciation of "" United States aggression"" by Venezuelan workers.
U THANT MISSION, NCNA reportage on 31 October foreshadowed open U.N, ROLE denunciation of the U,M. role thdt was to appear in authoritative Peking comment the following day.
OFFICIAL USE ONLY OFFICIAL USE ONLY PROPAGANDA REPORT 2 NOVEMBER 1962 CHEN I NOTE The United Nations was directly denounced in authoritative comment on 1 November, and the propaganda took on a more blatantly polemical cast, CPR Foreign Minister Chen I's note to the Cuban charge d'affaires in Peking, broadcast in the Peking home service on 1 November, contained a thinly veiled indictment of the Soviet Union for its willingness to sacrifice Cuban interests for the sake of its own security.
Directed ostensibly at ""U,S, spokesmen"" only, Chen's profession of anger that Cuban demands should not be regarded as a factor in the settlement of a crisis ""among the big powers"" was clearly aimed at a broader targr.t, Denouncing this as an ""imperialist"" viewpoint, Chen asserted that the destiny of Cuba is in the hands of the Cuban people ""and not in the hands of any other country,"" Chen declared that Cuban independence and sovereignty ""absolutely"" cannot be negotiated.
He reiterated the Chinese communist thesis that man, not weapons, is the ""deciding"" factor in the revolutionary struggle.
The Cubans are not only safeguarding the independence and sovereignty of Cuba and their own revolutionary gains, but are also defending the peace of the Caribbean Sea and the whole world, upholding the prestige of a socialist state, and giving encouragement to the just anti-imperialist struggles waged by the revolutionary people in all parts of the world.
It called the President's ""safeguards"" — the quotation marks are NCh'A's — a deception.
History has proved, and will continue tr. p>-ovc , that the course of history is determined by rr. .'wakened people, who have armed themselves and have the courage to firht and win, and not by weapons which the imperialistend reactionaries deem all-powerful.
The message to Castro from the 28 October rally had similarly declarec . that the ""people:-"" constituted a force which ""cannot he destroyed h\< any weapon,"" Throughout the crisis, CPP comment— including the government statement of 2'tOctober — generally referred to the United States ""war provocat -""on"" and ""threats to world peace,"" rather than srecifyinp a danger of thermonuclear war.
The Sofia broadcast claimed that all the U„S„ ""propaganda"" was based on the ""completely unfounded allegation"" that the Sclet Union was creating a danger to peace; Sofia suggested a similarity between rocWet bases the USSR might have in Cuba and those the United States definitely had in Turkey and Italy.
East Berlin, in several news reports on the Cubsn situation, called the U„S,, measures ""an extremely serious threat to world peace"" and a ""crass violation of the norms of international law,"" East Berlin also quoted the Cuban representative in the GDR, Andres Soler, as saying that the United States could not intimidate Cuba, which was ""counting on the solidarity with the GDR, the Soviet Union, and other socialist and friendly countries,"" Satellite transmitters stressed the ""danger"" and ""recklessness"" of the U,S, measures.
While Moscow propagandists avoided specific address to the President's statements about Soviet construction of mediumand intermediate-range missile bases in Cuba, satellite radios widely branded these statements ""absurd"" and ""provocative""— a ""pretext"" for efforts to liquidate the Castro regime.
The satellite radios ignored the OAS meeting of 23 October and its virtually unanimous endorsement of the American measures.
Poland's heavy coverage emphasized unfavorable world reaction, with special attention to opposition in Britain.
One domestic commentary said the speech ""aroused serious doubts"" in London, and another claimed that a majority of British papers ""negatively appraised"" the Kennedy speech.
The statement called the President's address ""unprecedented in peacetime"" and expressed full support for the Soviet stand.
A Sofia broadcast in Greek said that the ""artificial war hysteria"" created by the President's statement was possibly for election campaign reasons, although it could lead the world to the abyss of nuclear destruction.
Rumania was slow to report the President's speech, remaining silent on it for 15 hours.
Hungary's Janos Kadar issued a statement for Cuba journalists which generally followed the line of the government statement.
President OFFICIAL USE ONLY OFFICIAL USE ONLY PROPAGANDA REPORT 2 NOVEMBER 1962 Kennedy's action, the commentary said 9 violated international law and brought the world ""to the brink of an abyss "" FIRST TIRANA Albania's first reaction, like Rumania's^ was limited COMMENT to reportage, with editorial comment interjected.
East Berlin gave heavy coverage to a Cuba solidarity rally outside East Berlin at which Cuban ORI leader Bias Roca and SED Politburo member Paul Verner spoke.
The GDR, however, alone among the European satellites, failed to issue a government statement.
Later the editorial pictured the Albanians as ""united with the heroic Cuban people, the Soviet people [the editorial did not mention the Soviet Government statement], and all the other peoples of the countries of the socialist camp"" in protesting against ""imperialism"" and defending Cuba.
S aggression against Cuba as an integral parr of a United States ""aggressive policy against the peoples and against peace,"" It proclaimed solidarity with the Cuban people's ""just cause"" as a ""sacred duty for all peace loving mankind"" , and declared that Cuba would be victorious because there is no force in the world to defeat a people determined to the point of death to defend their freedom, independence, and socialist revolution.
The OFFICIAL USE ONLY OFFICIAL USE ONLY PROPAGANDA REPORT 2 NOVEMBER 1962 Cuban people are aroused and, with arms in their hands, are ready to face and destroy the new imperialist aggression.
Late on 25 October Albania issued a government statement making no mention of the Soviet Union—or of any other communist country by name.
It repeatedly stressed Albania's support for the Cuban people in the company of ""all socialist countries,"" In pointed language, it pledged that the people of Albania , a member of the socialist camp, will be, as always, in full solidarity with all the socialist countries against the aggressive activities of American imperialism and its allies.
Albania, the statement said, ""is convinced that peaceloving peoples and nations will rise to defend Cuba,"" The Soviet-oriented satellite media maintained a heavy flow of comment denouncing the United States quarantine action, but emphasis appeared to be turning from almost unrelieved denunciation of the United States to praise for the Soviet Union's ""calm"" and ""peaceful"" response to the United States move.
Khrushchev's letter to Bertrand Russell was widely reported by all the satellites except Albania, although commentaries did not emphasize the call for a high-level conference.
Other satellite comment set out to offset any notion that Soviet ""calmness"" might be a sign of weakness.
The commentators declared that ""more and more compromise proposals are appearing, and it would be foolish and politically wrong to aggravate the situation by some isolated conflicts.
Both the 27 and 28 October Khrushchev letters were well publicized by the Soviet-oriented satellites.
The weapons which the President regarded as objectionable, Budapest asserted, would never have appeared in Cuba had not that country been threatened ceaselessly with foreign intervention „ Press comment of 29 October, according to Budapest, emphasized relief at the satisfactory outcome of the crisis.
A later Budapest broadcast said that Khrushchev, U Thant, and Bertrand Russell had done the most to preserve peace, but added that ""it is not impossible that in assessing the efforts aimed at averting war, President Kennedy's name will also be mentioned in history,"" The 30 October TRYBUNA LUDU was reported by Warsaw PAP, in an English transmission, as welcoming the increased possibility of solving other East-West differences through negotiation.
The paper's reference to United States bases in Turkey and the ""problem"" of West Germany as an ""outpost of aggression"" was one of the few instances in satellite comment of an effort to draw a connection between the Cuban crisis and the Berlin question.
The Bucharest radio, after broadcasting the text of Khrushchev's 28 October message and the President's rejection of Khrushchev's 27 October proposal, followed up on 29 October with comment praising the latest Soviet message.
Because, according to Kennedy, offensive weapons which threaten the security of the United States were established on Cuban territory.
The Cuban people know from their own experience— the experience of the Bay of Pigs and of all that is happening about them--that Kennedy and the imperialist monopolies represented by Kennedy cannot be trusted.
The Albanian people, ""comrades-in-arms,"" were on the side of the Cuban people.
Pyongyang propaganda followed the CPR line of avoiding acknowledgment of Soviet involvement, A lengthy summary of a NODONG SINMUN editorial made only one mention of the Soviet Union, and this as a straight report of the fact that a Soviet statement had been issued and that it had promised all efforts to curb United States ""aggressive"" schemes.
Avoiding any mention of the reason for the blockade, the editorial asserted that it was ""long and carefully planned,"" and was taken after the President had received ""the right of a hangman from Congress,"" Reports of North Korean rallies in support of Cuba, carried by KCNA, protested the ""unscrupulous"" and ""shameless"" United States ""schemes for aggression"" against Cuba.
Through 31 October, available Pyongyang comment failed to mention the Soviet or United States messages, or any easing of the crisis.
The radio reported protest meetings in support of Cuba, including bellicose anti-U,S. speeches by the Cuban ambassador to North Korea, Lazaro Vigoa.
At a 26 October rally reported by KCNA, the chief Korean speaker, Ha Ang-chon, candidate member of the political committee of the KWP Central Committee, reit^ erated the CPR argument that it was Cuba's ""inviolable internal affair"" to take any defensive measures in its territory, ""and no one has any right to interfere with it,"" In his report to the rally, Ha made no reference to the Soviet Union or to the Kennedy-Khrushchev messages.
NORTH VIETNAM, The Hanoi radio s which mentioned briefly on 23 October MONGOLIA that the President had made a speech in which he officially announced the ""complete blockade of Cuba,"" on the following day reported the Soviet statement in a Lao broadcast.
OFFICIAL USE ONLY CONFIDENTIAL BLOC SURVEY 29 NOVEMBER 1962 DISARMAMENT; CUBAN CRISIS DEMONSTRATES NEED FOR SPEEDY SETTLEMENT Resumption of the 18-nation Geneva conference on 26 November occasions only a moderate increase in Moscow's attention to the disarmament and test-ban issues, which has remained at a low level since the recess of the conference on 7 September.
Soviet spokesmen repeatedly cite the near disaster of the Cuban crisis as dramatic evidence of the urgency of a disarmament agreement.
Declaring that the Cuban settlement demonstrated the value of approaching East-West problems in a spirit of compromise and mutual concessions, propagandists make clear that the next move in disarmament is up to the West.
Despite repeated assertions that the positions of East and West on the test -ban question ""are not far apart,"" Soviet spokesmen continue to reject Western demands for on-site inspection to detect underground tests.
At the same time, the British decision to conduct an underground nuclear test in Nevada is seen as further evidence that the West is deliberately blocking an agreement in order to continue the arms race.
Other partial disarmament measures receive only sporadic attention, although Tsarapkin remarked at the resumed Geneva sessions that such measures constitute one of the ""main questions"" to be dealt with at the conference.
Moscow Stresses Soviet ""Compromises"" in General F-isarmament Assertions that a disarmament agreement must be reached in order to save mankind from a thermonuclear catastrophe include that by Kuusinen in his 21 November speech at the Hungarian party congress.
Following his polemical defense of Soviet agreement to ""mutual compromise"" in the Cuban question, Kuusinen declared that ""disarmament is the imperious demand of our epoch,"" and that only disarmament can insure a truly stable, peaceful coexistence.
Declaring that the ""imperialists"" are creating various obstacles to implementation of general disarmament, Kuusinen said that the USSR is ready to discuss ""any constructive proposals"" which would bring disarmament closer.
Materials were identified, obtained, assembled, and indexed by the National Security Archive, a non-profit, Washington, D.C. based research institute and library.
In the case of each document, Chadwyck-Healey Inc. has filmed the best copy made available by the National Security Archive.
The unique identification numbers assigned to the documents are listed in the top right hand corner of the microfiche title strip.
Through the use of the Freedom ot Information Act, and an extensive network of government, media, and academic contacts, the National Security Archive has developed this varied collection of primary materials.
Just as the type of materials included varies, so does the quality of each document.
The National Security Archive has made every effort to provide Chadwyck-Healey Inc. with the best quality, most complete copy available of each document.
Chadwyck-Healey Inc. has faithfully reproduced on microfiche exactly what was provided by thp National Security Archive.
Government and even when declassified, sections or pages may be obliterated by the government due to the potentially sensitive information contained in them.
The variety of material reproduced in this publication includes photocopies or poor carbon copies of telegraphs, letters, cables, government documents, newspaper articles, and media publications.
This variety can present difficulties of image and contrast which the most careful filming and processing cannot entirely overcome.
This is a rich and varied source of primary documents made available for research and all microfiche have been produced to the highest quality and conform to NMA and BSI standards.
In contrast to the DPRK, both endorsed the Soviet Government statement,, A NHAN DAN editorial on 31 October, transmitted by the VIETNAM NEWS^ AGENCY, declared that the solidarity of the people of Cuba, the socialist camp, Latin America, Asia B and Africa had ""forced the U,S„ imperialists to make an initial concession"" to give up the blockade and renounce invasion o A Hanoi domestic broadcast early on 30 October contained the first monitored reference from Hanoi to Khrushchev's 28 October message.
Prior to this, Hanoi had referred only to the initial Soviet Govern ne,v'. statement of 23 October, The 30 October broadcast quoted Secretary of Defense McNamara to the effect that ""the United States will continue to engage in military spying activities over Cuba,"" According to the Ulan Bator domestic service, Mongolian Council of Ministers Chairman Tsendenbal met with the Cuban ambassador to express Mongolian support and solidarity with the Cuban people.
