Beyond the military and political facts of the crisis, Polmar and Gresham sketch the personalities that created and coped with the crisis.
They also show us how close we came to the edge without becoming sensationalistic.""""—Larry Bond, bestselling author of Dangerous GroundSpy-satellite and aerial-reconnaissance photos reveal that one of the United States's bitterest enemies may be acquiring weapons of mass destruction and the means to use them against the American homeland.
Administration officials refuse to accept intelligence professionals' interpretation of these images and order an end to spy missions over the offending nation.
More than a month later, after vicious infighting, the president orders the spy missions to resume.
The new photos reveal an array of ballistic missiles, capable of carrying nuclear warheads and striking deep within United States territory.
He has served as an advisor or consultant on defense issues to three United States senators and two members of the House of Representatives, as well as to several Navy and Defense officials.
JOHN D GRESHAM collaborated with Tom Clancy on his bestselling series of guided tours of military units, such as Submarine and Special Forces.
He is also the coauthor of an upcoming book on the Special Forces during the war in Afghanistan.
The Anadyr Effect.Appendix A: The Membership of ExComm.Appendix B: U-2 Missions Flown during Operation Anadyr.Appendix C: United States Naval Forces in the Caribbean.Appendix D: Soviet Missile Characteristics.Notes.Bibliography.Photo Credits.Index.
The book's title, which is also the name of a Discovery Channel documentary based on this volume, comes from the acronym for Defense Condition Two, the Unites States' highest state of military alert short of war.
The only time America went to DEFCON-2 during the Cold War was on October 22, 1962, the day that President Kennedy publicly denounced the Soviet Union's construction of missile launching sites in Cuba.
The authors, who interviewed Russian, American and Cuban military men who had leading roles in the showdown, provide new logistical information on how the Soviet Union moved a small nuclear arsenal to Cuba.
They deftly meld accounts of what happened in the sea and air with descriptions of the political and intelligence operations in Washington and Moscow.
Thoroughly researched and suspenseful, their book is an excellent choice for fans of Cold War history.
