It is remarkable to see how documentary films about President Kennedy have changed over the last four decades.
Years of Lightning, Day of Drums,"" which presented the stirring and emotional images of a courageous and brilliant young president, also a devoted husband and father, cut off in his prime.
By 1992, when the Public Broadcasting Service released ""The Kennedys,"" the pendulum had swung to the opposite extreme.
This four-hour saga of an Irish-American family's drive for success and power transformed JFK into little more than an extension of his father's political ambition.
The program raced through the Kennedy presidency, highlighting JFK's womanizing and the role of his father's money in his rise to power, and all but ignoring his impact on the presidency and the American people.
A Presidency Revealed,"" provided a more balanced account of a man deeply flawed in his personal behavior but also capable of extraordinary leadership.
He was slow, for example, to embrace civil rights, but eventually became the first president to publicly declare racial equality in America a moral issue.
He was a seasoned Cold Warrior who approved plans to undermine communism in Cuba and eliminate Fidel Castro.
JFK and his administration clearly bear significant responsibility for precipitating the missile crisis in the first place--because of the Bay of Pigs invasion, covert operations against Cuba and Castro, and ""contingency"" plans to reinvade Cuba.
The president consistently dug in his heels in the face of pressure to bomb the missile sites or invade Cuba.
He also repeatedly acted to prevent, postpone, or at least question the advisability of potentially provocative measures.
JFK repeatedly tried to rise above the Cold War rhetoric he had exploited from the 1960 campaign through his October 22 speech announcing the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Top officials in the Kennedy administration clearly regarded the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba as a clear justification for invading the island.
Defense secretary Robert McNamara declared on October 16 that the United States must be prepared to bomb the missile bases and follow up with a full air and sea invasion within a week.
President Kennedy replied that, on the contrary, an invasion would put extreme military pressure on the U.S.S.R. and undermine the NATO alliance.
JFK held his ground, ""Well, the logical argument is that we don't really have to invade Cuba.
He explained that former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Llewellyn Thompson, ""felt very strongly"" that Khrushchev would regard an attack on these missile bases ""with the killing of four or five thousand Russians as a greater provocation than the stopping of their ships.
History defines its own parameters and historical figures often defy our assumptions and expectations.
Contradictions and inconsistencies, in short, are the rule rather than the exception in human affairs.
John Kennedy often stood virtually alone against warlike counsel from ExComm, the Joint Chiefs and Congress during those historic thirteen days.
Nonetheless, he never really abandoned efforts, even after the Cuban missile crisis, to undermine the Cuban regime and get rid of Fidel Castro.
Two weeks later Sara Jane Moore actually got off a shot at Ford in San Francisco.
Yet no one is running around with all kind of ridiculous conspiracy theories.
I can actually understand a sniper in a building getting a shot a whole lot easier than I can the Ford and Reagan attempts.
This proves to me that Oswald acted alone in the killing, and I have seen no evidence to suggest that someone else prompted him to do it.
All the rest of the theories and evidence are irrelevant as far as I am concerned.
The jury returned a conviction for pre-meditated murder on 3/14/64, after deliberating less than an hour.
The problem was that he had gone from being half a fruitcake to a full-blown fruitcake by then.
The Commission also gave him a poly, which he passed, wherein he denied any involvement in a conspiracy or of knowing Oswald prior to killing him.
Of interest is that Ruby was granted a new trial in late 1966 because his post arrest statements were allowed at the trial even though they were taken absent a “Miranda” warning.
Unfortunately, Ruby, who was suffering from cancer,died in January of 1967 of a blood clot.
Dennis Johnson 11/24/2003 I agree with you that the Communist purge was only after General Suharto's coup.
I know the Hakka Chinese communities were there for centuries, but they are still looked upon as foreigners.
The end of the hostilites with the Dutch, however, gave the military generals more time to focus on domestic politics.
I read that in the 1950s, the United States and British covertly supported the various break away movements in Sulawesi and other islands.
So JFK siding with the Indonesians in their land grab for West Papua was a major policy shift.
Dave Livingston 11/24/2003 It was bit later, as I recall, using a supposed planned Communist coup in the works Indonesian Moslems instigated a massacre of Indonesian Communists, many of whom were of Chinese extraction, and their families, some half million people altogether.
Nor do I accept the idea that any United States gov't agency was involved in the possible conspiracy.
On the other hand, two reasons I'm tempted to accept the lone shooter theory are that a) the distance of the shots wasn't all that great, 88 yards, as I understand.
All that said, I remain very uncomfortable with the patness of Oswald's murder before he could testify, Ruby's death before he could testify & at the determined effort to dismiss out-of-hand any likelyhood of a conspiracy.
It is ever so easy to attack a man was is dead & cannot defend himself.
It amuses me that J.F.K., the Liberal icon was not in many respects a Liberal, certainly not of the weasel Clinton style.
For one thing, it was J.F.K. who established the Army's Special Forces, our premier counter-insurgency military force.
For evidence of the good repute the Liberal icon, J.F.K., is held by the Aremy's Special Forces one might visit his tomb.
One thing one one will discover there is that the Special Forces mount a twenty-four hour a day honor guard at the tomb reflecting their respect for and gratitude to him.
Even I a died-inthe-wool Conservative remember with deep fondness the classy Whitehouse we had when Jack, Jackie, Caroline & John-John occupied it.
Dennis Johnson 11/24/2003 There is another cold war crisis during the Kennedy administration that hardly ever gets covered, but is very significant in Southeast Asian History.
Indoneasian President Sukarno claimed that all former territory of the Dutch should be part of Indonesia.
The Dutch still held West New Guinea and recently discovered oil there.
The Kennedy adminstration feared the growing influence of the Soviet Union in the largest nation in Souteast Asia.
The Domino theory fear was once Indonesia falls, then all of Southeast Asia would fall.
Robert Kennedy was sent to Indonesia and United States government pressured the Dutch to the negotiation table.
The Dutch were to leave West New Guinea and transfer sovereignty to UNTEA until a national vote for either for independence or integration with Indonesia.
This greatly improved United States relations with Indonesia and weakened the influece of the Soviet Union.
Cram 11/22/2003 NYGuy, I have not heard about this, but have never seen a single piece of evidence that links LBJ to the murder of Kennedy.
Furthermore, even if such evidence did exist, and you could prove conclusively that LBJ killed Kennedy, your line about ""censorship controversy by the Democrats"" goes much farther.
This would baloon whose involved in the conpiracy to a large number of people,and would be akin to sayng that ""the Republicans"" were responsible for the Watergate breakin.
I assume you really didn't say ""the Democrats"" with that in mind and that the line was simply referring to ""the Democrat"" Johnson.
NYGuy 11/22/2003 Heard on TV today that LBJ censored Walter Cronkite and CBS on a story they were going to air on the assassination.
No one has presented any serious evidence that anyone other than Oswald had anything to do with the JFK assassination.
If it wasn't Oswald, it was probably the bigots, the bigots, the bigots.
Cram 11/21/2003 Sorry folks, but there is not a single piece of evidence that indicated that Oswold did NOT act alone.
The forensic evidence, the physical evidence, and sheer logistical issues demonstrate time and time again that Oswold acted alone.
Of course, these conspiracy theories are going to exist forever, so it a rather useless debate, but I must say, of all of the theories I find the LEAST plausable, LBJ is certainly amung them.
Crazy Bigot 11/21/2003 The History Channel show about LBJ and Kennedy relied on two impossibly duplicitous witnesses.
This attorney admits that he has a grudge against the deceased managing partner of that firm.
He presents no evidence to support his theory except for hearsay conversations with other attorneys around the water cooler.
LBJ was one of the most fascinating and complex politicians in United States history.
They'll have hours of documentary programming every day this week about the JFK assassination.
They explicitly put forward and support the thesis that the JFK assassination was a coup, with Johnson the direct beneficiary.
If you aren't able to watch any of this programming, you may be able to buy it from the History Channel in some recorded form.
Cram 11/21/2003 Dick, I am sorry for your experiencs, just as I am sorry that our nation ever decided to blindly believe everything our government told us about why we ""had"" to be in Vietnam.
It is worth noting that just as Americans supported the war up until 1968, when most of the damage had been done, Americans today supported the war In Iraq.
This is why the Founding Fathers thought that they were creating a government where the popular passions of the people could be held in check.
However, since his assassination on 22 Nov 63, I, a Vietnam veteran, KNOW that this country is a downward slope, and the present president is at the helm of a sinking ship.
It is quite apparent, from this latest fiasco in Iraq, that the leaders of this once-great country haven't learned a thing from that Vietnam debacle.
I am mildly traumatically brain injured, ""thanks"" to whatever was done to my brain in 1972, a little over 6 years since I got out of Vietnam.
Dick Dettrey Dick Dettrey 11/20/2003 Dear Mr Stern, This is an excellent article.
