The spyplanes were used to obtain proof that the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
USAF photo AIR FORCE Magazine / October 2012 32 HIGH NOON By John T Correll I n the 1960 presidential election campaign, Democratic The United States had been embarrassed the previous year by candidate John F Kennedy raised the alarm about a “missile the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion, but United States efforts to overgap” in which he said the United States trailed dangerously throw Fidel Castro’s regime in Cuba continued.
Lately, Castro’s behind the Soviet Union. allegiance to Soviet leadership had weakened as he drifted Kennedy’s claims were later revealed to be in error.
There toward the Chinese, who espoused a more aggressive brand of indeed was a missile gap, but it was in favor of the United States, Communism.
Khrushchev needed a dramatic demonstration of which had four or five times as many ICBMs as the Soviets did. his commitment to Cuba.
The United States Polaris submarine-launched ballistic missile was newly Walking alongside Khrushchev on the beach was Defense operational, whereas the Soviet Union did not yet have any SLBMs.
Minister Rodion Malinovsky, who pointed toward the opposite Kennedy knew this all along.
Eisenhower, the Democratic candidates had been briefed by intermediate-range Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The notion of a missile gap also was promoted by Soviet PreIndeed, putting missiles in Cuba would address several problems. mier Nikita Khrushchev, who was often carried away by his own “In addition to protecting Cuba, our missiles would have equalized bluster, exaggeration, and boasting.
Khrushchev was well aware what the West likes to call ‘the balance of power,’ ” Khrushchev of the true situation but he fed the impression of superior Soviet said.
The USSR had plenty of mediumand intermediate-range strength at every opportunity.
From Cuba, they would have the range to strike targets missiles “like sausages” and added, “We have rockets capable of in the United States as easily as ICBMs could from launch sites landing in a particular square at a distance of 13,000 kilometers.” in the Soviet Union.
SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles and 16 SS-5 intermediate“I had the idea of installing missiles with nuclear warheads in range missiles to Cuba.
From there, the SS-4s could reach as far as Cuba without letting the United States find out they were there SAC headquarters in Omaha and the SS-5s could cover the entire until it was too late to do anything about them,” Khrushchev said. continental United States.
The deployment also would include On a trip to Bulgaria in May 1962, Khrushchev took a brief holiday four combat regiments, advanced SA-2 surface-to-air missiles, at the Black Sea resort of Varna.
As he strolled along the beach, MiG-21 interceptors, and Il-28 light bombers. he thought about his problems.
The most serious of these was the Castro was not enthusiastic about the idea at first but agreed to disparity in strategic military power, but Cuba—the USSR’s first it as an act of solidarity with the socialist bloc.
He also welcomed and only ally in the Western Hemisphere—also was on his mind. the opportunity to stand up to the United States.
In November 1961, the President authorized Operation Mongoose to foUSAF photo ment an uprising in Cuba and overthrow Castro.
The project was overseen by Bobby Kennedy with the flamboyant Edward G Lansdale, the Administration’s favorite insurgency specialist, as operations chief.
Mongoose endorsed sabotage, psychological warfare, propaganda, infiltration by guerillas, disinformation, and much more.
Not revealed until much later were half-baked schemes to assassinate Castro with exploding cigars or to use depilatories to make his hair and beard fall out.
In early 1962, as part of Mongoose, the United States military developed contingency operation plans for the invasion and occupation of Cuba.
A wargame in August 1962 featured a mock assault on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques and the simulated overthrow of a leader named “Ortsac,” or Castro spelled backward.
The Big Deployment Never before in its history had the Soviet Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, head of does he have the courage to stand up to Union undertaken such a massive sealift. the Soviet rocket forces, visited Cuba a serious challenge,” he said.
Ships loaded at a dozen Baltic and Black prior to the deployments and assured The Kennedys—the President and his Sea ports and began moving out in July Khrushchev that the missiles could be brother and closest advisor, Attorney 1962.
Until the ship captains opened their disguised as coconut palm trees, which General Robert Kennedy—had not lost sealed orders at sea, they did not know had the same straight barrel trunk.
Fundamental to Khrushchev’s decision was his belief that Kennedy was weak and could be bulldozed.
He formed this impression on the basis of Kennedy’s fumbling in the Bay of Pigs operation in 1961 and on the Vienna summit that summer, where Khrushchev had pushed Kennedy around at will.
Kennedy also vacillated at several points in the Berlin Wall confrontation that fall.
At the end of 1961, Khrushchev told a group of Soviet officials that Kennedy would do anything to prevent nuclear war.
Richard Heyser, clearly shows a convoy of Soviet trucks snaking toward San Cristobal, Cuba, on Oct., 1962.
This image convinced the CIA that the Soviets were placing nuclear weapons in Cuba.
A map of the Western Hemisphere shows the range of the nuclear missiles placed in Cuba.
The top one shows the locations of valuable reconnaissance targets, the bottom Cuba’s naval bases. about the missile deployment.
On Sept., he relayed a message from Khrushchev assuring Kennedy that no offensive weapons would be placed in Cuba.
In his opinion, United States duplicity during the U-2 overflights of the Soviet Union in the 1950s entitled him to use whatever deceptions he wished.
Khrushchev planned to announce the presence of the missiles in a speech at the United Nations in November, when his entire force was in place.
United States aerial surveillance noticed the By late July, two Soviet ships a day were A U-2 made a regular run over Cuba ships under way and reported that they arriving in Cuba.
United States intelligence spotted on Sept., but owing to events halfway were riding high in the water, indicative the MiG-21s and Il-28s and watched the around the world, that was the last overof military cargo such as missiles, which buildup of troops.
In August, Central Intelflight for five critical weeks. are large in relation to their weight. ligence Agency U-2 spyplanes overflying On Aug., a Strategic Air Command Khrushchev continued his bluster.
The White House judged the SAMs flew Sakhalin island in the Far East by Guevara in July.
And if there is Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambasUnited States apologized.
In a White House meeting the afternoon of Oct., Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko—who, unlike Dobrynin, did know the details of the missile deployment—assured Kennedy that no offensive weapons were being delivered to Cuba.
U-2 flights increased and the CIA reported on Oct. that four SS-4 sites were in place with 16 operational launchers, and that two SS-5 sites and at least one nuclear warhead storage bunker were under construction.
Recalling it years later when he wrote his memoirs, Khrushchev still had not shed his braggadocio.
Rusk regarded it as the political consequences if a U-2 were President Kennedy was notified at 8:45 a device to give Bobby Kennedy a to be shot down over Cuba that there were m.
Unseen by the United States, the Soviet cargo ship Poltava docked at Mariel Sept.
During this interval, the Cuba overflight mission was reassigned—over CIA objections—to Air Force U-2 pilots.
Various reasons were given for the change, among them the rising prospect of armed conflict.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at a meeting of the United Nations in 1960.
The shadow of a US RF-101 aircraft passes a Soviet cargo ship during a November reconnaissance mission over Cuba.
ExComm struggled with On Oct., SAC activated its first 10 Before Kennedy could respond to the the missile crisis for a week before the Minutemen ICBMs and placed them on proposal, Radio Moscow broadcast a new public was informed. alert. message from Khrushchev at 9m.
SaturA nuclear missile threat 90 miles from Khrushchev had two regiments of SS-4s day changing the offer.
The Joint operational but he understood right away said they would remove their missiles from Chiefs of Staff advised an air strike, but that his plan had failed.
He had assumed that its Jupiters from Turkey. bombing sorties to get 90 percent of the Kennedy would back down rather than risk The Jupiters were essentially obsolete missiles, Kennedy decided instead on a war over the missiles in Cuba.
Strategic Air Command went on prematurely,” Sergei Khrushchev said. agreed.
Oct., Kennedy said there was “unBait and Switch Saturday would be the longest day of mistakable evidence” of Soviet missiles For a while on Friday evening, Oct. the crisis, when three separate incidents and bombers in Cuba.
He announced the 26, it seemed that the crisis had broken propelled the United States and Cuba to quarantine and said the United States would “rewhen the State Department received a their closest brush with nuclear war. gard any nuclear missile launched from long, rambling letter from Khrushchev That morning, Air Force U-2 pilot Maj.
Cuba against any nation in the Western to Kennedy, hinting at a possible basis Rudolf Anderson Jr. took off from McCoy, Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet for settlement. crossed the Cuban coastline at 9:15, and Union on the United States, requiring “We, for our part, will declare that our was soon picked up by the SAM site at a full retaliatory response against the ships bound for Cuba are not carrying any Banes in eastern Cuba.
Issa Pliyev, could not be interceptors and anti-aircraft batteries to for our military specialists in Cuba will found and his deputy gave the order to the southeastern United States. be obviated.” fire, in violation of orders.
The Air Force thought it would sink in terms of tactical peaceful cargos,” Khrushchev said.
Among Sergei Khrushchev later said, “Father connaissance of Cuba to supplement the the ships en route to Cuba was Poltava was inwardly pleased that another U-2, high-altitude surveillance by the U-2s. with 24 SS-5 ballistic missiles aboard. which had inflicted such humiliation AIR FORCE Magazine / October 2012 37 President John Kennedy and National Archives photo Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara in a National Security Council Excomm meeting. removed.
By December, all of the strategic missiles and the Il-28 bombers were gone.
The Jupiters were quietly pulled out of Turkey, with Polaris submarines deployed to take over their function.
By personal direction of the President, Rudolf Anderson was posthumously awarded the Air Force Cross for heroism. on our country, had been downed by a Bobby Kennedy, who had held several This was the first time this new decoration, Soviet missile.” back-channel sessions with the Soviets second only to the Medal of Honor, had Meanwhile, another Air Force U-2 had during the crisis, met with Dobrynin and ever been presented. gone missing in the far north.
It had taken told him that unless Khrushchev made a According to postcrisis intelligence off from Alaska on a mission to collect air commitment by the next day to dismantle analysis, there had been 40,000 Soviet samples at high altitude to monitor Soviet the missiles, the United States would begin troops in Cuba, many more than the United States had missile testing.
Five of the SS-4 sites had been confused by the northern lights, drifted removed the missiles, the Jupiters would operational, with 33 missile launchers.
The into Soviet airspace around noon, Washbe taken out of Turkey, although there Soviets had about 20 nuclear warheads ington time. would be no public announcement of that. in country although none of them had Six Soviet fighters took off to intercept “We could see that we had to reorient been mounted on the missiles.
The SS-5 the U-2, and American F-102s, armed our position swiftly,” Khrushchev said. missiles, aboard the cargo ship when the with tactical nuclear rockets because He knew that the USSR was years away quarantine began, never reached Cuba.
At the Kennedy had demonstrated courage protect the aircraft, which managed to time, according to McNamara, the United States had during the crisis, stood firm, and played return to United States airspace before a confronta5,100 nuclear weapons it could deliver his hand well.
Both tine, dropped practice depth charges about exchange would wipe his country off the Kennedy and Khrushchev contributed to the size of hand grenades in an attempt face of the map, whereas the United States would the peaceful outcome by their exercise to force a Soviet submarine to surface. sustain millions of casualties but survive. of restraint.
Sunday Washington time, Immediately after the crisis, the Soviets was armed with a nuclear torpedo and Khrushchev broadcast a message on Radio publicly depicted it as a triumph that prehad orders to use it if the submarine was Moscow saying that he had ordered “the vented an invasion of Cuba.
Pravda said hulled by depth charges or surface fire. dismantling of the weapons you describe that Soviet “calm and wisdom” had saved The submarine had to surface for air at as ‘offensive’ and their crating and return the world from a “nuclear catastrophe.” 9:52m.
The missile crisis The Russians didn’t really believe it, a radio check with Moscow and was told was effectively over.
S McNamara wondered if he would “live fait accompli,” said Sergei Khrushchev.
In In October 1964, Khrushchev was to see another Saturday night.” a rage, Castro peppered Khrushchev with removed from power and forced into re“son of a bitch, ... bastard, ... no cojones,” tirement.
There were various reasons for Khrushchev Blinks and other epithets. his ouster, not the least of them being the Around 8m.
Kennedy would respond to and accept Khrushchev’s offer of Friday night John T Correll was editor in chief of Air Force Magazine for 18 years and is now a and ignore the Saturday morning addition contributor.
His most recent article, “The Muddled Legend of Yalta,” appeared in the about the Jupiters.
