Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear WarBy Michael Dobbs Anyone old enough to recall the fortnight in October 1962 when all-out nuclear war between the United States and the former Soviet Union seemed a terrifyingly real prospect, might feel no need to seek added instruction on the dangers then narrowly averted.
The author notes that both had lost close kin during the Second World War, JFK older brother Joe Jr. and a brother-in-law, Khrushchev a son.
They had been personally blooded by war, themselves — Khrushchev served in World War I on the Eastern Front.
Having successfully bullied his younger counterpart in the June 1961 Vienna Summit, the Soviet leader concluded — correctly — that JFK would be passive were the East Germans to erect a wall separating East from West Berlin.
In September 1961 the Soviet Union ended a three-year superpower moratorium on nuclear tests in the atmosphere.
Its series of tests culminated in late October 1961 with detonation of the 50-megaton “Tsar Bomba,” whose Big Bang set the stage for the Crisis a year later.
Though too large to be a practical weapon, the apocalyptic symbolism was unmistakable.
Much of the story of October 1962, and the months leading up to it, is well known, and merits brief mention.
Reconnaissance photos taken in August and September 1962 showed that, contrary to assurances given the Kennedy administration, the Soviet Union was clandestinely deploying nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles in Cuba.
On October 15, President Kennedy convened thirteen top present and former national security officials, creating ExComm, short for Executive Committee.
Initially sharply divided between pro-invasion hawks and pro-negotiation-only doves, the group decided to impose a “quarantine” preventing ships carrying military cargo from docking at Cuban ports.
ExComm came around over the fortnight to acceptance of a crisis-ending compromise.
Russia would remove offensive weapons permanently in return for a public American pledge not to invade Cuba.
Quietly, six months later so as not to appear as a quid pro quo , Kennedy was to withdraw nuclear-armed ballistic missiles from Turkey, though keeping its intelligence and surveillance bases there.
Also well known is the dramatic confrontation between Russia’s UN Ambassador, the aging Valerian Zorin, and United States Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson.
After Zorin balked, Stevenson pronounced that Russia was “in the court of world opinion” and eventually put incriminating photographs on an easel in the Security Council chamber, thus scoring a huge public relations win for the United States.
On October 27, what the White House called “Black Saturday,” things seemed to spin out of control.
The U-2 eluded Russian interceptors and by a major miracle made it back to friendly territory, but for a while the “Fail Safe” scenario of accidental war looked as too real.
A Russian submarine carrying a torpedo with a 10-kiloton warhead was depth-charged by an American destroyer; the charges were intended not to sink the sub but to force it to the surface, but the Russian commander, completely unable to communicate with Moscow, considered firing the torpedo.
And then there is the news about just how many nuclear warheads and types of nuclear-capable delivery systems were on the island.
An estimated 150,000 troops were to be sent to take the island, and 1,397 separate targets had been marked for destruction as part of the invasion.
The carnage that would have been inflicted by a nuclear-capable Russian force of some 45,000, plus a much larger volunteer Cuban contingent on the invasion force alone would have been the worst in American military history–even without nuclear missile strikes on American soil.
Weapon security on Cuba was dicey; there was hardly anyone on guard, and the island heat made storage hotter than was safe for the warheads; accidental megaton-level ground detonation was a serious possibility.
The truth was that virtually every nuclear weapon on Cuba could, in a pinch, be released by the local commander — in some cases, a lieutenant — ignoring orders to the contrary from Moscow, as there were no trigger locks.
Had an invasion come, as one Russian former soldier stationed in Cuba then put it, “You have to understand the psychology of the military person.
Ironically, the minimal level of perimeter and site security at the Bejucal nuclear storage bunker led CIA analysts to conclude that the facility would not house nuclear weapons.
Pilots had unilateral release discretion for nuclear-armed air-to-air missiles, designed to vaporize strategic bomber squadrons.
F-102 interceptors had similar armament, and F-100 Super Sabres based in Europe carried hydrogen bombs to drop inside Russia.
Poor communications — the Russian ambassador in Washington sent telegrams via Western Union, complete with pick-up via bicycle messenger — made matters worse, and led to establishment of the Washington-Moscow Hot Line in 1963.
The Crisis ended on October 28, 1962, with a whimper rather than a bang.
Contrary to popular myth, America and Russia were never literally “eyeball to eyeball,” but the Kennedy administration was only too happy to promote that version, to dramatize its public triumph.
To be fair, considering some of his more hawkish advisers, Kennedy deserved credit for reining them in while not caving completely.
Strategic Air Command chief General Curtis LeMay — the model for the hilarious, insane General Buck Turgidson played by actor George C Scott in Stanley Kubrick’s Dr.
Asked to define victory in a nuclear exchange, LeMay answered that whoever had the most nuclear weapons left wins.
In the same vein, Air Force chief General Thomas Power said that if at the end of an exchange there were two Americans and one Russian, we win.
In a neat historical touch, Dobbs notes that in 1945 one of LeMay’s analysts who helped plan the March 1945 fire raid that destroyed one quarter of Tokyo and killed at least 100,000 civilians was one Robert Strange McNamara.
Perhaps Kennedy was fortified by knowledge that his vast arsenal — nearly 3,000 nuclear weapons, deliverable via ICBM, submarine launch or manned bomber — dwarfed the Soviet Union’s estimated few hundred deliverable missile and bomber nukes.
Yet Kennedy’s weakness at Vienna nearly led to nuclear war, because his flinching caused his adversary in Moscow to take a gamble, confident that no major confrontation would ensue.
We may see a replay of this with the new President — like JFK, young, charismatic, untested — leading foreign adversaries to see him as too weak and intellectual.
Betraying allies like Poland and the Czech Republic by caving to Moscow on missile defense, and failing to apply sufficient pressure on Iran, could lead to future conflict, possibly nuclear, involving America or Israel.
In contrast, John McCain, who sat in his A-4 Skyhawk carrier plane on the flight deck of the USS Enterprise, armed with nuclear bombs and ready to hit targets in Cuba, would be less likely to be tested, as his threats to use force would be far more credible.
Which brings us to perhaps the most important personality of the Crisis.
Fidel Castro, flush with his improbable revolutionary triumph and seething with rage at the United States, partly borne of ideological Marxist fervor, and partly due to the efforts of the Kennedy administration to get rid of him.
As recently as the summer of 1955, less than four years before he marched victorious into Havana in January 1959, Fidel’s comrades had dwindled to seven diehards.
Fidel wanted the Russians to incinerate the United States, and was willing, even eager, to sacrifice his six million subjects in a nuclear holocaust.
Religious messianism can be as lethal as romantic revolutionary fervor.
Compound this with several new Mideast nuclear powers, in the arms race that Iran’s march towards the nuclear club is triggering, and the recipe for accidental nuclear war is cooking in the regional pot.
But it is Fidel who may well be the future augury of nuclear crises — and wars — to come.
It all reminds me of July 1, 1987 when President Ronald Reagan nominated Judge Robert Bork for an opening on the Supreme Court.
But we do not have to look back 32 years to see how unruly the leftwing mob can be.
The simple fact is that the conservatives are often slow on the draw against the American left.
Yet the coming battle would be a lot less bloody if the conservative movement were to take the field on Moore’s behalf — and make it clear that from now on they are going to wage war for the President’s nominees.
The American Spectator and Spectator World are marks used by independent publishing companies that are not affiliated in any way.
