Placeholder while article actions loadFifty years ago Tuesday, United States national security adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy that a U-2 spy plane flight over Cuba two days earlier had revealed medium-range, nuclear-capable missiles installed by the Soviet Union.
At the time, Americans believed that the Soviet Union had far more, which had become a major domestic political issue.
But, after Kennedy took office, United States intelligence discovered that Khrushchev’s arsenal was far smaller than he’d claimed -far smaller than the United States arsenal.
The “missile gap” issue had permeated Washington, so it was only natural that the capital’s inhabitants continued to view the Cold War through this lens.
And, because part of the American response to its perceived shortage in the missile gap had included installing missiles in Turkey within range of Moscow, it was easy to apply this same logic to Khrushchev’s similar-seeming effort in Cuba.AdvertisementIt wasn’t until 1987 that the world learned that Kennedy and his team had been wrong.
At a Soviet-American conference on the crisis’s 25th anniversary, Soviet officials released never-before-seen documents from what they called the “Caribbean crisis” of 1962.
They immediately disproved the Western consensus that Khrushchev had been seeking to fix the imbalance in offensive nuclear weapons.
The best explanation, in the end, is that Khrushchev allowed his ideological romanticism to overrun whatever capacity he had for strategic analysis,” Gaddis concludes.
But strategy-obsessed Washington could not possibly fathom that the Soviet Union would edge onto the brink of global nuclear war because of the emotional obsessions of one man.AdvertisementThe crisis ended, famously, when Kennedy privately pledged both to remove America’s missiles from Turkey and to not invade Cuba.
In the American understanding of the crisis, which persisted until 1987, the removal of Turkish missiles was the decisive concession, granting Khrushchev greater balance in strategic nuclear weapons.
But, ironically, it may have been Kennedy’s pledge not to invade Cuba that was both the easiest for him to make and the most persuasive in convincing Khrushchev to stand down.
Even in ending the near-catastrophic crisis, both Kennedy and Khrushchev seem to have misread one another’s strategic priorities and personal motivations, ascribing their own worldview to the other.The world is lucky that Kennedy and Khrushchev’s priorities lined up in the end.
And, because part of the American response to its perceived shortage in the missile gap had included installing missiles in Turkey within range of Moscow, it was easy to apply this same logic to Khrushchev’s similar-seeming effort in Cuba."",""type"":""text"",""originalIdx"":3},{""_id"":""Q5IYKRKS2NANBH7BQX2SP4C3YM"",""content"":""It wasn’t until 1987 that the world learned that Kennedy and his team had been wrong.
A New History,\u003c/a\u003e\"" it is clear now, though, that this was not Khrushchev’s principal reason for acting as he did.”"",""type"":""text"",""originalIdx"":4},{""_id"":""7KPN27CWQFFTXNSB2G7KABJJOM"",""content"":""The Soviet leader, a committed Marxist-Leninist ideologue who had clawed his way to the top in the post-Stalin Kremlin, believed two things, both of them wrong: that the United States was planning an imminent, full-scale military invasion of Cuba; and that, without American meddling, Cuban-style communism would spread naturally throughout Latin America.
But strategy-obsessed Washington could not possibly fathom that the Soviet Union would edge onto the brink of global nuclear war because of the emotional obsessions of one man."",""type"":""text"",""originalIdx"":9},{""_id"":""266BMXS6MBHEBGGN6QGJ7DPKAM"",""content"":""The crisis ended, famously, when Kennedy privately pledged both to remove America’s missiles from Turkey and to not invade Cuba.
Even in ending the near-catastrophic crisis, both Kennedy and Khrushchev seem to have misread one another’s strategic priorities and personal motivations, ascribing their own worldview to the other."",""type"":""text"",""originalIdx"":10},{""_id"":""MCHVBE2OEJGOXPP34KCVKDH3PU"",""content"":""The world is lucky that Kennedy and Khrushchev’s priorities lined up in the end.
