It was not clear whether the release of the letters would be simultaneous.
A United States official said the Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962.
No other conflict during the post-World War II era brought the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than the crisis that grew out of the Soviet decision to deploy offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba.
One official said some of the letters have remained classified because they contain references to Berlin, a major point of U.S.-Soviet contention during that period.
Officials said the government's decision to release the Kennedy letters is linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis the Cuban government is holding in Havana starting next Thursday.
U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials who participated in the crisis are scheduled to attend.
Among the expected participants is Cuban President Fidel Castro, who was outraged by Khrushchev's decision to withdraw the missiles without consulting him first.
With the Cold War over, Americans for the first time in decades live without the fear of nuclear war.
Yet the war of wills between the United States and the former Soviet Union over Soviet middle-range nuclear missiles placed in Cuba still offers some important lessons.
Principal among them are the importance of standing strong in dealing with adversaries, setting clear goals and allowing diplomacy to work.
As is true with many historically significant events, a debate still rages about how the crisis was handled.
Some assert Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev made virtually unconditional concessions.
While the solution favored the United States, it was in fact a compromise.
Events might not have turned out so favorably if senior United States government officials had prevailed in early discussions about how to respond to the missiles.
If that action and a followup invasion had happened, say critics, the world might have been spared three decades of Cuban troublemaking.
Also, it's worth recalling a sobering tidbit that was revealed just this year.
In addition to the missiles, tactical nuclear weapons were hidden in Cuba.
Even though the United States boasted nuclear superiority over the Soviets in the early 1960s, it was likely that in a nuclear exchange perhaps 30 or more of Moscow's weapons would have hit United States cities.
Mr Kennedy managed to maintain a delicate balance of acting tough without carrying the crisis beyond the point of no return.
The Soviets backed down Mr Kennedy, having achieved his primary goal, properly made no additional demands.
That allowed the crisis to end as suddenly as it started, leaving a model of skillful leadership.
ARTHUR the communist phoned a few months back, suggesting I might assist some friends of his from Cuba.
A few days later, I found myself hosting a small unofficial meeting of the Australia Cuba Friendship Society.
They reckoned it was pretending to be Cuban by sponsoring The Buena Vista Social Club, that smashing Ry Cooder movie about Cuban music, and even sponsoring the Festival de Cuba at Darling Harbor.
Not surprising, thought I The story of rum is as miserable and wretched a yarn as you can find in the history of drinks.
I learnt more about it from reading Hugh Thomas's abysmally depressing The Slave Trade than I had gleaned from 30 years of glib connoisseur's magazines and coffee books.
Rum is the very simple spirit made by distilling brewed sugar, or molasses.
The Muslims, the Roman Catholics, the Jews and the Protestants shared the business, and to avoid any inconvenient foreign cash transactions, rum, that most fluent of currencies, perfectly fitted the bill.
The eternal slave route which Old World practitioners called the Golden Triangle was really a kind of perpetual-motion wealth machine.
A slaver such as the Reverend John Newton would drive his vessel against the coast of Africa, drawn in by signalling smoke on the shore.
Newton wrote great hymns to please his cargo, such as Amazing Grace, or How Sweet the Name.
Imagine lying there, in chains, listening to the dogs above rasping out; How sweet the name of Jesus sounds; In a believer's ear; It soothes his sorrows, heals his wounds; And drives away his fear.
Apart from a brief sojourn in Madeira, where they'd pick up a few hogsheads of that isle's sweet fortified verdelho, just for the captain's entertainments, these traders would carry their humans to the Caribbean, where they were swapped for molasses.
Off they went in chains to the cane fields, making more molasses for the next trader.
The rum then went back to Africa, where it was swapped for more humans, and so on, and so forth.
WHEN Fidel Castro and his brother Raoul led the revolution of 1959, the Arechabalas family had been making Havana Club rum in Cuba since the 19th century.
Some Cuban literature says the company was virtually bankrupt but that's contentious.
It is made in various countries, such as Mexico, Puerto Rico and the Bahamas.
Eventually, the Arechabalas family decided to make Bacardi the designated successor to the Havana Club name, and all hell broke loose.
Bacardi began selling its Bahamas rum as Havana Club in the United States.
In 1993, Castro made a deal with Pernod Ricard, setting up a joint-venture company to distribute the Cuban Havana Club.
Since Gorbachev had pulled the plug on the USSR, that committed market for communist rum frizzled, and Cuba needed help.
The new deal worked brilliantly, with Cuban Havana Club hitting the front of the clear spirit race, selling more than a million cases a year, and settling in at No 4 in the world's rum market.
Drunk with anticipation about the boom which would occur if the United States lifted its trade embargo against Cuba, the French-Cuban alliance went to war in the courts with Bacardi.
The United States says trademarks which have been pinched by revolutionaries who do not pay for them should not be honored there, so at the moment the whole thing is bogged in the courts, although it seems the anti-communists have kicked the most recent goal.
What peeves Arthur the communist and my friends at the Australia Cuba Friendship Society is not just Bacardi's use of the Havana Club brand in the United States but the way Bacardi continues to feign Cuban heritage.
Since the real Cuban Havana Club began making its presence felt internationally, Bacardi has worked extremely hard to present a popular Cuban image.
Its slogan in Australia is ``Cuban rums since 1862'', although no ingredient comes from Cuba.
And all this at a time when Fidel himself has suggested that in retaliation, Cuba should begin using US trademarks without approval. `` should not complain if we start using any North American brand to produce and commercialise products,'' Castro said last year, making particular mention of Coca-Cola.
The bigger worry for many Americans is the possibility of the United States hitting a trade barrier with the European Union, which has officially complained about the United States action damaging one of Europe's prized liquor companies.
It was that revilement which opened the door for the boom in Bacardi in the 1960s.
The moment Mr Gorbachev opened Russia, Stolichnaya became the white spirit on everyone's lips, and Bacardi suffered.
Now we see Bacardi so keen to feign Cubanness that it could well be seen to be a communist product.
The Havana Club's more boisterous and macho, and gives mixers such as lime juice or Coke a much more hefty rum flavor.
Kennedy demanded the removal of Soviet bombers from the island, calling them ""offensive weapons,"" and Khrushchev persistently sought a formal promise that the United States never would invade Cuba.
The letters began Oct., two days after Khrushchev gave the allimportant order to begin dismantling the mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles capable of reaching targets up to 2,000 miles away.
The fear then was of nuclear warfare, with the threat of Cuba launching Soviet missiles during a 13day international crisis that ended on this day 40 years ago.
After leaving central Texas, the troop train I was on traveled across Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama to Fort Stewart, Ga., near Savannah, where the Army invasion of Cuba was to have been organized.
We were in a STRAC unit, or Strategic Army Command, all members of the 1st Armored Division.
Throughout this Cold War time, we were constantly on mock alerts and engaged in huge peacetime maneuvers, war games in the South called Swift Strikes.
But right from the start, this movement to the Atlantic coast seemed vastly different, especially looking out train windows at railroad sidings with miles of flat cars loaded with tanks, armored personnel carriers and artillery pieces.
A good many of us back then were 1961 draftees, conscripted after college when the Berlin Wall went up.
There were at least 40 nuclear missiles in communist Cuba, put there by the Soviet Union and pointed toward America.
The missiles were capable of ranging over much of the United States and the Western Hemisphere.
Historian T Michael Ruddy said the missile crisis was the 20th century's scariest moment.
Other historians have called it the most dangerous period in recorded time.
Now, a possible war with Iraq and ongoing terrorists attacks are what haunt us.
Still, October 1962 was a time of real nail-biting anxiety, thoughts of a horizon filled with mushroom clouds, nuclear warfare of the sort that no one back then liked to think about.
Actually, we knew very little about how perilous this all was, that we were being prepared for an invasion of Cuba.
Standing near the tracks were several older men looking at us in a rather bemused way.
It became clear that this was a world-threatening situation when a few of us were ordered to burn a cluster of see-through map cover sheets showing colored arrows where various division brigades would have hit the Cuban shoreline.
Of course, there are others from here who were caught up in these scary times, notably Rams general manager Charley Armey.
Armey was aboard the Greenwood, a destroyer escort that was part of the Naval blockade, a ship that almost had to ram a Russian freighter.
No one in the 1st Armored faced anything like that, although there were units that traveled to Florida and practiced amphibious assault landings.
The Lincoln Continental convertible Kennedy rode in that day at Fort Stewart was the same vehicle he was in four days short of a year later, when he was shot and killed in Dallas.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion John M McGuire; Of The Post-Dispatch, 'REMEMBERING THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS FORTY YEARS AGO, MANY FEARED THE WORLD DIDN'T HAVE EVEN 40 MORE DAYS TO EXIST', St.
Prime minister Sean Lemass personally gave neutral Ireland's go-ahead to United States ambassador Mathew McCloskey for the inspections and the data handover to United States officials, said a memo.
Information handed over included details of cargo and its weight and passengers and their nationalities, according to the National Archives material.
The Cuban missile crisis erupted after Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev vowed to support Fidel Castro's regime by arming it with nuclear missiles capable of striking targets in the United States.
In response, in October 1962, United States president John F Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on the island nation.
The standoff led to the biggest crisis of the Cold War and brought the world the closest it had come to a nuclear conflict.
As the crisis unfolded, a United States embassy counsellor in Dublin visited the Department of External Affairs and said Washington was seeking information about planes stopping over in Shannon on Prague-Havana flights.
The diplomat, referred to only as Sweeney, ""spoke about these flights and the data the United States administration were anxious to have"", according to Cornelius Cremin, the Irish ministry's top civil servant, in a November 2 memo.
In response, the Irish premier told the United States ambassador that Dublin would supply data on future flights, while a coded telex to the United States embassy also agreed to help if ships on their way to Cuba stopped at Irish ports.
In 1964 Ireland sought to end the inspections, but Washington was keen for them to continue.
Sorensen spent 11 years as a policy and legal advisor, as well as writing speeches for Kennedy during his years as a senator and president.
He spoke of the important decisions which need to be made by any leader facing a crisis.
President Kennedy made the first of these decisions by selecting a team of advisors to help sort out the problem, Sorensen said.
Many members of this team were not government officials, but instead were citizens with specific expertise.
One of the citizens was the leading expert on the Soviet Union at the time.
Sorensen expressed the importance of deciding on a course of action, especially when war is a possible outcome of that decision.
The official, asking not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in October 1962 when the crisis was resolved.
Officials said the government's decision to release the Kennedy letters is linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis the Cuban government is holding in Havana starting Thursday.
If Soviet bombers shot overhead, bearing thermonuclear payload to the great population centers in the Northeast, it would be the responsibility of a 17-year-old United States Army private to activate the launch sequence for a barrage of radar-targeted Nike Hercules interceptor missiles.
If he fired his Nikes, he was under orders to grab his rifle and run out of the bunker to defend United States shores from any invading force.
And it is because of Carter that the Everglades Nike installation will be entered into the National Register of Historic Places today during a ceremony at the site.
One commemorative plaque will be affixed to a cinder-block building that holds some of the park's science offices and a cafeteria for park workers.
It used to be the operations center where the men of 2nd Missile Battalion 52nd Air Defense Artillery bunked, took mess and received their orders.
Another plaque will be affixed to a shed that the park had used to hold maintenance equipment and boats during hurricanes.
This was once the missile-assembly building, where nuclear warheads were attached.
He retired from the United States Army as a staff sergeant in 1965, but he showed up for a Friday tour of the installation in a dress uniform that displayed his insignia and medals, including the one President Kennedy gave to his unit for meritorious service.
He keeps a collection of memorabilia from that time his battalion's flag, his Geiger counter, some evacuation center signs but he did not do much with them until a few years ago.
He says he had an epiphany, home alone watching the president on television.
He prepared a history of the installation for the 2002 Conference of Military Historians, and made a presentation to the United States National Park Service, which sought the historic listing and agreed to pay for the installation's upkeep.
The bunker where Carter used to sit is structurally sound but very, very dirty, full of rats and wasps.
The control console is gone but in the missile shelter nearby, there is still a phone.
NOT USED SINCE '79 The installation has not been used since 1979, after the Soviet Union's preferred method of payload delivery shifted from bombers to high-flying Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles.
A more sophisticated interceptor, the Nike Zeus, was developed, but that too became useless when more sophisticated ICBMs came into vogue.
He was walking out of the bunker, covered in mosquitoes that seemed to be attracted to his uniform.
Desperate to beat back the 'cancer' of socialism from its doorstep, the United States aided a military task force to overthrow Castro, which landed south of Havana at the Bay of Pigs in 1961.
The rebels were easily put down by a well-armed Cuban army that had strong links with the Soviet Union.
Knowing that the Soviets were eager to prop up fellow communist regimes, the United States remained watchful of the Kremlin's relationship with Castro.
In 1962, tensions grew as American spy planes provided evidence that Soviet missiles were being shipped to Cuba.
Knowing that Soviet ballistic missiles on Cuban soil were capable of striking the US's eastern seaboard within a few minutes of being launched, President John F Kennedy warned United States citizens they might once again have to pay ""the price for freedom"", as conflict, this time with the Soviet Union, could not be ruled out.
Washington's hawkish stance did not receive the backing from her allies that Kennedy had hoped for, though support eventually came, notable from the British government.
Kennedy pulled back from his initial plan to invade Cuba, deciding instead to deploy United States navy ships, including aircraft carriers, to enforce a ""quarantine"", or blockade, on Cuba to prevent more ""offensive weapons"" being shipped in.
Days later, the deadly game of nuclear brinkmanship between the two nations ended, Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message that Soviet missiles would be taken back.
Kennedy also secretly promised to withdraw United States nuclear-armed missiles located in Turkey.
Cuba's Fidel Castro was left frustrated by the Soviets' retreat but realised he was effectively excluded from the negotiations.
With a catastrophic war averted, a hotline between the United States and Soviet Union was set up to prevent such a crisis happening again.
But in the tense days of October 1962, when the world trembled on the edge of the nuclear abyss over the issue of Soviet missile launchers based in Cuba, Canadians were very much involved.
When American reconnaissance planes discovered the missile sites in mid-October, 1962, Kennedy and his closest advisers were divided on what to do.
Some hawks spoke of invasion and air strikes; calmer heads called for negotiations.
After telling the public on Oct. of the existence of the weapons, Kennedy ordered the United States navy to impose a blockade on Cuba.
Warships put to sea to head off Soviet freighters carrying more missiles and components.
One of the big concerns was a potential confrontation with Soviet submarines lurking in the Atlantic.
As American ships concentrated close to Cuba and along the southeastern coast of the United States, they looked to the Royal Canadian Navy, as it was then known, for help.
The East Coast fleet sailed from Halifax to sea to cover the northern flank of the operation.
It was done without orders from Ottawa, under the guise of an exercise.
Basically, the entire East Coast fleet put to sea on a massive sub hunt.
Prime Minister John Diefenbaker disliked Kennedy and was suspicious of American motives.
Diefenbaker was at odds with his defence minister, Douglas Harkness, who favoured putting the military on full alert and offering all possible help to the Americans.
Harry Rayner, the chief of the naval staff, had no direction from their political masters.
Rayner said nothing, a reply which, in the ways of the navy, spoke volumes.
Rayner recalled the aircraft carrier HMCS Bonaventure and her escorts from the voyage to Britain and assigned them and the carrier's Tracker anti-submarine aircraft to the East Coast watch.
The Canadian air force sent Argus tracking planes on constant patrols over the Atlantic.
In all, Canada sent Bonaventure and her 28 planes, 22 destroyers, two submarines, 12 land-based Trackers and 32 Arguses into the search.
The Canadians freed up American ships to tighten their blockade and intensify anti-sub patrols in southern waters.
The Russians probably had a dozen submarines on the east side of the Atlantic, Haydon said.
Many were found, some were tracked and a few were actually hunted to the point where they were forced to surface.
Conventional submarines in those days had limited underwater endurance.
Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in Cuba.
Russian subs continued to prowl off the coast, though, and the Canadian and American navies kept the pressure on for another two weeks.
But each carried a nuclear warhead with an explosive force up to half as powerful as the bomb that leveled Hiroshima.
And, as was disclosed last week, Soviet commanders in Cuba had been given the authority to launch those missiles at United States forces if Americans had invaded.
Even now, nearly 30 years after the 1962 Cuban missile crisis electrified the world, there comes a chill in realizing how narrowly the United States and the Soviet Union managed to avert a nuclear war.
President John Kennedy, facing tough midterm elections and infuriated by the taunting presence of Fidel Castro's Communist regime in Cuba, had set in play a secret operation aimed at destabilizing Castro's rule.
Castro and Nikita Khrushchev, his Soviet mentor, had grown convinced that a United States invasion was inevitable.
The result, a retired Soviet general recently told a stunned Havana meeting of scholars and former officials from all three governments, was that Soviet officers in Cuba held the authorization without approval from Moscow to launch the short-range nuclear weapons at American forces if an invasion should occur.
Kennedy, upon learning that longer-range Soviet missiles were in fact being installed, had quarantined Soviet shipping and secured Khrushchev's pledge to withdraw the weapons.
As part of the deal, Kennedy promised there would be no United States invasion.
Yet in the mind-numbing days before the crisis eased, several key Kennedy advisers had urged an immediate United States air strike to destroy the Soviet missile installations.
But new research has shown that the crisis carried three governments to a level of risk previously unimagined.
The Havana meeting, which brought the astonishing disclosure of a Soviet readiness to authorize a nuclear attack against United States forces, was the climax of an unusual five-year study in which former American, Soviet and Cuban officials have recalled their actions during those tense days in 1962.
What the studies have reinforced, Blight said after the Havana meeting, is how badly each of the three governments in the 1962 crisis misread the others' intentions.
The Soviets had sought to extend their power in the Western Hemisphere but did not imagine that Ken-nedy, still largely untested, would respond to their missiles with force.
The Cubans did not imagine their ardent Soviet sponsors would let them down in a pinch.
And the Americans, for their part, could not imagine Khrushchev would be so reckless as to introduce nuclear weapons onto an island only 90 miles from Florida.
In planning for future foreign emergencies, the lessons of the Cuban scare can be studied to useful effect.
Intelligence information must be sound, operational decisions should be unhurried and taken only after thorough evaluation of all possible dangers.
ABC, which will broadcast the interview today, made the transcript public Wednesday.
As the current United States president seeks support to oust Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, former members of the Kennedy administration are heading to the Cuba conference to revisit that earlier standoff.
The crisis was defused when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
The China adventure is a reminder that like bad pork balls, history has a nasty habit of repeating.
The Cuban crisis, those 13 days in October 1962 when United States President John F Kennedy and the Soviet Union's Nikita Khrushchev went knuckle-to-knuckle, was notable for many things, not least some great quotes.
While the ending is known, the fascination of this political chiller comes in how a conclusion was reached.
The result is an intriguing movie about presidential leadership in action.
The Soviets are stocking Cuba with enough missiles to fry North America and the joint chiefs-of-staff want an invasion.
Even when Cold War warrior and elder statesman Dean Acheson (Len Cariou) advises a sneak attack, the president decides to wait until he sees the whites of their eyes.
Kevin Costner as O'Donnell is in OK form, apart from attempting an accent that would have him lynched in Boston.
But if he wanted this amount of attention he should have run for the president's role.
Old-time director, Ballarat-born Roger Donaldson (no stranger to Costner and Washington intrigue with his fine '87 political thriller No Way Out) teams with young screenwriter David Self to fashion a sweaty trigger-finger glimpse of a time when the world teetered on the brink of catastrophe.
It is just a shame when so much history is received from films that this movie bends the truth and seeks to mostly blame the military.
Russia blinked on Cuba simply because the Kremlin realised it did not have the military muscle to match its mouth.
Khrushchev was later to pay the price for his barefaced cheek and strategic blunder.
But documents declassified this year show that the time-honored notion was incorrect.
A series of letters exchanged between John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev reveals that the 1962 crisis lasted at least through the end of November.
Although relieved Americans returned to their routines after Oct., days of tense negotiations followed.
Kennedy wasn't satisfied with just the withdrawal of the missiles and pressed for the removal of other ``offensive'' weapons such as Soviet Ilyushin-28 bombers; the Soviets wanted to formalize the U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba; and the Cubans balked at on-site verification of the missile withdrawal.
On Halloween 30 years ago, negotiations for on-site inspections were stalled.
With the Cubans still refusing on-site verification, The Soviets proposed at-sea inspections.
In exchange, the Soviets wanted the blockade lifted and a formal pledge that the United States wouldn't invade Cuba.
On Nov., Khrushchev said that the United States was not living up to its part of the bargain by ending the blockade, stopping overflights and formalizing its non-invasion pledge.
Kennedy left one loose end untied the formal guarantee not to invade Cuba.
He said such conditions as assurances against reintroduction of strategic weapons weren't met.
However, in 1970 then-National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger reaffirmed the non-invasion understanding with no strings attached.
