Continue Cancel clear All articles published by MDPI are made immediately available worldwide under an open access license.
No special permission is required to reuse all or part of the article published by MDPI, including figures and tables.
This type of paper provides an outlook on future directions of research or possible applications.
Editor’s Choice articles are based on recommendations by the scientific editors of MDPI journals from around the world.
Editors select a small number of articles recently published in the journal that they believe will be particularly interesting to authors, or important in this field.
The aim is to provide a snapshot of some of the most exciting work published in the various research areas of the journal.
Get Support Feedback Please let us know what you think of our products and services.
Cuban missile crisis; game theory; threat that leaves something to chance; metagame theory; theory of moves; analytic narrative Cuban missile crisis; game theory; threat that leaves something to chance; metagame theory; theory of moves; analytic narrative 1.
When players in a real-world game make choices that can plausibly be associated with an equilibrium outcome, a game-theoretic explanation has been uncovered.
Similarly, game-theoretic predictions about future play presume rational choice—that is, the assumption is that an equilibrium choice will be made by each of the players.The precise definition of an equilibrium depends on whether the game’s depiction is dynamic or static and on whether the players have complete or incomplete information about one another’s preferences.
In Chicken, the assumption is that each player most-prefers to win and, failing that, to compromise.
The outcome called Conflict is the lowest ranked outcome of both players.From a game-theoretic perspective, Chicken presents a number of perplexing analytic problems.
A Nash equilibrium is the accepted measure of rational behavior in normal-form games with complete information.
Both Dobbs and Trachtenberg, then, find little evidence of the mathematically precise manipulation of threat levels that Schlesinger wrote about.
Thus, before rejecting Schelling’s explanation of the missile crisis, a more compelling reason would have to be given.In the years immediately after Schelling wrote, a determinative assessment of his interpretation of the crisis was problematic.
If the Cuban crisis were truly a competition in risk taking, there could have been no compromise; there would either have been a clear “winner” or a thermonuclear war.To put this in a slightly different way, Schelling’s interpretation of the Cuban missile crisis and, arguably, of most other intense major power disputes,11 is game-theoretically inconsistent with what is now a strong consensus among historians and foreign policy analysts that the resolution of the crisis was a political compromise or draw.
The historical record shows not only that President Kennedy was more than eager to compromise, but that he was also willing to offer much more than he did to end the high stakes stalemate that the Soviets referred to as the Caribbean crisis.The lack of fit between Schelling’s theoretical explanation and the resolution of the crisis is indeed disturbing.
Of course, this is what happened so Howard, unlike Schelling , implicitly accepts what is now the standard understanding of the crisis’s resolution, that is, that it was a draw.As noted above, the existence of two non-equivalent and non-interchangeable Nash equilibria in Chicken, each with equal status as a solution candidate, confounds a game-theoretic analysis.
Stable outcomes of the metagame are termed metaequilibria.One way to think about Howard’s reformulation of classical game theory is as a theory of equilibrium selection.
And the United States must intend to cooperate by blockading Cuba if the Soviet Union cooperates by withdrawing the missiles.This is an interesting and potentially important theoretical result.
Which metaequilibrium eventually comes into play depends on what the players expect from one another, or what they communicate to each other, in pre-play bargaining and discussion.In the present example, then, a bargain was struck not only because both players were prepared to cooperate but also because both indicated that they were willing to run the risk of all-out war if the other was unwilling to cooperate.
Notice that the metastrategy A/B/B/A—or what Howard refers to as the “sure-thing” metastrategy—is weakly dominant for the United States, giving the Soviet Union good reason to suspect that the United States would choose it; and since M Regardless is the Soviet Union’s best response to A/B/B/A, the United States would have had a good reason to suspect that the Soviets were going to choose it.
All of which suggests that the metaequilibrium associated with these two metastrategies, which would bring about a Soviet victory, might well evolve in an actual play of the metagame.Howard, however, rejects this outcome as the solution to the metagame, and denies that any particular reason exists for singling it out.
Specifically, if the United States were to select its retaliatory metastrategy A/A/B/A and the Soviet Union, anticipating the sure-thing metastrategy A/B/B/A, selects M Regardless, each player’s worst outcome, Conflict, results.It is difficult to ignore Harsanyi’s admonition not to abandon the use of even a weakly dominant strategy.
Like Howard’s theory of metagames, Fraser and Hipel’s analysis of options technique should be interpreted, at least in part, as a proto-theory of equilibrium selection.
Perform no aggressive action, either by doing nothing or by using normal diplomatic channels to try to induce the Soviets to remove the missiles,Destroy the missile sites with an air strike, orBlockade Cuba; and three for the Soviet Union: Withdraw the missiles,Maintain the missiles, orEscalate the conflict.Clearly, some of these options are mutually exclusive, while other could be selected concurrently.
Specifically, Fraser and Hipel assume that the United States most-prefers outcome 4 to outcome 6 , and so on.
Next, they ask whether any of the outcomes offer either player a “unilateral improvement” , which is defined as a better outcome a player can induce by unilaterally changing its strategy.
Although outcome 0 is rational for the Soviet Union, it is unstable for the United States, which can induce three other outcomes it prefers to outcome 0 simply by switching to another course of action.
Of these three unilateral improvements, outcome 2 would be the United States preference.
Hence, the United States reaction.The likely Soviet response to the blockade can be also deduced from its incentive structure.
Here I concentrate on the theoretical core of all his explanations and ignore the subtle differences that set the various explanations apart.Like Fraser and Hipel , Brams abandons both a normal-form representation and the standard Chicken analogy.
When Kennedy announced the blockade on October 22, the Soviet missiles were already being installed in Cuba.
Counter-intuitively, perhaps, the United States would, at the second node of the tree, also rationally move to its best outcome, not because it is its best outcome, but because it prefers to cycle back to the Compromise outcome, which is its second-best, to terminating the game at , its least-preferred outcome.Finally, Brams argues that the Soviet Union would stick with its choice to withdraw the missiles simply because, by not doing so, it would only cycle back to the Compromise outcome.
And since neither player has a long-term incentive to move away from this outcome if and when it is reached, it constitutes a nonmyopic equilibrium.Brams’ explanation proceeds from this fact.
All of which is another way of saying that the Soviet Union withdrew the missiles because, looking ahead, they believed that maintaining them would not be in their long-term interest.
Given the American blockade and the incentive structure of the game, they simply could not win.There is obviously much to like about the Theory of Moves framework.
Starting with a straightforward crisis bargaining model that he claims broadly mirrors both the choices and the sequence of moves made by the United States and the Soviet Union, he deduces what must have been true, game theoretically, for Khrushchev to introduce the missiles in Cuba; for Kennedy to have implemented a blockade rather than respond in a more aggressive way; and for the bargain that ended the crisis to have come about.
Thus, Wagner argues persuasively that the crisis was not a “competition in risk taking”, as Schelling suggests; rather, it was an exercise in bargaining and information gathering that is more than consistent with the fact that both Kennedy and Khrushchev lacked complete information about one another’s preferences.Wagner’s study provides a plausible and insightful description of the strategic dynamic that characterized the missile crisis.
But since Wagner’s method is to deduce preferences from action choices, it cannot but fail to fully explain actual behavior .27 For that, a general model that not only identifies a plausible equilibrium, but also specifies the general conditions under which it exists, is necessary.
Clearly, space and other considerations preclude either a full description of the model or a detailed discussion of the explanation derived from it.
Needless to say, rational choice explanations that reject even some of the logical imperatives of the rationality postulate are less than satisfying.Similarly, the improved metagame technique of Fraser and Hipel falls short of the explanatory mark.
Finally, since their description of the crisis begins after the missiles were installed, they fail to address one of the three critical questions that a complete explanation of the crisis requires.Brams’ theory of moves framework avoids the arbitrary foresight limitation that Fraser and Hipel assume of the players in their model.
However, Brams take as his starting point the announcement of the blockade on October 22.
Rational Behavior and Bargaining Equilibrium in Games and Social Situations.
For a discussion, see Rapoport, , 119.6As Quackenbush points out, the “threat-that-leaves-something-to-chance” depends on the possibility of an accidental war.
Empirical examples of accidental wars, including World War I, are nonexistent .7Snyder and Diesing also find no example of the use of this and, for the most part related, coercive bargaining tactics in the sixteen major interstate crises they studied.
See also Huth and Danilovic .8For a similar, albeit less general, model that is applied hypothetically to the missile crisis, see Dixit and Skeath .9Powell also shows that under certain conditions no challenge will be made and, hence, stable mutual deterrence can emerge.
Zagare and Kilgour challenge the adequacy of this deduction.The same is true of Dixit and Skeath’s model.
Powell’s model, however, suggests that when deterrence breaks down, the connection between resolve and victory in a crisis does not always depend on a greater willingness to risk war.See footnote 7.12A Soviet Victory is implied if the Soviets were to maintain their missiles and the United States took no aggressive action.
Brams , however, assigns different utilities.There is a Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies in Chicken.
All of which suggests that it provides, at best, a very weak explanation for the resolution of the Cuban crisis; at worst, it provides no explanation at all.A metaequilibrium is simply a Nash equilibrium in the metagame.For an insightful informal analysis of signaling, see Cohen .16For the particulars of their debate, see Howard and Harsanyi .17Fraser and Hipel do not provide a detailed justification for their preference assumptions.
Their assumptions, however, are not particularly unreasonable.There is a fourth type, an outcome that is rendered “stable by simultaneity”, that does not come into play in their analysis of the missile crisis.Note that this is the sole criterion Nash uses to gauge the stability of a strategy combination.Fraser and Hipel also describe a computational model, called the state transition model, that conforms to the actual outcome of the crisis.
While it uses the input of their improved metagame technique, it is not a game-theoretic model.Brams also develops a few explanations using standard game-theoretic concepts.
Additionally, Brams constructed an extensive-form game model in which the compromise outcome is a Nash equilibrium.Interestingly, Brams shows that it was in the interest of the United States to allow the Soviet Union to precipitate the move counter-move process rather than initiate the process itself.
Thus, the United States could afford to be “magnanimous” in 1962.23Unlike a Nash equilibrium, a subgame-perfect equilibrium requires the players to plan to choose rationally at every node of the game tree.A perfect Bayesian equilibrium is a natural extension of Selten’s perfectness criterion to dynamic games of incomplete information.
It must also indicate how each player updates its beliefs about other players’ types in the light of new information obtained as the game is played out.A sequential equilibrium is a refinement of perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
For a discussion, see Morrow .26Wagner’s was right to dismiss Schelling’s characterization of the Cuban crisis, but for the wrong reasons.
Nonetheless, the fact that the Soviets did not make their alert known to United States decision-makers is inconsistent with Schelling’s interpretation of the crisis.Wagner’s approach, called revealed preferences, should be contrasted with the procedure of posited preferences that assumes an actor’s goals rather than deducing them from actual behavior.
See also Hausman .28This explanation is, however, both theoretically and empirically inconsistent with Schelling’s .© 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Economies, EISSN 2227-7099, Published by MDPI Disclaimer The statements, opinions and data contained in the journal Economies are solely those of the individual authors and contributors and not of the publisher and the editor.
MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Help us to further improve by taking part in this short 5 minute survey here. here.
