The early days Khrushchev was born in April 1894 in Kalinovka near Russia’s southwestern border with Ukraine.
Due to near-impossible economic conditions in the rural area, the family moved to the industrialzed city of Yuzovka, Ukraine, in 1908.
The energetic young man became active in trying to establish trade unions and joined the Red Army following the Bolshevik revolution in 1917.
Up the ranks Khrushchev fought in the Russian civil war and gained favor with his superiors.
In 1925, he was graduated from a workers’ school that provided higher education for young adults to prepare them for management positions.
Stalin Industrial Academy, which produced factory management personnel.
Moving rapidly up the ranks of the party, he attained the rank of the first secretary of the Moscow party, and caught the eye of Joseph Stalin, the Soviet dictator.
Khrushchev’s involvement in World War II Even though World War II started in 1939, Russia managed to stay out of it until June 1941 when Germany invaded Ukraine.
Khrushchev, a top military advisor with a rank of lieutenant general, oversaw the evacuation of industrial equipment from Kiev before it was overrun by the Germans.
In 1944, Russia pushed the Germans out of Ukraine and Khrushchev helped get war-ravaged farms, coal mines, and steel mills back into production.
Postwar power struggle When Stalin died in March 1953, Georgi Malenkov became premier.
Leery of Khrushchev’s growing power, such rivals as Lavrenti Beria, Lazar Kaganovich, and Vyacheslav Molotov, banded together to plot against Khrushchev.
In 1955, Malenkov resigned as premier, to be succeeded by Nikolai Bulganin.
That triggered a period of ""destalinization"" in which pictures and monuments of the former dictator were destroyed.
Towns and cities renamed themselves to be rid of any reference to Stalin.
Khrushchev circumvented his rivals' plans by removing them from leadership positions within the party.
Then, in March 1958, Khrushchev promoted himself to head of the Soviet government.
The reign In May 1955, Khrushchev helped push through an agreement called the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance, or Warsaw Pact.
However, by attacking Stalin, Khrushchev caused a great rift in the communist world.
The Hungarian Revolution was crushed by Khrushchev by sending tanks and Soviet troops into the country.
What developed was an agreement to let the sovereignty of Eastern European nations take a greater role in self governing.
Khrushchev’s domestic policies to raise living standards for his people worked for a time.
A great deal of effort went into trying to increase grain and other produce production in Siberia.
His government also tried to encourage the production of housing , clothing, household appliances, and furniture.
The Space Race While military conflicts flared up and were later doused, the Soviet Union, and later the United States, were deeply involved in putting a man into space and eventually on the moon.
It was a source of national pride for Russians when, in October 1957, they launched Sputnik, the first artificial satellite to orbit the earth.
The U-2 Spy Plane Incident On May 1, 1960, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane, piloted by Francis Gary Powers, was shot down deep inside Russian territory.
United States President Dwight D Eisenhower disavowed any knowledge of the U-2 program and refused to apologize.
When the Soviets produced film and parts of the wreckage, the United States had to revise its earlier statements.
On May 16, at the previously scheduled Paris Summit peace conference, Khrushchev again demanded an apology.
When Eisenhower agreed to suspend the overflights but refused to apologize once again, Khrushchev withdrew from the conference, effectively ending any peace negotiations.
Sumulong had questioned Khrushchev about his stance on western imperialism when the Soviets had, themselves, swallowed all of Eastern Europe.
The Berlin Wall Further deepening the tensions of the Cold War, Khrushchev urged East Berlin officials to build a brick wall around West Berlin, cutting off all contact between citizens of East and West Berlin.
On October 22, Kennedy declared a quarantine of ships, especially Russian vessels, attempting to unload any cargo at Cuban docks.
The United States fleet consisted of 56 warships, including eight aircraft carriers.
A compromise was reached on October 28, with the United States agreeing to pull its missiles out of Turkey and the Soviets agreeing to dismantle its offensive firepower in Cuba.
On October 14, 1964, the Central Committee formally deposed the 70-year-old leader.
He was placed under house arrest in a small dacha near Moscow, where he died on September 11, 1971.
