We then discuss some common interpretations of the crisis and its aftermath.
The small island nation under Fidel Castro had defied the Monroe Doctrine not only by successfully resisting repeated American attempts to get rid of its leader but also had begun to turn to the Soviets.
The whole Cuban thing began on July 26, 1953 when a young nationalist lawyer by the name of Castro led an armed assault on the corrupt regime of Fulgencio Batista.
He got jailed but managed to escape, went to Mexico and came back with a small revolutionary force in 1956.
Batista had no difficulty neutralizing him again and Castro barely escaped with his life and 10 survivors.
Now Batista was not what you’d call a constitutionally elected leader beloved by the people-having overthrown the elected government in 1952 and all that.
Despite its colonial influence (Americans owned 80% of Cuba’s utilities, 40% of its sugar—the major commodity, and 90% of the island’s mining wealth), the United States did not foresee Castro’s return.
Neither did the Cuban communists who nearly missed joining his movement as he seized power on New Year’s Day in 1959.
Because of Cuba’s export dependence and near exclusive reliance on sales to the U.S., the United States could control Cuba by manipulating the amount of Cuban sugar al2 lowed into the American market.
Another major goal of his was wealth redistribution, a maneuver that was certain to cause serious opposition by those whose wealth would be distributed away.
Castro’s trip to Washington did not produce anything—the United States was unwilling to cooperate and was, in fact, secretly working to “force the revolutionaries to their sense” or at least hoping that “moderates” would replace Castro.
However, by the summer of 1959, Castro’s power was unquestioned, his agrarian reforms had alienated the Americans, and by the end of the year anticommunists began leaving Cuba.
In February 1960, the Russians moved in to fill the power vacuum by signing a trade agreement to exchange Cuban sugar for Soviet oil and machinery.
Trade with the Soviet bloc shot up from 2% in 1960 to 80% by the end of 1961.
In July 1960, Washington cut the Cuban sugar quota for the United States market, mobilized hemispheric opposition to the island, landed marines in Central America to quell rumored Cuban invasions, and began training an anti-Castro army of Cuban exiles.
On March 3, 1961, President Kennedy announced the Alliance for Progress, which improved on policies initiated by Eisenhower and meant to provide assistance for the economic development of Latin America.
The AFP provided for a 10-year commitment of $20 billion of United States money in return for which Latin America pledged $80 billion of investment over that period plus various land and tax reforms.
Kennedy hoped that the Alliance would produce a 5.5% increase in Latin America’s growth rate.
This was an attempt to reduce the “demand” for Castro-style revolutions throughout Latin America.
If working conditions improved and inequalities were made more tolerable, fewer people would support populist or communist challenges to the regime, reducing the likelihood of revolutions.
The Cuban leader had become so intolerable by refusing to go away that the United States decided to help him disappear, which it did on April 17, 1961.
On this date, a group of Cuban exiles, trained and supported by the US, landed at the Bay of Pigs to mount an invasion of Cuba.
JFK had promised air cover for the landing, but when the 1,500-strong force arrived, it discovered that no such support was forthcoming—a key air-strike was canceled because of clouds, and other naval and air units were immobilized by Castro’s small air force.
The beachhead was indefensible and the would-be counter-revolutionaries surrendered.
It was a major embarrassment for the US, whose involvement was widely known.
In fact, United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson was caught lying about the United States involvement.
Congress passed a joint resolution authorizing the use of force in Cuba if American interests were threatened.
These American activities in Cuba and around Latin America convinced Castro that the United States would not rest until he was gone.
And since the limited attempts were not succeeding, he began to fear that the United States might be tempted to take more drastic measures, perhaps even a ground invasion to topple his regime.
They probably estimated that an invasion is a serious possibility, and perhaps a probability in the future.
Kennedy had been humiliated after the Bay of Pigs, and we saw how the Soviets immediately attempted to capitalize on that in Vienna and then in Berlin, where the wall had gone up on August 13, 1961.
On the other hand, Khrushchev had not solved the Berlin problem completely.
In fact, he had issued yet another of his Berlin ultimata and was facing a major diplomatic defeat because he had withdrawn it after being promised negotiations, and the negotiations were stalled and on the verge of collapse.
This was precisely what had happened the two times he had tried this before, and he was convinced that the American intransigence was coming from their position of military superiority.
In October 1961, the United States let the Soviets know that the United States was aware that the Soviets did not have the nuclear capabilities they had been claiming to have.
This revealed that the Soviet ICBM threat was a sham, and this now became common knowledge.
It also drastically reduced the expectation of a favorable outcome in Berlin for the Russians who realized that the Americans would be even tougher bargainers than before.
The reasons for the Soviets placing missiles in Cuba are so many that their decision to do so seems overdetermined after the fact.
The astounding thing is that it was unanticipated by the United States administration.
The Americans had been monitoring the buildup in Cuba and were worried about the possibility of the Russians doing more than securing the defense of the island against an invasion that the United States was not even planning.
After Castro’s initial request for help, the Soviets agreed to send weapons and build up Cuban air defenses.
Once shipments began, the Americans got jittery about what was happening and asked that the Soviets promise not to install any nuclear weapons in Cuba.
After ascertaining that the Russians did not intend to put nukes in Cuba, in September Kennedy publicly stated that the United States would not permit any nuclear weapons to be installed there.
This was not an attempt to deter the Russians— they had assured Kennedy that they were not going to do it—it was an attempt to assuage fears in the United States by essentially ratifying what the Russians had told him they were willing to do.
Unfortunately, the Russians were lying and this public statement committed Kennedy to a confrontational response once it became known that they had lied.
Of course, it was not Kennedy’s fault that the Russians had misled him.
Perhaps they did not understand that when the president publicly draws the line, it would be very difficult to back down.
Secure in his office , Khrushchev had done so on numerous occasions and perhaps did not understand that Kennedy’s position was very fragile and that the president might be tempted to stand firm for political as much as strategic reasons.
But perhaps the Soviets misunderstood how their action would appear to the Americans because they failed to realize that the Americans might misperceive the reasons for that action.
For instance, if the Soviets wanted to defend Cuba under their assumption that the American invasion was inevitable, then the Soviet reasoning would be that the missiles were a natural defensive step to deter that invasion.
This should not be too alarming to the U.S., and the response could be expected to be measured, especially if the USSR confronted the Americans with a fait accompli.
But since the Americans did not intend to invade Cuba, they seriously underestimated how much this fear played in Soviet thinking.
The Americans thought that because they were not about to invade (had made no threats or preparations to do so), thus much would be obvious to the Russians, so when the Russians acted, fear of such a hypothetical invasion could not have been their motive.
The American reasoning would be that because there was no reason to defend Cuba against an invasion that was not coming, the Soviet emplacement of missiles there could only be a provocative offensive step designed to extract future bargaining leverage, possibly over Berlin.
Therefore, a step that the Soviets thought would work without much risks in produced an unexpected response that greatly increased the risk of war.
Another reasons the Soviets might have underestimated the risks was that they placed great faith in their ability to pull this off before the United States became aware of the missiles.
In fact, there are good reasons to believe that had the Soviets succeeded in 5 their fait accompli, the United States might have acquiesced to missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy’s remark about his wishes not have drawn the line make this clear but he was also supported by McNamara who argued that even with the missiles in Cuba, the U.S. military superiority was secure (the United States had overwhelming conventional weapons presence in the Western hemisphere) and the Russians would be unlikely to capitalize on the missiles for that reason.
So maybe the Soviets hoped to extract political dividends from the missiles but, ironically, the United States might have acquiesced to their installation because the Americans believed it gave no advantage to the Soviets.
At any rate, the risks would be serious only if the United States detected the missiles before they became operational and was tempted to intervene militarily to ensure that they never become so.
They had begun the supply of defensive weapons and maybe Khrushchev thought tactical nukes could prove useful against overwhelming United States conventional superiority.
In particular, if the Soviets could not hope to defend the island, the possession of nukes could bolster their deterrent posture.
Castro was talking about going to the PRC for support, which threw the Russians into panic.
Such a move would dilute their influence in Cuba and would undermine their prestige as leaders of the communist world.
The Soviets considered their options and decided to increase their commitment to Cuba.
The Soviets lived in perpetual anxiety, and Khrushchev thought that perhaps the Americans did not understand how stressful this was and were maybe unaware how unpleasant it was to give up under duress.
With missiles in Cuba, 1 At this point it might be useful to ask why the Soviets failed in their fait accompli tactic.
They had taken great pains to conceal the shipment of the missiles, and they had been 100% successful— the missiles and parts had gone undetected by the Americans.
Perhaps they did not realize that their typical installation sites would be familiar to intelligence operatives in the U.S., making U-2 photos much more meaningful and informative.
Or perhaps the organization charged with building the sites had no operating procedures for camouflage designed to prevent aerial surveillance (the Soviets had never installed missiles outside of the USSR and they did not conceal the installations within the country), and nobody thought of ordering them to develop such until it was too late.
This just goes to show how the best-laid plans can come to nought because leaders cannot exercise complete control over their subordinates. 6 they would have a little of their own medicine, and might be more accommodating.
The missile gap, which had been publicly revealed, was an embarrassment to the Soviets and it probably caused additional fears that the Americans might be tempted to capitalize on it.
Given the inferiority of their ICBMs, the only way to reach the United States with nuclear weapons would be from Cuba with short and medium-range missiles.
In fact, the Soviets had plans to develop Cuba into a major base, complete with SLBMs and megaton-range nukes.
If the Soviets could defy the United States in its backyard, it would go a long way from demonstrating that the Russians were not afraid of the Americans, and that they would protect their friends.
When all is said and done, Berlin was the more important cause for concern for the Russians.
It was a perpetual sore that threatened to destabilize whatever relations they developed with the West.
It was a visible and powerful symbol of Western defiance and commitment.
With a base in Cuba, the Americans could be expected to be more forthcoming with a compromise over Berlin, and maybe the Russians would be able to use more assertive tactics for dealing with Berlin.
Maybe even they could trade Cuba for Berlin, with the Americans leaving Berlin in exchange for the Russians leaving Cuba.
Khrushchev had not anticipated that the Americans would react the way they did.
The Russians had lived with United States missiles based all around them, even as close as Turkey.
It is important to stress, however, that the gamble was premised on the Americans not discovering the nukes until they were operational, which would make a forcible removal quite dangerous, possibly dangerous enough to deter them from attempting it.
In April 1962, Khrushchev responded to the Cuban pleas for assistance and authorized the transport and installation of SAM sites and missiles for coastal defenses.
In May, the Soviets launched Operation Anadyr—the secret deployment of medium bombers, an entire regiment of mechanized infantry , and ballistic nuclear missiles , as well as tactical nuclear weapons.
In late August 1962, U-2 planes revealed the presence of the bombers but in midSeptember, intelligence reports indicated there was no sign of any nuclear-headed missiles arriving in Cuba.
As late as October 14, 1962, United States officials publicly stated that there were no ground-to-ground missiles in Cuba, and further expressed disbelief that the two communist leaders would be so rash as to emplace offensive 7 missiles barely 90 miles off the United States coast, especially after JFK had publicly warned Moscow about this a month before.
The Soviets had repeatedly, both publicly and privately through trusted channels, reassured the Americans that all military equipment going to Cuba was strictly for defensive purposes and that no nuclear weapons would be sent.
While the United States administration was solemnly telling its citizens that the Soviets were true to their word, and even as the Soviets were making solemn pronouncements to that same effect, Khrushchev had secretly moved to install not one, but two types of nuclear weapons in Cuba.
By the time of detection, the Soviets had managed to move 42 bombers , 40 Mig-21 fighters, along with 24 launching pads, 42 IRBM rockets, and about 45 nuclear warheads.
On October 16, Kennedy received the first U-2 photographs showing construction of the missile sites.
The situation was precarious but instead of reacting publicly immediately, JFK created a small select group of high-ranking officials, the Executive Committee , that began around-the-clock meetings to discuss how to deal with the issue.
Although the military advisers were united in their estimate that Soviet missiles in Cuba drastically altered the nuclear balance, McNamara was more sanguine and did not believe that the Soviets would be able to use them.
The problem was that whereas Kennedy agreed in principle, his public drawing of the line against nukes in Cuba made it impossible to allow it, certainly not after the Soviets had lied about it.
The military advocated invading the island, removing the threat before the missiles became operational, and toppling Castro’s regime in the process.
While almost certain to succeed, this drastic escalation was dangerous because it could provoke Soviet retaliation, if not in Cuba, then perhaps in Berlin.
Initiating such a large military action without an attempt to resolve the crisis would also be problematic with the allies in Europe.
This option remained in reserve, a fall-back position if other alternatives failed.
Some military advisers also advocated an air strike to remove the installations before the missiles became operational.
The problem was that in order to guarantee the destruction of all targets, such a strike would have to be massive.
Not only would the Air Force have to hit all sites numerous times, but they had to destroy the SAM sites to ensure the safety of the pilots, and all of this amounted to a rather impressive use of firepower.
This seemed to have all the disadvantages of a ground invasion without the high probability of success, and without the additional benefits of Castro’s fall.
Dissatisfied with this massive option, Kennedy asked and got a limited one.
These air strikes would take out the sites with precision bombing and would avoid expanding the attack.
The problem is that the probability of success drastically declined, the likelihood of American casualties climbed, and it was seen as impractical because the Air Force could not promise the destruction of all sites with sufficient confidence.
The United States Navy would blockade the island, search all incoming ships it deems necessary to inspect, and seize any offensive weapons it finds.
This would be a moderate escalatory step, better than doing nothing, and not as risky as an all-out strike.
It would shift the onus of escalation back to the Soviets who would have to decide whether to challenge the blockade and risk further escalation.
It would also give policy-makers some time to work out a diplomatic solution before resorting to violence.
After six days of deliberations, the ExCom converged on a combination of an ultimatum demanding the withdrawal of all offensive weapons from Cuba and the imposition of quarantine.
In addition, plans for ground invasion continued on the assumption that if the threat failed, the United States would have to go in and remove the equipment already in Cuba.
Kennedy listed all the lies of the Soviets and then announced that the United States was imposing a strict quarantine (the word “blockade” was avoided as it would be an act of war) on “all offensive military equipment,” which meant that the United States would stop all incoming ships for inspection.
He demanded that Khrushchev remove the offensive weapons under United Nations supervision.
Soviet ships, some of which were known by CIA intelligence to be carrying nuclear missiles, were sailing full speed ahead toward Cuba and the American quarantine zone.
The Soviets denounced Kennedy’s blockade and vowed that if the Americans attempted to board any Soviet ship, the Russians would fight.
For three days tensions escalated as the world seemed to march toward the brink of nuclear disaster.
The Americans boarded one ship that they were reasonably confident did not carry weapons, and it submitted to inspection.
After not finding anything objectionable, the Americans allowed it to proceed.
Another ship (a Swedish ship hired by the Russians), however, defied the blockade and the Americans let it go.
Their ships began to turn around—there were not going to run the blockade.
On October 26, the United States administration received a barely coherent letter from Khrushchev, in which the Soviet Premier offered to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade the island.
Just when there appeared to be a break, the situation escalated again when the next day a Soviet officer in Cuba shot down a U-2 plane, killing its pilot.
Kennedy refused, and after some deliberation the ExCom concluded that since the second message did 10 not mention the U-2 downing, it could have been unauthorized.
Proceeding from that assumption and hoping that Khrushchev was still in power in Moscow, Kennedy accepted his brother’s suggestion that they respond to the first letter with the non-invasion pledge and ignore the Jupiter proposal.
It would signal that the United States is interested in resolving the crisis without violence but that it would not publicly agree to the concession.
Had the Russians privately asked for the removal of the Jupiters, Kennedy would have no doubt agreed.
These missiles were obsolete, they were vulnerable to a Russian attack , so they were being phased out in favor of SLBMs in the Mediterranean, and so this amounted to no concession whatsoever.
On the other hand, withdrawing them under duress was another story altogether.
It was costly politically, it would cause serious problems in NATO when the allies begin to doubt American resolve, and it might conceivably provoke the Turks to resist the removal.
At any rate, the Turks could not be expected to agree without delicate and time-consuming negotiations, and time was running out.
Kennedy was prepared to promise the removal of the Jupiters but under absolutely no circumstances would he allow the Russians to make the promise public.
This eliminated the benefit for the Soviets—the only reason they had asked for the missiles to be removed from Turkey was to use such a promise in public to safe face now that the whole scheme had blown up in their faces.
The United States transmitted its official counter-offer through official channels without mentioning the Jupiters, and Dobrynin was told about the deal with those.
Amid all the uncertainty, and with the feeling that time was running out for action before installations in Cuba went online, the ExCom, worn-down by the brutal physical and mental fatigue, began planning for invasion.
The mobilization was underway, and there were already 200,000 troops in Florida.
Both sides were well-aware that such an attack would kill many Soviet soldiers, obliging the USSR to respond.
They also knew that the Soviet SAM sites were operational and had orders to resists, which would doubtless cause serious losses among the assaulting Americans, dragging the United States fully into a possible, which might conceivably escalate into a nuclear exchange.
The United States had not realized how much more dangerous this action would be.
The Russians had tactical nukes for coastal defenses and local commanders were planning a nuclear strike on Guantanamo base in case of an American attack.
They Americans had no idea about the actual number of Soviet combat troops they would be confront, and whose destruction would surely require a very drastic escalatory response by Moscow.
The Soviets were the ones who were bearing the full brunt of escalation because they were the only ones aware of the actual risks.
Khrushchev knew that if Castro got wind of the deal, he could refuse to relinquish control of the equipment and delay proceedings so much that a military confrontation would be impossible to avoid.
When Castro found out that the Soviets were going to withdraw the offensive weapons , he was furious.
He refused to allow United Nations inspectors to monitor the dismantling.
United States forces remained on full alert until November 20th, when Castro finally returned the bombers.
However, since he refused to allow inspection, the United States did not formally pledge not to invade Cuba.
On December 14, Kennedy wrote Khrushchev that the no-invasion pledge required both the final removal of all offensive weapons from Cuba and the assurance from the Cubans that they would not commit any aggressive acts against any nation of the Western hemisphere.
This second requirement was a major loophole—it was so elastic that its interpretation could stretch wide enough to allow an invasion of Cuba should that was deemed necessary.
They had challenged the United States directly and had been compelled to withdraw.
A bitter Soviet official warned the Americans that the Soviet Union would never permit the United States to do that to it again.
Indeed, soon thereafter, the USSR, convinced that the reason for its humiliation was the absolute military dominance of the Americans, embarked on a crash program of military buildup.
The dire predictions of NSC-68 and the warnings of the people scared by the “missile gap” had come to pass.
The second era of United States military superiority was over and the age of “mutually assured destruction” had arrived.
As terrified as the world was in October 1962, not even the policy-makers had realized how close to disaster the situation really was.
Kennedy thought that the likelihood of nuclear war was 1 in 3, but the administration did not know many things.
For example, it believed that none of the missiles were in Cuba yet, and that 2-3,000 of Soviet service personnel was in place.
Accordingly, they planned the air strike for the 30th, before any nuclear warheads could be installed.
In 1991-92, Soviet officials revealed that 42 IRBMs were in place and fully operational.
Further, 9 MRBMs were ready to be used against the Americans in case of an invasion.
The Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons that the local commanders were authorized to use to repel an attack.
After he learned of this in 1992, a shaken McNamara told reporters, “This is horrifying.
Both sides suddenly became fully aware just how perilous nuclear brinkmanship (diplomacy that relies on nuclear threats) really was.
The Soviet leaders had not authorized the action, and it could have promoted an escalatory step by the United States in the mistaken belief that they had.
The Americans scrambled interceptors to protect it but because of the alert, these fighters were armed with nuclear weapons.
The Russians could have thought that this was a last overflight preliminary to an American attack, and might have escalated if the American fighters had shot down Soviet planes, especially if this was done with nuclear weapons.
It is worth remembering that arming the fighters with nukes was standard procedure when going on alert and nobody thought of this when the fighters were scrambled.
This could be interpreted as preparation for a ground attack, depending on the target of sabotage.
The remaining Titan rocket was fired in the midst of the crisis over the Pacific on a routinely scheduled test.
The Soviets, who knew that the base was a test site, would have been monitoring it closely, and would also know that the missiles there might be carrying nuclear weapons.
They might have been prompted to escalate when they detected the launch in the mistaken belief that it was authorized by Kennedy.
When the explosion failed to materialize, an inquiry revealed that a radio operator had inadvertently put a simulation tape in the computer, and the control room observes who did not know about any of that mistook the simulated attack for the real deal.
The Americans could have reacted without waiting to see if Tampa was going to be obliterated.
NORAD falsely believed the warning had come from the reliable Moorestown but in fact it came from Laredo where the radar warning site had just gone online and the operators had mistaken an orbiting satellite for missiles.
Before NORAD could take action, the failure of expected detonations to materialize revealed that the warning was likely a false alarm.
There were no armed guards when one missile silo was ready on the 26th, and the launch equipment and codes were in the silo itself.
It was possible for a single person to launch a missile without authorization.
There are rumors that the officers in charge might have done this on purpose, to ensure that they could operate the missiles should communications with Washington break down.
As the threat that leaves something to chance logic would suggest, escalation really involves serious risks of random events that could be misinterpreted and cause the next escalatory step.
Both sides now moved cautiously to prevent similar crises from occurring in the future.
In fact, their European policy never really flared up over that city again.
The Chinese thought the Russians were stupid for putting the missiles 14 into Cuba, and cowardly for removing them.
Continuing to believe America to be a “paper tiger,” they ridiculed the less militant Soviet policy.
Just as the Soviets ignored the Cubans in their dealings with the US, so did the Americans ignore their NATO allies.
The French in particular were first appalled when Kennedy offered to negotiate bilaterally with Khrushchev over Berlin in August 1961, and were now angered that the United States had sent Acheson to Paris to “inform,” not to “consult,” as French President de Gaulle put it, the French on the crisis.
Although France fully supported the United States in this episode, de Gaulle became convinced that the United States would involve his country in a nuclear war without even consulting them beforehand.
De Gaulle feared unchecked American power, which he thought the United States might use irresponsibly and unilaterally, causing the French to suffer annihilation without representation.
In this version, the Americans compel the Russians to back down through a display of their strength, resolve, and determination.
First, the Russians had precipitated the crisis unknowingly in the sense that they had underestimated how the United States would react to their missiles in Cuba.
Their secretive action was not a challenge but an attempt to correct the enormous disparity in power that the United States enjoyed in strategic nuclear capability.
In an important way, this was the Russians’ attempt to force Washington to take the USSR seriously as an equal, to force a departure from the consistent United States insistence on dealing with the Soviets from a position of strength.
Second, their fears of possible invasion seem to have been quite justified given United States hostile behavior.
Their attempt to place nuclear forces in Cuba was a possible solution to a problem that the conventional forces were unlikely to help solve.
It would have worked too, had the Soviets succeeded with their fait accompli tactic.
They would have announced the presence of missiles in November, then concluded a defense treaty with Cuba that would allow them to create a full-fledged military base there (Castro 15 had previously refused to allow such a base fearing that it would provoke an American attack), and then perhaps blackmail Kennedy, whose political capital would be nearly depleted after such a humiliation, into concessions over Berlin.
Third, the Russians backed down because Khrushchev realized before the Americans that the crisis was spiraling out of control, and that a military confrontation was very likely.
Government actions could have unintended consequences, and there were instances of events that were interpreted as signals when in fact the leadership was not aware of them.
More importantly, Khrushchev knew (and Kennedy did not) that the Russians had tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, and that local commanders were authorized to use them for defense.
In the end, not knowing proved an advantage for the Americans who extracted bargaining leverage from their opponent who knew just how fragile the situation really was.
The crisis provides a good illustration of the various tactics we have discussed that rational players could use to credibly threaten use of force in the shadow of nuclear weapons.
To begin with, the Kennedy administration, while eschewing inaction, resolved on the least-provocative option that was available.
They relinquished initiative to the Russians by setting up a naval blockade that the Soviets would have to deliberately choose to break.
They could, of course, decide to let the Americans board their ships, but that would reveal the nuclear warheads.
This would have been an intolerable security risk, and there is little doubt that the Russian sailors would defended against it.
Although the Soviets decided against running the blockade, the crisis was not over.
They still had their installations in Cuba that the Americans worried about.
The United States needed a genuine escalation that was still short of a direct military confrontation.
Rather than coolly relying on a strategy that deliberately escalated risks of unintended and undesired consequences, both sides seemed genuinely frightened at the prospect of such events.
They do not seem to have tried to use nuclear threats for political ends.
They did implicitly threaten that things could get out of control into disaster, but they did the best they could to retain as much control as possible anyway.
Despite the urging of the General Staff, Kennedy resisted either air strikes or an outright invasion.
At least, he resisted them for a while, enough to give diplomacy some chance to work.
But of course, diplomacy could only work if enough pressure was brought to bear on the Soviets.
As American preparations for invasion got underway in Florida, the pressure became unbearable for Khrushchev, who suddenly became aware that the Americans were preparing for an action that would really trigger a nuclear war without even knowing it.
This would have placed the ball back into American hands and, if the revelation were credible, would have probably prevented the invasion planned for the 30th.
However, Khrushchev really had no way of revealing this knowledge in any credible way even if he wanted to, and he did not.
The likelihood that the United States would discount this as another tactic and a bluff was too great, and there was no time to even try it.
In the end, the Russians backed down because they had a better idea of the risks involved in further escalation.
Rather, they were hoping until the very last for some development that would help them get out of the situation and save some face.
It is not surprising that they seized on the Jupiter trade and the no-invasion pledge.
Khrushchev could pretend to the hardliners that he had compelled concessions from the United States , and he could tell the world that the USSR, despite withdrawing, had managed to secure Cuba’s independence.
When Khrushchev was removed from power, the Soviets began a rapid build up designed to propel the USSR toward military parity with the United States.
