School Building Committee for swamp work and di indicated that studies of the site and the receipt of certificates for work done had excess expenditure was acceptable. fhe Selectmen say they received the approval of the Town Accountant for t hi under the special enabling legislation passed by the General Curt last March.
A DIRECTOR, Miss Hit a Plummer, seated, shown with members of her staff.
Chief Derro L penmt passage, said that D’Ercole concealed the This decision is intended to restolen batteries in the rear of his lieve the serious and rather dangercar. | ous traffic congestion caused by Chief Derro said that in placing that Brantwood Road, a the youths on one year's probation [ non throughway, is very difficult Judge Henchey delivered one of to negotiate for motorists turning the sternest judicial lectures he their vehicles around, has ever heard.
Without equivocaThe announcement was made by tion, Judge Henchey warned that the School Committee and the if either youth deviated from the L’hief of Police, terms of his probation he would Dr.
Has New Director Navajo Life Is Subject of Talk To Unitarian Women’s Alliance Forty At Hearing On School Buses The Winchester Visiting Nursing ssociation, under Mrs.
Thomas L the leadership Turtle, president, announces that as of October 1, its new executive director is Miss Rita Plummer of Stoncham.
Miss Plummer comes to the Winchester agency with considerable experience in the field of public health nursing.
A graduate of the Massachusetts General Hospital in 1947 and of Boston College with a B.S. degree in I960, she has recently worked at The first general meeting of the Women’s Alliance of the Winchester Unitarian Society will be held on Tuesday morning, October 10th, at the Unitarian Church.
Following the coffee there will be a business meeting in the Symmes room.
Dudley Moore Director of the Callup, New Mexico Program as well as the African Program, of the Unitarian Service Committee, Inc., will speak.
Moore will discuss the work of the Unitarian Service Committee, especially with regard to the Navajo Indians.
Moore’s direction, the U.S.C. is, for the eighth year, acting as operating agency for the Callup Indian Community Center.
Here there is a program of adult education, hospitality, alcohol rehabilitation, community integration, and a special citizenship education project for the Navajos.
Moore worked with youth groups in school children, most of whom were resi Some 95 parents of dents of the Pond Estates and the High Street district, appeared Monday evening at the music room in the high school to attend the hearing held by the School Committee in connection with a petition from Pond Estate parents for school bus transportation tor their children.
Brink, chairman of the School C ommittee, presided and called upon Mr Falzione, a leader in the movement for buses, to open the hearing.
He said that High Street is a heavily traveled way and that there are no sidewalks on it for the use of children going to and from school.
Committee had given the matter of children from falling into the wa5ua 8ervjce very carefu i considerable Children on their way to the ti<m an( , whcn milWnff up its budLynch Junior High School, he con^ had decjf , e(J to g0 back to the tinued, have to pass through three o)( , two mjlc , jmit fol . walking bad intersections.
Vienna is described as a nice city, with charming people who drive like mad.
Andy’s delegation bus nice quarters in a hotel down town in the ojty and work out of a palace connected with the Hapsson o got a glimpse of the Soviet’s Molotov.
The Winchester boy has naturally taken many pictures as souvenirs of his trip, but recently discovered that a defective camera shutter resulted in ruining 40 of them.
His last letter, written September 26 reported the first rain he had seen in Vienna with thunderstorms coming up the Danube Valley.
Playing on his Greek ancestry he writes his father that the oldest place in Vienna, dating from 1500, is the Griechenhuus, or Greek’s Inn. stay in its bright new headquarters and invites visitors to come and look them The phone number will remain the same.
N until and beauty will be represented at the Friends of the Winchester Hospital W altz Evening on Friday and Saturday, October 12 and I 1.
A bevy of beauteous young ladies and handsome young men from H>th Winchester and Reading High School will serve as dower girls and ushers on these evenings.
Costumes of dazzling splendor will identify the flower girls for each evening.
Leslie Dube, Debbie Nichols, Judy Carr, Sylvia Pirotta, Sue Waldron, Roberta Kirkpatrick, Betty Bowes and Lynn Anderson.
On Saturday, seven Winchester High School girls and two Reading High School girls will offer corsages, each ticketed with a number which might be the winning one in the door prize drawing to be held each evening.
Janet Millican, Kate Robinson, Debbie Harrison, Gwen Eugley, Anne LaPointe, Janet Niles and Dorothy Williams.
From Reading to grace Winchester’s Town Hall will conic Jill Lougee and Diane Engell.
CAMELOT, continued on page 5 Well Done, Officer If Winchester were to name a “Man of the Week,” his name this week would be Officer John Fron gillo of the police department.
Photo by Ryerson OFFICER FRONGILLO Officer Frongillo was stationed at the Center Sunday afternoon and decided he had had enough of a situation that has long thoroughly annoyed responsible Winchester citizens; a beautiful common deluged with litter and refuse.
As he walked up Laraway Road, Officer John spotted a group of some thirty litter-bugging local youths lounging about with nothing to do, sipping milk shakes, and FRONGILLO, continued page 5 Six Boys Under Investigation For Vandalism At Pump House Six Winchester youths are under investigation by the' police department in connection with the yin d ali. stic destruction on August 1 of an eight-by-six-foot cinder block pump house at Leonard Beach Field, Police Chief Derro told the Star this week.
The boys’ identity was discovered as a result of special investigations by Officers Cogan and Roy.
These investigations uncovered the fact that the six hoys, who admit damaging the pump house, were members of a no longer secret organization comprising a total of 23 Winchester youths.
The names of all of these youths are known to police, who discovered a membership list at the Leonard Pool Bathhouse which the youths were using as a club house during the night hours.
The police investigation resulted — Two Youths Found Guilty In Auto Battery Larceny A 1 ] -year-old Stoncham youth and a W inchester juvenile wen arraigned in Woburn District Court Thursday, Sept. in con nection with the larceny of six auto batteries here on August 10.
The Stoncham youth was found guilty of receiving the stolen property, while the W inchester youth was found guilty of the larceny itself.
Both were sentenced by Justice William Henchey to one year’s probation from a complaint of the Park Department two weeks ago that the lock on the bathhouse had been tampered with.
It was discovered, Chief Derro said, that the youths had used the club house for card games, in direct violation of park department rules forbidding the playing of cards on park property.
As a result of the boys using it, the bathhouse will have to be repainted and repaired at an estimated cost of $60, Chief Derro reports.
Chief Derro said that from this point on the parks will be under stricter supervision, and that anyone apprehended playing cards on park property will face court action.
United Fund Reports On Its Progress Winchester United Fund leaders reported that 13. per cent of residential solicitors and 10 per cent of small business solicitors had been enrolled for this fall’s Greater Boston United Fund campaign.
The reports were presented at the Lfnited Fund Metropolitan Department’s first volunteer enrollment luncheon, which was held at American Red Cross Headquarters in Boston.
The goal for this date was 25 per cent for residential and 50 per cent for small business solicitor enrollment.
UNITED FUND, cont. page 5 Winchester Police Chief Joseph J Derro identified the Stonehani youth as William D’Ercole, whose parents, former Winchester residents, now live in Rhode Island.
Under the laws of the Commonwealth, the name of the juvenile was withheld by the police.
Officers Boyle and Baird conducted the successful investigation, assisted later on in the case by Juvenile Officer Cogan.
The theft took place at the Fitzgerald Auto Supply Co. on Glenwood Avenue school yard from Brantwood Road on Thursday, ""August 10, as reportto Sylvester Avenue will be removTraffic Snarl At Lynch JHS Is Unsnarled To make matters easier for parents driving pupils to and from the Lynch Junior High School, it has been decided that the chain now barring auto passage through the are holdinfi . out $6,540, the usual for some time.
Mr Saltmarsh said the Board — had acted on the advice of both the Town Counsel and Town Accountant, and that, of course, the decision was still subject to the approval of the State Director of Accounts, Herman Dine, as required by the enabling act.
The Selectmen are still holding out approximately $17,482 pending further investigation of the validity or accuracy of the bills.
These investigations have required the | services of the Town Accountant, the Water and Sewer Board, the Town Engineer and the Town Counsel.
The Selectmen are still not satisfied that the charge for this is justified in terms of the contract.
Mr Karp this week He said Mr Karp had told him that bis firm had been unable to complete the work as scheduled but that the work would be completed this week.
Mr Saltmarsh told the Star the grading for the court had already been done. $850, for stone fill put under the water mains.
There is some question as to whether the amount of fill put in was more than required.
The Selectmen are holding up payment of this item pending further word from the Water and Sewer Board.
In addition, the Selectmen retainage against the contract held out for one year after work is completed.
The Selectmen are hopeful that they will be able to announce more specific and final decisions on the payment of these items next week.
There was no definite word this week as to whether and the j arbitration would be sought on I any of them.
Home fron ters ’ Tag Dag October 14th The Winchester Home Fronters are again preparing for Tag Day on Saturday October 14, thus giving the Winchester people a chance to contribute funds for the Christmas packages that are still sent to our men and women in the service.
We have many more in the service this year because of the new draft call.
David M Rush, chairman held her committee meeting Monday, October 2, at her lovely home at 2 Mayflower Road.
Headquarters will be at the police station again this year which is very much appreciated.
Collectors will be on the street and at the football games from 9:00m. until 5:00m.
Stand Up, Be Heard State Representative I larrison Chadwick of 2 I Everett Avenue appealed for party unity and principle among Massachusetts Republicans this week following his utisuccesful bid for the G.O.l*. leadership in the House of Representatives.
Interest is growing in the October 19th appearance in Winchester of the world-famous F.B.I. counterspy, Herbert Philbrick, who sacrificed a happy home life and a career as an advertising career man to go underground and fight the Communists.
High The School Administration offices made another jump in their checkerboard housing history Tuesday when they moved in to spanking new quarters in the Lynch Junior High School on Brantwood Road.
The move was described as temporary, for the Department may occupy the Hast wing first floor offices only until they are needed for classroom space.
All the same, it was a welcome change for the office staff of 15 who do the planning, supervising, buying, and accounting for the Winchester school system, the largest department in Town government.
The new accommodations are a distinct departure from the “old woman in the shoe” atmosphere of the Main Street building over the past four years.
Superintendent Gilson and assistant superintendent have smart-looking adjacent offices looking out toward Horn Pond Brook Road, the most direct approach to the East Wing.
Lillie Mac Feeley will have the office to the. left of the area exterior entrance.
Then, progressing down the corridor are the offices of the superintendents, their secretaries and director of Guidance Norton Dempsey.
At the end of the hall, to the left, the departmental supervisors will share a large loom.
To the right as you enter the lower East entrance will be the general business offices and work room.
To the immediate right is the combined “Committee Room and Curriculum Laboratory and Library” to be christened by a school committee meeting next Monday night.
In addition to its function as a meeting room, as a curriculum work room and planning room it is a real symbol of modern school administration.
In the last fifteen years the school department has had a number of homes.
Curtiss won the post by a bare majority, or 41, as opposed to 29 for Rep.
The time has come for Massachusetts Republicans to act as a real opposition party should act.
The time has come for our party to change its direction, to stop going along out of a feeling of futility, to stand up and be counted and make a record it can really run on.
Mr Chadwick suggested that Republicans ought to act as if they were sitting in these seats, not hiding behind them.
Rut your savings account at Winchester Savings Rank assures dependable insured dividends.
And immediate availability when an opportunity can change your whole life.
A Visit From Ned The Star had one of its pleasant visits yesterday from an old friend, Ned Crawford, of Williamsvillc, Vt., where he acts as chauffeur and general handy man for Sumner McCall, formerly of Winchester, and son of the late war time Governor of Massachusetts, Samuel Walker McCall.
He hus served the McCall family for 57 years, going to work for the then Congressman McCall, later Governor,, when he completed grammar school.
In those days he drove the Congressman and his family in their horse-drawn carriage, often taking COMMONWEALTH OP MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To ull persons interested in the estate of MABEL L VINTON late of Wine he* Ur in Haul County, deceased.
Witness, John C Lejocat, Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this third day of October 1UG1.
A great sports follower, he particularly enjoyed taking the Congressman to see his son, Hal, play second base for the Harvard varsity nine.
Later in the early nineteen hundreds he drove the family’s Stoddard-Dayton automobile.
For many years now “Ned” has been with Sumner McCall on his place in Williamsville, Vt.
It is always nice to have this fine old timer drop in at the Star Office and it is the editor’s hope that he will come in often.
TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS September 18, 1961 The undersigned being the owner of a single family residence building and store numbered# 60 Harvard Street, located in a general residence district established by the Zoning By-Laws, hereby makes application for permission to alter the house for two-family use.
That a public hearing be held thereon in the office of the Building Commissioner, 9 Mt.
By the Board of Appeal Gilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V French Daniel T Chane Mtft-tt To All Jaycee Members The Winchester Jaycees are off and rolling again.
The Officers and Directors have met three times and have come up with definite plans for a fabulous Charter Night dance to be held December 9th at the Town Hall.
Ted Ben&rd is going to make the walls rock with Dixieland Jazz once again.
Meeting place will be at the Red Cross Chapter house between the Town Hall and the Library.
At this gathering details of the Charter Night dance, which will include free cocktails and a late buffet, will be one of the major topics for discussion.
This year’s project agenda, which tentatively includes Town Christmas decorations, High School foreign pen-pal correspondence, and a sports olympia, will be discussed along with all the ideas you can bring to the meeting to help make this a terrific year.
Please come down. i the School Committee to feel that senior and junior high school pupils can do the same.
She said there is every reason to believe that with the new layout made by the town at Cambridge und Wildwood Streets, the State will authorize the continuous operation of the traffic lights there.
Brink stated that there is a footpath running along High Street and there are traffic lights at Cambridge, Church and High Streets.
The School Committee, she said, does not feel that walking past winter pond is any particular hazard, and pointed out that elementary school pupils have been walking past it with safety for years.
There is a traffic officer, she said at the junction of Pond Street and Woods ide Road.
A pupil traffic count taken at several of the busy intersections showed a great falloff in numbers during the afternoon, due probably to the fact that many mothers pick up their children at school and bring them home while fewer take them to school in the morning.
A mother questioned the traffic count as not providing a true picture since she said that many children, not eligible, are using the busses illegally.
Brink said providing buses for the Pond Instate and neighboring children would add $6(515 to the School Department budget and approximately 20c to the tax rate.
The School Committee’s chief concern is education, and if it can effect savings in the other aspects of its budget, this money can be used for education.
One of the parents in the Pond Estates said that it isn’t so much the distance the children there are called upon to walk, but the fact that they have no opportunity to go by bus if they so desire.
Brink said she did not believe that walking to school is any great hardship for children.
There was a mixed reaction to this statement and one mother felt it was hard for the youngsters to walk in rainy weather.
A father asked if limiting the buses was the result of the econ omy involved, and Mrs.
Gilson, superintendent of schools, said that the financial con sideration was not the only con sideration.
He said that the old system placed the School Commit tee in the untenable position of believing elementary school young sters can walk four miles to and from school and that junior high pupils can not.
The alternative to requiring the longer walking distance for the old er pupils is to reduce all the mile age, which he said would result in a serious financial situation because of the large numbers of youngsters who would have to be taken by bus to school.
Gilson added that it is im possible to hold up any one traffic hazard, since they exist all over town.
The east side children have to cross Highland Avenue and the topography is as hilly on the east side as it is on the west.
As for discrimination, the Committee feels that reducing the distance to be walked by older children is effect discriminating against the younger ones.
Reducing the walk ing distances will, in his opinion lead eventually to a town-wide transportation problem cost ing thousands of dollars.
A mother from the Forest Street area asked how many of those pre sent shoveled the sidewalks in front of their houses, and was told that the west side hill residents had no sidewalks.
ONE OF THE MOST COMPLETE RUG SERVICING PLANTS IN THE INDUSTRY / I 20% discount for cash and carry — Plant — Koko Boodakian & Sons, Inc.
Set 9:30 A M to 5:00 P.M. j they had to use public buses at a cost of $480 a year.
She wondered | if pressure had anything to do with j the change in hus distances.
A High Street mother said the school bus stops near the Pond Estates and asked why the children of that neighborhood who want j to ride to school can not get on the i bus then* and pay their way.
However, these loads will be adjusted so that both buses will carry 50, which is the maximum load desirable.
Having the kids pay 5c a day sounds good, hut such procedure would result in loss of control and a serious situation.
A father suggested that youngsters living between one and one half and two miles from school who want to ride to school be permitted to pay for buses by the year so that the authorities can know in advance how many to provide for. i He said he personally is concerned with the distance the children have to walk.
Brink replied that one of the reasons for the luck of top physical condition in our children is the fact that they ride everywhere.
She also felt that children entering junior high school are growing up, are able to walk to school and should by walking and other responsibilities learn to become self reliant.
One mother felt that four miles is too far for little children to walk and unother wondered why younger children could not take a sandwich or other lunch to school and j stay there through the noon hour.
The I School Committee also feels, she j said that it is good for the youngi sters to get out in the air and walk j home for lunch.
A father asked if the extra monI ey involved in putting on more * buses was the paramount consideration in the lengthening of the i bus districts.
He said that six buses I would have to added to care for j ‘the efementary schools, and reiterated the Committee's position that there is no justification in asking 1st graders to walk four miles and feeling that junior high school pupils should not.
A father at the rear of the hall got a laugh when he ruefully said that there had been two changes affecting the bus distances in recent years, and each affected him adversely, in both cases his home being just outside the bus limit.
Brink reminded the hearing that the School Committee can not be held responsible for statements about school transportation made by real estate salesmen and urged that such statements he investigated.
A babel and some laughter greet ed the statement by one mother that her kids ride home from school and then walk down town to the Sport Shop or library.
Clark of the School Committee felt that the parents are suffering more over the lack of transportation than the kids.
One mother said that Mr Dosjarlais, assistant Superintendent of Schools, had told her there would be hus transportation for her children to the Lynch School and that now there will not be any.
She was told that his statement was made before the change in the Committee’s bus policy.
A father felt that the lack of sidewalks on High Street constitutes a distinct hazard for school children and a mother concurred, believing strongly that something should be done now to prevent a serious accident there.
Another father felt there should be hus service for those willing to pay for it but Dr, Gilson felt that the School Committee should not go into the transportation business.
Mr Ault of the School Committee felt the meeting showed no ununimity of opinion in the matter of child welfare involved in the new bus policy, and Mr Johns of the Committee stated that the School Committee in framing policy has to take a broad view of what is best for the entire town.
He said that with substantially increased school costs the committee is trying to retrench wherever possible in the interest of the tax payers, no matter how much as individuals its members might like to do everything that interested groups may ask.
The meeting was closed with the request by a mother that the School Committee ask for sidewalks for the Lynch and Vinson Owen Schools.
Informal groups gathered after the meeting to continue the discussion with school committee members and each other.
The hearing was admirable in every way, with ideas courteously exchanged and no tempers apparent.
N A. working under the supervision of Miss Plummer are Miss Eleanor Madden, Mrs.
They provide through the Winchester agency an excellent family-centered, generalized Public Health Nursing service for the residents of this town.
It’s a mystifying toy and a fascinating competitive game. f See Crazy Atoms Fiddlestick.
Mr Charles Merenda of Bacon Street underwent a major opera| tion Wednesday morning at the Winchester Hospital.
Overcrowding | Cars Dangerous Police report dangerous overI crowding of motor vehicles after football games.
Last week end 17 j young people piled out ot' a station wagon after a game.
Registrar Riley will take drastic j action to prevent injury to young ; people in the exuberance of victory, j Licenses will be suspended.
Cooperation of parents would help -officials to control this seasonal highway hazard.
Roberta Logan recently re| turned from Houston, Texas, where j she attended the 10th Annual Con1 vention of the Desk and Derrick J Club* of North America.
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 5, 1961 Page Three grandmother’s ivory silk and Mr Anderson’s best man, and ush Society Honors Local Hospital Administrator Reese E James, Administrator of the Winchester Hospital, was advanced to the status of Membership in the American College of Hospital Administrators, a professional society, at its 27th annual Convocation Ceremony held on Sunday afternoon, September 24, in the Ballroom of Convention Hall in Atlantic City.
REESE E JAMES The College, now in its 28th year, was founded for the purpose of providing* recognition to men and women who are doing outstanding work in their professional careers as hospital administrators.
Melvin L Sutley of Philadelphia, president of the College, presided at the convocation.
Radcliffc College Alumnae Meet On Monday Radcliffc College alumnae c Winchester will meet for coffc Monday morning, October 9 at the home of Mrs.
The informal gathering will focus its attention on one of the most rapidly developing areas of growth at Radcliffe its dormitories.
D., Dean of Residence and of Student Affairs, will bring the alumnae up to date on these developments.
Winchester Radcliffe neighbors who now number more than 60, will also have an opportunity to meet Mrs.
Robert Treat, President of the Radcliffe Club of Boston and Mrs William S Hanna, Executive Secretary of the Radcliffe College Alumnae Association.
John Volpe is to be a guest of honor at “Morning, Noon and Night in Suburbia”, gala fashion show sponsored by the Winchester Auxiliary of M.S.P.C.A. on Thursday afternoon, October 19th, at the Winchester Theatre.
Peter Picopolus of 18 Spruce Street announce the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Virginia, to Mr Lewis Joseph DeLuca, son of Mrs.
He is now employed as a Purchasing Agent’s Assistant, in the Executive Office of the former Tenney Group, Associates, in Boston.
MRS JOHN A VOLPE The hard working committee reports tremendous enthusiasm for this lush show planned to benefit those who cannot plan for themselves,e., lost, injured and mistreated animals.
Also benefiting will be the American Humane Education Society, the Angell Memorial Animal Hospital, the Alvarl Wildlife Sanctuary, the American Fonduk in Fez, Morocco, where brutally treated native donkeys are cared for, and where the cause of American good relations is promoted more effectively than in any way.
Personnel Changes At Winchester Hospital Along with the physical changes taking place at the Winchester Hospital there have also been several changes in personnel, as announced recently by Reese E James, Administrator.
Joseph A Gagnon of Peabody, has been appointed Comptroller, replacing Stanley W Krygowski who is resigning after three years in this capacity to accept a similar position at the Salem Hospital.
He is presently chief accountant and office manager at the Lynn Hospital.
His appointment further strengthens this department and frees the dietitians for further development of our patient food service.
Mr Roberts comes to the Winchester Hospital from a position as assistant manager of the Northeastland Hotel, Presque Isle, Me., and previous to that he had extensive experience as assistant food manager at the Harvard Club of Boston.
Louis C Evangelista, a native of Winchester, who has been employed in the hospital laundry, has been promoted to the position of Laundry Manager replacing Charles Heisler who held this position for the past three years.
Mr Evangelista will head this important department of the hospital during its crucial period of expansion and remodeling as it prepares for the increased patient load due to the enlarging of the hospital.
Young Actors Will Attend Boston Play A special arrangement has been made for some members of the Children’s Theatre School to attend a performance Friday evening October 13th or Saturday matinee, October 14th of the very beautiful new musical about African independence at the Colonial Theatre.
The superb choreography of Agnes DeMille has been acclaimed as her finest achievement, “Oklahoma being one of her earlier ones.
During her visit to the Samoiloft’s last Sunday with the composer of her ballet music in “Kwamina,"" she kindly agreed to try to arrange the plan for Mrs.
Parents of any former students or currently enrolled wishing to attend should phone Mrs.
Studio Guild's First Meeting The art classes of Winchester, are gathering for their first meetings at their various studios with fine teachers and varied emphases.
Some are for children, some for adults, some for women, others for both sexes.
The Studio Guild lays special emphasis on the friendly, informal atmosphere, the lack of well-defined rules, and especially the delightful encouragement to draw or paint the thing in which you are interested in the way you see it.
This results in definitely personal pictures, in various media and in realistic semi-abstract, or completely abstract styles as the artist sees the subject.
The director of this group, William Grady, gives intensely, personal criticism to each member.
Occasionally he gives a short talk on some subject of general interest.
But for the most part he confines himself to his criticisms of each individual picture, listened to and profited by all the other amateur artists.
Plans for the year were discussed at length with many suggestions and criticisms from the twenty members present.
Discussion of figure painting and portraiture were considered and left to be decided in the future.
Members were asked to bring all paintings done during the summer, so that the walls could present a gay and interesting sight.
Members were also asked to bring objects for still life studies; not handsome bowls and Japanese figurines but old rusty objects from the cellar or interesting bits of wood from the backyard.
Herbert Levin of Riverton, N J., as her only attendant at her marriage to Robert James Anderson of Chicago, 111., son of Mr and Mrs.
Ivan G Anderson of Evanston, 111., on Saturday afternoon, September 23, at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church.
Dwight L Cart, read the 3 o’clock marriage service, and a reception followed in Chidley Hall.
Frank Christian d’Elseaux of Winchester and Marblehead announce the engage* ment of their daughter, Miss Angela d’Elseaux to Mr James Campbell Wakefield, son of Mr and Mrs.
Boat Club Notice The Winchester Boat Club is providing entertainment this Saturday evening, October 7, for members, with slides on a trip to California by Warren Dannenberg.
Vessel Argentina Victoria Gripsholm Argentina Atlantic Brasil America Jerusalem Sta ten dam Rotterdam Statendam Victoria Rotterdam A tlantic Homeric Days 13 13 it 11 12 13 5 10 Min.
Oslofjord Mauretania Ocean Monarch Italia Homeric Empress of Can. ( 'a ron i a N Amsterdam Mauretania N Amstcrda m Days 14 12 10 10 9 12 15 90 15 38 Min.
Joseph B Peel of 34 Pickering Street, announce the marriage of their daughter, Lt.
The ceremony took place on Friday, Sept., in the chapel of the Naval Academy at Annapolis, Md.
The bride is a graduate of the Boston City Hospital School of Nursing and has been for some years a member of the Navy Nurses Corps, seeing service in World War II and in the Korean Campaign.
She has recently returned from a 20 months tour of duty in Spain and has 20 months additional service before retiring.
He is presently on duty in the office of the Judge Advocate General at the Pentagon in Washington and will make his home with his bride in one of the suburbs of the Capitol.
The Eighth District Leadership Workshop of the Massachusetts State Federation of Woman’s Clubs (Mrs.
Charles E Shepard, President) was held on Wednesday, September 27 at the W’ilmington Congregational Church.
Edmund S Ferguson, President of the Wilmington Club, welcoming the more than 75 attending.
Ralph W Hatch, President of the Fortnightly, and the President of the Wakefield Club were in charge of registration.
The first meeting of The Fortnightly will be a luncheon for the benefit of War Veterans on Monday, October 9, with Mrs.
The Melrose Highlands Woman’s Club Dramatic Group will put on a play “This Daring Generation” for the entertainment for the regular meeting at 2:00m.
Archibald, mother of the bride, wore a flag-blue matte jer sey sheath with a hat of deep pinls leaves and a corsage of matching miniature carnations.
The bridegroom’s mother, M Anderson, wore a beige sheer woo dress with brown feather hat anc corsage of small garnet roses.
Fred Shulz of Chicago, 111., was ering were Theodore H Anders* of Binghampton, N Y., brother the bridegroom; two brothers the bride, David K Archibald Cambridge, and Lawrence Archi bald of Winchester; and Herbert Levin of Riverton, N J., brotherin-law of the bride.
Anderson will make theii home at 6051 South Drexel Avenue, Chicago, 111.
Mr Anderson, an artist at the Museum of Natural History in Chicago, is a graduate of the Art Institute of that city.
ANGELA d’ELSEAUX Both Miss d’Elseaux and Mr Wakefield are 1958 graduates of Winchester High School.
Miss d’Elseaux attended Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital School of Nursing ami received her medical secretarial certificate from Hickox Secretarial School.
William Serbinski, of 97 Cambridge Street, in Winchester, announce the engagement of their daughter, Miss Barbara Serbinski, to Mr Daniel F Chisholm, son of Mr and Mrs.
Paul Weaver, tin* formal reception held annually with senior counselors and faculty.
MIRAk'S R EPl TAT I ON IS HH 11 Every sale^ hacked hy Mirak's 23-ycar honest dealing and quality service.
Meet the entire Chevy family for l%2 at MirakV rooms in the heart of Arlington Center.
Ave., Arlington Center Mission 3-8000 At an 11-o’clock Nuptial Mass m St.
Ann’s Church, Gulf Breeze, Florida, on Saturday, September 23, Miss Sandra E White, (laughter of Mr and Mrs.
Marco J White, Jr., of Gulf Breeze, became the bride of Lieutenant Francis P Hurley, USN, son of Mr and Mrs.
The Reverend Leonard F Hurley of Washington, D C. brother of the groom, performed the ceremony and celebrated the Nuptial Mass that followed.
The bride’s gown of white silk organza over taffeta had a modified V-neck line overlaid with appliques of Alencon lace.
A crown of lace and pearls held her veil of illusion and her bridal bouquet was fashioned of white fuji chrysanthemums.
Gowns of Dior-blue silk organza were worn by the bride’s attendants with headpieces to match.
They carried bouquets of white chrysanthemums on Dior-blue velvet leaves.
The best man was Lieutenant •lulin H McEnemin, USN, and Lieutenant Patrick Duncan, USN, and Lieutenant Raymond Hudson, USN, ushered.
Lincoln School Mothers’ toffee The “Coffee Hour” for new mothers was held on Tuesday morning, October 3, in the school auditorium.
Eleanor Davis, school secretary, joined the gathering for a brief visit and welcomed new mothers as they enjoyed their coffee.
Robert Millican poured at the attractively decorated table with a beautiful centerpiece of red and white carnations in an array of greens which was donated to the social hour hy Mrs.
The executive board wishes to thank everyone who participated in the first social hour of the school year and is looking forward to seeing all the new and former mothers at our next meeting.
John F Maguire, Jr. of 37 Clark Street recently observed their 40th wedding anniversary at a dinner party held in their honor at The Meadows in Framingham.
A large group of friends and relatives, including children and grandchildren were present to assist the Maguires with their anniversary celebration and to extend congratulations and best wishes.
Maguire were recipients of a substantial purse of money and other appropriate gifts.
MISS BARBARA SERBINSKI Miss Serbinski was graduated in 1959 from Winchester High School and is an alumus of Leland Powers School of Radio-TV and Theatre in Boston.
Spent four years with the United States Navy, and is also an alumnus of Leland Powers School in Boston.
Mr Ondrejka was received into membership by Letter of Transfer from the Bethany Baptist Church, waukee, Wis.
Girl Scout News Girl Scouts celebrate their 50th Anniversary of Girl Scouting hy planting a Golden chain tree on the Winchester Common.
Oct. at 4 o’clock all troops of the Winchester council will be represented at the tree planting to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Girl Scouting in America.
William Davis, Park Commissioner in charge of the Common along with Mrs.
James Stewart, President of the Girl Scouts will plant the Golden Chain tree.
Harold Butters, Program Chairman of the Winchester Girl Scouts has planned and will conduct the program.
I Counterspy Herbert Philbrick pretended to be, but that was only one of three roles he played in helping to smash the Reds.
Fortunately, this enn’t and didn’t happen as 67 donors out of the 79 who braved the torrents were accepted.
Martha P, Bund Allan T Burns Idoyd G Butterfield Herbert V Canfield Mrs.
Adelaide C Dunn Ralph H Earle Donald R Ellis Daniel F Fairbanks Clifford M Hammel William H Harris Donald V Harrod Robert D Heileman James F Henry Anna A Hormanson Edgar D Hinton Mrs.
Lane Richard B Lawrance Frank H Leslie Roland A Lewis Frank J Logan Charles F Mahoney Gordon D MacKay Mrs.
Claire E Mullen Clyde Y Mullen Austin E Naniy Fenton H Norris William J O’Malley Francis B Parsons Mrs.
Charlotte E Schaefer Richard E Schaefer Lawrence T Smith Lewis B Snow Mrs.
Ruth F Thompson Marguerite H Troop Donald C VanRoosen John J Waite, Jr.
Elinor V Walker Ronald A Ward Francis M Wiener Corey Wynn Our volunteer staff as usual were right on hand to assist in their varied capacities.
Harold E “Bergquist and her committee was greatly enjoyed by the volunteers and the bloodmobile staff.
Dunbar L Shanklin Motor ServiceChairman, Mr Theodore P Messer Mr Sherman Russell Canteen Chairman, Mrs.
Harrison G Wagner High School Rod Cross Wendy Everett Judy Towle Joan Hess Natalie Palmer Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club Two Are Jailed For Car Theft On Saturday morning the Medford police arrested two men on charges of stealing a car in Boston and reported to Winchester that the articles in the stolen car belonged to Winchester residents.
The men were 40-year-old John J Quinn of Shawmut Avenue, Boston and 24-year-old Raymond Guimond of Dover Street, Boston.
Crawford, assigned to the case, learned that a Boston court had sentenced the men to Concord Reformatory and Deer Island, one for an indefinite term, the other for a three-month visit.
Crawford visited both men and learned that they indeed had ransacked the Winchester cars in question, using the stolen car to get to Winchester.
One of the men was sentenced to Concord Reformatory in 1956 for a local house break.
A pair of old hands joined with a blind date partnership to capture top honors in the draw team of four practice round held on Wednesday, September 27tli.
The seven team field completed the round robin for an average score of 18 points, and the victory wont to Marge Sexton, Bill Duryea, Carl and Irene Sittinger who combined for 27 points.
Close behind was the foursome of George and Alice Kimball, Marthat Walker and Ellen Schofield with 24 team points.
Tied for third place, with 19 points, were Alta Stewart, Donna Redpath, Guy Mingolelli, and Bob Haskell, together with the husband and wife pairing of the Symmeses and Roots.
Section B, played as a straight Mitchell to accommodate 29 pairs, survived a congenital case of halftable hiccups.
Walter Mainberger, .570 James Byrne and Edward Sullivan, .565 Robert Arthur and J Nikula, .565 jStKP HARMACY^^ ^'WINCHESTERS* 7 WHOLESALE PRICES ALCOA ALUMINUM 3-CHANNEL COMBINATION WINDOW Screen is self-storing.
N E S W pass pass IS 2 NT You are sitting North and hold: S9 5, HQ 9 8 6 5, DK 8, CK 6 5 2.
The actual North was less than satisfied with his spade support, and held little hope for his hearts after that suit was bid on his left.
Not wishing to penalize partner, who may have been stretching a point or two to “compete,” North passed.
South actually has a little slam and even has a fine play for all 13 tricks against any lead except the ace of clubs.
West had “unusual no trump” written on his card and figured that here was the time to use it.
West might have some 22 plus points with balance, a possibility which both North and East had to consider.
Envisioning a “busted” partner, and five possible losers in his own hand, he decided to bid only three spades.
Gerry Lawrence and Betty Yeomans earned a fine top on this board at an imaginative contract of six no trump by North.
The top score EW was captured by Rose Hickey and Lillian Sheridan when they somehow managed to set six spades.
A social hour will be hold at 7:30 followed at 8:15 by the evening’s entertainment gi\ron by the “Two-By-Fours” a double male quartet from Winchester.
Easy to Handle For inorr information or free delivery cull BR 2-3187, EM 1-2642 7.
MAINE CORN DEL MONIE PEAS 5 FRUIT COCKTAIL Fancy ' RCArUCC RICHMOND— Cling, A ■ Slices or Halves DOLE PINEAPPLE JUICE 4 FACIAL TISSUES^ 6 II VI /tll£ LADY LEN0X NT I I teSY* % 60 Gauge — 15 Denier M ■ l I k V I W V Not available in All Stores #1 MEAT PIES 6 Tomato Paste Detergent 1LB3 0Z $| PKCS I AMl LEGS Savory Spring Lamb ... a gourmet treat at a wonderful thrifty price.
Cook, former minister at the Second Congregational Church of Winchester.
The section on “Adult Leaders” pro’ vides aid and suggestions for work; ers with adults in local churches, j CLASSIFIED ADS BRING RESULT] Senior Forum Mrs.
Horace M Bosecker, Jr., of Lexington will T>e the guest speaker at the Senior Forum this Sunday at 9:15m. in Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church.
Her chief responsibility is the direction of ('amp Rosemary at Farrington in Lincoln, a summer camp for mothers and their children from the tenement areas of Boston.
The Roseekors came to Lexington ten years ago from their home state of Pennsylvania.
As pariah* ioners of Hancock Church, they became interested in volunteer work with City Missionary Society.
From her training and experience, as well as from her twn spirit of enthusiasm and enjoyment of the work she is doing, Mrs.
The annual Fall Outing of Forum will be held on Columbus Day, October 12.
Arrangements are being made for a day of sports and fellowship at Cherry Hill in Beverly.
Frongillo hurling the empty dixie cups among the roses and shrubs donated by Winchester people to make their Town more beautiful.
Officer Frongillo made a bee-line for the gang, and ordered them to get busy cleaning up the Common as efficiently as they had messed it up.
Rakes were secured from the Fire Department and put into the hands of three specially appointed teenage foremen, while the others set to picking up litter from the roots and leaves of the rose bushes, by hand.
The “Show Toppers” and the “Four Rascals” will be featured, and since both are talented and experienced groups their efforts are sure to please.
The “Show Toppers,” and exciting group of six young singers, have won acclaim at the Terrace Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton in Boston.
They present a smoothly polished well-balanced program that combines supper club sophistication with memorable music, performed with warmth, youthful zest, humor and a dramatic flair.
In addition to enjoying a good show those who attend the Crittenton entertainment on October 27 will have a chance to win as a door prize an evening for two, all expenses paid, at the Statler Hilton Terrace Room.
Uamelot Philbrick At the trial the Justice Department revealed that Philbrick had gone underground and posed as a “Communist” to gain first-hand knowledge of the methods whereby they hoped to take over American society.
When he speaks in Winchester at the high school auditorium on October 19th, Mr Philbrick will give an account of his experiences with the Communists and will tell local residents what they can do to fight the Communist conspiracy.
John Scherban, Ktovt* Dee, Dean Anderson, Bob Kiley, Alan MacDonald, David Brock, George Laban and George Goethals.
Dean Erieson, Scott Erskine, Guy Hutchings, Jay Handy, Neil Kirkpatrick, Reed I .ovvry and Don McClellan from Winchester; Geoffrey Bell and John Man sur from Reading High School.
From 9 until 1 on Friday evening, October 13th, and from 9 to 12 on Saturday evening, October 14th, a telephone answering service will be maintained at the Town Hall.
Don't iniss this beautiful and exciting dance, one of the nicest social events of the year.
MOTORS PArkview 9-1447 Open Til 9:00 Collision At Wildwood And Cambridge Sts.
On Friday night at 11:40 police responded to an accident call at the corner of Wildwood and Cambridge Streets where a 1957 Chevrolet driven by Denzil Pack of Cottle, Kentucky, was in collision with a 1955 Ford operated by Lillian F Cheever of 41 Grove Place.
Pack was proceeding north on Cambridge Street when the collision occurred, while Mrs.
It spun around into Wildwood Street so that it was facing in a westerly direction.
Neither driver received medical attention at the time, police report, although both complained of injuries.
More volunteers are still urgently needed to help make this year's United Fund campaign a success, United Fund leaders report.
To keep United Fund agencies open and able to serve, they must have more funds.
Those wishing to share as volunteers should call United Fund Headquarters.
Chadwick CITES INDEPENDENTS The Everett Avenue representative appealed for the support of Massachusetts Independents and disaffected Democrats to join with Republicans in fighting what he called political opportunism which he said, has made Massachusetts and Boston politics so notoriou throughout New England and the nation.
All people of good will and intelligence regardless of party must join us in this battle against those who would put political expediency before the interests of the Commonwealth.
WILL SPEAK OFT The legislator expressed his views on the current political situation in a special visit to the Star office on Monday afternoon.
Mr Chadwick said, that naturally he was personally disappointed in his failure to win the House leadership post, but that he was less worried about disappointing turns in his own political fortunes than about matters of party principle.
SECOND CAUCUS The caucus last Thursday represented the House Republicans' second attempt to elect a successor to Mr Giles.
In the earlier caucus, held on July 27, Representative Chadwick polled 36 votes and Rep.
Curtiss polled 37, with 43 votes, or a majority of the entire Republican House membership required for election.
In the caucus last Thursday, the rules were changed to permit the candidate receiving a majority of votes of Republicans present at the caucus to be elected.
Later this month, he and Mrs Jeremy Whatmough move from Highland Park to Inkster Road Redford Township, Michigan.
VV,n<h f st,, r Hospital, following I860 in Malden and graduated from Mpv '-‘'al month • iIIiicms.
Mary McPrior to World War I, Mr Smith an of 4 Marvernment employee and a veteran of died late Tuesday was employed by Stone & Webster Engineering Corp. as advertising Cowan.
Army m the Ord1 ( ; niver ,j lv . had |, vc . d for t5ve nance Department at Edgewood years in Winchester, coming here Arsenal, Maryland, he continued ' Malden his career in the printing and adFor * 20 v ,, ars ho had been in the vertising business m Boston.
In 1941, Mr Smith served as Public Relations and Recreation director for the George A Fuller Construction Co., at their construction projects in Ireland and Scotland.
Upon completion of these contracts, he returned from Europe and was employed by Northeast Airlines in Labrador and Presque Isle, Maine.
Smith was prominently known in Winchester for her active participation in many civic organizations.
W’hen they returned from the Orient, they established their home in Chula Vista, California, where, for the past nine years, they have jointly operated the real estate management firm of Leslie H Edwards Company.
Mr Smith was a 32nd degree Mason in Malden and a member of the Aleppo Temple.
In addition to his wife, Mr Smith is survived by his two sons, Lucius, Jr., of Hingham and Law rence Talbott of Winchester; his sister, Mrs.
Christian Science services are to be held today at the Humphrey Mortuary in Chula Vista and burial will be in the military cemetery at Fort Rosecrans, San Diego, California. first as an investigator for the Labor Department and in recent years as a property disposal officer at the Watertown Arsenal.
During World War II Mr McGowan enlisted in the Army ami served overseas in the European Theatre.
Flags on the common and town buildings were displayed at half-staff in his honor.
On April 19, 1942, Mr McGowan married Mary Delaney of Malden, who is his only survivor.
The funeral was held Saturday morning from the late residence with Solemn Requiem High Mass celebrated at St.
Miss Mabel L Vinton Miss Mabel Laurinda Vinton of 3 Fairview Terrace, a lifelong resident of Winchester, died early Friday morning, Sept., at the Emery Nursing Home in West Medford, after a long illness at the age of 81.
She attended the Winchester schools and was graduated from RadclifTe College in the class of 1902.
Ida School in Newton, after which she lived with her parents until their deaths.
She then built a smaller house on Fairview Terrace where she lived with Mrs.
Miss Vinton was an honorary member of the Fortnightly Woman’s Club, a former member of the Women's Republican Club and a member of the Winchester Historical Society.
She was one of the older members of the First Congregational Church, which her father served as deacon and in other capacities during his lifetime.
She was also a member of the Mission Union of that church, in which she took an active part in her earlier years.
Funeral services were held Monday afternoon at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with Dr.
Dwight L Cart minister of the First Congregational Church, officiating.
Chester F Wolfe, long time Winchester dentist, of 19 Jefferson Road, died early Thursday afternoon, Sept., at the Emery Nursing Home in West Medford after a long illness.
She was born Sept., 1892, in Norwood and spent her early life in that town, being educated in the Norwood schools.
Wolfe and they came to Winchester at the time of their marriage, living first on Myrtle terrace, and since 1929 at 19 Jefferson Road.
Wolfe was a member of the Winchester Unitarian Church and of the Eastern Star in Norwood.
Peter Knox of East Walpole; two sons, John F., of W’estboro and Chester F Wolfe, Jr., of Ashland; six grandchildren, a sister, Mrs.
Family services were held at the late residence last Saturday afternoon with the Rev.
Sullivan, secretary-treasurer of the Minute Man Branch for 1961-62, will be other members of the executive hoard; Mrs.
The Minute Man Branch welcomes members and newcomers from many neighboring communities including Lexington, Arlington Winchester, Concord, Lincoln, Bedford, and Waltham.
A special Guild project which will continue this year will be to act as a hostess committee for foreign students and wives and to procure warm winter clothing for those students from warmer climates.
ARLINGTON Mission H-04DS I THE WINCHESTER STAR* THURSDAY, OCTOBER 5, 1961 Page Six The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr.
Missed Opportunity The Star regrets that Winchester’s representative in the ( ireat and ( ieneral Court, Harrison C hadwick, was not elected House leader of the Republican minority in last week’s election on Beacon Hill.
We believe that Mr Chadwick has many of the attributes necessary to do an effective job in this important post.
For the sake of a strong bi-partisan approach to State problems we can sincerely hope he will go as far as he can, and that he, as Mr Chadwick, sees the need for stronger, more cohesive action on the part of his colleagues on Beacon Hill.
Mr Chadwick, we believe, would have put his very best effort into forging the Republicans in the House into the real opposition party they should he in a two-party government.
This is not to say that under Mr Chadwick’s leadership the (r.O.U. in the House would opj>ose all legislation proposed by the Democratic majority.
Mr Chadwick has said publicly that his party should support the Democratic leadership in effecting good legislation.
At the same time he feels strongly that the Republican minority should stoutly oppose any and all attempts of the Democrats to pass legislation which Republicans consider not in the public interest.
Regardless of the futility of opposing the Democratic majority of the House, Mr Chadwick feels, and has felt, that the Republican members should make known their opposition to what they conceive to be bad legislation, speaking strongly enough and loudly enough to make their objection known, not only on Beacon Hill but throughout the Commonwealth.
The Star believes there are many in Massachusetts who arc far from pleased with the way things have been going at the State Mouse.
Massachusetts politics are viewed askance, not only by many residents of the State but elsewhere through the* nation.
Recent exposes of graft and corruption in our body politic are arousing among those who cherish honesty in government a resentment that can well result in a shifting of party lines.
Independent voters and conceivably many within the Democratic ranks who have no stomach for the deals and chicanery that are being revealed in high places would, Mr Chadwick believes, welcome the opportunity to align themselves with a party that stands four-square for honesty in government and the prudent expenditure of the tax payers’ money.
Convince them that any party stands for these principles in government and they will flock to its standard.
Mr Chadwick hoped, if elected House minority leader, to get the G.O.Fk on Beacon Hill to, as he says, “change direction”; to become an effective opposition party, to speak out against bad legislation and the waste of public funds, and to become a party that will attract independents and members of the opjK>sition party tired of the status quo.
Its opposition to past excesses has been something less than vigorous ; its voice raised against legislation believed to be bad has been far from clarion.
Mr Chadwick, in his candidacy for the House leadership, did not get backing in quarters where he had every reason to believe he would receive strong support. 1 is uncomprising refusal to make deals and promises in advance of election mav have contributed to his defeat.
Political resentments for which he could not be. held responsible also very probably counted heavily in the balance.
For himself, Mr Chadwick likely has no particular regret over his defeat.
The present rote of the Republican House leader on Beacon Hill is not likely to be a happy one.
Mr Chadwick sought the minority leadership because he felt he could contribute in this post to the revitalizing of his party and could also effectively assist his neighbor Governor Volpc, in his plans to improve the standing of Massachusetts in the eyes of her sister states.
His past record in the General Court bespeaks his effectiveness in office.
He has lost the chance to bring these talents to the assistance of his party on Beacon Hill.
Perhaps he shares the Chadwick wishes for a strong and articulate Republican minority in the House.
If so, he will have Mr Chadwick’s active support in his effort to affect this change.
Mr Chadwick has said he will assist the new leadership) in any program that is in the public interest.
Police Chief Derro, together with other friends of the town’s youth, is becoming increasingly concerned over the drinking that seems to be more and more evident among our young people.
It is useless to say that such drinking does not exist and it surely serves no useful purpose to ignore it.
Certainly boys and girls in their teens should not be drinking at all. primarily for their own physical and mental welfare.
Anything that can be done to curtail youthful drinking is entirely worth while.
Chief Derro is of the opinion that one of the most effective ways to cut down or eliminate youthful drinking is through the parents.
He is very probably right when says that many parents have no idea that their youthful son or daughter is a party to juvenile drinking.
How they can avoid knowing is hard to understand, perhaps, but Chief Derro is quite sure most of them do not, and the Star is inclined to agree with him.
In what are usually referred to as “the gocxl old days’’ boys and girls in their teens would have had a hard time getting home from a liquor party without parental knowledge and subsequent parental action, of one sort or another.
C hief Derro is trying to secure the cooperation of parents in bis effort to curb youthful drinking, and to this end is notifying them when his men have knowledge of youthful drinking parties in which their children have been involved.
It is the Chief’s belief that most effective progress in combatting youthful drinking can be made by the cooperative effort of parents and police, rather than in merely punitive action on the part of the authorities.
Asked by the Star how his plan is working, the Chief replied it is too soon to say.
This is discouraging to the Police who feel they are giving the parents of youthful offenders a break in the hope that they will in turn appreciate the opportunity to assist the authorities in stamping out youthful drinking in town.
The Police of course can make mistakes, both in the identification of youthful drinkers and in their method of approaching problems involving them.
Failure to cooperate because of this is not, however, the proper reaction for parents, who are urged to report to the Chief any action of his men which they consider to have been improper.
Generally a frank discussion will clear the air and result in improved understanding on both sides.
These members are now asking the cooperation of town parents in their effort to do something constructive about teen age drinking.
It would seem that their effort should have the hacking, especially «>f parents, but also of all who are worried over the spread of this deplorable practice.
The Star has met no one who has not applauded your action in making a group of hoys clean up the mess they had made on the Common.
Getting rakes from the dire Station and putting the hoys to work immediately was a most effective way to bring home to them the consequences of a careless act while the evidence was there for all to see.
Beyond that he was reminding you that the town likes to have its Common clean and was asking your future cooperation in keeping it that way.
HISTORIC BACKGROUND OF HOME RULE IN M ASS ACH United States ETTS Colonial Background of Local Government In the three centuries since the founding of the colonies of Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay , local government in Massachusetts has evolved from a simple, informal structure oriented on an agricultural, fishing and trading society to a complex, formal set of institutions reflecting a vast and intricate urban industrial civilization.
The number of municipalities has expanded from 27 in 1640, with a population of but a few thousand, to .351 communities in 1060 embracing 5. million inhabitants.
Originally the responsibilities of these municipalities were limited to support of a church and school, poor relief, a few roads, military defense, the suppression of crime and the collection of taxes.
Now they encompass a wide range of public services, social programs and public works.
Legal Origins of Local Government Legally, local government originated in the commercially oriented royal charters authorizing the establishment of the Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay Colonies.
The charter of the latter, granted by King Charles I in 1628 provided for a colonial government consisting of a Governor, a Deputy Governor and 18 Assistants to be chosen annually by the freemen of the colony assembled in a Great and General Court.
The first local governments were established by the settlers without prior authorization by the General Court, and developed without significant legislative oversight for many years.
In part, local government institutions reflected innovations by the colonists, and in part they borrowed from the administrative practices of the Puritan Church and English local government.
Thus, the election of committees of “select men” to manage administrative matters was a natural product of English love of committee government.
These institutions were regularized in Dorchester in 163. and spread swiftly throughout the Colony.
In the beginning, the General Court was content to legislate only on major policy questions affecting localities.
The isolation of many towns, the difficulties of travel, and the preoccupation of the central government with commercial, religious and military problems limited the control of the General Court over local governments, and fostered a local spirit of independence.
Two years later the General Court enacted the first General statute of local government establishing central control over the activities of these frontier communities.
In the next half century the General Court increased its control of the towns, especially the Town of Boston, despite the “home rule” sentiment manifested on several occasions.
Thus, the freemen of Watertown refused to pay a 1632 assessment by the Colonial government because it had been levied without their consent In 1655 the Town of Sudbury defied the General Court when it intervened in their quarrel with their clergyman, who was attempting to dictate town policy in non -ecclesiastical matters.
And in 1688-1680, Lynn and other towns resisted the efforts of the dictatorial royal Governor, Sir Edmund Andros, to impose heavy property and excise taxes, and to limit the number of town meetings.
The overthrow of Governor Andros enhanced the “rights of Englishmen”, but did not halt the trend to greater central control of local government.
Under authority of the new Charter of the Province of Massachusetts Bay granted in 1691, the General Court required towns in 1692-94 to submit their by-laws to the judiciary for approval, empowered justices of the peace to convene town meetings if the Selectmen refused, and elaborated upon the powers and structure of local government.
Of these six forms the towns enjoyed far greater autonomy than the latter units of government, all of which were to disappear by the mid-nineteenth century.
Organization of Counties County governments were first created in 1643, with the organization of the four counties of Essex, Middlesex, “Old” Norfolk (partitioned in 1680) and Suffolk.
County government responsibilities then, as now, largely related to the maintenance of county courts (by so-callcd district courts, probate courts, registries of deeds, jails and houses of corrections, and county roads.
This multiplication of counties reflected the need for judicial services beyond the capacity of most individual towns.
As previously noted, localities advanced various theories of inherent municipal rights as a basis for almost complete independence of the central government; and many interpreted the Declaration of Independence to mean that the central government had been abolished.
These theories were accepted by the General Court for a brief five years , during which this body became more a convention of local ambassadors than a legislature, and the towns were treated as so many independent city-states.
Local autonomy was further encouraged by the disruption of central authority during the siege of Boston, and by the preoccupation of the succeeding revolutionary government with general military and economic problems.
Reestablishment «f State Authority in 1780 The need ror a stable central government for Massachusetts was soon apparent, and resulted in the Constitution of 1780.
This document established a powerful bicameral General Court consisting of a Senate of 40 members elected from as many legislatively determined districts, and a House of Representatives consisting of one to three representatives per town depending on the number of voters therein.
Essentially, the Constitution restored to the General Court in almost the same language the legislative power it had possessed under the Massachusetts Bay Charters of 1628 and 1691.
With this restored power in hand, the General Court reasserted its control over t*he localities.
Legal requirements effecting town administration were strengthened by the General Court.
Notwithstanding these extensions of legislative control, considerable local autonomy existed when the Eighteenth Century ended.
NINETEENTH CENTURY DEVELOPMENTS Impact of Industrial Revolution In the nineteenth century the Industrial Revolution brought economic and social changes which tremendously strained the political institutions inherited from a slower moving agricultural past.
The inability of the municipalities alone to deal with these changes, the demand for more state action, and judicial review by the courts all combined to subordinate the communities fully to the General Court.
Physically, nineteenth century Massachusetts lost 79 per cent of its territory when Maine was admitted to the Union under the Missouri Compromise of 1820; but the state’s population rose nearly sevenfold from not quite ahalf million in 1800 to 2. million in 1900.
Textile and shoe mills sprang up along the rivers of the state often resulting in great political stresses between the mill and agricultural populations of the towns.
In the Great Depression of 1929 many of these densely settled mill towns, with their small territory, became municipalities of questionable viability when the mill closed.
The growth of the state’s railroad network after 1826, and especially after 1860, spurred the evolution of metropolitan areas surrounding Boston, Worcester and Springfield.
The process hastened as many foreign born laborers poured into the central cities to work in the mills and industries.
DICHTER By WILSON SULLIVAN In 1957 Vance Packard wrote “The Hidden Persuaders,’’ warning that, depth psychology is being used to make us buy products and politicians we neither need nor rationally want.
He exposed the psychologist’s cynical appeal to our subconscious hope and fear to sell us beauty in soap, status in cars, and security in T V.-deep statesmen.
Dichter, bibliography blazing, replies to Mr Packard and anyone who implies that he is less than a prime agent of human progress.
That is to say he’s not nasty; it’s just his culture that makes him that way.
First, he discovers what actually motivates people, in choosing a wife, a whiskey, or a cake of soap.
Second, he remotivates them toward more desirable goals that effect self-fulfillment.
He knows for example that you tend to equate weight with quality, silk with sex, and slogans with truth.
But his purpose in doing so is not to move on Step Two, to correct or re-direct your motives.
His actual concern is to exploit the motives he has discovered, to determine the most effective way to make you buy what his client wishes to sell, be that a smooth margarine spread, or a smoother Presidential candidate.
Depth psychology, intended by Freud and responsible psychologists to liberate men from the tyranny of the irrational subconscious, is here used to manipulate man, to freeze him in un-reason, to capitalize on his fears and insecurity.
Dichter, as a good Viennese, is still sufficiently troubled by Judeo-Christian morals to feel the need to rationalize his nasty business in ideological terms.
But when all of this is said, it is clear that our friend is inordinately more concerned with the fortunes of floor wax than with those of freedom.
In the “psycho-economic” struggle, anything goes as long as the product is sold, even that old huckster trick of letting people keep their illusions so long as they do things, or buy things, your way.
Dichter’s book, moreover, is itself a masterpiece of not-so-hidden persuasion.
Its author is too brilliant, too much aware of aspect, however, to hide even his worst thought.
Even as he affirms a theory of moral therapy, his book, with abundant detail, makes it clear that his main interest is to exploit moral sickness.
That is to say. he placates traditional moralists even as he delights his colleagues in manipulation.
Similarly, he publishes generous and telling quotations from the works of his harshest critics to indicate that he has read them and disproved them hut fails utterly to deal with these criticisms.
As a disciple of Freud, he knows full well that what he is doing is scientifically irresponsible and morally sick.
What he is doing, therefore, is only less appalling than the fact that he is entirely aware of it.
In a man of civility knowledge is power, hut it is also responsibility.
Dichter that his toughest problem seems to be to persuade himself that what he is doing is morally tolerable.
And when all arguments are heard, one still shrinks from casting the first stone.
In a sense, the brutal candor of a Dichter is preferable to the moral hypocrisy of those who evade basic illness by prating about symptoms.
Telephone PArkview 9-0029 OLDEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN WINCHESTER Serving Ihe Community 81 Years Largest Sworn Circulation REPRESENTING WINCHESTER Senators in Congress Leverett Saltonstull Benjamin Smith Congressman 5th District F Bradford Morse Senator 6th Middlesex District C Eugene Farnam Representative in General Court Harrison Chadwick County Commissiononi Edward L Buckley, chairman William G Andrew Thomas B Brennan I 4 THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 5.
Chiefs Suggest Law Enforcement Aids Crawford Remember When m At the recent conference of the New England Association of Chiefs Services demanded of law offiof Police at Dixville Notch, N.H. oors ar< > unifonnly the <ame. the assembled chiefs, of which whether they serve a small rural Winchester’s Joseph J Derro was community or a large city, yet the one, considered many phases of I compensation varies greatly.
While law enforcement activity, discussed j recognizing that there will always he a certain variation in compensaYouth Choir 200th time, it’s . . .and all for free, For tht the hank Shown here at the Winchester Saving., Hank, little Jan Wrisley smiles as she receives her very own bank book from the bank’s Treasurer Ralph W Hatch.
She is the 200th youngster to receive a free $2 savings account, at the Bank as a gift from Converse Supermarket.
Wrisley, shown with Jan, is a regular Converse customer, and has been saving green tapes for years, getting $2 in cash for every $99 worth of tapes she presented at the store.
Both these well-known Winchester institutions are proud of the ever growing army of young savers they are helping, some as young as two months.
We inquired how big some of these bonus accounts may look after several years worth of Supermarket shopping and tape saving.
Wrisley volunteered, with a for Jan, Converse depositing the $2 wink, that all her family had wonwhich opened the account.
Wrisley plans to add all her j to see her children’s Converse bank future $2 Converse bonuses to Jan’s | accounts build up rapidly.
Adult Education Program, which her Barnes Named Director J Stanley Barnes of West Harwich, a former widely known resident of Winchester, has been elected president of the Harwich Chamof Commerce. opened Monday night at the High ; School and McCall Junior High.
About 20 enrolled Monday night and some of the 13 courses offered i are filled and closed to late comI ers.
Two new courses, however, each of which offers a very particular return for time invested, have room for more applicants.
Woodworking and Furniture Repair with Paul Goodwin, which has been very successful in the past, will have to be cancelled this fall if there are not more enrollees by the end of the week.
This kind of unpredictable class enrollment is something familiar to those programming for Adult Education, despite their efforts to present courses in answer to expressed public interest.
Eaton’s Ko-Rec-Type enables you to correct mistakes in typing without left town to take up residence on erasing.
Among other activities it has sponsored the annual Cranberry Harvest Days, Air Force Band concerts at Brooks Park and square dances at the Harwich Recreation Center.
It has also been instrumental in getting an exit olf the Mid-Cape Highway in Harwich and in getting a comfort station erected at the parking lot in West Harwich.
The Chamber donates money annually to a milk fund and to the Harwich Women’s Club for Christmas j^ifts to veterans.
It also gave the gradauting class of Harwich High School a commercial award.
Mr Barnes and his wife, Muriel, who was every active civieally and politically while in Winchester, are now in the real estate business in West Harwich.
While in Winchester they lived at Ravenscroft Road and later on Canterbury Road.
Youngsters and adults enjoy the suspense and rivalry of working out the picture-word puzzle solutions.
XT TRYING TO PRIZES Priced at $2.99 Ronel ’s Toy Department Open Friday Evening 23 25 Thompson Street PA 9-1708 ways in which law' enforcement can be improved and the influence outside the police ranks that affect luw enforcement efforts favorably or adversely.
First of all the chiefs, in a hit of soul searching, strongly urged the active personal interest of members in the objectives the Association has set for itself.
They also strongly recommended that its members give the widest possible dissemination of the Association’s recommendations so that people may know for what the chiefs are working and assist their elforts by lie support.
Law enforcement education is considered of great importance by the Police Chiefs as enabling law enforcement agencies to provide greater and improved service to their individual communities and the over-all enforcement system.
In this connection the Chiefs expressed their appreciation to the FBI for its continued assistance in polieje training and urged all members of the Association to avail themselves of the opportunity to get for its personnel the instruction being* offered at the various FBI training* schools.
The Chiefs call upon all lawabiding citizens together w’ith the press, radio and television to join in a community effort to support the rights of society and encourage and support those agencies established by the state as law enforcement agencies in the discharge of their lawful tasks.
In this connection the Chiefs found that the life of a nation rests in part on the strength of its families, and that children through this family strength develop respect for their parents, which respect reflects itself in a sense of community responsibility.
Continuing, the Chiefs emphasized the grave responsibility resting with parents to concern themselves with the activities and interests of their children, to guide them in the path of good citizenship and point them toward adult life with a firm understanding of its duties as well as its privileges.
The Chiefs found that good gov eminent and good law enforcement require a respect for the two agencies that create and interpret the law, the legislature and the judiciary.
With respect to the judiciary the chiefs agreed that while those in law enforcement work may well differ from judicial decisions this lack of agreement in no way dimin ishes their respect for the authority of the decisions.
In a strong tribute to the strength and assistance lent law enforcement agencies by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Chiefs saluted Director J Edgar Hoover, dean of law enforcement, for his lifetime of service and sacrifice to our nation and its people.
The Chiefs came out strongly for uniform legislation authorizing law enforcement officers to carry firearms in states other than those where they are employed, while on official duty only.
In reporting its stand to the conference of the International Association of Chiefs of Police at Montreal, Canada, in October, the Chiefs will ask the International Association to prepare a uniform code and present the code to the law enforcement association in each state of the United States for adoption and consideration of their legislative Assemblies.
Present laws of the individual states permit law officers to carry firearms within their borders to protect themselves and their communities against law violators.
They do not however provide for uniform authority to empower such officers to carry firearms between states.
The Police Chiefs feel strongly that the absence of such authority seriously challenges the safety, legal position and lawful responsibility of such officers.
More uniformity in compensation is another matter over which the Chiefs are concerned.
They feel that such a lack of uniformity handicaps the recruiting of competent personnel for law enforcement work.
Police service is becoming much more complicated, less strong arm man-handling and more science; requiring young, energetic and competent individuals with the capacity to uhsorb mental as well as physical training for their work. tion for police officers according to the ability of the communities they serve to pay, the Chief believe that their Association should set as its goal minimum compensation for police chiefs of $7,500 and $5,500 for patrolmen.
These amounts the Chiefs consider reasonable in view of existing conditions.
The Chiefs went on record’ as whole heartedly endorsing the objectives of the Jimmy Fund, and to further its support appointed a committee of one member from each state in the Association to coordinate its activities and efforts in this important charitable and sociological field.
This compilation was made with the cooperation of the Women’s Archives of Radcliffe College.
Larson was born in Isle of Wight, Virginia, the daughter of Rev. and Mrs.
Larson served on the Medford School Committee, studied law, and was admitted to the Massachusetts Bar in 1946 and the Bar of the United States Supreme Court in 1960.
As an active Republican, she served nearly twenty years on the Republican City Committee of Medford and now is a member of the Winchester Republican Town Committee.
Active in national and local Bar Association, she was recently appointed to the Legislative Committee of the Massachusetts Association of Women Lawyers.
She is on the executive board of the Massachusetts Association of Trial Lawyers and is co-chairman of their Public Relations Committee and also is on the executive board of the Middlesex County Bar Association and is Executive Secretary of their grievance committee.
Gloria Maifeld will continue as the j director of this choir and the choir | “mothers” will again lie Mrs.
The choir is made up of boys and j girls from the fourth through the j ninth grades anil is limited to about fifty.
To make a better schedule for rehearsals some minor adjustments have been made in the church schedule and order of Morning j Worship.
Church Services will start at 10:45 o’clock and a youth I sermon will he included in the service.
They will hold rehearsal during the hour following and will be ready to go home when their parents come out of the church service.
This week’s picture in the Star’s Remember When series is of the former home of the late Thomas Hutchinson on Hutchinson Road, just olf Ridge Street.
This old house was not. the original Hutchinson mansion which stood adjacent to it.
Remains of the cellar and granite work of the older structure were visible for many years and there was at one time a family burying ground on the property.
In Colonial days the old Hutchinson house witnessed much entertaining with British officers coming out from Boston to attend parties there.
Unfortunately the Star knows little of the history of either house and would he glad if any of our readers can fill us in on details.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors S3 THOMPSON STRERT PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers PA 9-5972, 9-1136, 9-1966, 9-3355, 9-6213 Crawford Memorial Methodist Church The Crawford Memorial Methodist will observe the fortieth anniversary of the Laying of the Cornerstone of the present church edifice this Sunday.
The cornerstone was laid on October 7, 1923 during the pastorate of the Rev.
Alliston B Gifford, with Bishop Edwin Holt Hughes preaching the sermon.
At the Morning Worship Service this Sunday at 10:45, the pastor, the Rev.
The Senior High Methodist Youth Fellowship will leave the church at 1:30m. to attend the I Lynn District Fall Rally at the j Old South Methodist Church in | Reading.
Student notebooks, paper and dividers at the Star office, 3 Church Street.
Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf Legal Holidays Named Police Chief Joseph J Derro reminds local business operators that the laws relating to the observance of legal holidays were revised Nov.
January 1 May 30th July 4th Labor Day Oct.th Nov 11 Thanksgiving Christmas All shops, workshops, stores, warehouses, places where persons do any kind of business or work must be closed on the above dates in the same manner that they would be closed on Sundays.
When any of the legal holidays fall on Sunday the provisions relating to the observance of such a holiday shall apply to the following day.
Public offices must be closed but places of business may he open for business on those days.
TRANSFER MAKES THIS POSSIBLE Winchester $27,900 \ cry pretty seven-yeur-old Cape Cod House in best location.-foot living and dining room with gorgeous view.
Nice, sunny kitchen, downstairs lavatory, downstairs bedroom, screened porch.
Two twin-sized bedrooms up, with tiled hath, loads of closets and room for unother bedroom.-foot paneled play room.
PArkview 9-3719 For Rent WEDCEW00D APARTMENTS n the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center are tin* newly completed Wedgewood Apartments, where you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living.
Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area.
Make an appointment today to see these apartments about which the whole town is talking.
Call Mission H-6250 Monday through Friday. oct5-tf Paragon Candles, an unusual assortment of 6in. twists in attrac tive colors; also color-flow Fiesta candles that change color as they burn.
This harmonious dwelling has on first level, ample guest closets, lavatory, laundry, storage area, stairway that leads down to panelled fireplaced family room.
Hall leads to second level with huge living room, family dining room, modern convenient kitchen and porch.
The third level has three large chambers with double closets and two full buths.
READING FOUR-BEDROOM CAPE $20,500 On quiet street in the West Side section of town, this nearly new home has 1 V6 baths, oversized master chamber, garage and landscaped lot.
READING THREE-BEDROOM RANCH $27,500 Executive living is the theme of this oversized ranch home with two-car garage in the finest residential area of town.
Large living room, pine-panelled den with large screened and flagstone porch.
Spacious dining room, lavatory and completely modern kitchen with dishwasher and disposal.
Third floor offers excellent storage or could be converted into one or two additional bedrooms.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis HR 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp PA 9-0373 Jean Gibb PA 9-3808 HORACE FORD — Realtor PA 9-5887 WINCHESTER — WEST SIDE Two new homes in excellent locations.
RANCH — Three chambers, 2*4 ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage.
GEORGIAN BRICK-FRONT COLONIAL— Four chambers, two full and two half ceramic-tile baths, den, 26-foot puneled family room with fireplace.
Large ’61 kitchen with double-oven stove, dishwasher, and all other electrical equipment.
WHITTEMORE, Realtor 38 Church Street PA 9-3320, 0017, 5612, 2672, 1164. 5046, and EX 5-1784 WINCHESTER Remodelled six-room Colonial in convenient central location.
Three bedrooms, 1 \4 ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining room, good living room with fireplace.
Call exclusive brokers for appointment to see this modestly priced home.
PA 9-5550, PA 9-3268, PA 9-2790 Unusual value in this almost new* eight-room brickfront Colonial Ranch.
Attractive fireplaced living room, family dining room, large all-electric built-in kitchen, tiled hath, three twin bedrooms on one level.
Lower level offers fireplaced family room, bedroom, lavatory, and garage.
Exclusive Brokers BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 24 Thompson Street PArkview 9-4240 WINCHESTER CAPE-STYLE HOMES $19,900 — Four rooms and bath on first floor.
JOSEPHSON Real Estate 6 Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 CONTEMPORARY RANCHES Large contemporary ranch on a heavily wooded and private lot.
Four bedrooms, two baths, two-car garage, and large fireplaced kitchen.
Cathedral ceiling contemporary with many bright and appealing features of decor especially suited to blend with modern furniture.
A Co-operative Bank makes it pleasant and safe for you to save regularly.
Open your regular Savings Account here today. . .and add to it regularly ...it mounts up fast.
Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street Newsy Paragraphs Processing by Kodak at the Winchester Camera Shop.
Half Size Foundation with easy zipper front closing by LaResista or an all elastic with side zipper by Smoothie.
Carl Newman of 8 Fen wick Road put in two busy, but happy weeks recently caring for her young granddaughter, Judith Bertha, for two weeks while the baby’s parents enjoyed a vacation at Rockport.
Dorothy Ellis, serving Winchester with Curtains, Draperies, Window Shades, Fixtures and Venetian Blinds, 52 Wyman Street, West Medford.
PA 9-2696 Name I > I ► WI | > • * • • > ► Newsy Paragraphs Patio Blocks, various sizes and colors, Pavement Sealer in 5 gal. cans, to give your driveway a new life.
WE 5-0570. july6-tf Two students from Winchester have begun classes at Emerson College in Boston.
Gerald B Tall man and their daughter Lucy will arrive home tomorrow from Tanganyika where Dr.
Tallman has been conducting an industrial survey for the Arthur D Little Co. in Cambridge.
When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf A Waltz Evening host and hostess will welcome you to the King Arthur table at the Camelot Ball, October 13 or 14.
The Winchester Kiwanis Club offers the use of these items to Winchester residents.
John M Geoghegan of 14 Hemingway Street, completed recruit training on September 16 at the Naval Training Center at Great Lakes, Illinois.
The end of nine weeks of hoot camp were marked by military ceremonies, including a full dress parade.
Eva G Twombly of Lawson Road is among those who will receive certificate awards for services rendered in behalf of the disabled veterans at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Bedford.
The awards will be presented in the Hospital Theatre on Wednesday, Oct 11, at 7:45m.
Pauline Gordon Taffeta Bra Slip is a must under the brilliant new fall look of knitted dresses.
Robert E McCaffery of 14 George Road, began classes at Simmons College on Monday, September 25.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf A Stoneham youth appeared in Woburn Court on Wednesday morning and was fined $20 for trespassing in the Fells area on September 8.
The youth was in I party of five., (two boys and three girls) who were apprehended by Winchester Police for drinking and trespassing.
In leaving the wooded area their car hit a tree, injuring some of the youths and necessitating their treatment at the Winchester Hospital.
Another Stoneham youth was scheduled to appear in court also but did not do so.
EX 5-6265. janl9-tf A Main Street man was taken off a bus near Winchester Center Sunday evening at 6:30 when he became profane and abusive while under the influence of alcohol.
Officer Nurnberger took the man off the bus when the driver refused to proceed with the man any further.
Parkview Taxi PA 9-0666 ""Right on the Dot** nov3-tf Friel Named To New Post By Edison Boston Edison Company announces the appointment of Daniel F Friel as Public Relations District Manager for the northern area of Greater Boston.
He will represent the electric utility in East Boston Chelsea, Somerville and Woburn and in the towns of Arlington, Bedford, Burlington, Carlisle, Lexing ton, Stoneham, and Winchester.
He joined Boston Edison in 1936 as a clerk in the Transmission and Distribution Department at the Woburn Service Center.
Subsequently he served the Company as Lineman, a Trouble Despatcher and an Overhead Supervisor at Walpole, Hyde Park and Woburn.
Active in community and church affairs, Mr Friel is presently serving as Chairman of the Woburn Boy Scout Committee and is a member of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Woburn Kiwanis Club and St.
David M Stowe, Boston, general secretary for interpretation of the United Church Board for World Ministries and a former missionary in China, will speak at the 9:15 and 11:00 services Sunday morning at the First Congregational Church.
Mothers of Twins Met Here The Massachusetts Mothers of Twins Association Inc., Founding Chapter, held its second executive board meeting of this year, on Oc tober 2, at the home of Mrs.
Members are either mothers or grandmothers of twins Regular monthly meetings are held on the last Monday of each month, at the Robbins Library Arlington.
Stowe and his wife, Virginia Ware Stowe, were serving in North China under the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Mis sions in late 1948 when the Com munists seized power in that region.
Though they had two young children, the Stowes refused to leave, insisting that this was an opportunity to demonstrate their Christian faith.
They stuck to their posts until the summer of 1950 when a serious health problem and the outbreak of the Korean War made it imperative that they return to this country.
While in China the Stowes did evangelistic and student work in Tientsin counseling and training Chinese students and pastors for intelligent and courageous leadership.
Stowe has served as secretary of the Commission on Theology of Mission of the World t’ounil of Churches and the International Missionary Council.
The 25 member international commission is composed of leading theologians >f many Protestant and Orthodox denominations.
Before going to China he served for two years as associate minister of the First Congregational Church of Berkeley and during that time he and Mrs.
Autobridge, the game that lets yoil play bridge any time by yourelf and have -world champions as irtners.
See this fascinating game at the Winchester Star, also the official aluminum duplicate bridge boards and the udvanced course in contract bridge.
V General Meeting The LWV of Winchester will hold its first General Meeting October 1 1 at the home of Mrs.
Relations with Latin America, following brief speeches by two South American students.
Mr Jaime Urrutia of Columbia, South America, has been studying in the United States for about 6 years.
Mr Urrutia’s father is the former Ambassador from Colombia to the United Nations, was at one time Ambassador to the United States from Colombia, and is currently serving as Commissioner of Refugees in Latin America for the United Nations The other speaker, Mr Arturo DeMelo, is from Rio de Janiero, Brazil, and has been in the United States for 4 years.
He is also a junior at Harvard and studied here during his last 2 years of secondary school.
Both Mr Urrutia and Mr DeMelo have returned freluently to their native countries during the past several years, inluding visits this past summer.
Within the general framework of United States Relations with Latin America”, the speakers will outline the major problems of their own country stressing the unofficial point of view.
Each is well-informal about his own nation, and is n a unique position to analyze the U S. relationship with the man on the Latin American street.
It should be a refreshing approach to a serious and increasingly pressng problem.
Ellis Green, Finance Chairman, will give a program report of the LWV’s current finance drive.
This meeting has been arranged by the Foreign Affairs Committee is an informal and stimulating introduction to United States Latin American elutions.
Any non-member who is interested in attending the General Meeting, or in becoming a member of the League should contact Mrs.
Medical Society Auxiliary Opens New Year The Women’s Auxiliary of the Middlesex East Medical Society opened the new season with a very pleasant meeting on September 28 at the Country Club in Winchester.
Following the business meeting conducted by the President, Mrs Henry Magno, Professor John Lerch was introduced.
Mr Lerch is the professor of Radio and Television at Boston Uni versity; he presented a fascinating and, at times, amusing tape recording consisting of excerpts from radio programs starting back as far as 1925.
At any rate, the sampling he did present was enough to make all of us wish there were more to hear.
This “nostalgic excursion into the past” included such sounds as a pianist of the early ‘20’s playing a very tinny “3 o'clock in the Morning”, the C-liquot Club Orchestra, Dr.
Mr Lerch feels that radio suffered a decline after the war, hut that the quality of programs is now improving with the advent of stereophonic sound.
Many people Agreed with his statement that radio offered the listener the opportunity to use his imagination while television lacks that necessary ingredient.
The November meeting of the Auxiliary will be at Hadley Hall •it the Church of the Epiphany in Winchester, on the 16th.
Mr Milton Babcock will talk about antiques; it is hoped that women will bring articles to be looked at and Appraised, which Mr Babcock is happy to do.
Guests are most welcome at this meeting, so please keep the date in mind so there will be a large number present.
New Scout Executive Mr Frederick Smith, Scout exej outivo, Minuteman Council, Boy Scouts of America, announced at October 5.
Second in soric* of the council executive board the ap ^ t • -<-• M .nin. ,,, , . ,,..,1 in win• j rhonter Wclloslry Club in Hndley Hull, pointment of Anthony N Toto as j Church of the Epiphany.
CnfTof* nt 9:4ft district Scout executive sorvin K ; t 0 m lf , ,,r M A * w,u <i,,nn nt Stoneham, Burlington, Winchester October ft.
Friday Coiicvc Club Art Group will meet in the Rich Room of the Public Library, promptly nt 10:1ftm.
October IT and 14 Friday nnd SaturI <l«y, Waltz Evening, Town Hall, 9:00m.
Bay State Historical League Fall Meeting at State House, guest, of Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
October 24, Friends of Winchester Hospital, Volunteer Training Program for ALL HOSPITAL VOLUNTEERS. 8m., Wyman School.
TOTO Mr Toto succeeds Henri Erkelons, recently recalled to active duty with the Army.
Prior to his appointment, Mr Toto serviced Malden and Melrose as district executive for four years.
In addition to his duties as district executive, Mr Toto serves as camp director at Parker Mt.
Scout Reservation, one of the Minuteman Council Camps, and as advisor to the council advancement committee.
A graduate of State Teachers College at Salem, Mr Toto taught in the Chelsea school system prior to entering the professional service of the Boy Scouts of America as field executive of the Quannapowitt Council.
Executive Toto served scouting in a volunteer capacity as scoutmaster, explorer advisor and a member of the district committee and in such capacities earned the Scouter’s Key for service.
Mr Toto is presently active in the Knights of Columbus, Holy Name Society and the Young Men’s Christian Associations of Chelsea, where he resides with his parents.
Charles G Phippen of Marlborough, Connecticut, are the parents of a fourth child, third daughter, Cheryl Ann, on Sunday, October 1st at the Hartford Hospital.
Rachel A Morse of this town is the great-grandmother. i i i Mr and Mrs.
Arthur A Fowle , a sixth child, third daughter, Lucy Munn Fowle, September 25th in Waltham.
LONG S AUTO SCHOOL WEIIs 3-3339 Res. july27-tf Glamour Tips jc~r Hair Styles for fall will be lose at the nape and ears — full at the crown — very lacy.
C WAFFLE CREAMS each 69c each 59c P k g29c 2-lb. pkg. 99c P k g49c P k g49c P k g29c P k g29c P k g25c P k g39c pkg31c Pkg25c Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Speeial, October 9, Ribamli Chops 10, and 11 89c lb.
Port raying “Tessie the living symbol of this year’s Greater Boston United Fund campaign, will be these three attractive young ladies, left to right.
Miss Lillian Zirakian of Winchester, Miss Helaine Jones of Beacon Hill and Miss Anne Mckinney of Back Bay.
A lovely lady from Boston's past named “Tessie” is being introduced this fall as the living symbol of the Greater Boston United Fund “People Helping People"" campaign.
Her initial appearance this fall was at Fenway Park Tuesday (September 26) before the Red Sox game with the Chicago White Sox.
Tessie was introduced to the crowd and the modern United Fund version of the song was played by the i|ualily Footwear for men, women and children sin«e lOGO Coward Shoe I Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m.
Tessie will make appearances at all United Fund functions and will represent the Fund at public events throughout the campaign.
On November 3 she will visit each of the 49 cities and towns in the Greater Boston area participating in the campaign to help kick off the Fund’s residential and small business campaign.
Selected to portray Tessie were three attractive girls, Miss Helaine Jones of Beacon Hill, Miss Lillian Zirakian of Winchester and Miss Anne McKinney of Back Bay.
We bill you at the end of the month. ""30-60-90-day budget plan Pay nothing down, then 1/3 each month for three months.
Treat Yourself To A New Fall Wardrobe Weil's, Hoys' and Laities' Shop Mt.
That year the Red Sox met the Pittsburg Pirates in the first World Series.
A group of the Red Sox most loyal fans, who were known as the Royal Rooters, followed the team to Pittsburgh to cheer them on.
That year the Royal Rooters were in the habit of marching to the ball park in a body singing “Tessie” and led by the mayor, John F “Honey Fitz” Fitzgerald.
The 1914 season brought the Boston Braves a pennant and a four-game triumph over the Philadelphia Athletics.
Bostonians too young to remember the original Tessie and the spirit she engendered will see her in person at many public functions and United Fund rallies, watch her on television throughout the campaign and hear the song revived over all local radio stations.
I was chosen ‘Child of the Mopth’ in the August contest among children photographed by Pinocchio Studios in Quincy.
My parents will receive a large heavy -oil portrait of me as a prize, but really, just between us.
The Bay State chief executive was one of ten new directors electd to the corporation which was established in 1956 under a special charter from Massachusetts legislature to make unsecured personal loans to students for higher education on a state-wide basis in cooperation witli Mass.
Page Ton THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOHER 5, 1961 omen Bowling ’s S 0.
F Home on Leave Town League Bowling Fragile Completes Basie With the third week of scheduled bowling completed the league is now in full swing.
The Diamond* are in second place winning by pinfall as the j Emeralds and Garnets are tied j with the Diamonds with a close score of 8 wins and 4 losses.
Our million dollar friends from the Diamond team came sporting | their tV4 carat mascots.
Maybe they though that by blinding their opponents they would scon* four easy points.
Emily Buzzotta, our winner last season of the high single trophy is setting a good pace for herself in regaining the honor as she bowled a string total of 103.
Well known to the league this is Ginger’s fourth year of bowling and her second year as chairlady.
Eleanor Russo is an excellent bowler and shared the honor of being on the top winning team last season.
Just last week Eleanor got four spares in a row, which even had the opposing team cheering for her.
Our ex-venerable of the Lodge, Rose Fiore, and veteran bowler of four years, maintains a good average.
Sue has a distinctive style of her own by ever so gently placing the ball on the alley with amazing results.
Lastly we have Jeanne Di Donato who has a lovely style of howling with good re suits.
John M Geoghegan of 14 Hemingway Street, is home on two-weeks leave en route to the Fleet Sonar School, Key West, Fla., after completion of nine weeks recruit training at the Naval Training Center, Great bakes, 111.
The young bluejacket enlisted at the local Navy recruiting station, City Hall, Medford, under the guaranteed electronic schooling program.
Also to support the statement of this being one of the strongest seasons is the fact that 6f Hv of the bowlers have an average over 90.
Football The Winchester Wee Sachems opened the 1961 season at Needham on Sunday, September 24, at 2:00m.
October 8 — Dedham at Winchesch ester October 15 — Winchester at Wellesley October 22 — Winchester at Hull.
October 29 — Open November 5 — Winchester at Woburn Coaches Don MacElwee, Bill Sipp, and Ed Gravalese are working hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needhum.
With the return of a dozen veterans from last year’s team, Don expects to field one of the best teams in the league.
A real economy item j Springfield College, Springfield, for the student who likes all his , she is a graduate of Winchester notes in one neat volume.
On Montvale Avenue in Woburn the bus broke down stranding the boys for half an hour.
Approximately 50 runners started the race with the Salem men surging out in front.
Winchester’s co-captain Jack Scherban tried unsuccessfully to break up this trio and Reardon of Salem was chased across the line by team mates, Murphy and Ribicki.
Scherban, Johnson, Anderson and Bird of Winchester placed 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th respectively.
He was followed by Guiliani, Thoms, and Hills, whose places were enough to win.
Kellev McClay Tofuri Russo Kimball Anderson Wilson Griswold Cassidy B Nash 109.
Winchester At Cambridge Saturday Winchester High School’s football team, smarting from its defeat at the hands of Stoneham last week, will try Saturday to take it out on Cambridge Latin in a nonleague game at Russell Field in Cambridge, commencing at 1:30.
Cambridge Latin has yet to win a game, having been beaten by Maynard and Methuen.
The Cantabs are reputed to be better than last year, but even after their poor showing at Stoneham, the Sachems will be favored.
Winchester came out of the Stoneham game in good shape and the first stringers should be ready for action Saturday.
Should the game permit Coach Knowlton will probably use many second stringers to get an idea of how they perform under fire.
T.V. football team did better against Stoneham than its big varsity brothers, heating the Stoneham scrubs, 16-6, Monday afternoon.
Bill Branley set up Winchester’s first score with a 53 yard run to | the Stoneham two.
Winchester drove 70 yards in the third quarter for their second score with Erskine going over from four yards out.
Serving went on from 6:00-9 :00p.m. and was followed by music and dancing until midnight.
The evening was a most successful one with all in attendance enjoying the meal and entertainment afterward.
O.I. is a “Stag” Columbus Day Banquet being held by the Mens’ Lodge for members of the Lodge only.
The banquet is set for Wednesday, October 11 at 7:00m. at the Club Hall on Swanton Street.
Richie Penta, Bill Fiore, Carl Bertolucci, Joe Paeonessa, Pat Bruno, Boss Dattilo, Nick Ronzio and Randy Kazazian.
Members are urged to contact these men for tickets as soon as possible.
A strong contingent of members of the Ladies’ and Men’s Lodges has arranged to attend the Columbus Day Dinner to be held by Mass.
Grand Lodge, Order Sons of Italy, Thursday evening, October 12 at the Hotel Bradford in Boston.
The Winchester Lodges extend congratulations to best wishes to Governor John A Volpe and take this opportunity of expressing their pride in his accomplishments.
Upon completion of special technical training at an Air Force technical training center, airmen are assigned to operational units of the USAF Aerospace Force.
When started the program will be held every Tuesday night at the “Y”’ during the school year rom 8 to 10m.
These classes will be organized | for “high schoolers,” clubs and or1 ganizations on an amateur level, not just for the heroes and stars of high school athletic groups.
In other words, “duffers,” others willing to learn, as well as the more experienced boys will be given a chance to take part in the program.
Local Students At Mount Fda Winchester girls registered as freshmen at Mount Ida Junior College in Newton include Miss Ellen DeVries, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Leo A Donovan of 12 Dartmouth Street; and Miss Deborah Wadsworth, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Deborah Donovan, also of 12 Dartmouth Street, has begun her senior year at Mount Ida. irriers Trounce Reading, 1744 With their initial defeat still in mind, the Winchester Cross Country Team traveled to Reading Friday, to what they hoped would he a victory.
W inchester had thoroughly trained for this race by intensive road work on South Border Road.
Reading has a longer course than most other schools and it is run completely on tarred roads.
Right from the start, the locals took charge of the race with Scherban, Anderson, and Bird taking over the leading positions.
By the half-way mark the outcome of the race had already been determined with Winchester moving three more runners, Johnson, Dee, and Gallagher, into the top six places.
Jack Scherban ran his best race of the season and he also compiled one of the fastest times in recent years for the Reading course, covering the distance in 13m, 33s.
He was followed closely by Frank Johnson who also ran an excellent race.
Winchester also placed Dean Anderson, Steve Dee, Dave Bird, and Phil Gallagher to insure the win.
Neil ' Loam the Piay W;iy “Flash newcomer to cross | Card*” now on sale at the Winchester Star.
ELEANOR B HALL, Director PArkview 9-3492 HU 3-8556 EX 5-4117 by posting an Kirkpatrick, a country, running an excellent race was first home, closely followed by Gerry Hills, an up and coming so phomore.
DARR0, our voice teacher, announces openings days or evenings for all those interested in VOICE instruction.
STEVE TABB PIANO and ORGAN INSTRUCTOR “FULL ORGAN and CHORD ORGAN Instruction Now Available “Lessons given at home for these instruments only Complete RENTAL and SALES on All Instruments Phone WE 3-0094 Eves.
Two members of the group, Susan Bryant and Laurel Ingraham, will tell of their experiences abroad this summer.
The troop holds regular meetings Tuesday night between 6:45 and 8:45 at the Parkhurst School.
All boys, 11 years of age or over in the Parkhurst and Vinson-Owen School areas are cordially invited to attend.
Any adults interested in scouting and wishing to help in Troop 524’s program are urged to contact Mr Ted Cook, 10 Mayflower Road, PA 9-6193 or Mr Dave Burnham 23 Indian Hill Road, PA 9-3543.
You don’t have to buy a thing to enter ... or to compete in the PUNT, PASS & KICK Contest sponsored by Ford Dealers in cooperation with the National Football League.
But remember, you must be accompanied by your father, mother or legal guardian in order to register.
PArkview 9-1448 or WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
Vespucci, R Rotondi, P Murphy holidav There will be no howling next Thursday bccaui se it falls on the holiday.
In second place is California, whose members are F DiMambro, J Faietta, F Dattilo, M Buzzotta, A Amico, R Fiore and R GiacaIqne.
Bowling for Notre Dame are S Bellino, A Bavuso, E Amico, D Mistretta, R Fiore, J Dattilo and T Saraco.
Harvard takes on I2th-place Army this week, second-place California vs. fourth-place Yale, thirdplace Notre Dame vs. sixth-place Maryland.
Mary’s expects to climb, now that Pucky Perritano has returned from the armed services.
Randy Kazazian lowered that this year, and now Pat Bruno has the dubious distinction of holding honors in that department with a 30, which he bowled in his first string last week.
Nick Molea, who did not bowl because of the death of his mother, was missed by his Georgetown teammates, who dropped four points to Yale.
All the members of the league express sincere sympathy to Nick and his family.
Last week’s attendance prize Stoneham Finally Beats Winchester , 22-8 Stoneham High finally heat W inchester at football last Saturday afternoon.-8, at Recreation Park in Stoneham, outclassing the hapless Sachems before a big crowd of slightly delirious Stoneham rooters, who had waited 31 years for a victory that was especially sweet.
They were dancing in the Stoneham streets last Saturday and at one point in the |x>st-game activities there was a twomile traffic jam as civic organizations joined the happy Stoneham High student body in a noisy celebration.
Cars of gleeful Stoneham students invaded Winchester after the game with horns blaring.
Douglas Griesemer of 2 Ravenscroft Road, and a June, 1961 graduate of Winchester High School entered Antioch College Wednesday.
Miss Griesemer was a National Honor Society member in Winchester and served on the school newspaper staff and 'on the school radio.
Winchester's Mike Bellino and unidentified Stoneham back about to meet head-on as Bellino broke into the elear deep in his own territory late in the game.
Their crash was jarring and tile Stoneham hoy was slow in getting to his feet after it.
My motto for the fund drive this year will lie ‘People Helping Koeh.’ o rumors circulated by ing (dot ha II sel “By encmie Tin is that you have increasingly cynical comments on the crazy world we live in.
IWrkview 9-1931 V-Jil; 0 ,.r VLt / X( "" Boat Chib News A warm sunny week end in the seventies this week turned off for another wqek thoughts of winter cold and the end of the sailing sea son.
Every skipper will agree that this time of year is a sailor’s par adise.
It’s too bad it couldn’t last longer, but soon Indian summer with its stiff steady breezes and lovely weather will come to an abrupt end and leave the Win Chester Boat Club wondering where another season has gone.
Juniors this week end as ap proximately 60 young people en joyed the annual dinner-dance.
Saturday evening, September 30th Parents provided delicious homemade salads and desserts in one of the most enjoyable buffets of the year, while dancing, door priz es, and the entertainment of the “Fabulites,” a band strictly composed of Juniors topped off a per feet evening.
The Snipe that was raffled off at our club and won by Robert Gabine of Winchester, was sailed by the United States Team and took 2nd place.
The winning boat of the World Championships which was sailed by the Brazilian team, was bought by Air Force Col.
Dick Preston For the high schooler, faculty or student, stationery imprinted with the Winchester Sachem in red.
MaryVWoburn Pop Warner League football game at Woburn Stadium last Sunday.
Mary’s Fundamental Freedoms and Modbt ' ,‘) Ia, v s °P cne J d lta c . urrcnt ern Reality” will he the topic of ootba11 s f ason Sunday afternoon, discussion at the first fall meeting l ° s,n £ a c 'r« a « th u e Woburn of the Winchester Philosophy Club.
The club was organized last Febuary by Lisa Bieberman, a student at Radcliffe College, as an independent, nonpartisan forum for philosophical discussion.
Meetings are held throughout the academic ye WHS students and their friends are welcome. game bid to even the score.
Offensively Gentile ran for three long gainers in the losing cause with Dalton, Grant and Gannon the defensive standouts for St.
Wheaton Dance The Boston Wheaton College Club has completed plans for a dancing party to be held Saturday veiling, Oct.. at the MassachuLongworth Eyes Soccer Lawrence Longworth, a junior from Winchester, is a candidate for setts Institute of Technology Facthe 1961 varsity soccer squad at ulty Club from 9 o’clock until midnight.
John D West, Jr. of High year, opened the 1961 season Street, is one of the patronnesses | against Hartwick on September 30. for the dance and is giving a dinOther teams on the schedule inner party before the festivities j dude Clarkson, Cornell, and Cortcommence. land.
Before the game mem bers of the high school student bo dy with many other pupils from the upper elementary and junior high grades met at the high school to march to the playground be hind the Colors and color-guards the Stoneham High band, major ettes and cheerleaders.
Marchers were still pouring down the short street leading to the field whi the front ranks were scrambling for the few seats left in the packed stands.
A group of Stoneham enthus iasts hung Winchester’s Mike Bel lino in effigy at one of the goal posts, though they got his number wrong and the dummy they actual ly suspended from the cross bar wore Lennie Timpone’s number Some one had the good sense to get the figure down well before game time.
Perhaps the largest squad Stone ham has had trotted onto the field for the game, running between lines of majorettes in real big league style.
The enthusiasm on the Stoneham side stirred the Win Chester rooters to action in ad vancc of the opening whistle.
The Light Blue and White was hungry for victory hit hard, blocked and tackled effectively and fought like wildcats for every inch.
Halfbacks Mike Ni colazzo and Rick Tasker drove hard all afternoon, gaining plenty of yardage after being hit by Win Chester defenders.
The Stoneham line continually got the jump on the bigger Win Chester linemen, opening holes through which their backs drove for consistent gains.
The Light Blue stayed strictly on the ground and completely outplayed the Sa cherns after the first few minutes of play.
For our money the real Stone ham hero was Rod Blethen, second string quarterback who entered the game in the first quarter after an injury to the regular signal caller Jim Hureau.
Blethen did a great job of running the team, handing off smoothly and deceptively and occasionally contributing good gainers on keeper plays.
Two of the fifteen yarders prevented one Winchester touchdown and called back another.
Despite the shellacking Stoneham handed the Sachems as things turned out, the game might well have been quite different if these touchdowns had been scored.
The Sachems made seven first downs and were held to 90 yards on the ground by the fighting Stoneham defense.
They tried 12 passes, completing five for 64 yards, with two of the completions being actually for no gains.
Stoneham took the opening kickoff and drove from its 25 to a first down at the Winchester 23.
Bellino on a pitchout reached thc 34, Rowe added seven, but Stoneham was off side on thc play and Winchester chose to take the penalty, the ball going to the 34.
Bellino broke through for a first down at the 47 and Benincasa added five.
Stoneham was assessed 15 yards at this point for piling on, the ball going ahead to the 30 and first down there.
Bellino was dropped for a four yard loss on a draw at the 35, but Benincasa, driving hard, reached the 18.
Rowe picked up short yardage, hut a holding penalty against Winchester put the ball back at thc Stoneham 36.
Benincasa got hack 10 and a pass from Colliander to Donlon was good for additional yardage.
Winchester was called on the play for back in motion and the ball went back to the Stoneham 35.
At this point Bellino took a pitchout and dodged and faked his way in a great individual effort to the Stoneham five.
Again Winchester was called) this time for clipping, and the ball went back to the 20.
Nicholazzo got 15 to start a Stoneham drive just before the end of the opening quarter, and a 15 yard penalty for clipping against j Winchester gave the Light Blue the ball at its 16, first down.
The teams changed goals here, and with Nicolazzo carrying on | four out of five rushes drove to < the Winchester 23.
Here the Light Blue fumbled and Winchester re covered at the Sachems’ 25.
Winchester in turn fumbled pitchout and Stoneham recovered at the Winchester 18.
Nicolazzo foun<J a huge hole off his own left tackle and drove to thc Winchester six.
Then in three more tries Nicolazzo bucked over Blethen ran for the extra points on a keeper play.
After a short kick to Tim pone on the Winchester 48, the Sachems aided by a pretty pass made two first downs, only to have the sec ond one nullified by an offside Bellino had to kick and booted to the Stoneham 12.
The Sachems stopped Tasker cold, but a 15 yard penalty, for which the signal was holding put the ball ahead to the 29.
How 15 yards can be assessed for defensive holding isn’t apparent, but Stoneham put the ball in play and drove to a first down at the Winchester 16, only to have a penalty for clipping move the ball back to the 31.
Here Nicolazzo broke off tackle and literally ripped away from the Winchester secondary to sprint 49 yards to the Winchester 20 where he was caught by Bellino.
In two belts through the line Ni colazzo reached the nine, and Tasker added five yards to the Winchester four.
Here Joe Murray, fullback, went up the middle for the touchdown, with Blethen passing to Nicolazzo for the extra points.
Stoneham was caught holding on the play and the ball went out to the 17.
Penalties on both teams nullified the next .try and on the third a pass fell incomplete.
Stoneham, again using the short kick, booted to Timpone, to start the second half and Len was downed on Winchester’s 43.
Bellino got away for a first down, but an offside nullified the play and the ball went back to thc Winchester 38.
Here Colliander dropped back and arched a long pass down the field to Bellino.
Stoneham’s defense looked like interference, but it wasn’t called and after another pass fell incomplete, Bellino punt ed to Tasker who made a pretty runback, which was nullified by a 15 yard clipping penalty.
Had interference been called on the pass to Bellino, Winchester would have had the ball deep in Stoneham territory, and who knows.
Stoneham, after its 15 yarder, started at its 39 and drove into Winchester territory, only to have another 15 yard penalty stall its drive.
Stoneham punted deep to Bellino who took the ball at the goal line, ircled a couple of yards into the end zone and then set sail up the field.
Driving straight out, he cut to the Stoneham sideline and outsprinted several defenders until he reached midfield.
Here faking nicely, he cut back toward the middle, and dodging and twisting iway from several would-be tacklers, straightened out to outleg the emaining defenders all the way into the end zone.
The Winchester stands were still whooping it up when the ball was called back for a clipping penalty committed 15 yards behind Bellino as he sped gonlward.
The ball went back to the Stoneham 43, where the winded Bellino failed to gain.
Rowe reached the 34 and Bellino was literally inches short of a first down at center.
Here Stoneham piled up a trap right play with Benincasa carrying to take the ball at its 36 and Winchester’s last chance to get into the ball game went glimmering.
With Nicolazzo, Tasker and Murray alternating the Light Blue reached the Winchester 23 as the third quarter ended.
Continuing its rugged ground game Stoneham made first down at the 12 and had the hall at the two yard line when a fumble gave Winchester the hall.
Bellino circled the Stoneham right end to cross the 20, but a holding penalty, on which half-thedistance to the goal line had to be called, placed the ball back at thc four.
Aided by a Stoneham offside Winchester reached the 14, but. here a fake kick on fourth down failed to fool Stoneham and the Light Blue took over at the 14.
Two drives into the sagging Winchester line made a first down on the one, and from there Tasker plowed over for the score.
At this point Coach Halliday sent in his scrubs and they were playing the tired Winchester first stringers evenly when Blethen was dropped for a six yard loss on an attempted pass play.
Colliander hit Bellino with a pass at the Stoneham 45 and Mikey was finally forced outside at the Stoneham 20.
Another pass to Bob Donlon went to the five and from here Bellino barrelled up the middle for the touchdown.
Bellino hit the line for the additional points and seconds later the whistle ended it.
Periods 12 3 4 Stoneham Oil 0 8 — 22 Winchester 0 0 0 8 — 8 Touchdowns — Nicolnzzo, Murray, Tasker, Bellino.
Sheets and envelopes will be customprinted in the color that you choose.
PArkview 9-4572 janl9-tf CEMENT WORK DAVID J SPER0 & SON BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE MASONS Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls Brick Flower Boxes New and Repair Work Satisfaction Guaranteed Free Estimates MI 8-2751 aug24-8t CLEANING WINCHESTER CLEANING SERVICE Storm Windows, Floors, Paint Washing, Rubbish Disposal.
Just 10 min. from your town For alterations on that dress You will find me the best.
WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
HIGHEST CASH PRICES Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Rags, also Rubbish Removal.
Call PArkview 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon Street, Winchester. apr27-tf WANTED WANTED Antiques — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc.
MROTtH trays, small to very large, syphon, rollers, electric heater, cabinet*. lumps ami mine, items.
FOR SAI.F. — 1967 Ford convertible, tecond car, low mileage, excellent condition, power brakes and steering, other 'xtras.
FOR SALE— West Side Ranch. twinsized bedrooms, large living room, dining room, cab. kitchen, 2-car garage, immaculate oond., large landscaped lot.
Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, gravel, brick, all types, flue liners, drain pipe, cesspool covers, fireplace dampers, cleanout doors, ash dumps and heatilators.
WElls 60670. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheep because we use remnants.
Sedan, fully power equipped, including Fordomatic drive, power steering, brakes, windows, and & 4-way seat.
FOR RENT FOR RENT — Fiveroom apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments. $190 up.
Haverty, WElls 35389. sept21-tf FOR SALE — Hotpoint mobile dishwasher with cutting board top.
FOR SALE — Girls’ clothes, two lovely winter coats, wool skirts, teen 14; also woman’s car coat.
FOR RENT FOR RENT — Professional office space with parking on grounds, central locution.
FOR RENT -2nd floor, 6-rm. apt... fireplaced living room, screened porch and sun porch.
SHARE APT. — Professional woman would like to share her apartment with responsible wonmn or studentCali MI 8-6424.
FEMALE HELP WANTED— A very interesting opening for a good secretary who likes a variety of duties and meeting the public.
MALE HELP WANTED— Alert, industrious. marriedmen to train for vending machine route work.
For interview call EX oot5-2t FEMALE HELP WANTED— Experienced seamstress for power sewing machine.
FEMALE HELP WANTED— Office position in executive office of the Corporation.
Candidate must be excellent typist and like detailed record keeping. hour work week, 3 weeks paid vacation, 12 paid holidays.
WORK WANTED MUSIC LESSONS— For Trumpet or Cornet lessons, contact Bob Mingolelli.
PA 9-1525. oct5-2t WORK WANTED — Experienced secretary desires part-time work, 8:30 to 12 noon.
SEWING MACHINE SERVICE SEWING MACHINE SERVICE— Electric Sewing Machine Repair Service.
All makes ineluding Japuncse manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service.
NOrmandy 5-4620. jun22-tf DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use.
TeL WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There la a way out.
Our professional services discourage burglaries as well as maintaining neat and proper car® of your property.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling your Authorized Travel Agent.
Let us know your travel pluns and we will be happy to work them out with you.
WINCHESTER SAVINGS BANK Ralph W Hatoh, Trenimrer sop 28 -3 1 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of CHARLES W KELLEY late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by LOUIL C KELLEY of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should flJe a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twenty-fifth day of October 1961, the return day of this citation.
John V Harvey, Register. sep28-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persona interested in the estate of MICHELE BUTTAFUOCO, also known ns MICHELE BOTTAFUOCO. late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court praying that VINCENT BOTTAFUOCO of Winchester in the County of Middlesex be appointed administrator of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond.
John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this eighteenth day of September 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. •ep21-3t COMMONWEALTH OF M ASS AC III J S F.TTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES SHERMAN KENNEDY, also known as JAMES 8.
KENNEDY and J SHERMAN KENNEDY late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of sAid deceased by LOTTIE G KENNEDY of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyfifth day of October 1961, the return day of this citation.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-sixth day of September 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. oct5-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of WENDELL D IRVING, late of Winchester, In said County, deceased.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this thirteenth day of Sep tern ber 1961.
To all persons interested in the estate of KENNETH W PRATT late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The administratrix of said estate has presented to said Court her first account for allowance and a petition for distribution of the balance in her hands.
To all persona interested in the estate of GRACE S BANCROFT late of Wincheater in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of u certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARION BANCROFT and VINCENT P CLARKE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that they be appointed executors thereof without giving a surety on their bonds.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twentieth day of September 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. sep28-3t Eaton's personalized stationery for men and women.
To all persona interested in the estate of JAMES SIDNEY ALLEN, also known ns JAMES S ALLEN late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition lias been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceused by BRADLEE E GAGE of Amherst in the County of Hampshire and SANFORD T ABELE of Gloucester In the County of Essex praying that they be appointed executors thereof without giving u Burety on their bonds.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-eighth day of September 1961.
EDST, in the Town Hall East Room, upon application of Frank Catalano, Edith C Armstrong and Robert W Armstrong, Jr., for definitive approval of a subdivision of land on Pilgrim Drive, a way extending from the existing approved portion southerly to Hilltop Road, and on two unnamed ways extending from Pilgrim Drive southwesterly.
Prior to the hearing, the plans may be examined at the office of the Town Engineer.
The said premises will be sold subject to all unpaid taxes, tax titles, assessments, and other municipal liens.
T-1093 issued by the Winchester Co-operative Bank and that written application has been made to said bnnk for the payment of the amount of the deposit represented by said book or for the issuance of duplicate book tnerefor.
Said premises will bo sold subject to outBtunding tax titles, municipal or other public taxes, assessments, liens or claims in the nature of liens.
Suffolk Franklin Savings Bank By Joseph H Bucheller, Jr., KxecutJv# Vice-President 46 Krunklln Street, Boston, Mass.
Present holder of said mortgage September 15, 1961 Attorney, Marshall R Pihl.
To all persons Interested in the estate of ROBERT C BOONE late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last W<11 of said deceased by PHILIP BOONE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed executor thereof without giving a surety on his bond.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-fifth day of September 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. octo-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the trust estate under the will of ELLEN M DEARBORN late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of WILLIAM A SCOTT, JR. and others.
The trustees of said estate have presented to aaid Court for allowance their sixth account.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this thirteenth day of September 1961.
John V Harvoy, Register. sep2l-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested In the estate of J ANDREW MILLICAN. late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain insrtument purporting to bo the last will of Baid doceased by DEAN W CARLETON of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex praying thnt he be appointed administrator with the will annexed of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, Firat Judge of said Court, this eighth day of September, 1961.
THEN DIAL PA 9-0029 I i THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 5, 1961 Page Thirteen / o ^c/eX'^ >*9-m FORESTER’S FLOWER SHOP * CUT FLOWERS * WEDDING FLOWERS if FLORAL DESIGNS PA 9-1077 Even.
IB Thompson Street nov3-tf Parkliurst Parents A morning coffee for mothers new to the Parkhurst School was given on Thursday, September 28, at the gracious home of Mrs.
Members of the Executive Hoard and Mr Sutula were present to meet and welcome the thirty moth, ers who attended.
You can now order Raton’s personalized stationery at the Winchester Star.
FICTION The Fleet Rabble, by Frank B Hanes Flight Into Camden, by David Storey For the Time Being, by Julia Siebel V ny are the Hearts, by Bruce Palmer Missing, Presumed Dead, by Carlton Keith, pseud.
Rogues’ Ransom, by John Creaspy The Undying Past, by Orville Prescott, ed.
Full nursery facilities are available for children through the age of seven. 6:00m.
The new fall and winter series of fashion shows will continue each Friday at luncheon with three lovely models and exquisite clothes from some of the best women's shops in New England.
Patrons are invited to question the models about prices, fabrics and how best to wear clothes. i Sunday.
Tlu* Fortieth Anniversary of the leaving of the CornerHtone of this church building. 9:30m.
Will leave here by automobile to attend the Lynn District MYF Rally in Reading.
Supper and Meeting with Bishop Mathews for Laymen of Lynn District at Melrose.
PArkview 9-4363 after 6m. augl2-tf auy 12-tf SPECIALS GENUINE BLACK FOX COLLARS >19.95 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats CASHMERE SWEATERS WITH MINK COLLARS AND LINED s 47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED INTO A CAPE, STOLE or CAPELET at a labor charge of $■ 20 SWARTZ FURRIER 24 College Avenue Davis Square Somerville SOmerset 5-3399 oct5-eow FITZGERALD With OIL HEAT You Can Have Heat When You Want It IF You Want It NEW ENGLAND WEATHER IS SURE TO PROVIDE COLD, WET DAYS. oil heat is ready to serve you, available when you want it.
CONVENIENT — INEXPENSIVE Let us tell you about the advantages of oil Phone or come in W incheater 36 Church Street PArkview 9*3000 niar2-tf Rev.
W INCH ESTER UN IT A KI A N CHURCH Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev.
Wednesday, October 11. 7:30m TeHcher Training Institute meeting in Lexington. 7:30m.
TWO-DAY TAILORING SERVICE ON MOST GARMENTS STORE HOURS Monday and Tuesday — 7 :30m. to 6m.
PA 9-2220 Roy W Horn, Prop. july20tf IMMACULATE CONCEPTION CHURCH 1001 Main Street, Winchester Rev.
Style and Comfort in Glasses ARTHUR K SMITH Guild Optician 49A PlefciBant Street, Woburn WElls 3-1704 •u5-tf Sunday, October 8.
The title of his sermon will be ""The World Looks at the Christian Church.” 9:15 und 11:00m.
Why the hunting law of God can be relied upon to overcome ain and aickneoe will be explained Sunday at Chriutiun Science church services.
Members of the club will be on hand all day to help hunters properly sight-in their guns.
The club is offering this opportunity as a public service to hunters in this area as part of a nationwide program conducted by the National Rifle Association.
Hundreds of NRA affiliated clubs throughout the country are taking part in this program.
A correctly sighted-in gun is an important step to safe and accurate shooting.
The range is located off Salem Street in Woburn one quarter mile south and one eighth mile west of the intersection of Washington Street and Route 128.
The Welcome Wagon Hostess Will Knock on Your Door with Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors and Your Civic and Social \\ elf are Leaders ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies Charlotte L Dodge HL'nter 8-2882 No Cost or Obligation Special Christian Science Program A special program on Christian Science will be broadcast Sunday morning at 8:35 in the local “Call to Church"" series of Radio Station WEEL George Favre, First Reader of First Church of Christ, Scientist, Lynn-Swampscott, will speak on the subject.
The program will be presented through the radio facilities of The Mother Church, The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston.
Anchors machine firmly, reduces noise, lessens fatigue and increases speed and accuracy.
Moffett Funeral Service augO-tf Charming, useful, and quaint are the new 1962 “calendar towels,"" size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to flt any decor, $1.25, at the Star.
The report is being distributed by the League to all Massachusetts legislators on both state and national levels, to state government agencies, to local government heads, to college and university dein the state measj partments of public administration expectations.
This 1 15the only comprehensive document on the Mass, personnel system, aims to tell the average citizen what he is entitled to expect of a merit system and administration ures up to thoi a “Layman' s-eye view” of public personnel policy and practice in Massachusetts, both under Civil Service and outside it.
Past League study of several state government services has repeatedly pointed up the fact that the people who administer the service are the real key to its success or failure.
Because of this conviction, Massachusetts League members in 1959 elected to study the “people” in government service, the public personnel system itself.
Organization and Administration of the Public Personnel Agency; Civil Service Coverage; Recruitment for the PublicService; Selection; Classification and Compensation; and Career Development in the Merit System.
In the final chapter, “Recommendations for Improving the Commonwealth’s Personnel Program,” the report brings together the suggestions and proposals of other interested groups and individuals.
Local League groups will be discussing the findings during the coming year with the purpose of arriving at their own recommendations for change.
When the 12,000 Massachusetts League memWater colors and Sketches of Homes Creations that Attempt to Capture th(‘ tuner Beauty oj ) our Home Waltz Evening Patrons And Patronesses The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very grateful to the patrons and patronesses of the 1961 Waltz Evening.
Aiding Museum Membership Drive Winchester is one of the areas which is actively participating in the current membership drive at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, with three of its residents, all members of the ladies’ committee, giving full support to broaden the community awareness and support of the museum.
Unlike most art museums, ours in Boston receives not a cent of city or federal money.
Few people realize that, for a very modest sum, they get a lot of benefits, free admission to films and private views, a free illustrated calendar of events, discounts at the museum sales desk and reduced class fees.
The Fall meeting of the Friend* of tht 1 Winchester Hospital will he held at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church in Winchester on Thursday, October 26th.
The meeting commencing at 3:00 pan., will be dedicated to the “Candy Stripers”, the junior volunteers who work so faithfully at the hospital during the past year, Mrs.
Harry P Hood, Jr., Progam Chairman, has planned i most interesting meeting.
Awards will be presented to these volunteers, there will be a brief program including slides on “Do’s and Dont’s” for volunteers, after which a special social hour will be held for the young people.
A most i cordial welcome to this meeting is extended to Friends and their friends in Reading, Wilmington, and surrounding towns, as well as to those in Winchester. oct5-3t Junior Crittenton New Members’ Tea A tea to welcome the new members of the Winchester Junior Circle of the Florence Crittenton League was held on Tuesday, September 19, at the home of the new president.
William Wilde, Jr., and her able committee served delicious reI freshments.
Donald Richardson Mr and Mrs Mr and Mrs Mr and Mrs Mr and Mrs Mr Charles b' Doe Murray Bryce Charles E Potts Sheppnrd Holt Dr. nnd Mrs Mae Adams and Mrs.
LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE OF EVERY DESCRIPTION •1> low (,llK(iKINh OlN I’ INAL PLANS for Waltz Evening are these W inchester High School students, left to right, Kate Robinson.
Both Kate and Janet have given many hours as volunteers at the Winchester Hospital.
Holyoke Club entertained for morning coffee at her home on Glen Road members of the committee in charge of planning the Fall Tour of Homes, as well as the hostesses who so graciously opened their homes for this event.
These tillers can help turn a sparse stand of grass injo a nicely filled-out turf — if plants have the nutrition they need for proper growth.
That’s why a feeding of protein-building turi builder® can do more for your lawn at this time than at almost any other season.
Lots of homes have Gas burners that arc .still giving trouble* farce service after 25, even 30 years.
More than 20 million American homes now heat with Gas. . .an additional million are being added to theuiks each year.
This summer save $ k00 on a Gas Burner Gas is competitive in price with other automatic heating fuels.
It has NO 1 IIDDliN COS I S It assures your home of clean, warm heat . . . laithful service . . . and no trips to the basement to check fuel supplies.
Call us now for a FREE LSI IMA1 h of how little it will cost you to beat with Gas.
If at the end of one heating season a home owner is not completely satisfied, we will remove the burner and refund <*»r* ry cent paid on it.
Everythin# you ne*d, wfth directions, for a really fascinating craft game.
Conlon FUE L SE RVICE Oil Burner Installations All Work Guaranteed Time Payments WE 3-1720 27 Lake Avenue, Woburn “The Consistory in Rome” will he the subject of a talk and movie to be presented by Mr Gerald Hayes after the 7:45 Mass on Sunday Oct., in the K of C Hall.
Mr Hayes is an assistant vice president of the National Shawmut Bank of Boston and is in heavy demand as a speaker.
The usual book prize will he presented and there will be coffee and doughnuts available.
Every man in I the parish should make an extra effort to be present on Sunday.
Due to many inquiries about a Red Cross First Aid Course, the Winchester Chapter is starting a 1 (J hour Standard course on Monday evening.
The classes will be limited so please register early by calling the Red Cross Chapter at PA 9-2300.
Any boy ofgirl interested in refreshing his knowledge and skills is invited to contact the Winchester Chapter.
Six years ago in September 1955 jackets were still dripping from I classroom techniques.
This leisurely outdoor fellowship gave a welcome midday break to a very busy day for the Mystic School teachers and the members of the hoard supplying the luncheon, under the direction of Mrs.
The next morning on that hectic first day bouquets of fresh flowers greeted each teacher before the opening bell rang.
The new mothers at the Mystic School were hardly getting used to their children’s new school and teachers when they were invited to a morning coffee, just for them, at the home of Mrs.
Each guest was personally contacted by a member of the board who made aure that she had transportation and someone to attend this event with.
Ganson Taggart, president of the Mystic Mothers' Association, was there to greet and welcome each guest and she spoke briefly about the various committees that function as part of the Association.
He was most sincere in i Weaver’s directions, his invitation to all members to j a parent an understanding of what i and dealt almost exclusively in the teacher is trying to accomplish to ys at discount prices.
The Fall Meeting of any organization is always brisk, full of promise, and yet almost as exciting as a college homecoming week end.
The September 25th meeting lived up to all of this and it was further stimulated by the guest speaker, Mrs.
Her topic was “Child Gui dance in the Elementary School and its Availability.
Keville stated in clear terms what child guidance is in Winchester, why it is needed, how it is given and what the aims for this program are.
Keville brought to this audience a wide encompassing subject and her lecture excellently prepared and delivered exposed many facets of interest to all.
This is a subject that should be understood by all parents of school children.
Tray Painting Classes Stenciling, Oil Painting, Gold Leafing on Furniture, Tinware and Wooden articles.
PAULINE WHEELOCK PA 9-1304 oct5-4t Fall is a lovely time of the year | in New England and a busy one.
I Committees are formed, projects I are planned, dates for many community activities are set, and it | sometimes becomes a mad dash I between bulb planting and comImunity efforts.
The Armchair Benefit Program at the Mystic School gives you an opportunity to help your school association carry on its activities and yet gives you hours of free time to spend with your children, so the moral of this story is please give your room mother at Mystic School your dues now, before the snow comes.
Fireside Guild Of First Church The October meeting of Fireside Guild will be held Wednesday, October 18, at 8m. at the home of Mrs.
Growing in leaps and bounds, Wayside Bazaar has become the fastest growing discount house in the area.
People told people, people sent people, people brought people, until today a large staff of personnel is necessary to provide Wayside’s customers with u world of bargains.
Department after department has been added and now there are 32, each of which carries a wide assortment of merchandise at low, low prices.
To celebrate its sixth birthday Wayside Bazaar is conducting an anniversary sale with spectacular savings throughout the store.
Daily specials, month-long promotions, peirodic give-a-ways and free toys for the kiddies make up the attractions for the whole month of September.
Also with every Christmas lay-a-way of $15 or more, a choice of two Christmas figurines is given Free.
Air conditioning, background music, wide aisles, helpful personnel, ample parking, discount prices, high quality, refund guarantee, bigselection, all these features have contributed to the growth of this popular shopping mecca and the growing number of customers, your friends and neighbors, attest to the popularity of Wayside Bazaar, where all are welcome.
Motor Vehicle Inspection Reminder Today Registrar Riley chairman Massachusetts Highway Safety Committee, ordered his inspectors to place inspection reminder cards under the windshield wipers of motor vehicles that have not been inspected.
Although the inspection period started September l, and ends Sunday, October 15, only about half of the registered motor vehicles have been inspected.
We have about 2,000,000 motor vehicles and trailers.,000,000 motor vehicles and trailers must be inspected in the next two weeks.
Registrar Riley suggests you drive to your neighborhood inspection station today and get your green sticker.
Monday morning, October 15, registry men and police will patrol every highway.
Colorful Opening For Mary cliff Guild The new season for members of the Mary cl iff Guild will be initiated by a preview of colorful fall j and winter fashions graciously presented by Peck and Peck of Winchester.
Parading the runway will be these Guild members Mesdames Richard Berthiaume, John Finamore, Paul Kelehor, Robert O’Brien, Timothy Henigan, Robert Luick, Joseph Lepore, Henry Lawnieki.
Frederick Ricci, George Rose, also three former students at the Academy, Virginia Nilo, Jane De Marchi, ami Joanne Maselli.
After the ladies aesthetic tastes have been satisfied, they will be served light refreshments.
Cardinal Presents Marine Band His Eminence Richard Cardinal Cushing is bringing the famed United States Marine Band to Boston on Sunday, Oct., to play at the Donnelly Memorial Theatre in aid of his charities.
The band, which appears anywhere only by special approval of the President of the United States, will play two concerts in Boston, one at 2:30 in the afternoon, and the other at 8:30 in the evening.
The United States Marine Band came to Winchester some years ago, presenting a concert of outstanding excellence in the Town Hall under the auspices of Winchester Rotary.
Many who enjoyed the band’s performance on that occasion will undoubtedly plan to hear it in Boston on October 15.
Waterfield Opticians offer A COMPLETE OPTICAL SERVICE Physicians’ and Hospital Prescriptions Accurately Filled Glasses Fitted — Lenses Duplicated Hand Readers — Frames Repaired Batteries, Cords and Repuirs for Most Hearing Aids Room 1, Masonic Building Winchester, Mass. sep«8-2t Lynch Jr.
High To Welcome Newcomers Newcomers to Winchester who have young people attending Lynch Junior High School are cordially invited to a tea to be held in the home economics room of the new school, Tuesday, October 10, at 3:15.
Board members of the Lynch Junior High Associates urge all newcomers to attend to meet the principal, Mr Gardner Handy, and to become acquainted with the new school.
Guild of The Infant Saviour The Winchester Chapter, Guild of the Infant Saviour will open the coming season with a dessert bridge.
This is to be held at the Knights of Columbus Hall, Winchester Square, on Tuesday, Oct. 10, at 1:00m.
Noted tor Quality and Workmonthsp ' ALL STYLES — See our complete line of quality wood, chain link and ornamental fencing.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY — Landscaped exhibit of wood fencing, garden furniture and tool houses.
For here is a motor car that has already oatablished its mastery in everything that makes an automobile good and fine and desirable.
In appearance, it is clearly a Cadillac masterpiece — graceful, clean-lined and elegant.
In safety, it is in a class of its own— with a host of exclusive features, including remarkable new side cornering lights.
In craftsmanship, it is simply without rival; Every 1962 Cadillac will undergo more than 1400 inspections to assure its quality and goodness.
But however lengthy, that list could never replace the experience of inspecting the car and driving it.
Once you have, youTl understand why the word has gone out so quickly that this is the finest motor car ever to bear the Cadillac name.
OCTOBER 5, 1961 HOW BANKS HELP YOU TO Banks across the couni ry make loans for home repair work.
At our bank, prompt action is the policy, for we know that the longer a householder is obliged to put oft making a necessary repair the greater his ultimate cost is likely to he.
Get contractors’ estimates on the work to be done; decide how much cash you can assign to the project; sit down with one of our officers to work out details of borrowing the balance at low cost and repaying over a convenient period.
VERNON STREET 35 CHURCH STREET Serving the Community Since 1897 WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS MEMBER FEOERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION MEMBER FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM BANKING HOURS — 8 A.M. to 2 P.iVL Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Finger In The Pie Membership Drive Internationally Speaking One unit of four East German soldiers guarding the Berlin barricade decamped en masse to the West.
One wonders what would happen if all troops engaged in this venture should suddenly wheel and follow suit.
To Sponsor Concert This year Aletheon Chapter O E.S. will again sponsor a Pops Concert.
It will be presented in Hadley Hall, Church of the Epiphany on Saturday, October 14th at 8:00m.
The program this year will include well known arias, American Folk music and selections from “Camelot,” “Finnian’s Rainbow,” ‘‘Porgy and Bess,” and other familiar songs.
Barbara Wood, Mr Allan Higgins, and Mr William Calhoun Accompanists will be Mrs.
William Cusack of 2 Lakeview Road is to be the gracious hostess at Winchester Auxiliary of M.S.P.C.A.’s next meeting on Monday afternoon, October 9th.
Mr Albert Governor, assistant editor of Our Dumb Animals, will speak on a Day in the Life of the “Animal” Editor.
Why (tales Are Gals Orta in ladies have shown more or less justifiable resentment at the current practice of bestowing feminine names on impending hurricanes.
A New Orleans matron found the idea “insulting,” adding that she’d rather have an unnamed hurricane hit her house than one reminiscent of one of her hus hand’s old flames.
For the lady’s comfort, let us say that the controversial business of naming hurricanes appears to have no connection whatever with the war between the sexes.
Mr Ivan Ray Tannehill, a tall white-haired pipe-smoker who is chief of operations of the United States Weather Bureau, has studied some 1,000 hurricanes recorded since the days of Columbus.
One of them that devastated Santo Domingo, was called Padre Ruiz, for a priest who was being buried when it struck.
Tho horn, a young meteorologist, christens the threatening low-pressure areas after girls he has known, calling the most destructive one Maria.
Later, in World War II, our armed forces made up lists of girls’ names to identify the hurricane-like typhoons in the Pacific, which are so numerous that to designate them three lists, each from A to W, are sometimes required annually.
Then, in the first week of September, three of them roamed the Caribbean simultaneously causing confusion in official weather communications.
As a result, a labeling system was adopted at the next hurricane conference — an annual meeting of experts from the Weather Bureau, the Civil Aeronautics Administration, the Navy, the Air Force, and other interested agencies.
Simple numbering was no solution in the face of the complexity of things.
Alice, Barbara, Carol, Dolly, Edna, Florence, Gilda, Hazel, Irene, Jill, Katherine, Lucy, Mabel, Norma, Orpha, Patsy, Queen, Ra chel, Susie, Tina, Una, Vicky, and Wallis.
Only two names were picked, says Mr Tannehill, with real people in mind.
The resignation of former Chief Joe Moffett was announced, also the following promotions by order of Chief Derro, Fred Wier, Auxiliary Chief, Anthony J Puzzo, Deputy Chief, Roger McTighe, Captain.
It has been a very active year for the Auxiliary, assisting the regular police department, covering churches, parades, En Ka Fair, Rotary Auction, Medical Missionaries of Mary, P.A.L. dances, band competitions, town meetings, policeman’s ball, fishing derby and all two-alarm fires.
A special letter of appreciation was received from Chief Derro, acknowledging the services rendered by the Auxiliary over the 4th of July and Labor Day week end.
Due to the present civil defense step-up and the possibility of arising emergencies we have openings for several qualified public spirited citizens.
Hospital Volunteer Training Program A special Volunteer Training Program for hospital volunteers, sponsored by Friends of the Winchester Hospital, will be held at the Wyman School in Winchester on Tuesday, October 24th.
A most instructive and worthwhile program has been arranged, and it is earnestly hoped that ALL hospital volunteers will attend.
Registration will he at 8:00m. with the chairmen of the various volunteer services.
Richard J Clark, president of the hospital staff, Miss Marjorie Snyder, director of nurses, and Mr Reese James, hospital administrator.
Officer Training Andrew B Cornwall of 57 Grove Street was recently accepted as a cadet in the Air Force Reserve Officrs Training Corps at Colby College, Waterville, Maine.
Cadet Cornwall, a freshman at Colby, is m igned as a flight basic airman.
Continued acceptance and training in this program will lead, upon graduation, to a commission as a second lieutenant in the Air Force Reserve, and, if qualified, silver wings of a pilot or navigator.
Leo M Pistorino, Winchester members of the ladies’ committee of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, admire “Bronze Dancer” by Degas.
Both are working on the muscuufs current membership drive. es already had Olga, Opal, Olive, and Ophelia.
JOHN B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED ” HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage at Less Cost 1 Mt.
INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WlhTOSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH Sc ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET Rea.
PArkview U-1062 FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
If you get yourself a dog, you can be sure he’ll have a dog’s temperament, a dog’s disposition, and that he’ll act like a dog.
A do-it-yourself enthusiast who had lost the tip of his index finger In the hungry teeth of a power saw was making a plane trip.
His seat companion was a charming, rather sophisticated ten-year-old who chatted about a number of things until her eye fell on the shortened digit.
Ronnie was most anxious to make a good impression on her, so he took her to Tiffany’s to pick out an engagement ring.
ERASMUS Morning Coffee For New Mothers At Vinson-Owen All new mothers to the VinsonOwen School will have a chance to see it and meet with other mothers at a morning coffee, arranged by the Board of the Parents* Association, which will be held on Thursday, October 5 in the school auditorium.
The association will be particularly happy to welcome mothers of children from the Wyman School area, who are attending the Vinson-Owen school this year.
Parent-Faculty Coffee Mothers of new students at Winchester High School had the opportunity to meet members of the ParentFaculty Association at a coffee on Tuesday morning, October 3, at the home of Mrs.
Forty mothers of new students received invitations from the Parent-Faculty Association for this fall event which serves annually to welcome these new members to the school community.
It was announced that the major event to help parents become better acquainted with the High School will be the Parent-Faculty sponsored Open House at the High School on the evening of November 2.
Mass. fa M KM BURS NKW YORK STOCK KXCI IANCiK Allyn’s nation-wide facilities handle your stock and bond buy or sell orders quickly, efficiently— provide up-to-date information on specific stocks . . . with experienced guidance in investment program planning.
Allyn . . . where every investor gets individual personalized service# j4.dyl//^n d Co.
Pit still In If in-st ion School Dispute Nearing Arbitration Arrangements for arbitration of still disputed excess expenditures for the Vinson-Owen School are now being discussed by Winchester officials.
Working on this problem are Town Counsel Vincent Clarke, Chairman of the Hoard of Selectmen Sherman W Saltmarsh. and the Town Accountant, James J Costello.
In addition the Selectmen will meet shortly with the Johnson Road School Building Committee.
The object of the arbitration proceedings will he to determine whether the Keystone Construction Co. or the Town of Winchester is liable for the costs of certain change orders in the contract specification as construction of the school proceeded.
Ciipaid items as of the moment, total $23,310.08, of which $1,121.31 is for the architect’s fee, plus $0,310 being held out as rclainage against the contract.
High 1 he Lynch Junior High School Building Committee urged the Selectmen Monday night, October 0, to call a Special Town Meeting to appropriate at least $11,000 more to complete furnishing and supplies and to build a fence around the wells on the school site.
Barbara Clark Bailey, Chairman of the Building' Committee, and Assistant Superintendent of Schools Richard Desjarlais appeared at the regular weekly meeting of the Selectmen to make the petition.
They urged that the Special Town Meeting he held in mid-November, when they said, the building committee would know with greater certainty precisely how much more money it would need and precisely what it would be needed for. re In arbitration proceedings, contending parties try first to agree on an arbitrator acceptable to them both.
The Selectmen last week voted to pay all hut $6,805 of the most controversial excess expenditure, $16,243 for swamp work and drainage necessitated by unexpected shooting springs on the construction site after the actual building began.
Of central importance in this connection, has been the contour map used by the architect and contractor.
The contractor has indicated that the contour map provided by the Town Engineer did not adequately show the location of ledge, whereas the Town Engineer has maintained that the map he provided to the contractor at his request was intended only for general and superficial purposes and that construction should not have proceeded until a more detailed map was made of the construction site.
Such a map, the Town Engineer maintains, was given to the contractor and architect as promised.
No definite date has yet been set for the arbitration proceedings, nor has the specific amount to he arbitrated been settled.
It is known that the Selectmen are hopeful that the legitimacy of more items can be determined before arbitration proceedings begin.
Reprints Ready On Editorial On H-Bomb War In response to many requests, the Star has reprinted copies of its August 31 editorial on nuclear war.
The editorial cites statistics concerning the H-bomb threat and considers what would happen to Winchester if an H-bomb were dropped on Boston.
The Star is very grateful for Winchester’s strong response to this editorial.
Homefronters’ Tag Day On Saturday The Homefronters will hold a tag day on Saturday, October 14, from 9m. until 5m.
The volunteers will be in the downtown area and at the football games to collect money for the Charistmas packages to be sent to Winchester boys and girls in the armed services.
That was the message brought to Winchester Rotarians at their meeting last Thursday by Mr Henry L Desjardins of Beverlv. governor of district < 93 of Rotary International.
Americans seem to he the chief as the selling of masterpieces had been prohibited during the war.
She also showed cases of suspected forgery which were proved to be originals, and some which will never he settled.
Artists at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts sometimes make copies of paintings and sculptures which can scarcely be distinguished from the originals, and these are put on display.
To preserve the originals in air-conditioned vaults away from the harmful Boston air.
She mentioned briefly some of the chemical and physical tests which can be made on pictures, many of which the wily forger can circumvent by using old canvas, FORGERY, continued on page 3 | victims of a new million-dollar industry, dealing in fakes of the paintings of old master^, old sculptures and other art objects.
Hausen told about Hans van Meegeren who painted many pictures sold as genuine Vermeer’s, one of which was called by critics Vermeer’s best.
By means of slides she showed so well the difference between van Meegeren’s style and Vermeer’s that even the audience could guess correctly which was the genuine and which the fake.
He finally had to prove to the Dutch court that the pictures were fakes done by himself, in order to save his own life, Meeting.
Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke tells the Star, a simple majority vote would he required to approve the additional appropriation, since no excess expenditure has been incurred and since no bond issue is being floated.
Chairman Saltmarsh told the Star that the Selectmen hope to have the complete list of expenses from the Lynch committee either this week or next.
Also attending the meeting, which was less than amicable, we 1 own Accountant James J Costello and Finance Committee Chair man John T Lyman.
One Selectman indicated that neither he nor the Board of Selectmen was in a mood to consider calling a T Meeting to appropriate more money for a school than was originally appropriated, and that in any case the matter could wait until the Regular Town Meeting in March.
As of the moment, the Selectmen have not made a decision as to whether they will call a special town meeting.
They are awaiting the arrival at Town Hall of more specific figures concerning the amount of additional money the building committee wanted, and what they wanted it for.
Chairman of the Board of Selectmen Sherman W Saltmarsh and Town Accountant James J Costello both told the Star that the Lynch Building Committee had definitely not over-spent its appropriation.
Under the recently established encumbrance system, which assures that no building committee may make any expenditure without first reconciling it with the balance of money in its appropriation account, the building committee could not make an excess expenditure.
In fact, the Lynch Building Committee has a balance of $9,000 in its account.
The difficulty arises from the fact that the Committee considers as essential additional expenses amounting to at least $20,000, or at least $11,000 more than its original appropriation of $1,500,000, which was voted by L.e Town Meeting of May 19, 1960.
It is estimated that some $6,000 of the additional $11,000 asked for by the Lynch Building Committee is for a picket fence around the well field.
The erection of such a fence was a condition of the transfer of the site from the jurisdiction of the Water and Sewer Board to that of the School Department.
The Star has learned that there is some question as to whether the fence should be paid for by the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee or the School Committee itself.
It is understood by the Star that if the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee bears the expense it will get some $1,800 in state aid, and that if the School Committee bears the expense, no aid will be forthcoming.
At the moment, no final list of Lynch Building Committee expenses has been received by the Selectmen.
This is why the Selectmen have not given the Building Committee any indication as to whether they will call a Special Town Professor Aiken Honored Friday At Harvard Prof.
Howard H Aiken, who pi oneered one of the major developments in modern science, was hon ored Friday, October 6, at a surprise gathering of his friends, former students, and leaders in the design and use of large comput ers in industry and government.
The delicately crafted replica, about two feet AIKEN, continued on page 4 T« Promote Good Will HENRY L DESJARDINS In addition to the activities of the more than 11,000 Rotary clubs within their own communities to promote this objective, Mr Desjardins explained, Rotary international has awarded grants of more than $3,750,000 in the past 14 years through its program of student fellowships, which enable outstanding college graduates to study for one year in countries other than their own, as Rotary ambassadors of good will.
Since l'J47, when this program was established, 1,454 Rotary Foundation Fellowships have been awarded to students in 70 countries for study in 50 countries, with grants averaging $2,600.
Mr Desjardins urged all local | Rotarians to attend the Rotary district conference to he held in Swampscott in April, and to make plans for the club to be represented at the 53rd annual convention of Rotary International, which will be held in Los Angeles, California, [next June.
Citizens Radio Service Organized n April 19, 1961 a group of radio operators in the Citizens Radio Service formed a two-way radio network with the objective ot promoting good will among personal and business users, as well as to provide a service to the community in the event of local or national emergencies.
In the United States there are more than 180,000 C itizen Land licensees and the service is still growing.
Applications are being received, by the Federal Communications Commission, at the approximate rate of 12,000 a month.
In the event of local, or even a national emergency, the Citizens Radio Service piaivides the largest common radio outlet in the United States, even outnumbering radio amateur stations.
The book will cover all major aspects of the life of the midshipman, whose athletic prowess has already become legendary.
The hook was written by Winchester’s Cynthia Barone, assisted hy her husband, Dr.
It will be published by their newly formed firm, the Winchester Publishers.
There is every likelihood that it will be a best-seller among the nation’s sports fans and no doubt, whatever, that it will he a top item on Winchester Christmas lists this season.
It will include a pictorial review and a special chapter on his senior year at the Naval Academy, game by game.
In a sense, the writing and publication of this book are themselves a feature story.
The idea of writing it occurred to the Barones last year during the Army-Navy game, and Dr.
Barone immediately got to work collecting pictures of Joe published in various newspapers throughout the country.
Every time a good picture came out showing Joe the Jet on the field, at public gatherings, on the Annapolis grounds, or shaking hands with some celebrity it was filed away and picture rights were promptly obtained.
The Barones’ table was a little less fancy than BELLINO, continued on page 3 McLean Wins DuPont Grant In Journalism David C McLean, son of Dr. and Mrs.
DAVID C McLEAN McLean graduated from Bowdoin last June as a philosophy major and served as editor of the Bowdoin Orient as a senior.
A member of Delta Kappa Epsilon Fraternity, McLean was a letter winner in rifle, was publicity director for WBOR, the Bowdoin radio station, and was a member of the Bowdoin sailing club.
Photo hy Uycrhon CITIZENS RADIO SERVILE cheeking out units oil operational map, left to right, Peter Crawlord, Bob Little, Ernie Covino, and Bill Suuruian.
The ceremony took place aboard the world’s first guided missile cruiser at Pier 4, Boston Naval Shipyard in Charlestown.
Altair on which he has served as ommanding officer for the past 15 months.
Barker as an Ensign and emained aboard for a period of five years, the last year and one half of which he served as Commanding Officer in the rank of Lieutenant Commander.
During this time the Barker participated in the Java Sea Campaign and in number of anti-submarine-warfare operations.
In December 1950 he reported for duty in the office of the Chief of Naval Operations where he was assigned to the Politico-Military Affairs Division.
In the spring of 1956 while attending the Naval War College, Newport, R I., he was assigned to organize and act as director of a new course for Senior Free World Naval Officers.
After two years in this assignment at the Naval War College, Captain Colbert was ordered to the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Stall* in Washington, D (\, where he was assigned to the Long Range Plans and Basic War Plans Branches in the Plans and Policy Directorate.
His new orders send him to Hawaii where he will report to Commander, Hawaiian Sea Frontier.
Equipped with Terrier surfaceto-air missiles and air intercept control facilities, the Boston with a crew of over 1,300 men plays a key role in the Second Fleet’s antiuir-warfurc operations.
October is dividend time at Winchester Savings Hank, another October custom of long standing.
An excellent time to get your savings started — without missing out on any of the earnings in our new dividend period, just starting.
Cusack Brilliantly colored fall flowers and candles graced the table of Mrs.
E William Johansen had made, as representatives of our group, out to the Buddy Dog Humane Society in Sudbury.
This newly-started “nonprofit society dedicated to the care and .placement of homeless dogs” is a most worthy and appealing project, Mrs.
An enthusiastic vote was taken to become a sustaining member of this dedicated organization.
Lyle Longworth and cochairman Mary Knox detailed last minute “polishing up” plans for the October 19th Fashion Show at the Winchester Theatre.
Our interesting speaker, who had not been heard in Winchester before, told of his work as assistant editor of Our Dumb Animals magazine published by the Mass.
The touching and amusing stories and pictures about pets are often contributed by readers.
Mr Governer described the Braille edition of “Animals,” which is doing so much to bring happy rending matter to blind animal lovers.
Junior Veterans’ Doubles Championship Art Mills and Bob Joslin, an old Winchester tennis partnership, closed the books on another season in the sun as they won the New England Junior Veterans’ Doubles Championship over Hill Powers and Henri Salaun Sunday at the W eston Golf Club, 2-6, 6-1, 6-4.
In a tense struggle, the local pair came from behind to upset Powers and Salaun, who were top-seeds in the draw and heavily favored to win the coveted title.
Joslin, while yielding only one point in his two service games, could not find the court with his overhead and this malfeasance was exploited by the eventual losers to achieve a double break through of Hills’ serve for the set.
At this point, the champions rallied their resources and attacked without let-up breaking Powers’ serve twice and controlling play at the net throughout.
Salaun was badgered through three deuces, but held his service game for his team’s lone game in the set.
To open the decisive third set, Jalaun sol ved for a 1-0 advantage, hut saw this disappear as Joslin served another love game and Powers was cracked on a perfect lobvolley by Hills after a fast exchange with all four players at net.
Hills held serve, as his overhead, which was the last word, thundered two over the fence and flushed two golfers out' of the rough on the adjacent course.
Once again it was Salaun’s turn to serve and his fate was sealed as the winners returned low and set themselves up for winning volleys at the net and grabbed a heady 4-1 'end.
A volleying lapse by Joslin and nn untakable return of serve by Powers gave the losers their only service break of Joslin in the sixth game.
However, Hills and Joslin refused to fold and although unable to break their opponents serves again, held their own serves for the win in the tenth game as Hills hit a volley to the backhand corner which Powers could not handle.
In winning the New England title, Hills and Joslin reached a goal which had twice before eluded them in the final round.
And to win over their arch tormentor and such a fine player as Salaun, who rarely has known defeat, made the victory particularly sweet.
Lawore is a high school math teacher in her native land where her husband is in the diplomatic service.
During the past summer she was active in youth conference work throughout New England.
Her visit to Forum will add special meaning to the year’s theme of “Building a Better World” since Mrs.
Lawore is an example of how the Christian churches through their missionary programs are helping build international understanding and peace.
Mike Hammel and Eric Schaefer will be deacons and Fred Cardin and Dwight Bellows ushers.
Sunday evening the Woburn Association of Pilgrim Fellowship will hold a rally at the Lynnfield Centre Congregational Church with Rev.
Plans for the annual Work Day for Christ are being made by Forum members under the leadership of Linda Carter and Jane Hood, co-chairmen.
This year Congregational young people of Massachusetts are hoping to raise enough money through the Work Day projects to provide a library for Mt.
R Hillger Assistants, Mr C Stebbins, Mr J Bradley Cubmaster, Mr J Mulcare Treasurer, Mr R Carr Program Chairman, Mr R, Whitman Assistants, Dr.
G Kaufmann, Mr J Lanigan, Mr R Richmond, Mr E Palmer Master of Achievement, Mr H Woodward Assistant, Mr J Harrington Minuteman Council Representative, Mr H Richardson Publicity, Mrs.
C Stebbins Webelos Master, Mr R Westwater Visitation To Beacon Hill A look at the old and the new.
Seven different residences will be on view including those of Mr and Mrs.
Rhys Williams, 7 Chestnut Street, among the first houses to be built for speculation on Beacon Hill (most were built by their owners); the Beacon Hill Friends House, 6 Chestnut Street, with its two-story Music Room; Mrs.
Barbara Brooks Walker, 13 Walnut Street, with its mantle from the original Hancock House.
Time out was taken from this valuable public relations work to attend the convention of the Am* I eriean Association of Workers for I the Blind in St.
Louis, serving as i one of the school staff representatives there. j Commencing in August Norma 1 and her faithful dog, Patty, checked out for a well deserved vacation camping trip.
She has many friends in her old home town who follow her career with interest.
PAL Forming Co-ed Bowling Teams Here The Police Athletic League with the assistance of the PAL Recreation Committee is now forming Pal Co-ed Bowling Teams.
The teams will meet every Saturday at 10m. at Strike Lanes on Converse Place.
Registration will take place at the police station Friday evening, October 13, from 6:30 to 9:00m.
Every person that joins the league must remain with their teams during the season.
Local Boy, 16, Medford Man, 67, In Collision Police responded to a report of an automobile collision at the intersection of Church and Cambride Streets, Tuesday, at 8:02 m. involving a Plymouth sedan owned and operated by 67-year-old Arthur W Leighton of 97 Talbot Avenue, Medford, and a Ford coupe operated by 16-year-old Kent S Baerenwald and owned by Oscar J Baerenwald of 53 Johnson Road.
Mr Leighton, accompanied by bis wife Frances, was proceeding north on Cambridge Street and was making a left turn into High Street when the collision occurred.
His Ford was damaged on the front mudguard, bumper and headlight, while the Plymouth was damaged on the right rear mudguard and rear door.
No injuries were indicated in the report made by Officer Archie T O’Connell Winchester Public Librar Film programs at the Winchester Public Library will begin again next week.
Each week from October through March families are invited to view the* program together on Friday evening at 7:30.
Junior High and High School students are particularly invited to attend the Friday night programs.
Children younger than 7th Graders must be accompanied by an adult to the evening program.
On Saturday morning at 10:15 a Children’s Program showing the same films is held for all schoolage boys and girls.
Hobbies, historical subjects, animated children’s books, geography, current affairs, simple science, and occupations are treated in various ways during the year.
A summary of the subject matter of the film will be found in the Star each week and the program is listed under Coming Events.
Parents who enjoy sharing exjeriences with their children have found the Friday evening programs worth including in their plans tickets for the Saturday morning program must he obtained in the Boys’ and Girls’ Room after 10:00 m. each Saturday, and seats are on a first-come first-serve basis.
Watch for detailed information on the first program in next week’s Star.
Marycliff Guild New members of the Marycliff Guild enjoyed a coffee hour at the home of Mrs.
Since the Guild’s membership comprises residents of many surrounding communities, this was a gracious way to welcome newcomers and to acquaint them with the aims of the organization.
Francis Gallagher, the newly elected president, addressed the group and chatted with each new member.
Potpourri And Polaroid » Pandemonium ; The Tandem Club of the Church of the Epiphany has planned a pot j lurk supper in Hadley Hall, October 18, followed by an unusual treasure hunt.
All owners of Polaroid cameras are asked to contact Bob Gallant, PA 9-4672; cameras will be supplied to other participants.
Please phone the Bensons, PA 9-4461., or Thayers, PA 9-1126 by Sunday, October 15 to guarantee your participation in this gala occasion and indicate what dish you will prepare for the supper.
John Broughton Dinners, Mr Thayer and Di Benson Publicity, Mr Hall Tickets, Mr Washburn The Potpurri and Polaroid Pandemonium is just the first of many interesting and informative programs which have been arranged for your enjoyment by these officers and committee members. and Mrs.
OfIN WID nil FBI til » PM Pric** Effudlu# 0c» 11,13 aid 14 Closed all day Thursday, Oct 12 / St.
Everything you need, with directions, for a really fascinating craft game.
Club for the 1961-1962 season was held on Wednesday evening, October 4, in St.
Under the very capable chairmanship of Andy Bubser, everyone was given a chance to select or “swap” a choice gift.
Many of the prizes (such as an “antique” sewing basket an “antique” leuther-covered liquid container, un “antique"" cherry pitter) were swapped many times throughout the evening.
To make the evening’s entertainment completely enjoyable, Chris Wendy Ellison, Debbie Gregory, | und Jack MacDonald and their Mary Elise Suulnier, Janet Puffer, i committee provided delicious reAgalin Rutherford, Nancy Clark freahments at the close of the and Polly Lee Knowlton. j meeting.
Stanley H Withrow of Dix Street, gave a party for a group of her little friends on Friday, September 29, in honor of her seventh birthday.
Enjoying the refreshments and fun with Cherie were Jody Parker, Crittenton Holds First Meeting The first meeting of the Winchester Circle of the Florence Crittenton League will be held on Friday, Oct. at the home of Mrs.
A dessert and coffee party will be served at 1:30m. followed by the business meeting and program.
Plans for this meeting and for the pre-sale for the annual Florence Crittenton Bazaar were discussed at a meeting of the executive board held at the home of the circle president, Mrs.
There will be more news about the pre-sale at a later date, but it will be held on November 15 at the home of Mrs.
All Florence Crittenton members are urged to attend this first meeting on October 20 and get the year off to a good start.
Norma Porraa of 11 Hutchinson Road, is among a group of sixty practicing pharmacists who are enrolled in the second annual Postgraduate Seminar program offered by the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy, Longwood Avenue, Boston.
The program includes a series of eight lectures given on Tuesday evenings from September 26th through November 14th.
The 1961 Seminar features a basic review of organic chemistry with discussions of organic nomenclature, the reactions of functional groups, isomerism, and the relationship of chemical structure to physiologic activity.
Associate Professor Joseph D Mutthes and assistant professor Ronald N Du vail of the Department of Chemistry are lecturers for the extensive review course.
J .. ■■ ■ raw iwi .v . — ... — • t Page Three THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 12, 1961 Happy Birthday EIGHTY-FOUR YEARS OLD OCTOBER 14.
Donahue as customers used to see him in the days when lie was proprietor of the Central Hardware Store on Mt.
Joe founded t lie business in 1907 in a little store on Main Street at the Abcrjona River and ran it until he sold out in July of 1959.
No special celebration has been arranged for his birthday, hut a host of friends and former customers will he glad to extend best wishes to one who through the years made a real contribution to the business life of the town.
Forgery old-style paints, etc., but she also showed how even the most expert forger leaves a bit of his own style of painting in his forgeries.
Those who missed this lecture missed a real treat, and it is hoped many more will come to the next meeting on the first Tuesday evening in November.
Membership in the association is not costly and families may join at reduced rates.
This organization is for all who enjoy art and not just for those who paint.
Donald Van Roosen, program chairman, is to be congratulated for securing fine speakers and for all programs of the year.
Clarence Luitwieler helped with the arrangements on this month’s program, and also invited all present at the meeting to an open house at her home afterwards, to meet the speaker and enjoy refreshments.
Albert Steigmann of Winchester, announced that the “Membership Jubilee” will take place Monday October 23, at 8:15m. at the home of co-Vice President Mrs.
This Golden Toastmistress Club In Full Swing The Winchester Toastmistress Club met last Monday night October 9, in the Common Room of the Epiphany Church, Winchester, at 8:00m.
Catherine Swauger, Medford, who put in her application to join the dub.
Phyllis Thorensen, topic mistress of the evening chose varied subjects such as, “Should One Retire at Age 05,” “Craze Diets,” “Delinquency,” “An Interesting Person” and “To Adopt or Not to Adopt Children,” for the two minute extemporaneous speeches.
Beulah Thompson who spoke on “How to Make Enemies and Influence Nobody,” Mrs.
The amazing amount of work that women put into self-improvement through Toastmistress training from our fifty states was unbelievable.
Through Toastmistress membership, members have an opportunity to get up at each meeting and learn to think on their feet.
Many of the members plan to use this gained ability in their club, church and civic affairs.
All are invited to attend or call Ml 3-9536. spring marks Hadassah’s Anniversary.
The associates have set the date for Thursday, October 20th, from 8 to 9:30 in the gym.
Mr Mickey Meurling will be in charge of this evening of gay square dancing, and also a mixture of novelty, ballroom, and folk dances.
Melvin Sidebotham at the school in the morning and afternoon on Wednesday, October 25, and Thursday, October 20.
When she completed it recently she made the round of publishers, urging them to publish the book this fall while the memory of Joe Bellino’s brilliant last season was still particularly fresh in the public mind.
The Barones were convinced that with the start of a new football season the book would pack an additional punch.
But the best publication date that any publisher could offer them was sometime next year.
When their book hits the stands in a few weeks, we suspect their many friends as well as Joe Bellino’s many fans everywhere will be delighted.
The Barones are convinced that their venture of faith in the great public interest in Joe will prove well-justified.
Policemen’s Ball November 7 The Winchester Police Relief As sociation has chosen Tuesday evening, November 7, for the annual concert which in recent years has replaced the old time Policeman's Ball in the town hall.
The concert will be held as usual in the Memorial Auditorium of the high school and already a fine program of professional entertainment has been booked.
College Club Cuest Night T he annual fall meeting of the Winchester College Club will be held on Monday, October 16, at the parish hall of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church.
Mr Paul G O’Friel, general manager of WBZ and WBZ A for the past three years, will be guest speaker.
Members and their friends are cordially invited, as well as all those interested in College Club membership.
At Korn Frank Dunn For the convenience of ils customers who pay their *:as hills or merehamlise hills over the counter.
Mystic Valley (his Company has appointed the Winchester Appliance Company to act as it:-, agent of ( letoher 2, 1 9(> I . this extra accommodation for the benefit of li customers.
PAUL G O’FRIEL WBZ, the Boston and Springfield station of the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company, recently celebrated its 40th anniversary.
On this occasion the station was awarded a certificate of merit by the New England Council and the governors of the six New England states.
He has also served as director of labor relations and personnel with the DuMont television network, and as assistant sec retary of the DuMont Broadcasting Corporation.
In addition to conducting a law practice in Pittsburgh, he has served as a special agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in several of its field offices.
A Navy veteran of the Pacific theater during World War II, he presently makes his home in West Newton.
Because of his professional experience and his participation in community affairs, Mr O’Friel is unusually alert to the cultural and educational implications of the recent great expansion of the radio and television media.
Charles Joyce Is Appointed Ass’t Librarian The appointment of Mr Charles Joyce as Assistant Librarian of the Winchester Public Library was announced this week by the Library Trustees and Librarian Lois Smith.
Mr Joyce replaces Mr William Buckley who left his post to accept a position at the Lexington Public Library.
Following his graduation with a Bachelor of Arts degree he served until 1953 with the United States Army.
After that he entered Simmons College from which he graduated in 1955 following a oneyear course in library science, with a Master of Science degree.
Mr Joyce brings to his Winchester post an impressive six years of experience in practical library work.
From 1955 to 1957 he served in the Detroit Public Library, first as director of the young adult service of the library, later as educa tional film librarian.
From 1957 to 1959, Mr Joyce served as head librarian of the Blackstone Memorial Public Libra ry in Branford, Connecticut.
From 1959 until recently he served first as head of the catalogue department, and later as associate librarian at the Wellesley Free Public Library.
Born in Tremont on Mount De sert Island in Maine, Mr Joyce grew up in South Portland, Maine.
Mr Joyce’s central interest and training in library work have been associated with administration.
But I am dso very much interested in young adult people using the Library.
We all them adolescents, and some older people, I’m afraid, consider them as problems.
They are forming the eading, or non-reading habits that they will take with them into later years.
I think it’s important to help them form the right patterns of reading.
Smith and want them to know that ony of my jobs, and interests, is to help them any way I can.
He carries with him the best wishes not only of the Library staff, but of all readingpeople of Winchester, for whom the Library is an increasingly impor tant part of Town affairs.
Fallout May Pose Threat To Bay State Birds The Massachusetts Audubon Society has received numerous queries lately as to the hazard posed to our bird life by the current nuclear testing in the Soviet Union.
These populations would be decimated by such explosions coming at the right time.
The species whose nesting habitat is in the far north could be in danger of extinction.
There is little question but what birds would be more susceptible to radio-active fallout than people.
Most of our shore birds are already in South America by now, and the waterfowl down into Canada en route to warmer climates.
Alter fifteen years of high-grade service to the people of \\ inches ter, Mr Korn is delighted to add Even though Mystic Valley closed its >torc, Frank Dunn, will still be available to devote his full time to the merchandising requirements of Gas Company customers in Winchester.
Mystic Valley Gas Company See modern all-Gas homes on “Builder’s Showcase” WHDH-TV, CHANNEL 5 — every Sunday at 12 noon.
Following this he was appointed to the Men’s Rehabilitation Department in Pittsburgh, Albany and Boston.
Come in and see ] body High School. our sample book. , 1 i' Army Reservists in the 11th Special Forces Group , who recently spent a weekend in the New Hampshire woods, are looking forward to a weekend drill this month at Fort Devens.
The Reserve unit is now conducting an autumn recruiting campaign to fill enlisted vacancies.
Young veterans are invited to visit Special Forces headquarters at Boston Army Base on Tuesday evenings.
New men must either be paratroopers, or willing to attend airborne training within one year of enlistment.
The mission of Special Forces in wartime is to travel far behind enemy lines to organize and train guerrilla fighters.
The Reservists would expect to infiltrate enemy rear areas by parachute or submarine to attack supply and communication lines.
On October 21 and 22, the parttime soldiers plan to encamp at Fort Devens.
Special Forces demolitions experts will teach them how to destroy bridges and railroads with small charges of TNT and Composition C, a “plastic” explosive.
Satin finish gold tone top mokes this a most attractive match boob cover, for pocket, purse ^ ^ oq or home use.
He had been ill and twice hospitalized with a heart ailment during the summer.
He was bom January 27, 1911, in Winchester and was educated in the Winchester schools, graduating 1 from high school in the class of 1928.
The tour went bankrupt in Hamburg, Germany, and it was several weeks before the United States consul could get him passage back home.
In 1942 he was made general agent in charge of the Philadelphia branch office, and May 1 of this year he was transferred to the Boston office as general ,agent in charge of New England territory.
He was widely known in railroad and refrigeration circles and was a member of several traffic busimis organizations.
Richard Sweeney of Stoneham; also two brothers, Henry T Knowlton of Winchester and Hal F Knowlton of Stoneham.
Funeral services were held Monday forenoon at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with the Rev.
Antionette L McKeering of 38 Middlesex Street, wife of Charles L McKeering, died suddenly Friday morning, October 6, at her home.
Her death was unexpected, but she had not been in good health for several months.
She was born 49 years ago in Frenchville, Mo., and had made her home in Winchester for the past 23 years.
Besides her husband, she leaves her parents, living in Frenchville; a daughter, Ruth Ann McKeering of Winchester; two sisters, Mrs.
Henry Costello, both of Sanford, Me., and a brother, Sylvio Martin of Sin clair, Me.
The funeral was held Monday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at the Immaculate Conception Church.
Burial was in Calvary Cemetery where the committal prayers were read by Father Kenny.
Grace Hallowell Word has been received of the recent death in Harvard of Mr Grace Gould Hallowell, a former resident of Winchester for nearly 30 years.
She came to Winchester in 1933 and lived at 14 Fenwick Road with her son and daughter-in law, Mr and Mrs.
MisB Doherty, a native of Winchester, was a graduate of Winchester High School and the Salem State Normal School.
Following her graduation from normal school, she taught the first grade in the Rumford School and later in the Noonan School, her teaching service covering 43 years.
She was a member of the League of Catholic Women, Aquinas Guild and many missionary societies, as well as the Winchester Historical Society.
Miss Doherty is survived by four sisters, Rose E., Mary A, C Frances and Marguerite F Doherty, all of Winchester.
The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with a Solemn High Mass of Requiem at the Immaculate Conception Church.
Interment was in the family lot in Calvary Cemetery, where the committal prayers were read by Father Kenny.
Alonzo Woodside, the Winchester Home and Garden Club has lost its friend, founder and first President Mrs.
Woodside passed away Sep tember 26 after a long, active and useful life.
An ardent gardener, she knew a great deal about horticulture and gave her time and knowledge freely.
She founded the Winchester Home and Garden Club, then known as the Better Homes and Garden Club, in April, 1934, and saw the club membership grow from 1G to two hundredHer pride and interest in it continued until her death.
As a living memorial to its first President a book on horticulture will be presented to the Winchester public library in her name.
Presented to the Winchester Public Library by the Winches ter Home and Garden Club in memory of Mrs.
Gretchen Spaulding, formerly of Winchester, died suddenly October 2 at her Bethesdu, Md., home.
Spaulding leaves her husband, John H Spaulding; her son, William G Spaulding; her parents, Captain and Mrs.
Garrett Van A Graves; her brother, Garrett Van A Graves, Jr.; and her grandmother, Mrs.
George Graves; all of Chevy Chase, Md.; also her sisters, Mrs, Peter B Gray of Portland, Maine, and Mrs.
The Fortnightly The 80th season of The Fortnightly opened most auspiciously in the Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall on Monday, October 9th with a very delicious luncheon at 12:30m.
Charles E Potts (chairtnan of the War Veterans and Community and Hospital Committee), and their committee, assisted by the Social Committee headed by Mrs George W French and Mrs.
Hatch conducted a short memorial for Miss Mabel L Vinton, an Honorary Member, who died recently.
Attention was called to the next meeting on October 23, which will be guest night, with dessert at 7 :30m.
The musical program should be most enjoyable with the popular Salvy Cavicchio, Marimba-Xylophone artist and Dan Cavicchio, accordion soloist.
On October 30 the Massachusetts Federation of Woman’s Clubs will meet at the Bridgewater State College at 10:15m. for an all day meeting with luncheon in the gymnasium.
The cast, all in authentic costumes, was Selina by Ruth Baker, Aunt 1 Missouri by Maurene Trities, Aunt Muy by Thelma Atwood, and Betty, the housekeeper, by Louise Forsythe.
Bay State Historical League On Saturday, October 21, the Buy State Historical League will be the guest of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in the House of Representatives in Boston.
An interesting tour of the rest of the State House will be available in the morning.
The afternoon meeting will begin early, at 1:15 in the House Chamber with Col.
Members of the Winchester Historical Society are also members of the Bay State Historical League, and many should take advantage of this outstanding occasion, and should register as early as they can after 9:30m.
The entrance opposite Shaw Memorial should be used, and registration will be in a nearby anteroom.
Before commenting on the board, 4th at the WDBO as 19 teams we invite you try to identify the clashed in competition for the 1961 precise contract reached at our talcum of four c hampionship.
We doubt whether you > , could spot it, in fact, even if you i * v re P rGsents the took the time to write out 25 guesses.
Zavan Garabe dian , and Donald Ponniman , with a team score of 37 points.
Average score was 26, or one point for each of the 20 boards played by the field.
Fourth and fifth places were shared by Robert Haskell, Guy Mingolelli, Edward Sullivan and Richard Herlihy, who tied with the team of Mr and Mrs.
At duplicate, however, the traveling score slip gives a pretty complete picture.
At spades, one South made after the jack of diamonds was opened by West.
At another table, South was held to 3 spades when the king of clubs was led.
In both spades and no trump, some tables reached game while others settled for part score.
Your correspondent was sitting East on this one and kept his mouth shut throughout.
During the last quarter of 1960, nearly 28,500 traffic accidents were reported injuring 28,500 citizens and killing 167.
Seasonal traffic hazards of early darkness, slippery highways caused by wet leaves, frosty roads, snow and ice, fog, and rain were nature’s contribution to this bad accident experience.
Nature requires motorists to slow down during the Fall season of the year if they wish to avoid becoming traffic accident statistics.
We have expanded our program of enforcement and education to meet this challenge.
At a recent Citizen’s for Safety meeting in Worcester County, an Insurance Department official predicted an increase in compulsory liability insurance premiums for 1962 and, if the trend continues, an added increase for 1963.
It was reported that more than 100,000 personal injury claims had been filed this year.
Although slower speeds would reduce nature’s highway hazards, our study reveals the startling fact that more than one-half of our traffic accidents are caused by driving after drinking.
We are making an earnest effort to reduce this tragic toll of suffering and death during the last quarter of 1961.
On the same evening, a fractional master point Section B was played as a Howell movement.
West doubled, to suggest a lead against some eventual contract with North as declarer.
Georgie Gamage and Joseph Bai ley, .648 Isabelle Chilton and Linda SeeREDOUBLED by South, na .591 The queen of spades was Mr and Mrs.
Mansfield. .574 Rose Hickey and Lillian Sheridan, .557 led and declarer was down one.
Noren, .541 After trying duplicate, players frequently find that it has a bit more “zing” than rubber bridge j and that it holds their interest more completely than the older version of the game.
One of the big reasons for this is provided ^ be Park Department is currentby the traveling score slip which ly working on plans for a new bath moves around the room with every bouse at Palmer Beach to replace board. the one destroyed by fire during Right after you have played a past summer, hand, and while it is still fresh in Planning New Bath House your mind, you open the slip and a whole panorama of possible contracts and interesting results unfolds before your eyes.
At the WDBC, we also follow the procedure of writing in the opening lead, which so often has an important bearing on the outcome.
An excellent case in point is provided by board 13 in the championship round.
KALEIDOSCOPE North * A 8 6 V 9 8 5 ♦ A K Q 8 *962 The old bath house was of wood construction and had originally been a school house used at the rear of the old Wadleigh Building.
The Park Commissioners’ present plans call for the erection of a concrete block building at Palmer Street similar to the one built at Leonard Field beach after the fire there.
The new bath house will be 24ft. by 50ft. and the Park Commissioners are getting together cost figures to submit to the town.
MASSACHUSETTS PRINTING TOWN REPORTS FOR 1901 Sealed proposals plainly marked “Town Report Bid” and addressed to the Board of Selectmen will be received at the office of the Selectmen, T o w n Hal 1, Winchester, Mass., on or before 2:00m.
Some of the copy will be supplied about December 20th and a large part of it by January 17, 19(52, and final Accountant’s report by January 30th.
Complete delivery of the paper-bound copies at the Town Hall is REQUIRED by February 16, 1962.
All copy and proof to be taken from and delivered to the Selectmen’s Office.
The right is reserved to reject any or all bids, or to accept such bid as is deemed for the best interests of the Town of Winchester.
By order of the Board of Selectmen October 9, 1961 long and six inches high, accuratemammoth Mark I — down to tiny flashing panel lights, and thumb-nail-sized electric typewriter with keys and silver ribbons.
Aiken also received congratulatory telegrams from all over the world, many from former students whom he trained to use the basic tools of automation.
Aiken’s leadership, the Computation Laboratory has pioneered in several important new fields related to computers, including research on mathematical linguistics and the automatic translation of languages, the automatic transcription of shorthand, the development of the new subject of switching theory, and the use of magnetic cores and magnetic drums as computer components.
The laboratory also assisted university scholars in research in such fields as astronomy, chemistry, economics and business administration.
His awards include the palmes de l’Aeademie Francaise, Ingeniors Vetenskaps Academien, National Fonds voor wetenschap Pelijk Onderzoek, Chevalier of the French Legion of Honor, Officer's Cross of the Order of the Crown , La Medaille Vermeil de Paris and the Ralph E Hackett Science Award.
Two 1962 heavy duty Police Special, 4 door, 6 cylinder, 6 passenger, Ranch Type automobiles with Standard Transmission in which there is room for a collapsible cot stretcher making same a Cruiser Ambulance.
Spare tires and rims. 4-ply tube tires. 12-volt, 70 amp. heavyduty battery. 50-amp generator low cutin or alternator.
Radio and Siren and underhood speakers to be transferred from old cars to new.
Cars to be equipped with switch to control underthe-hood radio speakers.
One 1959 Plymouth Ranch Wagon 4 door, 8 cylinder, color blue and white, to be turned in toward purchase of one Ranch Wagon.
One 1959 Ford Custom 2 door Sedan 6 passenger, 8 cylinder to be turned in toward purchase of second ranch Wagon.
Further information may be obtained by applying to Joseph J Derro, Chief of Police, Winchester, Mass.
The Board reserves tho right to reject any or all bids or to accept such bids as may be for the best interests of the Town of Winchester, Mass.
Board of Selectmen October 9, 1961 of Arts and Sciences and of the Institute of Radio Engineers.
A native of Hoboken, N J., he received his early education in the Middle West.
He has taught at Harvard since 1935, and | became Professor of Applied Mathematics in 1946.
Professor Aiken’s idea for developing a large-scale computer grew out of his vexation with the amount of hand computations necessary to prepare his doctoral dissertation in physics at Harvard.
Paragon Gandies, an unusual asj sortnient of 6in. twists in attractive colors; also color-flow Fiesta candles that change color as they burn.
See them all at the W ini' Chester Star. chlorophyllI COCKTAIL LITES Secdtedt (ZoMcCUtf Deodorize and refresh the air as they burn.
Long after other cartridges are dry, the big 45 cartridge goes on writing.
Looks Expenslvel Distinctive slim-swept styling from classic clip to the semi-hooded gold point gives the Parker 45 an air of elegance . . . that expensive look.
Neat-and-Easy To Fill I Just slip in giant size spill-proof cartridge of Parker Super Quink ink.
Overflow in^ collector prevents leaking ...keeps fingers, clothes and paper clean.
Choice of 7 Gold Polntsl Select the point that fits your handwriting . . . from superfine to extra-broad.
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 12, 1961 Common Walks Planned for Fall In connection with the overall beautification of the Common, the Park Commissioners are planning to resurface the walks on the Common and to add two new ones.
One of these will border the Common on Waterfleld Road and another will extent) along Caraway Road.
Another new' walk will extend across the Common from opposite the Congregational Church to Laraway Road, which should prove convenient for those who wish to park on Lara way Road and go to the church.
President First Baptist Women's Fellowship On Wednesday evening, October 18, at 7:45m., the Women’s Fellowship of the First Baptist Church will gather for their first meeting ol the Fall.
David Thoms, and the following women will present a play entitled “Wing My Words'’; Mrs.
The goal of this presentation is to make every woman aware of the importance of her personal witness for Christ.
All members and friends of the First Baptist Church are cordially invited.
Come, enjoy the fellowship of the group and be inspired for greater service.
Focal Residents Getting Taller All the Time Winchester’s population, m e n women and children, is getting taller all the time.
Each succeeding generation is becoming loftier than the one that preceded it.
Today, men who are six feet tall and women who are 5 feet 7 inches are commonplace, compared with 20 years ago, when only 10 per cent grew to those heights.
The records show that way hack in the year 15)10, when the local population amounted to 9,309, the average man was 5 feet 7 inches and the average woman, 5 feet 2 inches.
According to studies made by insurance company actuaries, by the Department of Agriculture and by, others on a national basis, today’s young man is taller than his father was at a similar age.
Extra S&H Stamps Jet Bon Ami with a 1 5 oz can with a 1 5 oz can Extra S&H Stamps Dust 'n Wax Furniture Polish Extra S&H Stamps O'Cedar Sponge Mop with one Extra S&H Stamps O'Cedar Sponge Refill Extra S&H Stamps r egz® Bcllview Broom Extra S&H Stamps lu ^° M Bellview Brooms Extra S&H Stamps Dazzle Bleach Extra S&H Stamps 2 ib W is h o° pkg Finest Dry Detergent Extra S&H Stamps i Finest All Purpose Liquid Cleaner < Smelts BONUS STAMPS in our Grocery, Bakery anj Frozen Food Depts.
Pineapple 1 1 oz Cello 49c M&M Candies P fw,°t r cello 29c 4c Off on 4 Blue Ribbon B tZT 4 & 33c Dinty Moore beef stew ,L c/ n ol 47c R&R Chicken Broth ’can 2 15c R&R Chicken BONED CAN 64c Snow's minced clams 2 CANS 49c Extra S&H Stamps 5 % can Colonial Picnic Extra S&H Stamps 8 W oz h pkQ Finast Large Bologna Extra S&H Stamps l^iTpkg Colonial Sandwich Pak Extra S&H Stamps 6*z h pko Nepco Postromi Extra S&H Stamps nb pkg Finast Sausage Meat Page Five Assistant PAL Directors ASSISTANT DIRECTORS OF IVVL RKCRKATION COMMIT* I Kb.
The dance will he held on Friday night, October 27, in the Winchester High School gym.
Over a period of years the wasting and resultant weakening becomes more and more apparent and the patient is confined to a wheel chair and eventually to his bed.
Research, however, has indicated that it may be due to faulty metabolism of the muscles, related to their inability to utilize vitamin E All proceeds from the dance will go to the Muscular Dystrophy Fund.
During the summer, many of the patients are sent to a summer camp from two to five weeks, which at times is the only opportunity they have to leave the confines of their homes. headway.
They have added nearly 1 and one half inches in height since grandma’s day.
If both kinds of growth were to be taken into account, the increase in number and the increase in size, the local population would appear in a new light.
According to the data, if everyone in the town were set lengthwise along a straight line, head to foot, they would cover a distance of 19. miles, compared with the 8. miles that would have been spanned by the 15)10 population.
Beds and mattresses must be longer, chairs must be deeper and wider, shoes larger and clothing roomier, to mention a few.
The authorities say that progress in medicine, sanitation and nutrition is responsible.
For hospital patients, shut-ins, vacationists, or any one who likes cards.
Now, your ]ob U to find those three words end corectly spell ♦fiam. ft'i a grand oporfunity to become a good dancer and atari *ith free leuons—if you can apell.
Phone your answers to DAI-8785 Cell 10m. to 10m. weekdays & certificate good for $25.00 in private dancing leaaona will bo mailed for all correct answers.
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 12, 1961 Page Sit The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P> Wilson, Sr.
Why We Are Concerned Now and then some one comes in to the Star office to ask us why we are so concerned over the anti-social activities of our young people.
W e do not agree that young people of today arc just the same as they were years ago.
The conditions under which they now grow tip. the multiplicity of influences to which they are exposed would almost guarantee that boys and girls with a twist in that direction will get into trouble, almost without trying.
The young people of even twenty-five years ago had no such temptations as those existing for their modern prototypes.
As for the hoys and girls of the “horse and buggy” era ; it was so much harder to get into trouble in their time.
Winchester has its fair share It is useless to deny it. and an ostrich-like ignoring of the problem only aids and abets it. liven if the Star did not see fit to comment upon the depredations of the town’s young citizens, and simply reported these activities as news there would he a great deal about juvenile delinquency in our pages.
Having them grow up in the right way is not only important to them but vital to the country.
Fortunately the vast majority of Winchester's boys and girls are all right.
The trouble they get into is negligible and prompted by no vicious motives.
There is, however, commencing to form in town a little hard corps of youngsters whose activities can be called neither thoughtless nor mischievous.
The Star feels that such activities should be brought to the attention of our townspeople, especially to those who seem to believe our Winchester boys and girls can do no wrong.
We feel that it is our duty as the town newspaper to convince them that they can.
We also feel it is our duty to point out that it is high time the authorities adopt a much stronger attitude in dealing with these young marauders.
The police have been patient and long » suffering in their treatment of them and to the Star’s way of thinking their leniency has not paid off.
It seems definitely time to clamp down, and bring home to the young wrongdoers the error of their ways.
In most instances they are able to locate those responsible for the trouble that takes place in town.
And it can be said with entire truthfulness that the jx> licc are not trying to persecute our young j>cople who deviate from good conduct.
Chief Derm's appointment of a Juvenile Officer to work with and for the town’s young people and the way in which fficer Cogati has operated in this capacity is proof positive that our law enforcement officers have the welfare of ottr youngsters at heart.
There have been times in the past when parents with sufficient influence have succeeded in preventing the prosecution of their progeny after the police had caught them in serious misdemeanors.
We had an officer tell us of being ridiculed by a youngster because his “old man,” as the boy said, had gotten him out of a trip to court when he was caught slobbering paint around in a house from which the family was absent.
Such parental action is of course bad for the boy and doubly bad for police morale.
The Star is happy to state that most of the town’s young people are sound, pleasant to know, and headed for alert, informed man and womanhood.
However, even in this group, there are those with a tendency toward mischief and a sufficiently adventurous spirit to want to try something devilish, just for the lark of it.
These young people know about the wrong doing of their really anti-social mates.
They learn that they have been apprehended by the police, for some escapade and they eagerly wait to see what is done to them.
They learn that nothing actually has been done, that they have been placed on probation, or the case against them lias been continued.
This in effect means probation, except that if the youngster, whose case has been continued, gets into no further trouble within a given time his case is dismissed without a finding, and he has no record at all.
So in the disposition of cases involving juveniles it is necessary to look beyond the original wrong doer and consider the effect leniency for him may have on many others who are considering doing what he did. or perhaps worse.
The understandable disinclination of the authorities to give a youngster a court record can result in a springboard for others to follow in his footsteps.
The prevention of crime, which is always much more important than its punishment would seem best served in making an example of the few malefactors for the sake of the many waiting to see what happens to them.
The Star is sorry it has to write about the anti-social activities of our voting people.
It is so much more pleasant to write about the winning of a Merit Scholarship or making All America in the football arena.
But until we can see a lot more clearly that we are winning the fight against juvenile delinquency we will continue to stress the importance we attach to the inroads it is making among our young people.
In one of history’s great ironies, Columbus discovered the New World in an attempt to fatten the old.
Financed by Spanish royalty, the Italian seaman was seeking treasure in the Orient when he bumped into America bv mistake.
He proved that the earth was neither so square nor so cozy as Hu rope had thought.
There was a green, new world across the sea, a rich, unformed world where men might begin again.
Well, ul course, Columbus was followed by C ortez, and by the Redcoats.
And we know that the green, new worldbecame an unhappy stew of colonies.
But the real meaning of C Olumhus’ discovery was not to become clear until 1715, when the richest and most ornery of those colonies shook ntf its chubby king and declared itself free.
All things being relative, we Americans are not faring terribly in this regard.
W ide oceans have permitted us the pleasant illusion that we could “go it alone,” keep out of F.uropc’s “family troubles,” and build a prosperous island fortress isolated from the ugly world around us. i i i But science and the ll-homh have changed all oi this.
Science ha> given us the jet, reducing oceans to lakes, making all men everywhere neighbors in tact it not yet in spirit. \ war in Korea, traditionally one of the world’s most exotic and remote areas, reaches into Winchester and takes our boys away.
National boundaries become legal fictions as the ll-boinh unites all nations in a single human unit of fear.
Since I Tib we have declared liberty and justice for ALL as our objectives.
The celebration of the discovery of the Jtew World is a good time to consider just how new it is.
Whenever we can answer “yes” to these questions, then we are still the new world, and we deserve to call ourselves sons and daughters of the American Revolution.
MATTHEWS ON CUBA City Government Authorized Early in tlio nineteenth century, it became evident that the town meeting system could not function properly in Boston and certain other large towns.
A city form of government was not possible since the State Constitution required election of state officers at public meetings of town inhabitants.
The number of cities increased to nine by 1850, 21 by 1875 and to 33 by 1000.
Weakening of Town Political Power In 1857, the voters adopted a constitutional amendment which weakened the relative political power of the towns (Constit.
This amendment replaced election by individual towns of one or more members of the House of Representatives with election of such members from representative districts established decennially by the General Court.
Consequently, many smaller towns lost intimate contact with legislative developments; and legislators were encouraged to think of themselves more as state officials than as municipal representatives.
Judicial Assertion of State Supremacy Over Municipalities In a series of important opinions in the nineteenth century, the Supreme Judicial Court substantially repudiated local theories of inherent local rights and confined the activities of Massachusetts communities to those specifically authorized or reasonably implicit in statutory authorizations.
In the first decade of the nineteenth century, the Court declared in Bangs Snow and Dillingham Snow that parish governments had no powers except those granted by the Legislature, which could redraw parish boundaries without local consent.
Continued claims by towns to “inherent rights”, and their references to historical facts compelled the Court to adjust judicial policy accordingly.
Fortified by these judicial decisions, the General Court rapidly extended its control over numerous details of local government, especially where Boston and other large communities were concerned.
TWENTIETH CENTURY DEVELOPMENTS ( ’onstitut ional Developments In the present century, the general constitutional status of the municipalities has not changed fundamentally.
The State Constitutional Convention of 1917 rejected eight proposals for a constitutional municipal home rule amendment as has the General Court in subsequent sittings as a constitutional convention.
However, a constitutional amendment adopted in 1926 authorized the General Court to establish “limited” or “representative” town meeting governments in towns exceeding 6,000 in population, upon petition of a majority of the local voters in the town and subject to their later approval.
The few local efforts made to ' overturn special statutes on the basis of “inherent rights” were systematically rejected by the Supreme Judicial Court.
Improved Forms of Town Government New forms of town government have been authorized in extensive general and special legislation passed since 1914.
The development was most pronounced in 1914-1915 when statutes were passed authorizing town manager governments, representative town meetings, and other town provisions, as indicated below.
Special legislation was enacted in 1914 which permitted the Town of Norwood to establish a town manager form of government.
This statute provides for a town manager who is responsible to the board of selectmen for the administration of town departments and who appoints the heads of such departments, some of whom had previously been elected.
The status of the town meeting and of the school committee were continued without substantial change.
Mansfield Stoughton Middleborough Saugus Ipswich Danvers Wilmington Arlington Holden Amherst Provincetown Shrewsbury Randolph Concord Williamstown Andover The General Court has enacted no standard official town manager charter law.
Instead the towns have drafted special legislative proposals which have varied with local conditions, needs and political viewpoints.
The reluctance of growing towns to change to city status motivated the “limited” or “representative” town meeting system of 1915.
In contrast to traditional “open” town meetings which include all registered voters, “limited” town meetings consist of town meeting representatives elected from districts or precincts, and certain general town officers elected at large, such as the selectmen, who serve as ex officiis members of the town meeting.
Between 1915 and 1960 a total of 41 towns obtained representative town meeting statutes.
Legal doubts about this type of statute were removed by Constitutional Amendment in 1926 (Art.
In “The Cuban Story” Mr Matthew's repeats this statement and tells why he made it.
In reporting the Cuban Revolution, the former Havana correspondent writes, our press acted in ignorance of Cuban realities.
Extremists on both sides were utterly lacking in objectivity and balance.
It was not simply a question of United States correspondents reporting what their publishers wanted to print, Matthews says.
Our basic failure was a failure of understanding Cuba, the Latin American temperament, and the conditions of extreme poverty and political tyranny that made Castro inevitable.
Our journalists, he says, acted and wrote as if Cuban history began when Castro first marched on Havana and reported new f s in the over-simplified terms of the cold war.
The American-hacked invasion of Cuba this April, Matthews says, epitomized our utter lack of understanding of what is going on in Cuba.
Matthews calls it “the most futile, stupid, and costly blunder ever made” in our relations with Latin America.
In supporting this invasion, Matthews says, we actually strengthened Castro, weakened the exiles, badly damaged our reputation, hurt our own economic interests, and broke our solemn treaty promises not to intervene in other nations’ affairs.
But Matthews, who is disturbed hy Castro's Sino-Soviet connections, is less interested in blaming President Kennedy than in determining what we can learn from our errors.
To deal with Cuba effectively, therefore, is to deal effectively with all Latin Americans, our most valuable allies and our number one market.
First, Matthews says, we must realize that antiYankeeism existed long before either Castro or Communism.
Until Castro’s accession to power, for example, we owned 80 per cent of Cuba’s utilities, 90 per cent of its mines and cattle ranches, all of its oil refineries and distributors, and 40 per cent of its sugar industry.
Long before Castro, we restricted Cuban sugar production to freeze prices for our own producers, forcing Cubans into a one-crop economy and 8-month unemployment periods.
Cubans also saw us sell arms to Spain during Cuba’s fight for independence, and suffered United States military occupation after it gained freedom in 1898.
They remember that we sent Marines in 1906, 1912, and 1917, and that we trained Batista’s troops.
Our success in Latin America, Matthews warns, depends not on frustrating or defeating Castro, but on whether we help Latin Americans in their efforts toward social and economic justice.
If the Latins do not solve their problems under capitalism, he says, they will rebel and adopt non-capitalist economies.
Certainly, Matthews says, if our economic aid continues to assist only a tax-evading Latin oligarchy, or if the only test we apply to investment is whether it helps United States business, we can never w r in in Latin America.
If Castro, employing totalitarian methods, gives Cuba economic justice, the temptation to adopt his methods in other Latin nations will become irresistible.
The United States must answer many painful questions in the coming months, Matthews writes.
Mr Matthews’ hook, factual and dispassionate, should help us to answer these questions.
Your fine editorial “Seek Parents Aid” suggests to me another cry for help from the Chief of Polici and yourself to rescue our youth from the cesspools of alcoholic de generacy, which abound in this and other communities.
And I do not refer exclusively to the “secret clubs"" and other surreptitious opportunities for juvenile drinking The roots are in the homes where “cocktail parties” flourish.
An attack of nostalgia might be fatal if one does not let off steam so let me add a few words for the record.
He was great on the gymnasium apparatus and a grand basket ball player.
A good shot putter and track man he retained his interests in amateur sports for many years.
Hal McCall the younger son of Governor McCall played baseball four years for Harvard, one as a freshman and three years on the varsity.
I personally remember Hal visiting the Harvard cage to observe baseball practice the spring before he entered college.
The baseball coaches of that day in Harvard will still be remembered by many; “Happy” Jack Chesbro for the pitchers and “Wee” Willie Keeler (originator of the Texas leaguer) for the batters.
Ned Crawford's influence on the McCalls was far greater than his duties for he took keen interest in the welfare of all of the family.
After careful consideration the School Committee has decided to take no action on the petition of residents of Precinct 4 for a reduction in the maximum walking distance for junior high school stu dents from two miles to one and a half miles.
The School Department will continue to investigate with the Police Department traffic conditions at certain crossings traversed by junior high school pupils from the area west of Cambridge Street.
While sidewalk construction is not under the jurisdiction of the School Committee, the Committee will, as it has in the past, review requests submitted to the Board of Selectmen for sidewalks to serve school children and will support such recommendations as the Committee believes are justified to assure our children proper protection when walking to and from school.
Yours very truly, Mary M Brink, Chairman Winchester School Committee My Congressman Brad Morse j On domestic matters, the 87th ^ r„n«T.'s* racked up a record break1 Communist I hr Cat ing number of bills enacted during Enlisting For Global Army A Card from Ned The Star received in yesterday morning’s mail a postcard from Ned Dalton, well-known school traffic officer and custodian, who, with his daughter, Mary, is visiting relatives in Ireland.
Ned made the trip across by plane in four hours and fifty minutes and reports that there has been lots of rain so far and little sunshine.
He finds Irish food and drink very good and the Irish people delightful.
W Butler, Treasurer of the above-named bank do hereby declare that this report of condition is true and correct to the best of my knowledge uud belief.
Butler We. the uivderaignod director* attest the correctness of this report of condition and declare that it hue been examined by us aad to the beat uf our knowledge aud belief is true and correct.
Additional unemployment compensation for the jobless, including railroad workers, and assistance for their dependent children.
Application of Federal law to crimes on airplanes engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, making hijacking punishable by death or life imprisonment. $375 million for airport construction over the next five years.
Increase of minimum wage to $1.25 and extension of coverage to 3. million additional workers by gradual wage step-ups over the next five years.
Social Security increases in minimum old age payments, and in benefits to widows; lower retirement age for male workers at reduced benefits; liberalized disability provisions.
Federal grants totaling $20 million for a four year program to finance projects to fight juvenile delinquency.
Additional Assistant Secretary of Labor on problems of women in industry.
Extension of direct and guaranteed home loans for WWIl veterans to July 20, 19G7, and for Korean conflict veterans to February 1, 1975.
Expansion of the water pollution program, increasing grants to state and interstate agencies from $3 to $5 million annually through June 30, 1908, and from $50 million to $100 million annually for construction of treatment works; raises former 30 per cent ceiling on Federal grants.
Housing program for low and moderate income families on liber alized terms; urban renewal; open space development; college dormitory construction; public housing, community facilities.
Creation of Area Redevelopment Administration in Department of Commerce, to make loans and grants for industrial plants and public facilities in areas of economic distress.
Many other measures which have attracted national interest, which were not acted upon finally this year, will be carried over to the second session.
Creation of a Department of Urban Affairs and Housing at cabinet level.
Congressional consent to the Northeastern Water and Related Land Resources Compact.
Three-year program of training youths, aged 10 to 21, in conservation projects.
Two-year program of training unemployed in vocational schools, or on the job, to develop new skills.
If by chance I have omitted mention of any legislation in which you are interested, or if you wish further particulars concerning the measures I have mentioned, I will be happy to hear from you.
During adjournment I shall be home, ready to sit down with you personally to discuss any matters involving the Federal government or just to get better acquainted.
I ‘ President Kennedy's Berlin Mes Heranti-Communist counterspy, bert A Philbrick.
Mr Philbrick’s talk, “Techniques for Combatting Communism,” will Winchester Home And Garden Club The Winchester Home and Garden Club will hold its first meeting of the year on Wednesday, October 18, at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church hall.
Joseph Vaeearo, President, will conduct the 2 o’clock business meeting dursage is helping to man key positions in the Army’s Fortresses of Freedom, world wide.
Granville vortising to join the anti-Communj maw *G , and the Eighth United Kilpatrick ami Mrs.
He shook the foun1 St «tes Army in Korea are stand dations of American Communism when, during the trial of the nation’s top Red spies, the Justice Department revealed that for nine years he had posed as a Communist and had so gained first hand information concerning the operations. techniques and objectives of the American Communist conspiracy.
Mr Philbrick considers it his personal responsibility to warn anyone who could be victimized by Communist exploitation of otherwise worthy causes.
He shows in his lectures techniques whereby Communists infiltrate “worthy groups” or fake organizations with high sounding names for their own purposes.
At the same time, Mr Philbrick warns against the public hysteria that can develop in the face of this unseen menace.
Even after Philbrick retired from his counterspy activities he still could not follow a normal life.
Even today the Philbricks are not entirely safe from the threat of reprisals by outraged Communists whose secrets the New Hampshire father of five revealed to a startled America.
Also in the, pacific are the 25th Division in Hawaii, support commands in Japan, and the “guardians of the North”, the United States Army, Alaska.
Looking to the South is the U.S Army Caribbean guarding the vi tal Panama Canul Zone.
In Europe, Baystaters in Army green are stationed in France as members of the Communications Zone, in Germany as part of NATO’s nuclear equipped Seventh Army, and in Italy as the Southern European Task Force with its medium missile command.
Strategic Army Corps ready for rapid movement to any part of the world where trouble threatens.
Army Air Defense Command defending the nation aguinst air attack Still other Massachusettsites are members of over 40 Army Military Advisory Groups helping to train the defense forces of our allies.
PUBLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT Report n* of September 27, 1961. of Hayitatc Corporation, Boston.
Massachusetts, which ia affiliated with Winchester Trust Company, Winchester.
Baystate Corporation owns a majority of the Capital Stock of the Winchester Trust Company.
None 1, Raymond F lieislein, Treasurer jf Baystate Corporation, do solemnly swear that the above statement ia true, to the beat of my knowledge and belief.
RAYMOND F HE18LW1N Swum fco and subscribed before me this Oth day <>f October.61.
Notary Public. hobbies of photography and his home workshop and to play his Hammond organ.
Home Rule 1931 but 39 of the 41 towns listed below preferred to seek special legislation.
Brookline Watertown Winthrop Arlington Greenfield Weymouth Methuen W Springfield Belmont Dedham Dartmouth Milton Swampscott Saugus Winchester Lexington Fairhaven Ludlow Danvers Needham So.
Hadley Easthampton Milford Adams Falmouth Wellesley Amherst Braintree Reading Norwood Randolph (1948 Framingham (1950 Stoughton Natick Plymouth Shrewsbury Agawam Amesbury Billerica Athol Auburn Other Town Provisions.
Much other legislation has been enacted since 1900 enlarging town powers and improving organization of town government.
When zoning laws were authorized by constitutional amendment in 1918 (Art.
In 1947-1954 municipalities were authorized to establish salary classification plans for their employees and to create personnel agencies.
A 1953 optional statute authorized towns to establish a board of public works to administer engineering activities.
And in 1955 optional legislation enabled municipalities to install improved methods of property assessment. them.
The painting, “Bridge Nocturne,” one of the favorites, with its cool dark greys is well composed and has all the freshness and feeling of the night.
In “San Malo Beach and “Marblehead Yacht Club” we see highly simplified sketches of figures placed in the landscape, yet they are lifelike and seCm to move.
These were drawn by a master craftsman, an expert in figure drawing, who could have put in as much detail as he Wished.
In these pictures Mr Oberteuffer has combined crayon or charcoal with the watercolor for texture.
While all the pictures are realistically painted, they are done in a simple, delicate style, yet are strong and well composed, with lean color and well thought-out design.
He puts on his strokes with sureness and leaves out details that clutter.
If anyone wishes to >wn any of these paintings he ihould call the program chairman of the Winchester Art Association, Mrs.
Donald Van Roosen, PA 91074. pier, has considered a wide variety of gardening interests in selecting subject material for its programs during the coming months.
Recognizing the talents of many members within the club several member-participation activities are also planned.
There will, of course, be speakers who are outstanding authorities in the field of horticulture, including the populur flower arranging.
Mr Alexander I Heimlich, landscape designer and horticulturist of Woburn, will be the speaker of the afternoon.
His designs and plantings of many private gardens around town are well known and he is also responsible for the splendid job of face-lifting on our Winchester common.
He is a perennial winner of top awards for excellence and artistry at flower shows throughout the country and for the past two years has won the Gold Medal award at the Washington, D.C., show.
His talk on Wednesday will feature colored films of alpine plants and gardens and this will be followed by a general discussion period.
Prior to the meeting a social hour from 1:30 to 2:00m. will he enjoyed by club members and guests.
It’ is With profound regret that the Staff of the Winchester Civil Defense accepts your resignation.
Through the many years that the writer has been associated with you, he and his staff have felt that you gave freely of your time and worldly goods in a most unselfish and patriotic manner.
We should like to ask you to come to our meetings at any time your health permits in order that we may avail ourselves of your broad knowledge and experience.
It’s a good game, and you can get it, and other new games at the Winhester Star.
PA 9-1&3 nov8-tf Card of Thanks We wish to express our sincere thanks to our neighbors and friends for the beautiful flowers, piritual bouquets and other ex pressions of kindly sympathy that meant so much during the dark hours of our bereavement.
Locul and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 novS-tf For Rent WEDCEW00D APARTMENTS On the shore of Wedge Pond in WinchcHter Center are tilt* newly completed Wedgewood Apartment*, where you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-eleelric living.
Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or pluy area.
OCt/l-tf I REAL ESTATE TWO OUTSTANDING VALUES \Y ESI SIDE — Throebed room Split-Entrance Ranch in I “like new” condition.
Seven large rooms in all, two and a half baths, two-car garage, beautiful grounds, and all-modern features.
MV ST 1C SCHOOL — Close to town, this well-constructed four-bedroom home offers a great deal to the young, growing family.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors SS THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers PA 9-4136, 9-196(1.
Living room with fireplace, dining room and large modern kitchen with laundry area.
We also have just listed two new split-entrance Ranches in the middle, thirties on large, level lots.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6660 Kathryn P Davis BR 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp PA 9-0373 Jean Gibb PA 9-3308 HORACE FORD — Realtor PA 9-5887 WINCHESTER — WEST SIDE Two new homes in excellent locations.
RANCH — Three chambers, 2% ceramic-tile bathi, family room with fireplace, two car garage.
GEORGIAN BRICK-FRONT COLONIAL— Four chambers, two full and two half ceramic-tile baths, den, 26-foot paneled family room with fireplace.
Three bedrooms, 1 Ms ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining loom, good living room with fireplace.
Four bedrooms, 2M> modern baths, family-size kitchen, large secluded yard.
Features of this charming house include fireplaced den, 2Y> baths, three bedrooms, screened porch, two-car garage.
Attractive firepluced living room, family dining room, large all-eleelric built-in kitchen, tiled bath, three twin bedrooms on one level.
Lower level offers fircplaced family room, bedroom, lavatory, and garage.
Exclusive Brokers BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 24 Thompson Street PArkview 9-4240 WINCHESTER CAPE-STYLE HOMES $19,900 — Four rooms and hath on first floor.
JOSEPHSON ■ Real Estate S Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 WINCHESTER Centrally located in the Wyiuan School Section, a large older home in neat condition with four bedrooms, 2'j baths, large yard, good kitchen.
Fastest Color Film Service in town. aug3-tf The two Winchester Catholic parishes, St.
In the 7 drives conducted since 1946 more than 155,000 volunteers have gathered some 139,565 tons of scrap paper.
Tel EXport 6-3349 after 6m^ apr27-eow Leo C Thibeault, son of Mr and Mrs.
Leo Thibeault of 4 Hollywood Road, recently was enrolled in the freshman class at Babson Institute of Business Administration in Wellesley, Mass.
Arthur W Pratt, who have been in England for several years, have returned to Winchester and are back in their old home on Salisbury Street.
For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. tf Anna L Doherty of Woburn, who died Tuesday, was the sister of Hugh O’Doherty of this town.
Patio Blocks, various sizes and colors, Pavement Sealer in 5 gal. cans, to give your driveway a new life.
WE 5-0570. july6-tf Forty-seven Samoset Road was the scene of great activity early last Saturday morning when “Camelot,” a collie, delivered a litter of 10 puppies, with the able assistance of her master and mistress, Ann and Lane McGovern.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf The ducks from Mill Pond have been returned to their off season quarters at the School Street, Woburn home of Dorothy Lord of the Star.
Babe Mullen and his men moved the ducks and geese unbeknownst to Dot some time in the dark hours over the weekend.
When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 r>r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf All requests for street acceptances to be acted upon at the Annual Town Meeting of March, 1962 must be filed at the office of the Board of Selectmen on or before December 1, 1961.
Joseph M Puffer and their daughter Janet of 9 Ravine Road, and Gardner E Smith of 24 Calumet Road attended the annual homecoming celebration of the New Hampton School in New Hampton, New Hampshire last Saturday.
John H Irish of 44 Johnson Road, is attending William Jewell College in Liberty, Missouri where she is majoring in political science.
Saturday Frederick W Parsons of 25 Prince Avenue reported to police that his car had been struck by a hit and run motorist driving a 1953 Dodge south on Highland Avenue.
The report was immediately conveyed to Medford and M.D.C. police and put out on teletype, but no trace of the hit and run driver has been found.
Graduating Tuesday, October 17 f r o m the Electrician’s Mate’s School at the Navy training center at Great Lakes will be Stanley H Withrow, son of Stanley H Withrow of 2 Dix Street.
The Navy firemen apprentice has taken a course which included instruction in the repair, maintenance, and operation of all modern naval electrical equipment.
PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf At 3:45 Saturday the Girl Scout Cabin on South Border Road was reported entered and the matter was immediately turned over to the M.D.C. police.
EX 5-6265. janl9-tf On Monday a large pheasant high-tailed it through a 10 by 12 foot bay window at the home of Mrs.
On Tuesday night at 7:18 o’clock they used the smoke ejector for 15 minutes to clear away smoke caused by a plumber’s blow torch in a house at 8-10 Hillside Avenue, owned by R Joslin.
Walter JoscpliHon, Bill Saiinnan, Peter Crawford, Bob Little, Ernie Covino, Mai Mnckay, Jim von Rosenvingc, ami Walter Scott.
Radio James von Rosenvinge Walter Scott William Wilson The Channel-Masters Radio Network, during a recent hurricane alert, was on a 24-hour standby basis in the event that assistance could be rendered to the local Civil Defense Agency.
The ’’ChannelMasters,” over the Labor Day week end, assisted Saugus authorities in “operation road watch” by sending three mobile units equipped with two-way radio.
Dean A Ricker State President of Congregational Women’s Fellowship on Tuesday October 17 in the Palmer Room, Parish House, First Congregational Church.
Dessert and coffee will be served at 1m. with an inforfollowed by the program.
Paul Walters First Congregational Men’s Club Meets Wednesday, October 25 The club will inaugurate its 19611962 season, appropriately enough, with a review of the 1961 session of our Massachusetts Legislature, its achievements and its shortcomings, and a preview of what is pending for 1962.
We can all stand some enlightenment, and they are admirably equipped to provide it.
We anticipate a rousing evening and an in teresting question period, Wednesday evening, October 25.
Should you wish to come to the 6:30 supper, reservations may be made by phoning Philip D Cabot.
Ricker,’ p ort Dix , ast weeki was p,.jvate Walter F Morgan, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs.
Army Training Center, Infantry, for eight weeks of basic training at Fort Dix.
Rush will receive basic instruction in general military subjects, which will prepare him for more advanced specialized training.
She was the eldest of six children in a minister’s family, born in Little Harbor, Nova Scotia, and later coming to Haverhill.
She taught school, married, and she and Mr Ricker were keenly interested in Extension Service work of the Mass.
Clifford Hummel, director of the Social Service Guild which is presenting Mrs.
Morgan will undergo eight weeks of basic training in infantry, during which he will receive basic instruction in general military subjects, which will prepare him for more advanced specialized training.
Playing For Tilton Floyd P Horn of Dunster Lane, who saw a lot of action as left i tackle on last year’s varsity footof 18, she loves gardening, Girl bull eleven at Winchester High, is Scouts, cooking, she has traveled i playing at right guard on offense, into almost every country of this j an d line-backer on defense at Tilworld, she likes clothes and color, ton School, Tilton, New Hampshire, ceramics, but most of all, she 1 loves people.
Edmund Blair Hawley of 25 Ledgewood Road and “Holly Acres,” Jennings Land, Smith’s Parish, Bermuda, a sixth child and first daughter, Victoria Standish Hawley, October 9, at the Waltham Hospital.
Kendall Wright of Lexington, are the parents of a son David Hamblin born Oct., at the Winchester Hospital.
We have found over two-thirds to be employable, and of this group, about 70 r / t have been returned either to their former job or have obtained new employment.
Jobs obtained have ranged from light bench assembly or office work to strenuous physical labor.
Under proper guidance, a patient with heart disease of any cause, with a reasonable cardiac reserve, definite desire and motivation for work, sonic utilizable or transferable skill, and personal qualifications which would render him employable if he were not a cardiac, can generally be placed in the regular labor market.
Those returned to gainful employment have included people with coronary heart disease (some had experienced as many as three “heart attacks” in the past), heart disease resulting from high blood pressure, rheumatic or congenital heart disease.
Announcing the birth of a son Robert Holt Atkinson, Jr., on September 22nd, to Mr and Mrs.
Milton L Brown, Jr. of Winchester, are the parents of a second child, Stephen Mark, on September 23 at Winchester Hospital.
Milton L Brown, Sr. of Winchester, and Mr dames Salter of Skibbcreen, County Cork, Ireland.
Robert W Hicks announce the birth of Kevin Lewis, their fourth child in Springfield on October 3.
Richard L Fales of Tewksbury are the parents of a fourth child, second daughter, Audrey Elizabeth, on Wednesday, October 4 at St.
Saint Mary's Sodality The Sodality held its first meeting of the year on Tuesday evening, October 4, at St.
Mary Harrington, prefect; Virginia Govoni, vice-prefect; Eleanor Reppucci, treasurer; Dorothy McCarthy, secretary.
Margaret Murray, cards and Masses for the sick; Elizabeth Iannacci, altar linens; Ruth Stevens, bulletin board; Helen Spaulding, book rack; Betty Kirk, flowers; Anna Cumming, publicity.
Sodality Communion Day is the first Saturday of each month at the 9 o’clock Mass.
On October 7 there was an anniversary mass for Father Sennott, a former spiritual advisor.
Second in series <»f Winchester Mornings, presented by Winchester Wellesley Club in Hadley Hall, Church of the Epiphany.
October 20, Friday, College Club Art Group will meet at. the De Cordova Museum in Lincoln promptly nt 10:15m.
October 21, Saturday, Bay State Historical League Fall Meeting at State House, gu«*st of Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Guest night of The Fortnightly at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Hull.
Open meeting at 1 Yale Street, sponsored by Winchester Mental Health Association.
CLASSIFIED AD IN THE STAR BRINGS RESULTS 1 OVER 1000 ORIENTAL RUGS From sizes 1.6'x2.6’ to 14.6'x30\ including a selection of new, used, antique and semi antique in all qualities and colors.
Mon. through Fri., 8 A.M. 5 P.M. — Sat., 8 noon +■ women today are desperately needed, as women, in the tremendous fields of service.
The Social Service Guild has members who work quietly in the Waltham Hospital, in Boston City Missionary, in visiting shut ins, nursing homes in bringing comfort to the elderly and the lonely.
Lawrence E Heck ley are in charge of the dessert. )k%^\X^^VVV\VVVV\m\V\\A\%VVVV\i Newsy Paragraphs Dr.
C ALL-AMERICAN ASSORTED COOKIES EDUCATOR BUTTER COOKIES EDUCATOR FIG BARS SUNSHINE CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIES SUNSHINE CHEEZ-ITS 10pkg.c pkg.c pkg.c pkg.c pkg.c ■oz. pkg.c Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday Special, October 16, 17 and 18 Veal Cutlets 99c lb.
Discusses Relations With Latin America The LWV Unit discussion groups on United States Relations with Lat^ nier ' ca will he held October 17th through October 19th.
Two students from Latin America presented informal background material at the LWV General Meeting October 11 as an introduction to a more intensive exploration of the subject at the Units.
Specific material to be covered is a history of past relations of the United States with La tinAmerica; present attempts to establish closer cooperation among the countries of this hemisphere.
President Kennedy’s ‘Alliance for Progress” plan will )e explained and analyzed, as well as more general topics such as the interdependence of the countries involved, the part private investment has played in shaping >ur Foreign Policy, the present political climate of Latin America, jtc.
The format of this series of Units will be a panel composed of members of the Foreign Policy Committee, with emphasis upon audience-participation.
To Address Winchester Mornings The Winchester Wellesley Club takes particular pride in presenting to Morning subscribers Miss Margaret Clapp, president of Wellesley College.
Auction Nets Big Sum At last week’s regular luncheon 1 meeting of the Rotary Club, secretary George Billman announced that the Club’s annual April Auction netted $7,503, the largest amount yet realized from this increasingly populkr event.
John Wilson, chairman of the I Auction Committee, was given a vote of thanks for his own and his committee’s efforts, after which announcement was made that work has already been begun on next year’s auction.
Rotarians feel generally that it will take a bit of doing to equal or surpass the results of this year’s sale.
EatI >n’s Ko-Rec-Type enables you to correct mistakes in typing without erasing.
M Agnella Gunn talk on her professional hobby, the American Theatre, were indeed rewarded.
Gunn is a person of exceptional charm and her presentation of her subject is enthusiastic and delightful to the point where one might say, “If you can’t go to the theatre, listen to Dr.
She spoke of the best plays of the season on Broadway, calling attention to the preponderance of musicals.
Of Elizabeth, the Queen, with Eva LeGallienne, she said that when one of the greatest actresses of our times portrays one of the greatest characters in history in an important play, there is a combination which can hardly be surpassed.
Gunn gave more than passing attention to “The Blacks,” a non-objective play, the underlying meaning of which is not too easily understood.
It seems at times to be a jumble of unrelated things, but a closer look reveals layer upon layer of symbolism.
It is a story not of the power of the Blacks, but a story of what power does to people.
Whip-slim without an extra thread of hulk, this 6hcath has been designed, cut and darted for silhouette sublety.
A 24-inch hidden zipper down hack gives an able assist with the figure shaping.
Uncollared neckline awaits that important jewel or scarf accent; 5 A sleeve.
Count rtj clothes by Pendleton ALWAYS VIRGIN WOOL Metis, Hoys’ and Ladies’ Shop 6 Mt.
PA 9-1447 Hiitrl >i if Gunn mentioned “Milk and Honey” as one of the most successful.
She feels that such plays as these make up for many lacks in the season.
To the critics of Camelot who say that it is a love story without passion, Dr.
Gunn recommended unconditionally “The Miracle Worker” for its warm human appeal.
Her entry was selected from tens of thousands received in the contest which opened June 1 and closed August (5.
Herbert P Clark, Jr., of the Nordblom C o m p a n v Realtors of Boston ran the r e cent Grand Opening of the Cambridge House Motor Hotel, at which Governor John A Volpe was guest of honor.
The construction cost of the Motor Hotel was $2,000,000 and is to be operated by the Cambridge Motor Inn Incorporated.
Herbert Clark, who has been with the Nordblom Company for the past three years as head of the Motel-Hotel brokerage division, attended Winchester High in 1959 and 1900 and presently resides at 27 Cross Street.
Mr Clark is one of the few brokers in the New England Area that has specialized in the sale of Motels and Hotels and in the selection of sites for new motels.
The drawing for a mink-colored, cashmere sweater will take place at this time.
THURSDAY, OCTORF.R 12, 1061 Opportunities To Be Aired A t Colleges High school students in the Ros. ~ ■ ■ ton suburbs will learn about oppor. entirely filled, some with students tunities at colleges outside the east f rom many as forty states.
Town Charles Watson Again Rowling F-eague Wins Town Tennis Crown hiring the presidents and admissions directors of twelve small, coeducational liberal arts colleges in six midwestem states.
The colleges, members of the Midwest College Council, are seeking to broaden the geographic base of their enrollments and are interested in well-qualified IochI students.
All presidents anti admissions officers wilt be available after each session for consultations with college-bound high school students and their parents who are being invited to the meetings from public and private schools throughout the area.
The conferences will be conducted with the cooperation of local guidance counselors who will attend afternoon sessions planned for them at both Lexington and Wellesley.
Arrangements for the Wellesley session were made last spring at a meeting arranged by Samuel M Graves, principal of Wellesley Senior High with the guidance directors of nearby schools and a Council representative.
Mr Graves formerly taught and was interim principal at Winchester High School.
The Lexington session was arranged through Charles J Johnson principal of the school and Frederick Thurlow, assistant principal in charge of the guidance program.
Aside from its own students, Lexington High expects to draw its largest audience from schools in Concord, Winchester, Reading, Bedford, Woburn, Maynard and Waltham.
Schools farther to the north are also counted on to send a number of their children.
The theme for the conference, “New Horizons in College Selection” reflects its purpose of the conference, which is to have secondary school students and their parents take a fresh look at the college situation.
This they can do, the Council points out, by learning about colleges they now know little about but which may offer more than some familiar to them.
The conference idea has been welcomed enthusiastically by many New England school officials coping with an unprecendented demand for admission by college, mostly to those in the east.
Many have found their past efforts to interest students in western and southern colleges meeting with little success because there is little appreciation here of the excellence of many colleges in other parts of the country.
The counselors are supporting the Council’s program in the hope of helping even their top-grade students to avoid the disappointment many are likely to suffer by applying only to oversubscribed eastern colleges.
Pinkham, president of Ripon College, and acting chairman of the Midwest College Council, points out that eastern colleges and universities actively recruit students in many states, including those in the midwest.
The Council, he explained, is now coordinating the efforts of its members to bring about a better balance.
We feel the conferences also perform a useful service for the schools and school families”, he said.
I Bowling League This week in first-place team standings are the Emeralds, captained by Ginger Maggio, and supported by Eleanor Russo, Rose Fiore, Sue Barbnro and Jeanne Di Donato.
The Diamonds once again are in second place winning by virtue of pinfalls.
The Diamonds are captained by Louise Vigorita, and supported by Cert Fiore, Emma Provinzano, Angie Dattilo, and Phil Marrone.
This will be the last week of bowling for Captain Louise Vigorita, as she is leaving for the dreamland of California.
With the league for three years and the winner of the special improvement award her first year, Louise will certainly be missed by all.
On behalf of the bowling league and your many friends we wish you every happiness.
There was much spontaneous cheering and applause for the skilled bowlers who came through with a multitude of spares and strikes.
With her team in first place, high average of 87.3, the high single string of 110, and a lovely high three-string total of ‘287, Ginger retains the top honors thus far.
Our worthy brothers bowl on the following evening, and many of the husbands participate.
Top Ten c This week’s bowling produced a noticeable change in the standings and also a tie for high single honors by John Maguire with a 133.
As of now the two American Legion teams are fighting it out for first place hut Strike Lanes are making their bid to regain that first place spot they held so strongly the last couple of years.
Legion 2 24 8 6934 Strike Lanes 24 8 5511 Rrother-in-Laws 24 8 5335 Post Office 2 22 10 5543 49er’s 20 12 5578 Atlantic Gelatin 18 14 5626 K of C 18 14 5330 St.
B Kelley R Russo A Anderson F Kimball B Nash R Tofuri O McClay J Cassidy L Landry A Griswold 109.
Charles Watson successfully defended his W inchester Town • tennis tille last week end as he downed Shop Holt in the singles linaT 6-3, 6-2, 8-6 ai William Packer Courts.
Doubles honors were annexed by Josiah Bacon and Bob Horne as they edged 'Pony Apsey and Jim Moulton in a five set marathon 3-6, 6-1, 6-4, 2-6, 12in.
In a close mixed doubles final, Shop Holt and Phillipa N oting defeated t’andv McConnell and Bill Macneil.
An insurance broker, Bill is a member of the Bear Hill Golf Club in Wakefield.
He shot his ace at Wianno with an eight iron while playing with Cliff Smith, Don Morse and Jim Edgar.
See our book of Eaton's many Right now our own colleges are styles at the Winchester Star.
October 29 — Open November 5 — Winchester at Woburn Coaches Don MacElwee, Bill Sipp, and Ed Gravalese are working hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needham.
With the return of a dozen veterans from last year’s team, Don expects to field one of the beet teams in the league.
Noonan School News The annual rummage sale at the Noonan School will be held on Tuesday, October 17, from 10:00 m. to 12:00 noon.
Outgrown clothing, household items, gifts, jewelry, sports equipment, books, games, puzzles, skates, and overshoes are but a few of the items to be found there.
Come early, and plan for a relaxed moment at the Stage Shop for coffee and doughnuts with friends.
Noonan School is easy to find — just one block west of Main Street between Hemingway and Canal.
PAULINE WHEELOCK PA 9-1304 octtf-4t STOP FOR 1 PAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE ON ALL CHRYSLER BUILT CARS ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc.
William W Finlay, professor of business administration at Antioch had a distinguished business career before he joined the faculty in 1952, first as director of industrial relations for the Wright Aeronuu tic Corporation when it employed 72,000 persons and later as general manager of the Guiberson Corporation in Dallas, Texas.
Antioch is known for its cooper ative plan of education under which all students, regardless of field of interest, regularly supplement on-campus study with offcampus job experiences.
Currently half of Antioch’s 1500 students are attending classes on the Ohio Campus while the other half are on jobs in more than 30 states and a dozen foreign countries.
A Winchester student now enrolled at Antioch is Miss Patty M Griesemer of 2 Ravenscroft Road.
Scouts Enjoy Cook-Out Seventeen Boy Scouts and two “mascots” of Troop 507, sponsored by the First Baptist Church, enjoyed an all-day outing at Plum Island last Saturday, October 7th.
The “Warm-up Cook-out” was the first of a series of events marking the Troop’s 30th Scouting season.
Jim and John Bates, John Buzzotta, Frank Carlson, Les Stokes, Chris Halverson, John Murphy, Dale Abrahamson, Lee Hillman, David Joiner, Bud Marvel, Steve New, Peter Merrow, Bob Charles, Arthur Hayford, Andy Sklodowski and Dan Mears, plus mascots, Dick Butterworth and Don Marchant.
Frank Carlson, Tom Bates, Tom Bates Jr., Don Marchant, and Scoutmaster Paul Butterworth.
A on Friday evening, October 20th and an overnight camping trip to “Grotonwood” in Groton on November 3rd and 4th.
The singles final was a well played match which demonstrated once again the old tennis adage that tennis matches are won on errors, not on placements.
Watson, throughout the match, made few unworthy errors and was clearly in command in the first two sets.
His looping forehand, if not scoring outright winners, was well placed and gave Holt little opportunity to gain the net.
On the backhand, Charlie left little to be desired as he hit a flat ball «lown the line or cross court with good depth and pace.
Mixed in judiciously was an occasional top spin backhand or slice of uniformly good depth.
Check -mated in every quarter, Holt found himself down two sets against an opponent who refused to err off the ground and displayed a seemingly infallible choice of shot.
At this point, Shep showed what a fine player he can he, as he stepped up the pace and attacked behind his heavily topped forehand and undercut backhand.
Winners flowed off his racket as he volleyed and smashed with abandon at the net to earn a 4-1 advantage with his own serve to follow.
Holt surged to a 30-0 lead, needing two points for a 5-1 lead, but could not hold serve as Watson scored with two well stroked passing shots to regain the initiative.
Shep stayed in the fight, but met his fate in the fourteenth game after Watson had evened matters at 4-all and held serve for a 5-4 lead.
It was nip and tuck after that until Watson engineered a break through in the fianl game to guin a well-earned win.
The doubles final found Tony Apsey all alone with three south paws, one being his partner, Don Moulton.
In a tense struggle of two hours and 14 minutes, the all lefty team of Bacon and Horne came out on top against their younger opponents.
Bacon gave a good demonstration of the use of the lob in doubles and was well supported by the clever ripostes of Horne.
Apsey and Moulton, although tormented by the delicate touch and accurate fire of their oppon ents, lashed the hall without let up and were very much in contention until the final point.
In the mixed, the more experi enced team of Holt and Young had a slight edge all the way and env erged with a G-4, 6-4 victory over McConnell and Macneil.
Don Puffer was tournament chairman and presented trophies to the finalists to conclude a busy two weeks of tournament play.
Team Teaching Is Subject Of Parkliurst Talk Team teaching will he the topic of an address to be presented at the first Fall meeting of the Parkhurst Parents’ Association, an open meeting to he held Wednesday, October 18 at 7:45m. in the school auditorium.
Snipe and Turnabout fleet officers are busily planning their joint awards' banquet which will take place this coming week end, Saturday, October 14.
And appropriately so, as skippers and crews alike got together to receive the fruits of their labor and congratulate each other, while recalling ninny memorable moments of anxiety, victory, and most of all humor.
Ironically, the Snipe Fleet has just begun a new “Frostbite” series that will keep the red-nosed sailors on the lake until November, long after days of swimming have been forgotten and the Boat Club literally deserted.
Other clubs have come to join them on just about the only body of water where such a series is I possible.
The game you have been asking for, the perfect bridge teacher that enables you to play by yourself, anywhere, with World Champions as partners.
Three models, plus duplicate bridge boards and an advanced course in contract bridge.
Anderson who lives at 8 Winslow Road, is also director of the team teaching project of the Franklin Elementary School in Lexington, one of the first schools in the country to undertake team teaching in all of its grades.
Team teaching was introduced in Winchester in 1959 at the Mystic School.
It has been adopted at Parkhurst School this year in grades 4 through 6.
Because of the general interest in this new teaching technique the Parkhurst Parents’ Association meeting has been opened to all who wish to come.
WE 3-2852 •ep21-4t Winchester’s Opponents Lexington, 14; Stoneham, 8 Reading, 32; Concord, 12 Melrose, 30; Belmont, 8 Wakefield, 12; Newton, South, 6 Woburn, 20; Natick, 20 ARTISTS t Your finast o* paintings deserve only the best . , * frames Ityled by Stevens F«ctory-to-you prleMl Malcolm G Stevens MI 8-4111 Cor.
A checking account means you can pay all your bills by mail, with checks.
Open your checking account here now and begin to enjoy the convenience it offers.
Bowling League Last week every team but Notre Dame changed positions in the standing’s.
Harvard, though managing to take four points from Army, dropped from first to second on pin falls; both are tied with 14 wins and losses.
Next week’s matches will have first-place California competing against fifthplace Navy, and second-place Harvard taking on third-place Notre Dame.
Two attendance prizes were drawn last week, and believe it or not, “Hokie” Procopio won both.
The meeting will be preceded by a Mass for the Missions to be offered at St.
Winchester starters for Lexington game, left to right, standing, Coaeh Henry Knowlton, Jim Menueei, Richie Rowe, Captain Mike Bellino, John Chane, John Colliander, Boh Benineasa, Dave Mullen, Bill Graham.
Kneeling, Boh DonIon, George Nowell, Dan Mahoney, Tom Mooney, Ned Nihlork, Joe Dattilo, Al Kimball, Lcnnie Timpone.
It was with real regret that popular “Tom” handed in his cross country portfolio, for he has always loved the sport, and he is missing his work with the harriers this fall even more than he thought possible.
A graduate of Medford High School, “Tom” participated in track and cross country at high school.
He went to Norwich, which at that time had no cross country team, and participated in wrestling and football at the Northfield military college.
He had to leave college and go to work, later enrolling at Burdett College.
After his graduation from Burdett he worked as an accountant for Lever Brothers but decided he wanted to teach and left business to accept a teaching position at Suffield Academy.
At Suffield he coached varsity track, wrestling and golf and also coached football in the junior school.
He left to accept a position as assisfcmt principal of Plainville Junior-Senior High School where he coached basketball and cross country, introducing the latter sport to the school.
From Plainville he went to Bryant & Stratton and from that post, to Winchester.
For a time “Tom” assisted Coach Henry Knowlton in track, and for two years was head coach of the sport at high school.
He did well with track, but it has been in cross country that he has made his greatest contribution to Winchester High School athletics.
Morse coached varsity cross country teams have won 73 meets and lost eight.
His Jay Vees have Our New Teachers done even better, winning 74 of 75 outings.
The varsity harriers have won seven divisional championships, two Middlesex League championships seven state championships and two New England championships.
And if you are wondering why a team good enough to win seven state titles, could only win two league crowns, be informed that Middlesex League cross country titles are hard to come by.
During the Morse coaching regime at high school no team has won more than the two Winchester annexed.
SfB&s Gettop jobs Responsible jpbs— and important promotions — go to girls with outstanding Gibbs secretarial training.
KATHARINE GIBBS SECRETARIAL Commonwealth 6-2475 tl Marlborough St, B0ST0I It TOM MORSE Winchester Jay Vee teams won 11 divisional meets and five league titles.
During the time “Tom” coached at high school, 13 years, in only two years did his teams lose two meets.
The sport has built up from a squad of 16 in 1948 to one of 45 this year.
This group won divisional, league, state and New England crowns and was undefeated.
Allan Osborne and Robert Becker captained the team, other members of which were Paul Franson, Paul Donlon, Ken Brown, Quent Roberts, Ron Roberts, Harry Ekstrom, Robin Carlson and Bill Emerson.
Miss Bellows instructs at the kindergarten level and also in grades one, two and three.
She actually does most of the teaching, visiting each of her classes once a week.
She got her Master of Arts from Tufts in 1961 and did practice teaching in Winchester while working for her degree.
Miss Bellows lists music as a hobby as well as a vocation and also likes sports, especially tennis.
Sachems Bounce Back To Beat Cambridge , SO -6 Winchester High School's football Sachems, minus many eagle feathers from their war bonnets lost at S ton eh am the previous week-end, took the Warpath again last Saturday afternoon and tomahawked an inept Cambridge l^itin School eleven, 80-6, in a non league game at Russell Field, Cambridge.
Both teams played ragged football, but though the issue was never in dou&b Cambridge kept trying.
Neither team could sustain a drive during the first quarter with the defenses dominating play.
In the second period Winchester broke the scoring ice when John Colliander passed from his 29 to Lennie Timpone at the 47.
Bellino swept left end for nine and then on a trap play from the Cambridge 44, broke through cleanly to outleg the Cambridge secondaries into the end zone.
The try for the conversion points was no good and the half ended with Winchester on top, 6-0.
Opening the second half Bellino ran the kickoff hack 16 yards to the Winchester 39.
Benineasa picked up five and a Colliander pass to Timpone reached the Cambridge 46.
An illegal procedure penalty set the Sachems back five yards to the 27, hut Bellino got away for 16 yards to the Cantabs’ 12, and Benineasa drove through for the score, also adding two points for the conversion by rushing.
After forcing a Cambridge punt, Winchester was twice held for less than a yard advance.
On third down, however, Colliander hit Rich Rowe with a pass at midfield and Rowe galloped 50 yards to score.
Coach Knowlton sent in his reserves at this point, and Cambridge Latin scored quickly.
With action still in the third quarter Winchester kicked off after Rowe’s touchdown.
Taking the ball at his own 15, the Cantabs’ Purcell contributed a sparkling 85 yard run along the sidelines with a great individual effort for Latin’s only score.
The Sachems scored their fourth and final touchdown in the final stanza when Captain Bellino got away on a twisting, dodging, faking run, 43 long yards for the score.
Captain Bellino scored 16 points on two touchdowns and two conversions to lead the Sachem scorers.
Purcell, playing both quarter and halfback, did the bulk of the Cambridge carrying.
Two passes dropped in the end zone didn’t help Winchester’s offensive record any.
It, Covcll : le, Phillips; qb, Reveira : rhb, Coleman ; lhb, Purcell ; fb, Cellineri.
Score by Periods 1 2 3 4 Total Winchester 0 G 16 H 30 Cambridge Latin 0 0 rt 0 t» TD’s — Bellino 2, Benineasa, Rowe, Purcell.
Field Judge, Spellman Sachem Harriers Outleg Revere • a I lie Red and Black Harriers won their second straight on riday, October 6, by defeating Revere, 16 to 44, over the Fells course. ger.
Of these he rates Farrell, Brown, Osborne, Bob Becker, Ekstrom, Bird and Reuter especially outstanding.
It is both an individual and a team sport, calling for courage, stamina and intelligence, but no outstanding physique.
Any boy who wants to work it it can do well over the hills ind dales, even though he may never he a champion.
When you see l group of boys running cross ountry, doff your hat to them.
During the first half of the race Dee and Anderson were battling for the lead with Johnson following close on their heels.
Bucky Johnson soon proved himself the master of the course as he overtook Dee and Anderson and went on to win the race in 17m. 12s.
This proved to be the fastest time on the home course in the past two years.
Steve Dee running his best race since joining the club was a close second.
The Harriers had excellent grouping with Johnson, Dee, Scherban and Anderson, all coming in within 15 seconds of each other.
Bird, Gallagher and Guiliani took 6th, 7th and 11th places for the home team.
The ruggedness of the course which runs up South Border Road and through the Fells for two and and one-half miles proved to be too much for the hoys from Revere who could place only one man in the first seven.
Gerry Hills was the top scorer for the Sachems and was followed to the finish line by Harrington, Kirkpatrick, Goethals and Callahan.
Winchester High faces a crucial football game in its Middlesex League series Saturday afternoon when t lie rejuvenated Lexington 1 1 igh School football team, riding the crest of an undefeated season thus far, with three wins in three games, conics to Manchester Field to engage the once-beaten Sachems in mortal combat with the kickoff at I :30.
Lexington has a new coach this year, Johnny Janusas, an old Lexington football and Boston College luminary, who until this fall coached Saugus.
The old Lexington “blue,” has the Minuteboys up and rarin’ to go, and their record to date is impressive.
The Blue and Gold opened well in the Middlesex League Bay State League jamboree, playing a scoreless tie with Framingham and beating Natick 6-0.
Just in case you have forgotten, Stoneham is the team that clobbered Winchester 22-8 two weeks ago.
The whole town is talking football over in Lexington and there will probably be a big crowd of rooters follow the team to Winchester Saturday.
The years have been lean for Lexington in its football competition with Winchester and the Minuteboys really feel this is their year against the Sachems.
This feeling is shared by many who suffered through the Stoneham debacle, and even though the Sachems came back last Saturday to outclass Cambridge Latin, 306, not a few local fans are picking the visitors Saturday.
Winchester has a two and one record, beating Concord and Cambridge Latin and losing to Stoneham, a team in turn beaten by Lexington, last week.
Coach Knowlton was far from pleased with his charges showing at Cambridge last Saturday, the dropping of two touchdown passes in the end zone by no means adding to his pleasure.
He has been working his charges hard this week in anticipation of a tough game with Lexington on Saturday, but he urges all Winchester rooters not to sell the Sachems short.
A couple of breaks or so could have made a different ball game out of that Stoneham thing.
Nites to 9 PJi. aprl3-tf Student notebooks, paper and dividers at the Star office, 3 Church Street.
ENTERTAINING . . . suspense filled . . . builtin “equalizing” factor — gives slower or younger players same opportunity as experienced players.
SCIENTIFICALLY DESIGNED ... all letters and word points rated according to usage from a standard dictionary which means over 20,000 usable words.
FULLY PLAY TESTED, evaluated . . . helps develop competitive instinct, manual dexterity.
QUALITY CONSTRUCTED . . .all parts of longlasting Hi-impaet plastic and metal.
Erskine N White Holy Name’s First Meeting On Sunday, October 8, the Holy Name Society of the Immaculate Conception Church held its first meeting of the season following the celebration of Mass by its spiritual director Rev.
The members of the Society gathered in the school hall where an enthusiastic group discussion of the interests of the Society was held.
The guest speaker was Father O’Hara, a Maryknoll missionary, who gave a very enlightening talk on the Catholic Church in Bolivia and Peru.
Stove Kimball loads the group as president, with Joan Zrodowski, vice-president; Don McClellan, treasurer; Kearln Richmond., recording secretary; Rebecca Fitts.
Deborah Price and Lyndy a r )•. corresponding secretary; John Parsons, inter-denominational representative; and Betsey Woodward, diocesan representative helping to make this the best year ever.
The new seminarian advisor, Robert Winter, and the Parents’ Advisory Board have provided the Y.P.F. with an exciting and enjoyable program.
Next Sunday, October 15, there will be a Corporate Communion at 8:00m. in the church, followed by a delicious breakfast in Hadley Hall.
The series will feature speakers from an alcoholics’ group and should prove to be quite interesting.
The pad will be open like from 8:00-11:30 m., with beat-eats furnished and cokes for sale.
Swift New on the bookshelves this fall is “Second Semester”, another story of girls’ college life by Helen Miller Swift, known to her intimates as “Bunny” Swift, and in Winchester, as Mrs.
Robert Johnson, will already have provided a generous share of their imaginations in converting Wyman School’s auditorium to a Southern European sidewalk cafe atmosphere complete with flowers, travel posters, and some ingenious innovations.
Music by Roger Ca rpenter and the popular Meltones will start your toes tapping as soon as you enter the door.
Generous Winchester merchants will again provide exciting door prizes with an added prize for the purchaser of a lucky corsage.
Rob ert Tesar, is enthusiastically plan ning an evening of fun for all with her committee.
Robert West water; refreshments, Mrs John Shanahan; and publicity, Mrs Russell Zimmer.
These tillers can help turn a sparse stand of grass into a nicely filled-out turf — if plants have the nutrition they need for proper growth.
That’s why a feeding of protein-building turf builder® can do more for your lawn at this time than at almost any other season.
HELEN MILLER SWIFT Those who read her previous book, “First Semester”, might believe “Second Semester” is a sequal.
It would have been nice to follow the principal characters of that first tale of freshman college life, Betsy Dal rymple and Jan Cornwall, a bit further to see if their budding friendship really jelled.
Principal characters in “Second Semester” are “Ginny” Newhall and Carrie Ford, an oddly assorted pair who are thrown together as roommates just before midyears.
She had left that college badly mixed up, with poor marks and unhappy memories, largely due to the fact Beck of Winchester to the bonanza Converse Market has currently been providing its customers.
She is shown here with her daughter Pamela, who is proudly holding her very own hank book, a gift from the popular supermarket.
Converse opened the account for Pamela at the Winchester Savings Bank, with an initial $3 interest-earning deposit, all free as a bonus for $99 worth of green tapes.
Beck now plans to deposit all her $2 Converse bonuses in Pam’s account, using bank-by-mail envelopes.
Judging by the number of families that are getting and using the new Converse gift accounts, a lot of ladies feel as she does.
Wiklund Feted “Show Toppers” Here October 27 The Junior Florence Crittenton Circle has already signed some top talent for its big charity entertainment to be held Friday evening, October 27, in the High School Auditorium commencing at 9:00 o’clock.
The “Show Toppers” and the ‘Four Rascals” will be featured, A delightful party and reception was given to Mrs.
Doris Wiklund, retiring Visiting Nursing Association director, on Thursday evening.
William Spaulding opened her home on Main Street for this very pleasant party sponsored by the present W.V.N.A. board, and and since both are talented and exmany of Mrs.
Wiklund’s friends perienced groups their efforts are and co-workers came to wish her 3ure to please. well as she takes up her new life j The “Show Toppers,” an excitin Peterboro, N.H., where she will ing group of six young singers, be the school nurse. | have won acclaim at the Terrace Under Mrs.
Ihey present a smooththat she was too close to her parthe W.V.N.A. has become a generPoHshed well-balanced program ents and was trying to live up to alized public health agency workthat combines supper club sophistheir plans for her.
Wiklund’s experienced of the founder of U.S.C., get her guidance and understanding for into that college and give her the this improved public health service chance to be herself and stand on | in Winchester.
Her hosts of friends wish her Godspeed and she will be glad to see or hear from them at her new address, East Sullivan, N.H. her own feet.
Carrie, her roommate, comes from a farming family, is earning her way at college and is there to get an education.
To her college is a privilege and she has no time for fun on campus or in the dorms.
She has actually so dedicated herself to work and study that she thinks any sort of good time is not for her.
Conlon FUEL SERVICE Oil Burner Installations All Work Guur an teed Time Puymentg WE 3-1720 27 Luke Avenue, Woburn janl2-tf make a sorority and to enter into help given us.
A station wagon the social swing of things. loaded with flowers, vegetables.
The girls work out their own salcooked and canned goods left Winvation, each getting something Chester every Tuesday morning for from the other.
Carrie’s example various settlement houses in Bosprompts “Ginny” to really study ton. and watch her diet, while “Ginny” Special thanks are due the womis able to make her sober, self conon who represented each church scious roommate realize that there and were on hand, regardless of is nothing wrong with fun in the heat or unpleasant weather.
Market, Forester’s Florist, MahonAided by a book on psychology, ey’s “Rocky Ledge Farm,” and the written by a friend of “Ginny’s” Winchester Conservatory.
Both also learn from “Uncle Mai's” book that the only real happiness comes with giving something of yourselves to others.
Swift’s latest book will bring back to college people pleasant memories of their undergraduate days; the junior prom, the dormitory gabfests, the dreaded examinations with their familiar blue books, the campus walks and the tribulations of those who wait on table.
Cleverly worked in are some pros and cons of joining sororities, how the girls feel about the good night kiss and “pawing,” especially on the first date; and the feeling, unconscious though it may be, that there is a difference between the “townies” at the college and the other students.
There is some good practical psychology running through “Second Semester,” and though primarily for teen agers, many adults will enjoy the book.
The Fortnightly Presents Children’s Event On Saturday, October 28, there will be a morning performance at 10:30 by the Gordon Bennett Tickle-Um Theatre Marionettes to be presented in the McCall Junior High School Auditorium.
The College Club Art Group will hold its first Museum meeting at the He Cordova Museum of Art in Lincoln, on Friday morning, October 20. at 10:15.
Those who have visited this unique museum in previous years will )ook forward to this trip; and for those who have never been there, a rich experience is in store.
There is no museum more beautifully located high on a hill, overlooking the lake, and surrounded by autumn foliage at Ibis time of year.
Inside there is also an exciting feast for the eyes; for the large exhibition of paintings owned by Mr and Mrs.
Those are paintings of real significance, which have been ac claimed by all reviewers as one of the outstanding exhibitions of the season.
It is interesting to note that the pictures represent the steady stream of art from the early Impressionists, such as Mo net and Renior, down through the European Abstract Expressionists to the current present-day work by the Action Painters.
Members of the College Club Art Group cannot afford to miss this opportunity of seeing these paintings and hearing Miss Jane Miller of the De Cordova staff talk about them.
There are several ways to go, but one of the most direct is to follow Pleasant Street in Arlington to Route 2; on Route 2, go toward Lincoln for about 7 miles to Bedford Road.
At another sign turn right on Sandy Pond Road and go a short distance to the Museum.
After the meeting many may wish to have luncheon either at Hartwell Farm or at the 1775 House, both of which e near.
Ronold King, this year’s chairman, outlined a most interesting program for the coming season.
King’s enthusiasm for the year’s program was contagious, and all present are looking forward eagerly to these Museum trips.
The plans include the Addison Gallery in Andover on Nov., the Boston Museum of Fine Arts on Dec., and equally interesting trips each month through April.
One week before each trip, those who have enrolled as members will receive notices; there will also be articles in The Star with information about the exhibitions.
Monday morning, October 16, inspectors and police will patrol every highway and hook drivers of Antiques Study Group The first meeting of the Antiques Study Group will be held on Tuesj day, October 17, at 7:45m., at jthe home of Mr and Mrs.
Charles Greene will i amuse us with a review of a hook ! — -Treasures and Trash.
If memvehicles without green inspection * H>rs have a special fan or fans, do stickers. j bring them.
The program planned for the prospective student nurses will include a guided tour of the Hospital and a panel discussion on the life of a student nurse at Beth Israel Hospital.
Almedingen A Companion to Murder, by Edward Shew Dinosaurs, by Edwin Colbert Education and Income, by Patricia Sexton Folklore a n d Symbolism of lants uikl Trees, by Ernst and Johanna Lehner How to do Pasteups and Mechanicals.
The Preparation of Art For Reproduction, by S Ralph Maurello Introducing Seashells, by Robert Abbott Letters, by Henry Mencken Minerals for Atomic Energy, by Robert Nininger, 2nd ed.
WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev.
A Male Choir will sing and the Deacons and other men will participate in the service. 5:00m.
The Senior High P.F. will go to Lynnflold Center for u Woburn Ansocintion Rally.
The pages of recorded history are replete with the contributions Pharmacy has made to the liberation of mankind from pain and illness.
Open daily except Sundays and holidays from 11m. to 4m Sunday, October 15. 9:46m.
Junior High Fellowship, About Myself,” worship, refreshments, unRonald Ondrejka and Miss Mary A Skruta. 6:30m.
Adult Discussion Group on Testa of a Living (Church,” at home of Mr and Mrs.
Women’s Fellowship, all CirOne of the correlative citations to bfl c leH, dessert and coffee, play ""Wing My read from ""Science and Health with Key Words” in Social Hall, to the Scriptures” by Mary Baker Eddy Thursday.
This is the ‘beauty of Friday, October 20. holiness, that when Truth heals the sick, 8:00m.
Shirts Laundered in 24 Hours Same-Day Dry Cleaning Two-Day Tailoring Service on Most Garments EMBASSY Laundry & Dry Cleaning 5 Park Street, Winchester, Mass.
PA 9-2220 Roy W Horn, Prop. jnlyZOtf NEW HOPE BAPTIST CHURCH Cross Street near Washington Street Rev.
Carlton Helgerson, Pastor Baptistic Evangelistic Non Denominational 9:30m.
Miss Dotli VonVelson. an exchange student from Germany who is living in Melrose and attending both Melrose High School and the Melrose Methodist Church, will be the speaker.
Important business including the proposed Church Budget for 1961. very member of the Board ahould be present.
Autobridge, the game that lets you play bridge any time by yourself and have world champions as partners.
See this fascinating game at the Winchester Star, also the official aluminum duplicate bridge boards and the advanced course in contract bridge.
This week’s picture in the Star’s Remember When series is of the old Hawes Brothers livery stable that stood years ago on what later was a part of old Manchester Field after the cleanup and improvement campaign instituted by the late Forrest C Manchester.
The stable stood beside the Al>erjona River adjacent to what is now Waterfield Road, roughly across the street from the present Post Office.
Sharing the lot with it was the P Waldmyer Tannery, the tall chimney of which shows in the picture.
The tannery was situated beside the old Boston and Lowell, later the Boston & Maine Railroad and a spur track led from the main line to service the tannery.
The other side of the river from the stable was Cutting Street, running beside the water down toward the present Cutting Street which leads off Manchester Road.
Still later a railroad freight yard was located beyond the Blanchard yard.
The balustrade showing in the picture is on the bridge over the river, which branched at Waterfield Road and went around the stable rejoining the main stream south of the building.
The owners of the livery stable, Ilawes Brothers, were Reuben C Hawes and Daniel Webster Hawes.
The latter was for many years in the express business in Winches ter and the small building to the light of the stable was his express office.
The two brothers finally dissolv ed their partnership and Reuben moved over to Glen Road to the big house on the left hand side of the Road at the bend, near Glen Green.
At the rear of his house he built another livery stable which he ran for a time.
Webster, or “Web,” as he was familiarly known, joined with Dan iel Kelley in the firm of Kelley and Hawes, for many years undertak ers and operators of a livery and express business.
The two partners, both bearded, one tall and spare and the other short and sturdy, were familiar figures on the streets of Winchester for many years.
The Welcome Wagon Hostess Will Knock on Your Door with Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors and Your Civic and Social W elfare Leaders ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies Charlotte L Dodge HUnter 8-2882 No Cost or Obligation Charming, useful, and quaint are the new 1962 “calendar towels,” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star.
OCTOBER 12, 1961 Qll ' yon more The marriage of Miss Mary Jane Elmore, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Frank R Elmore of 18 FVeeman Street, Arlington, to Ensign Richard Francis Gibbons, USNR, son of Mr and Mrs.
John F Gibbons of 6 Worthon Road, took place Saturday morning, October 7, at St.
Miss Elmore wore a full length gown of white satin embroidered with Alencon lace and tiny seed pearls.
Her elbow length veil of silk illusion fell from a tiara of orange blossoms and she carried a cascade bouquet of white chrysanthemums, stephanotis and orchids.
Miss Mary Elizabeth Buckley of Arlington was maid of honor and Miss Cornelia Curtin, also of Arlington, was bridesmaid.
Both attendants wore sheaths of indigo blue taffeta with overskirts and carried cascade bouquets of pink and white chrysanthemums.
John T Gibbons of Winchester was best man for his brother and ushering were Richard F Elmore of Arlington, brother of the bride; and Ensign Terrance S McCormack, USNR, of Malden.
The bride, a teacher in the Medford school system, graduated from Matignon High School and from State College in Boston in the class of 1960.
Ensign Gibbons graduated from Winchester High School and from Holy Cross College in the class of 1960.
Matignon Guild The opening meeting of the Matignon Guild will be held Thursday, October 19, at 2:30m. in the school auditorium.
John H Flynn, spiritual advisor, and Sister M Lumena, C.S.J., supervisor of the school, will greet the members.
Clement F Mackey of Somerville, guild president, will present the officers and board of directors to the members.
Fallowing the reception and tea, parents may visit the members of the faculty in their rooms.
Glamour Tips Fashionable Hair Colors for fall run lln* range from baby beige to deep black.
S Driscoll, officiated at the 10 o’clock 1 ceremony, and a reception followed at Hayes Steak House in Billerica.
Caci-XcWi pi*'* ,v,\ AC ' w ' in ico At the Immaculate Conception Church on Sunday afternoon October 1, Miss Nancy DeMinico, daughter of Mrs.
Frederico DeMinico of 56 Water Street, became the bride of Benjamin Anthony Caci, I son of Mr and Mrs.
Herbert K A Driscoll, performed the marriage ceremony at 3:30 o’clock in a setI ting of large and small white pomJ pons.
A reception was held at Loban Post, Veterans of Foreign Wars, Hall in Somerville.
JAMES ALLEN Given in marriage by her godfather, Philip Savage, Miss Bresnahan wore a white taffeta gown with a rounded neckline, long .sleeves and a cathedral train.
Her fingertip veil was caught to a Camelot style headpiece and she carried a bouquet of white carnations, chrysanthemums and stephanotis.
Miss Mary Doherty of Winchester was maid of honor and the bridesmaids were Miss Esther Guidi of Chelsea, Miss Sandra Humphrey of Woburn, Miss Joanne Cuffre of Winchester and Miss Patricia McEnery of Medford, cousin of the bridegroom.
Miss Linda Allen of Woburn, sister of the bridegroom, was junior bridesmaid.
The honor maid wore a red taffeta dress with a white cummerbund and full length sleeves.
Her matching crown was adorned with pearls and she carried a bouquet of red and white carnations and chrysanthemums.
The bridesmaids wore dresses having white bodices and red skirts with white cummerbunds.
They also wore red crowns decorated with pearls and carried white carnations.
Bresnahan, mother of the bride, wore royal blue with matching accessories and a white orchid.
Allen, wore a pink orchid with her cocoa brown dress and matching accessories.
After a wedding journey to Williamsburg, Va. and Montreal Canada, Mr and Mrs.
C A. fashion show bv Monet planned to benefit the many animals less fortunate that t hem two pedigreed prize winners.
X QifforJ, arc len Wed Studio Guild’s Summer Work Exhibited On Wednesday, October 4, the Studio Guild assembled for their first meeting w r ith their director, Robert E Grady of Concord.
The walls of the studio were hung with i fine collection of oils, watercolors, wood block prints, pastels and other media, making a colorful background for the members, who waited eagerly for Mr Grady’s criticism of the summer’s work.
Each and every picture received a careful and interesting evaluation, helpful for all the members as well as the individual artist.
Especial attention was given to the dissimilarity of the pictures, not only in techniques, but also in composition and color, and most of all, in ideas.
Nites to 9 P.M. apr 13-tf There is Winchester interest in the marriage which took place re cently at the Nevvtonville Methodist Church where Miss Alison Gifford, daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Hamilton Miller Gifford of West Newton, formerly of Winchester became the bride of James Moffatt Larden, son of Mr and Mrs.
Gifford, former pastor of the Crawford Memorial Church, officiated at the two o’clock cere mony which was followed by a reception at the church.
The bride wore a Chantilly lace gown over peau de soie with a scalloped neckline, three-quarter sleeves and a chapel train.
She wore a fingertip veil and carried a cascade bouquet of stephanotis, valley lilies and white roses.
Miss Gail Atwood of Waban was maid of honor and the bridesmaids were Miss Dianne Gifford of Stratham, Miss Sheri Blair and Mrs.
The honor maid wore a dress of blue chiffon with a velvet hat and carried pink carnations and snapdragons.
The bridesmaids were similarly gowned and carried cascade bouquets of pink carnations.
Donald Ford of Lexington was Mr Larden’s best man, and ushers were James and Peter Gifford of West Newton, brothers of the bride Richard Hussey of Reading and Arthur Glass of Newton.
After a wedding journey to Bermuda Mr Larden and his bride will make their home in Waltham.
Carousel Bazaar “Carousal” — the dictionary says “a jovial feast or festival” and that is what the Parish of the Epiphany promises on Wednesday, October 25.
A buffet-style, home-cooked dinner will be served from six to seven thirty.
Ton Harner, PA 9-3561; or stop by the church office and pick up a ticket.
A “merry-go-round” bazaar, with food, fun and frolic for old and young.
Booths will display and sell aprons, books, gift wrappings, knit articles, plants, stamps and toys, not to forget a white elephant table.
There will be two settings for luncheon, one at 12:00 o’clock and one at 12:45.
In order to facilitate easy shopping for the harassed mother, pony rides for pie-school children will be in order from 2:00 to 3:30 Thursday afternoon.
Everyone, residing in or out of Winchester, is invited to come and make merry.
J, swor on as £ ncjacjecl lh, ll/iss *1 1 j onto nefaejee ddnsig^n EccLr Mr and Mrs.
Herbert Todd Wadsworth of 15 Norwood Street Winchester, and Duxbury, announce the engagement of their daughter, Miss Suzanne Grace Wadsworth, to Mr Victor Havelock Jonas, son of Mr and Mrs.
Frederick William Aseltine of 7 Cabot Street and the late Mr Aseltine, also Mrs.
John U Monro of Cambridge, formerly of Winchester, announce the engagement of their daughter, Miss Ann Monro, to Ensign Robert Addison Becker, U.S.N.R., son of Mr and Mrs.
She is a member of the Greater Boston Lasell Club, of which she is secretary.
MISS ANN MONRO They are both graduates of Winchester High School, class of 1956.
Miss Monro was graduated from Colby College in 1960, and from the Katharine Gibbs School of Boston in 1961.
Ensign Becker was graduated from Dartmouth College in 1960, and from the Amos Tuck School of Business Administration in 1961.
Two By Fours Announce Plans For New Quartet The Two By Fours, Winchester’s eight-year-old male singing group, announced plans this week to organize a new male quartet, in Addition to the present double quartet that has proven so popular in the area.
The new group will be made up of four singers not now in the organization.
Two By Four arrangements will be available to the quartet, which will plan its own appearances.
Auditions will be held October 23 at 8:30m., at 11 Wildwood Street. — ANNOUNCEMENT — \\ e have received numerous requests for our Fabulous Buffet I bis will be served on riiursduy and Saturday evenings in our Dining Room.
Quality Footwear for men, women and children since 1 II 6 B Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15 in. to 5:30m.
Infant Saviour Guild Plans Tea The members of the Guild of the Infant Saviour and their guests are anticipating an interesting tour and tea at the Gore Place in Waltham on Wednesday, October 18, at 1:30m.
Anyone desiring reservations should communicate with a member of the committee.
BENJAMIN CACI Miss DeMinico was given in marriage by her brother, John F DeMinico.
She wore a gown of white peau de soie with a re-embroidered lace bodice fashioned with a scoop neckline and three-quarter sleeves.
Her draped skirt terminated in a court train and she wore a threetiered veil of French illusion caught to a crown of pearls.
She wore a dress of pink taffeta with a Sabrine neckline, scoop back and an inset waist having two bows at the back.
William Doherty of Stoneham, sister of the bridegroom; and Miss Charlotte De Rosa of Somerville, cousin of the bride, were bridesmaids.
They wore royal blue taffeta dresses like that of the honor attendant and carried cascades of yellow pompons.
DeMinico, mother of the bride, wore black chiffon with blending accessories and a corsage of fall flowers.
Caci, also wore fall flowers with her mink brown peau de soie gown and flowered hat.
William Caci of Winchester was his brother’s best man, and ushering were Michael DeMinico of Winchester, brother of the bride; Frank Rallo of Winchester, brother-in-law of the bride; and William Doherty of Stoneham, brother in law of the bridegroom; Robert Fioretti of Mansfield, cousin of the bridegroom Thomas Pecoraro of Everett and Robert Jones of East Boston.
John G Lindsey announces the engagement of her daughter Elinor to Joseph Neville of Roxbury, son of Mr and Mrs.
Christopher A Powers of 37 Pond Street announce the engagement of their daughter.
Arthur Hydren of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Laconia N.H., formerly of Belmont.
MISS ELINOR LINDSEY Miss Lindsey is a graduate of Winchester High School class of 1960 and at present is a secretary at John Hancock M utua l Life Insurance Company.
Charles R Fish of 20 Myrtle Street announces the engagement of her daughter, Martha Louise Fish to Jack Everett Moore, son of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Fish, also the daughter of the late Mr Charles R Fish was graduated from Becker Junior College in 1960 and is presently employed at the Lahey Clinic in Boston.
Her fiance, who is corpsman in the United States Navy, is now stationed in Bermuda.
Waltz Evening Tomorrow And Saturday Sounds of gaiety and merriment this Friday and Saturday evenings will emanate from the “Castle on Mt.
Vernon” when the Friends of the Winchester Hospital and their friends enjoy the long-awaited Waltz Evening.
Readers of the Star must certainly be aware by now that this dance, which directly benefits the Winchester Hospital, promises to be one of the most beautiful of the entire social season.
At this printing, there may still be a few reservations available by calling Mrs.
A list of patrons and patronesses and of dinner parties being given before Waltz Evening may be found elsewhere in the Star.
MISS ALINE POWERS Miss Powers is employed by Goodrich-High Voltage Astronautics, Inc., of Burlington.
The Fall meeting of the Friends of the Winchester Hospital will be held at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church in Winchester on Thursday, October 26th.
The meeting commencing at 3:00m., will be dedicated to the “Candy Stripers”, the junior volunteers who worked so faithfully at the hospital during the past year.
Harry P Hood, Jr., Progam Chairman, has planned a most interesting meeting.
Awards will be presented to these volunteers, there will be a brief program including slides on PDo’s and Dont’s” for volunteers, after which a special social hour will be held for the young people.
Some “bargain” sheets are treated with ail exeessive amount of sizing to give them bod\ and crispness.
When they are laundered, ihi* filler goes down the drain and you re in for a sad awakening.
I he 17-day Thrift Tours to Europe, including the round-trip air fare, begin as low as S439.00.
COUNTERSPY, Herbert PHILBRICK Will Be In Winchester Next Thursday, October 19th HERBERT PHILBRICK LED THREE LIVES, Counterspy, Citizen. iiikI Pseudo-Communist.
ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 deel 5~tf FLOORS CARPENTERS Home Repairs & Remodeling Carpentry, Complete Additions, Kitchens, Roofs, Gutters, Painting, Plastering & Masonry.
WElls 5-0169 augl2-tf CONTRACTORS FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTORS Established 1914 Bulldozing — Excavating Driveways — Roads Landscaping — Trucking Loam, sand, gravel, crushed stone, shrubs Tel.
Bulldozer — Shoveldozer Cellar Excavating — Grading PArkview 9-5067 — 9-1531 augl2-tf DRESSMAKING ALTERATIONS See this number jot it down.
WILLIAM BUTTS 10 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 *t5-4t ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
HIGHEST CASH PRICES Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Rugs, also Rubbish Removal.
PA 9-2835 apr6-tf PAINTING — PAPERING Borgeson & Gustafson PAINTING & DECORATING Interior & Exterior FREE ESTIMATES WE 3-6069 BR 2-3437 auyrlt-tf PAINTING — PAPERING James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 angrl2-tf PIANOS PIANO CARE Tuning — Reconditioning Organa and Players Complete Rebuilding Clinton Jonas PArkview 9-0785 angl2-tf PICTURE FRAMING |j Picture J Framing i at 5 Winslow Press 5 2A Mt.
Gall a 3-4 PA 9FOR SALE FOR SALE— 1960 Ford Galnxi*. 4-door hardtop, powor st*M*ring. now tiri*s and battery F.xrMlont condition.
Call PA 9-341 R FOR SALE — 1953 DeSoto nedan. good engine. goo<l Urea niul n«w aparo. plua 2 anow Urea.
Call PA 9-1299, WANTED— Ride to ~r 7 Rillerle* for 7 :3<)m. t« Call PA 9-28H0 after 5:39.
Do you hnv a ln'ii to uiit a family with 3 children Former resident returning to Winchester wishes to buy.
Owner please Call PA 9-0141 HELP WANTED WANTED Woman to rk> afternoon and evening habyaitting.
WANTED High school girl to do baby sitting afternoons and evemings, Call PA 9-1292.
Hus pushbutton control, automatic clock timer. nt»console light, glass oven door and storage drawer.
FEMALE HELP WANTED Dental as slstant-secretary, part-time, Wincheate Mature |K»rson preferred.
FEMALE HELP WANTED -A vary in tereating opening for a good nocrvtary who likes a variety of duties and meeting the public.
F’or interview will EX 6-&054. oct5-2t FEMALE HELP WANTED— Office position in executive office of the Corporation Candidate must be excellent typiBt and like detailed record keeping, 35 hour work week, 3 weeks paid vacation. paid holidays.
Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, gravel, brick, all types, flue liners, drain pipe, cesspool o overs, fireplace dampers, cleanout doors, ash dumps and heatilators.
WEUs 50570. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants.
WORK WANTED WANTED — Experienced woman would like part-time office position or will do typing at home and call for and deliver work.
FOR SALE — Christmas display, all colaatlc. life size reindeer, large Santa and sleigh, large manger and nativity scene Gothic window and angels, organ and choir boy’s with stand, bulbs, strings ant) star.
Call PA 9-6285. octl2-4t FOR RENT — Professional office space with parking on grounds, central location.
Call WElls 3-2334. »ep21-tf MUSIC LESSONS — For Trumpet or Cornet lessons, contact Bob Mingolelli, PA 9-1625. oct6-2t WANTED — Work doing cooking and cleaning for 3 or 4 days it week.
SEWING MACHINE SERVICE SEWING MACHINE SERVICE— Eleotric Sewing Machine Repair Service.
All makus including Japanese manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United Status and all Over The World ran be made at tariff rates by railing your Authorized Travel Agent.
I<et uh know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out with you.
Our professional aervices discourage burglark's as well os maintaining neat and proper care of your property.
Travelers Home Service. aug3-tf commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persona interested in the estate of CHARLES W KELLEY late of Winchester in Mid County, d<*ceasod.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a eortain instrument purporting to be the last will of naid deceased by LOUIL C KELLEY of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that ahe be uppointo«l executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, Baquire, First Judge of sold Court, this seventh day of September 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. sep28-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
A petition has been presented to aaid Court, for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said d«*ceus«»d by ALICE E YOUNG of Winchester in the County of Miiblb-sex praying that she he appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her liond.
To all persons interested in the estate of MABEL L VINTON late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ROLAND R CARTER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex pray ing that he be appointed executor thereof without giving a surety on his bond.
John V Harvey, Register. oct5-3t DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use.
WEUs 8-0052. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS READING IMPROVEMENT Classes— 6th through 12th grade students, Saturday mornings.
For further information call Medford Reading Center EX 6-6321 or WA 3-0332.
Call PA i 3132. octl2-3t UPRIGHT PIANO, fair condition, anti stool may be hud for the moving.
FOR KENT — Furnished apartment, fireplaced living room, bedroom, kitchen, full bath, and garage.
Call Ml 6-6250. octO-tf FOR RENT — 2nd floor.-rm. apt., flrepluced living room, screened poroh and sun porch.
WEUs 3 1947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker 1 There is a way out.
The administratrix of said estate htfiH presented to said Court her first account for allowance and a petition for distribution of the balance in her hands.
WINCHESTER SAVINGS BANK Knlph W Hatch, Treasurer sep28-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES SHERMAN KENNEDY, also known as JAMES S KENNEDY and J SHERMAN KENNEDY late of Winchester in said County. decea«ed.
A petition has been presented to said Court for prolxate of a certain instrument purporting to he the last will of said desi-sed by LOTTIE G KENNEDY of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
John V Harvey, Register. oct5-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
Northeasterly by Englewood Road, sixty-eight and 50/100 feet: Southeasterly by Lot B on said plan, ninetyfour and 66/100 feet ; Southwesterly by land <xf Franklin Pynn and land of Theresa C MePai*tland, sixty-eight and 51/100 feet; Northwesterly by land of James T and Catherine L McMullin, ninety-five and 59/100 feet.
The said premises will be Bold subject to all unpaid taxes, tax titles, assessments. and other municipal liens.
Vernon Street, Winchester, Massachusetts. sep28-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
To all t>erson* interested in the estate of JAMES SIDNEY ALLEN, also known as JAMES S ALLEN late of W i n Chester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the Inst will of :<akl deceased by BRADLEE K GAGE of Amherst in the County of Hampshire and SANEORI) T ABKLK of <Slou.-r.st, , in tho County of Essex pmying that they be Appointed executors thereof without giving a surety on their bonds.
Esquire, First Judge ,»f aaid Court, this twenty -eighth duy of September 1901.
Oscar E Merrow, Secretary oct6-8t TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS September 18, 1961 The undersigned being the owner of a single family residence building and store numbered 60 Harvard Street, located in a general residence district established by the Zoning By-Laws, hereby makes application for permission to alter the house for two-family use.
That a public hearing be held thereon in the ottice of the Building Commissioner, 9 Mt.
By the Board of Appeal Gilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V French Daniel T Chane COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, bs.
Probate Court, To all persona interested in the estate of GRACE S BANCROFT late of Winchester In »Aid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to aaid Court for probate of u certain Instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARION BANCROFT and VINCENT P CLARKE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that they be appointed executors thereof without giving a surety on their bonds.
John C Leggat, Esquire, Firat Judge of 9aid Court, this twentieth day of September 1961.
TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS October 2, 1961 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add a room to existing dwelling numbered 66 Grove Street, locating the same less than fifteen feet from the lot line.
But, where prolonged and/or special treatment is necessary, today’s fees plus associated bills could upset even a foresighted family’s budget.
There’s where banks, such as ours, come in— with Personal Loans to meet medical costs.
Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Learn By Looking “IIow To Keep Ahead of Your Kids” might be the title of a new publication of the American Petroleum Institute.
Actually, it’s a free Guide to the Zoos, Museums and Aquariums within easy driving distance of your home.
One of the best ways to satisfy youngsters’ thirst for new knowledge is to make frequent trips to the nearby museums, zoos and aquariums.
There’s a wealth of zoological, archaeological and historical lore, as well as just plain fun, right within automobile reach of your home.
A key to these fascinating and rewarding sources of knowledge for your children, and you, is the Guide to Zoos, Museums and Aquariums in your locality.
Finger In The Pie Moving Day Internationally Speaking After you watch the crowd at a hockey game when the referee makes a close decision against the home team, you have some idea of the problem of world peace.
What this country needs is a man who can be right and President at the same time.
Shelters are a pitiful token of our optimism that We might be able to survive another war, and at the same time a pitiful token of our pessimism that we cannot prevent war, andust therefore prepare for it.
Annual Meeting The Annual Meeting of the Winchester Co-operative Bank for the election of Directors anti Clerk will be held in the banking rooms November 6, 1961 at 2:00 P.M An amendment to the by-laws relative to the signing of checks will be voted upon.
Morris B Kerr, Clerk JOHN B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED” HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage at Less Cost 1 Mt.
The spring from which Spring Lane took its name disappeared long ago, and unless it rains there is little water on Water Street.
The beacon that named Beacon Street has vanished into the misty past; there is neither fort nor hill at Fort Hill Square no dock at Dock Square, no corn on Cornhill, no school on School Street, and the beach is a long, long walk from Beach Street.
It is said that cities are remembered by their streets, and if a street is known far and wide then is the city.
But streets are famous for other reasons, too; sometimes it is an individual; in one case, at least, a character of fiction.
Baker Street is synonymous with Sherlock Holmes and his garrulous companion, Dr.
As Downing Street holds the future of England, so Wall Street symbolizes the wealth of America.
Here in Boston, Tremont Street stands for Boston Common, the bright lights of the theatres, and the long array of shops.
Harrison Avenue to the initiated means Chinatown and its restaurants, where almond-eyed Orientals serve chop suey and other supposedly Chinese dishes never heard of in their native land.
Charming old Cornhill still remains the center of the secondand book trade, intriguing the asser-by’s interest with rows of books and heaps of old magazines placed outside the doors.
Back in 1701 Bromfield Street was called Rawson’s Lane, but it didn’t take.
The authorities tried Cushing’s Lane, then Hoar Lane and finally named it Bromfield, af ter Edward Bromfield who lived there.
Mr Bromfield, it seems, was a most devout man who, in order to worship in private, built an ora tory or small chapel there, whither he would retire several times Photo by Ry^rnon MOVING DAY \\ AS Y\ Kl IUESDAY when tin' School Administration offices moved from Main Street up to the new Lynch Junior High School on Brant wood Road.
Harry V Gilson, superintendent. and Richard Desjarlais, assistant superintendent, were among the first to arrive early in the morning.
By the end of the day the whole stair and many loads of files and materials had made the change. day.
Today, grove, pasture, oratory and owner are gone, but his name seems destined to live.
Its old name of Savage’s Court failed to survive, but it onee gloried under the cognomen of Pie Alley.
Here, fifty years ago, Henry’s Hole in the Wall featured a savory meat pie.
Here later Gridley’s Restaurant was succeeded by Thompson's Spa, both of whom served luscious pie.
For many years there was in this little alley a pleasant tavern called the Bell-in-Hand, a favorite resort of printers and typesetters who worked nearby.
In printing plants a considerable amount of loose type, often of different styles and sizes, will become thoroughly mixed up.
One thing is certain — in this old ale house that amazing raconteur John Savage Shaghellion, used to hide behind yesterday’s newspaper with one eye on the bartender and the other on the door, hoping against hope that someone would come in and buy him a drink.
When his thirst was assuaged, he was most likely to comb the cheese out of his whiskers, order another half mug of ale, and spin yarn af ter yarn in true sailor fashion.
Form New Advertising Firm Robert W Reynolds, formerly of Winchester, announces the formation of Reynolds and Foster, Inc., a new agency specializing in advertising, sales promotion and related communications activities.
PA.9-0654 INStl AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY PIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS -JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET Rea.
PArkriew 9-1062 FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
EX 5-1317 O'BRIEN'S LIQUOR MART 2153 Mystic Valley Parkway Medford, Mass.
A hospital superintendent had cautioned the nurses against discussing tl^e merits of the staff doctors in the presence of others.
Soon after the lecture he heard one of the nurses answering a phone call from a man whose wife needed hospital care.
The man evidently asked if there were doctors connected with the hospital.
A man was carrying a grandfather’s clock down a crowded main street to a repair shop.
As the clock limited his vision, he unintentionally collided with a woman, knocking her down.
ROBERT W REYNOLDS The agency, located at 8 Newbury Street, Boston, is organized on a functional basis with Mr Reynolds heading the Marketing and Contact group and Mr Foster in charge of Creative and Marketing Services.
Both Mr Reynolds and Mr Foster were recently with the Sutherland Abbott Agency in Boston.
He is past president of the New England Chapter of the American Marketing Association and served as Director of the local chapter of the Association of Industrial Advertisers.
Inipalus, Bel Airs and Biscaynes . . rieli new styling with jet-smooth ride.
MIRAK’S REPUTATION IS > Ol R PROTECTION Every sale is hacked by Mirak’s 28-year reputation for honest dealing and quality service.
Meet the entire Chevy family for 1962 al Mirak's hliowrooms in 1 1 ic* heart of Arlington Center.
Ave., Arlington Center Mission 3-8000 Pingree Attended Mr Ralph H Pingree of 50 Allen Road, attended the monthly meeting of the National Office Management Association held at the Boston Club, Beacon Hill, Boston on Thursday evening, September 28.
The guest speaker was Mr William McCarthy of Associated Industries of Massachusetts, who spoke to the chapter members on the New Wage and Hour Law.
Mr Pingree is budget director for the Boston Insurance Company in Boston and is also active in the Institute of Internal Auditors and the National Society for Business Auditing.
Hospital Volunteer Training Program A special Volunteer Training I^*o gram for hospital volunteers, sponsored by Friends of the Winchester Hospital, will he held at the Wyman School in Winchester on Tuesday, October 24th.
Richard J Clark, president of I the hospital staff, Miss Marjorie j Snyder, director of r*irses, and Mr ; Reese James, hospita 1 administrator.
This meeting is most highly recommended, and 10O per cent attendance by all Winchester Hospital volunteers is sincerely hoped for.
Josephine La wore of Nigeria will speak to the families of the First Congregational Church on Sunday, October 15 at 4:30m.
They’re available in the 3 styles shown here ... in a wide choice of colors.
Vo# Yvt Vuhlii Philbrick Speaks On Reds Here Tonisrht Reorganization Of Town Hall Recommended By Consultant Reorganizing Town Mall clerical and administrative procedures toward a more aibject of a discussion at Town Ft all Monday night between special systems consult; A inchester Methods and Procedure Committee. use of personnel and equipment was M Sinclair of Bentley College and Tickets will be available at the door of the Winchester High School auditorium for Herbert Philbrick’s talk here at 8:15m. tonight.
Mr Philbrick’s talk, “Techniques for Combatting Communism,” will be presented under the auspices of the Women’s Republican Club.
Mr Philbrick gave up his family life and a promising career in advertising to join the anti-CommunHe shook the founCommunism nathe Justice nine eport affect the General Services Department, the office of the Town * of lice of the 1 rca.su rer and Collector of Paxes.
The report, informais expected to be made public within approximately ten days.
At the meeting were Chairman of the Committee Rae D Anderson, Mr Arthur R Hills, and Mr R Ashley Lewis, committee members.
Shortly after they concluded their East Room meeting, the committee and Mr Sinclair went upstairs to the Selectmen’s chamber to discuss it with the board.
Mr Sinclair Photo by Hyeraon Highway Department truck was agon was toppled over on its side Herman E Soule of Lexington, lacked up to put down his auto n an attempt to avoid hitting d by the Highway Department lie ear to extricate him.
Soule was rescuer ew, one of whom smashed the windshield of tl inchester Hospital by a passing motorist before the pol X-rayed for possible rib fracture, $500.
Regional Planning Discussion ear Eleven Winchester High School seniors have been honored for high performance in the National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test given in Winchester last Spring.
William Gordon, formerly of Ardley Place, now moved to Rockville, Maryland.
No Decision commissioned was by the Methods and Procedures Committee to study Winchester Town Hall office and clerical procedures in the summer of 1961, after the town meeting of March 1961, appropriated $2,000 for the study.
The Methods and Procedures Committee, a permanent group, was itself authorized by the regular town meeting of March, 1960, to serve in an advisory capacity on procedures at town hall both to town meeting and to various town departments.
The report received by the Methods and Procedures Committee from Mr Sinclair and discussed for the first time on Monday night was described as 70 pages long and highly technical.
It is reported that the Methods •unmittee hopes to meet with the Financ He shows in his lectures techniques whereby Communists infiltrate “worthy groups” or fake organizations with high sounding names for their own purposes.
Philbrick now operates a country store in New Hampshire, where he lives with his wife, five daughters and son.
He now f has time to indulge in his hobbies of photography and his home workshop and to play his Hammond organ.
November 20 is the probable date for the Special Town Meeting that will be asked to appre ate at least $11,000 to complete the furnishing of the new Lynch Junior High School on Brantv Road.
The Lynch Junior High School Building Committee has a balance of $9,000 left in its accc whereas some $20,000 is needed.
S Building Comm had not presented its list of iinal and specific expenses to the Selectmen, who cannot call the T Meeting until they k The Board of Sel< need High School Changes System Of Warning About Grades Great God Brown Opens New Season At The Charles Committee to discuss the report on November 6.
The report itself is divided into two parts, one describing existing procedures, the other recommending various changes in procedure.
The Star will report in greater detail on its contents when they are made available by the Methods Committee.
In a continuing effort to place responsibility for their action on the students themselves, the High School is experimenting thi week with a new academic grade warning system, Principal \\ Howard Niblock announces.
The Charles Playhouse opened its fifth season this week, did battle with Eugene O’Neill’s “The Great God Brown,” and lost.
The Charles had the talent, but O’Neill had obscurity, and in the theater the first inevitably bows to the last.
If you are hard put to determine why competent young actors like Dora Landey, Mitch Ryan, and Bronia Stefan are unable to provide first-rate theater, you’ve forgotten your early O’Neill.
But these bright young people are staging one of O’Neill’s most tiresome and heavy-handed plays, awash in a sea of contrived symbolism, pseudo-classicism, and one-a-minute messages.
NEW SEASON, continued page 8 Heretofore, students whose midterm grades were below passing or unsatisfactory have been sent home with cards to be signed by their parents and returned.
Beginning this week the students in this category will be given a sheet which advises them of their poor work in a given subject and which includes a description of the problem by the teacher.
It requests the students’ signature only but does suggest that parent-teacher conferences “often” are helpful in this situation.
WARNING, continued on page 7 j football team, Retiring thief Moffett Feted 25th Reunion At Belmont Hill list of additional expenses from the Lynch building committee some time this week.
It is understood that the list will include expenditures for building fences around the well sites on school property and various hooks and furnishings.
A dinner was given last Friday evening for one of this town’s most civic-minded citizens.
His name is Joe Moffett; and the occasion was in recognition of his retirement as active chief of the Winchester Auxiliary Police.
He has been actively connected with this organization since the critical days before World War II and has given unstintingly of his time and money to make it the finest unit of its type in the state.
When Joe took the office of auxiliary chief back in ’58 his steps made a more positive stride in the direction of fulfilling his fondest dream, that the auxiliary force would be second to none.
At this time Joe can sit back and watch with pride and confidence as the unit progresses in the capable hands of our new auxiliary chief, Fred Wier.
To you, Joe Moffett, every man extends his heartfelt thanks and will strive to earn your future respect and guidance.
Richard G Snell and their four children, recently returned to the States after spending two years in Taranto, Italy.
The variance is necessary because the site on which it is proposed to build comprises land in the heavy and light industrial districts and in the general residence district.
Zoning regulations forbid the erection of convalescent or nursing homes in light industrial and general residence districts.
There is a question whether in this instance the zoning restriction would apply to the land in the heavy industrial district.
John S Morgan, Jr., of Church Street is acting as attorney for Mr Carver and told the Star that his client is now operating nursing homes elsewhere and is planning a chain of such establishments to include the one he hopes to build in Winchester.
This is to he an attractive two and one-half story brick building of 82 bed capacity.
There is in Winchester no social organization devoted to the general interests of the men in this town.
The Men’s Club organized at the First Congregational Church has been functioning for many years with programs of this character.
Several years ago this club adopted the Hancock plan so successful in Lexington, wherein a single fee covers the expense of meals served at the seven scheduled meetings and the dues necessary to operate a club of this Honor Mrs.
Master of C eremonies ( a the affair and immediately cal let in vocal ion.
Frongillo then explained the meaning of Columbus Day and the experiences met by Christopher Columbus in discovering the New World.
First to be called upon by the M.C. was the chairman of tin* Board of Selectmen, Sherman W Saltmarsh.
Mr Saltmarsh extended the best wishes of the Town to Winchester’s Sons of Italy Organization and congratulated it on its wonderful home and worthwhile undertakings.
In closing Mr SaltMeeting At Vinson-Owen School On Shelters for Nuclear Attack the chairman of the committee making plans for this most successful banquet.
Chairman Robert Fiore expressed that he* was happy to make arrangements and thanked the entire Sons of Italy membership for the tine cooperation and support.
Chairman Fiore then thanked the members of the committee which worked diligently for the banquet and finally asked the following members of the committee to stand and be recognized, Carmine Frongillo, William Fiore, Joseph Paonessa, Richard Penta, Randolph Kazazian, Frank Dattilo, Pat Bruno and Nick Kunzio.
A meeting designed to better inform the people of Winchester on civil defense problems will be held at the Vinson-Owen School, Johnson Road, on Thursday evening, October 26.
Civil Defense Agency, Natick will present the Shelter and Home Preparedness Course which includes films, models of shelters, samples of foods, and other articles necessary for survival.
Mias Lanigun has been asked to discuss school safety in the event of a nuclear attack.
It is felt that this program will answer questions in the minds of all of us as to how wc can best protect our families in an emergency.
Mr Theodore Boecker, director of Civil Defense for Winchester, and Mrs.
Philip Woodward of the federal Civil Defense Headquarters in Harvard, Mass, also plan to attend.
Friends Camelot Ball Gala Success WHSR Presents WHSR-FM, Winchester High School Educational Radio, at 91. megacycles on the FM band, begins its sixth year of broadcasting on October 23.
Due to a lack of commercial advertising, WHSR is able to provide its listening audience with many interesting and informative discussions by well-known specialists on our government, science, and schools.
In addition to these discussions, which are generally inaccessible to the public, WHSR presents good music, the latest news — campus, local, and worldwide, unique and informative special events, plus a complete and exciting coverage of all home sports games.
On Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday mornings “Wake Up Winchester” is on hand at seven to begin the day right.
Monday and Thursday afternoons at three bring you “Tops in Tunes” the best semiclassical, jazz, and even folk music highlighted by news.
Two hours of classical “Music from the Masters” makes Wednesday afternoons at four thoroughly stimulating.
Tuesday WHSR becomes alive on your dial at four with a host of the latest news to keep Winchester well informed, and fine music from Album Showcase.
At five the National Educational Association presents “Parents Ask About Schools” highlighting vital questions on timely school subjects.
The Reader’s Digest Freedom Foundation “All America Wants To Know” presents, at 5:35, Air Force Chief of Start 1 , General Curtis LeMay, discussing Is America Safe From Surprise Attack with questions from Senator Barry Goldwater, Arthur Godfrey,, and Marguerite Higgins.
After the latest news, as dinner begins at 0:15, so does relaxing and enjoyable music fit for the hour.
At seven, “Men and Molecules” is presented by the American Chemical Society and highlights towards the conquest of Cancer and Heart Disease by Dr.
If you are unable to attend any of the home football games, don’t miss any of the exictement by tuning in WHSR for an accurate play by play account beginning at 1:25 m.
There is the new r WHSR for 1961 -(12 with a larger and more varied program ready to serve you entertainingly and educationally always.
Diegelman gave a summary of the business discussed at the New Bedford meeting.
The next meeting of Mu Chapter will be held on December 6 at the Country Club.
Delia Mares, author of the recently published book, “Know Your Enemy,” an historical analysis of communism.
Knights and their beautiful ladies, fair damsels selling flowers, gallant page boys, not-so-wander[ ing minstrels, all enlivened a glittering scene last week end at The Camelot Ball.
The tenth annual Waltz Evening sponsored by the Friends of the Winchester Hospital was held at the Winchester Town Hall on Friday and Saturday evenings, October 13 and 14.
Manning C Morrill, this year’s chairman, Waltz Evening proved to be a tremendous success.
Proceeds from the dance are always Used by the Friends for gifts to the Winchester Hospital.
The Town Hall was transformed by a hardworking and artistic committee into a scene of medieval beauty.
Flags with heraldic crests lined the balconies, and every wall depicted parapets and battlements of ancient castles.
One wall contained a comment-provoking mural of knights jousting in tournament, and the stage was flanked by twin figure* of heralds blowing beautiful trumpets, a fitting setting for Sammy Eisen and his orchestra who provided music throughout the evening for the dancers.
Special lighting fixtures of gold which reproduced those found in King Arthur’s court added a final footnote of beauty.
On each table, the name of host and hostess was indicated by placards with Old English let tering.
Attractive flower girls wearing tall wimpled hats mingled with the guests during the evening selling corsages with lucky num hers attached.
Serving as judges on Friday were Mr Richard Champagne of the Champagne School of Dancing and Mr and Mrs.
On Saturday, the judges were Mr Russell Curry and his charming mother, Mrs.
Edwin Nelson, Jr., last year’s third place Friday winner, who graciously substituted at the eleventh hour for last year’s winner who was ill.
Horley each received as their prizes silver Paul Revere bowls suitably inscribed, which were donated both nights by Mouradian Rug Galleries.
Each lady also received bouquets of two dozen long-stemmed roses, given again this year by Forester Flower Shops.
Horley. were presented with sterling silver key chains, also inscribed, compliments of Winchester Jewelers.
The gentlemen also received as gifts from Chitel’s Men’s, Boys’ and Ladies* Shops, wool plaid sport hats.
Mr Birchall and Mr Pywell received a bottle of rare imported French armagnac from the Kirsten Travel Agency and i “Camelot” album from Winchester Appliance.
Sheppard Holt were third place winners on Friday night, and on Saturday Mr and Mrs.
Mr Holt won a $5 gift certificate from Winchester Hardware and Paint, and Mr Nigro was presented a $5 gift certificate from Keenan’s Service Station.
Both gentlemen received packages of golf balls from the Winchester Sport Shop.
The Friends wish to thank the above merchants for their generous contributions.
They also wish to express their appreciation to the Arnold Fisher Rose Growers of Woburn, who contributed flowers for the many beautiful corsages which were sold, and to Mr Forester for instructions in the art of corsage making.
Cigarettes were donated by the Atlantic Food Mart and Willis Pharmacy, both of Reading.
Charles Company, also of Reading, donated number tags for the corsages.
The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very grateful to the many generous individuals and concerns who helped make Waltz Evening a success.
Lists of Waltz Evening committees and also of Patrons and Patronesses not yet printed may be found elsewhere in this issue of the Star.
Thanks From Homefronters The Winchester Homefronters wish to thank everyone who helped make our Tag Day such a sue-, cess.
Many thanks to Chief Derro for the use of the Police Station as our headquarters.
Roger F McTighe, Mr Alan McLatchy, Mr Harry Pierce, David Schmink, and Mrs.
Tricia Buros, president; Joanne Hess, Jane Hess, Martha Dodge, Jackie Cartier, Nancy O’Neil, Linda Carter, Linda Amieo, Natalie Palmer, Judy Belliveau, Pat Overacker, Diana Kittridge, Chris Wilaghn, Ginny Scaturro, Patty Tofuri, and Pat McDonald.
Emmons S Ellis | F Rogers of New Bern, South Carolina. i i f Mr and Mrs.
Cathnrinfi Carroll of Winchester the birth of fourth child, first am , Mrs Alice Bcaton of Woburn, son, Emmons Stearns Ellis, Jr. on < October 13th at the Winchester ,, 1 / 1 , Hospital.
Sept., Miss Barbara Jane ZachSeptember 2b at the Winchester 1 ’ _ Jj^endon — <L~achcud (^Ldtrom — ^J^loJadon dison Avenue, Winchester and Mr and Mrs.
Russc Street, Orlando, Florida announce the birth of a fourth child, third daughter, Carolyn Joan, Septem| her 10 at the Orange Memorial Hospital.
Morris Kwnounce the birth of a son, Russell. alt of Carlsbad, California.
Richard Coakley announce the birth of a dauphter, Laura Jeanne, on October 5 at the Winchester Hospital.
W Prescott Keyes of 5 Governors Avenue announce the birth of a son, John Prescott, on Thursday October 12.
Charles R Klemetsen of Cutler Ridpe, Florida, announce the birth of a dauphter, Deborah Elizabeth, at the South Miami Hospital on October 3.
James Noble Clark, formerly of Winchester, now of Coral Gables, Florida.
Russell E Davis of Phoenix, Arizona, and the paternal preat-prandmother is Mrs.
Bonnie | Local Men Spark Building Drive Two Winchester residents had a leadinp role in the recently announced plans of Dickie-Raymond, Inc., to build a $1,000,000 mailinp plant and office buildinp on Morrissey Boulevard.
Robert W Raymond is treasurer and buildinp committee chairman of the direct advertisinp and sales promotion firm which will move into its new buildinp next fall.
Announcement of the project was made in the office of Boston Mayor John F Collins, and coincided with DickieRaymond's 40th anniversary.
Others present included Georpe J Zahka, DickieRaymond’s executive vice president, and Vincent Vappi of the Vappi Development Company.
The firm’s two-story buildinp will house what Raymond described as the country’s most modern mailinp facilities, and office space for the company’s creative and sales staffs.
Fred R Zachcus of 15 Lockcland Road, became the bride of Neil Gunnar Benson, son of Mr and Mrs, Gunnar S Benson of Attleboro.
Whiteand pold flowers decorated the Andover-Newton Chapel in Newton, Aupust 26, for the mar* riape of Miss Mildred Katherine Hodgson, dauphter of the late Mr and Mrs.
William B Hodpson of Malden, and Mr James Verner Ekstrom, son of Mr and Mrs.
The eandlelipht ceremony was followed by a reception at the bride’s home.
NEIL G BENSON The four o’clock eandlelipht ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Given in mar'riape by her father, the bride wore a princess pown of ivory brocade, fashioned with a circlet neckline, elbow lenpth sleeves, a fitted bodice with small bows at the back and a sweepinp chapel train.
Her veil of family illusion fell from a lattice desipned juliet cap and she carried a bouquet of white Fuji chrysanthemums, orchids and stephanotis The bridal attendants were identically powned in pold taffeta dresses with square necklines, fitted bodice and sliphtly flared skirts.
Their hats were matchinp pillboxes and they carried semicascade bouquets of pold flowers.
The bridesmaids were Miss Joan Benson, sister of the brideproom; Miss Betty Jane Kittredpe of Lonpmeadow, Mrs.
William Morrison of Sprinpfield and Miss Marcia Zacheus of Belmont, cousin of the bride.
She wore a pold taffeta frock with an overlay of pold orpanza and carried a miniature colonial bouquet like those of the bridesmaids.
For her dauphter’s weddinp Mrs Zacheus wore an emerald preen satin sheath with matchinp hat and a corsape of white orchids.
Benson, the brideproom’s mother, was powned in an aqua satin sheath with matchinp pillbox hat and wore a corsape of bronze cymbidium orchids.
Rolf Benson of Attleboro was his brother’s best man and the ushers were John Richard Zacheus of Winchester, brother of the bride; and Bruce Johnson, Robert Johnson, Daniel Larson and Dale Worrell, all of Attleboro.
SEE TOWLE’S I N FI N ITELY ' BE AUTI FUt^ NEW STERLING PATTERN ""VESPERA"" AND REGISTER FOR TOWLE’S ""BRIDE OF THE YEAR” CONTEST TODAY I 1,025 PRIZES INCLUDING ^ $12,000 WORTH OF HONEYMOON \ MONEY AND LOVELY FURNISHINGS FOR YOUR HOME I There's nothing to buy . nothing to write.
Just come in end see ""Vesper***. the lovely new a contemporary sterling pattern ^5] in enduring solid silver by CC^r**^* Towle.
JAMES V EKSTROM Given in mar riape by Mr Lloyd Skiffinphton of Boston, the bride wore a princess pown of white taffeta re-embroidered with Alencon lace and a full skirt, terminatinp in a cathedral train.
Her finpertip veil of French silk illusion was eaupht to a circlet of oranpe blossoms and she carried an allwhite bouquet of roses, carnations and baby’s, breath.
Miss July Barrett of East Lynn, the maid of honor, wore a fulllength pown of turquoise silk with a matchinp headpiece.
Miss Linda Evans of South Boston and Miss Jo-Ann Farrell of Greenfield, the bridesmaids, wore identical rose-silk powns.
After a weddinp trip to Nova Scotia, the newlyweds left for Connecticut, where Mr Ekstrom is a teacher in the Stratford school system.
CuJ,, _ can Announcement is made of the marriapo on Saturday, October 7, of Miss Fontaine Deanna Dean, dauphter of Mr and Mrs.
Barnes to Manage New Wakefield Hotel on Lake A W inchester man has been unusually busy, the past few weeks, purchasing furniture, selecting clrajxvs and choosing the overall decor for the Lord Wakefield Motel, which is expected to open in December.
Idd jMJen clnaaaed So W, St Whss Waiter, W, Drictell C^ntjaijeJ Mr and Mrs.
Frederick Walker of Wallingford, Penna., announce the engagement of their dauphter, Miss Carole W’alker, to Mr Georpe A Trickett, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs.
Mr Trickett is a graduate of the Fay School of Southboro, and the Holderness School, Plymouth, New Hamp shire.
A spring weddinp is planned. o (^ncjacjenient • — non n cal Mr and Mrs.
Miss Scott is a praduate of the Winchester High School and the Chandler School for Women in Boston.
TOO LATE TO CLASSIFY FOR SAI.K National (i«*njrra|>hicH. 1940 lltHO. incluaivc anti complete.
Chester Whitcomb Alden of Portland, Maine and the late Mr Alden and of the late Mr and Mrs.
Miss Alden attended the Columbia and Harley Schools in Rochester and the Villa Mercede in Florence, Italy.
Roderick Fisher , who were married on October 7 in Oxford, N S., spent a week of their honeymoon in Winchester visiting Mrs.
She is a praduate of the Sprinphill Hospital Training School for Nurses.
Parent-Faculty Advisory Council Winchester parents and members of the community particularly concerned about recent trends in college placement will want to attend the meeting of the ParentFaculty Advisory Council on Wednesday, October 25, at 7:45 in the music room of the senior high school.
The theme for this important meeting — “A Progress Report on Collepe Placement” — comes at a time when the increasing demands for higher education make early decisions more necessary.
Miss M Constance Trickett and Mr Bernard J Silva, supervisors of guidance at the high school, will also participate in this discussion on collepe placement.
The Parent-Faculty Advisory Council invites the public to consider answers to such questions at the October 25 meeting.
After the formal presentations, the entire gathering will be divided into groups to give further specific direction to the topic under consideration.
The High School Parent-Faculty Association, an organization through which parents have been able to express their support of the Winchester schools, has provided opportunities for members of the community to meet with representatives from the faculty, has presented much valuable information and answered many questions at meetings such as that of the Parent-Faculty Advisory Council on October 25.
Paragraphs Newsy Firemen responded Thursday afternoon to a fire at 54 Canal Street, it the home of the Conlons.
A livnp room sofa was afire, a situation which local firefighters had under control in short order.
Paragon Candles, an unusual assortment of Bin. twists in attractive colors; also color-flow Fiesta candles that change color as they burn.
At 10:18m. last Friday Oftier Amico extinguished a fire on the awning of Renton’s Market.
Continuing his fine performance this season, Jack Seherban came within 34 seconds of the 15:01 course record.
Right on his heels was the second Sachem runner, Frank Johnson, who posted an identical time.
Winchester again showed team strength by keeping the top Woburn runner, John Hill, out of the first five places.
The fleet-footed Red and Black placed four runners under sixteen minutes.
Steve Dee and Dean Anderson continued their fine performances by placing third and fourth.
Dave Bird and Phil Gallagher held sixth and seventh spots for the Sachems.
Sophomore Gerry Hills, continuing his fine performance, outran Larry Harrington for top JV position.
He is owner of the Ocean Point Hotel in Boothbay Harbor, Me., and is a former manager and assistant manager of hotels in Boston and Philadelphia.
Coast Guard, Mr Barnes currently is a commander in the Coast Guard Reserve, attached to a Boston unit.
Mr Barnes is a member of the American Hotel Association, New England Hotel Association (of which he is a member of the board of directors), the New England Council and the First Congregational Church of Winchester.
Rezoning was necessary to accommodate the Lord Wakefield hotel and this was spearheaded by the Wakefield Chamber of Commerce and the Junior Chamber of Commerce, along with town officials, who pointed out in a special town meeting that the hotel will fill a hip pap in Wakefield’s physical needs.
Offering two public restaurants, the hotel has 64 rooms, is electrically heated and air conditioned.
The two-story building is of colonial design with a brick face and constructed of steel and aluminum.
The first of the two office buildings is now underway, with the pouring of the foundations, this week.
Georpe and Charles Whitten, who with a third brother, Bradford resident of Weston, are Winches ter residents.
The first office building is expect ed to be ready for occupancy in the spring of 1962.
Mr Hughes Feted A surprise birthday party was held for Leon D Hughes at 10A Winthrop Street on the occasion of his 71st birthday, October 8.
Lincoln Grindle of Laguna Beach, California, who has been attending medical meetings in Chicago, made a flying visit to his parents, Mr and Mrs.
BILLIE BAZAAR Says ""WE'VE MADE A SPECIAL PURCHASE HALLOWE EN GOODS OVER THE HEAD COSTUMES 13.00 Value $1.58 GIANT MASKS 38c G9c Value HARVEST SALE Starts Fri., Oct.
Ten boys received awards at, the year’s first pack meeting anti Cuhmaster Sam Putnam outlined the 1961-1962 program for hoys and their parents.
Parents sharing in pack leadership arc Sam Putnam, cuhmaster; Paul Donahue nnd Joseph Maspero, co-chairmen of the pack committee; George Blair and Lindsay Caldwell, assistant cuhmasters; John Laursen, treasurer; Edward Crabtree, publicity; Windsor Carpenter, rifle assistnant range director; Russell Strout and Robert Armstrong, Jr., committeemen.
Charles Papadinis, assistant den mother; Ernest Crabtree, William Everett, Peter Knight, Wayne Padula, Jack Papadinis, John Uccello.
Putnam, assistant den mother; Philip Maloney, Kim Putnam, Jeffrey Armstrong, Grant Nowell, Andrew Porter, John Laui*sen, Daniel Strout, Gerald Ulm.
James Sullivan, co-den mothers; Guy Randlett, James Sullivan, Richard Chandler, Richard Smethurst, John McGuigan, Ted Shasta.
Keith Doty, assistant den mothers; Keith E Doty, Andrew Fichera, James Ulwick, Stephen Everett, Joey Julian, James Mullare, Stephen LaPointe.
Windsor Carpenter, den mothers; Peter Wardwell, David M Carpenter, Craig Stockwell, Joseph Maspero, Jr., Edward Byers, Timmy Donahue, D Mark Fell.
J Paul Marcous, assistant den mother; John Sawyer, Forrest Rivinius, Andy Marcous, Geoffrey Blair, David White.
Donald Puffer, assistant den mother; David Hillman, Jeffrey Charles, Stephen Caldwell, Mark Holland, John Puffer, Allan Eyden Mark Stoeckle.
Ten boys who received awards at the October pack meeting were Ernest Crabtree, Billy Everett, Peter Knight and Wayne Padula, Lions; Jack Papadinis, Lion with one Gold Arrow; Jeff Blair, John Sawyer and David White, Wolf; Jeff Charles, Wolf with one Gold Arrow and two Silver Arrows; John Laursen, Bear.
Fifth graders who have achieved Lions awards at the time of the Blua and Gold Banquet will participate in rifle range activities beginning in February.
Giant Auction On Monday evening, October 30, there will be a giant auction, part of the 1961 Fiesta Fair, in Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church.
Ted Langdell, a live-wire auctioneer, will preside and there will be many excellent antiques, household items, appliances, bric-a-brac, etc., on the auction block.
Doors open at 7 for public inspection of the items, with bidding starting promptly at 7:30.
All are welcome — mark the date on your Red Letter Calendar — October 30.
On the basis of some figuring done by the Tnx Foundation, a non-profit organization, the cost locally is $1315,700 for each billion spent.
College Club Guest Night The 34th season of the Winches ter College Club got under way last Monday evening, October 16 with the annual Fa'll Guest Night.
That is tfie estimated amount j Coffee and mints were served by that must he met sooner or later by the town’s 5,900 families.
The Government may get this money through direct or indirect taxation, or by going into debt, which means reducing the value of the dollar, or by a combination of these methods.
The statisticians at the Tax Foundation find that each billion dollars of increase in Federal spending represents $19 to the average American family of four.
It ranges above and below that amount in individual communities, in relation to their income levels.
In other words, notes the report, a $1 billion spending increase takes money that each family could have used to buy an electric toaster or five LP records.
A $2 billion increase would take the amount that they might have used to purchase clock radios or power tool sets.
If a firm went into business at the time Christ was bom and proceeded to lose $1,000 every day from that time on, it would not yet have lost a billion dollars.
The Administration has stated that it expects to spend $88 billion in the current fiscal year, a record peacetime amount.
In terms of the average family in Winchester, based on the Tax Foundation’s estimates, this is equivalent to $2,024.
For the entire population locally, the bill comes to more than $11,941,000.
The biggest part of this $88 bil lion spending program is for national defense.
More money has been earmarked for domestic projects and civilian aid than ever before, Democratic Town Committee It is hoped that several members of the Town Committee and its associate group will make the trip to Lexington on Wednesday evening, October 25, to participate in an op en meeting which will be held at the Muzzey Junior High School, 1557 Massachusetts Avenue, in that town.
Invitations have been sent out by the hosts of next week’s meeting, Arthur J Brock, chairman, Lexington Democratic Town Committee, and Martin I Small, president, Lexington Democratic club.
This will be the first of four important meetings to be held in this series, all to take place in the same locale and under the same auspices.
The speakers who have been en gaged for these three provocative and enlightening meetings are, respectively, Attorney General Edward McCormack, Lieutenant Governor Edward McLaughlin and State Treasurer John Driscoll.
Elizabeth McDonald 10 Hill Street, PA 9-1460 Secretary John Hogan 38 Salem Street, PA 9-2514 Mrs.
Mary Serieka 3 Middlesex Street, PA 9-4153 David Saliba 14 Oxford Street I A 9-0808, and Mrs.
Prize Winner In Flip Talk Contest Marcia E Ayer of 70 Hemingway Street was among the 18 Massachusetts winners in the recently concluded nationwide Vaseline Hair Tonic “Flip Tulk” Contest.
Contestants were required to describe in 25 words or less “What Vaseline Hair Tonic Means to Me” in teen jargon.
A typical entry read, “Since tuning in on this Vaseline bit, raunchy, goopy, wrong-o hair did a fade-out.
Rummage Sale Postponed The Guild of the Infant Saviour Rummage sale which was scheduled for Tuesday October 24 at K of C Hall has been postponed and will take place on a future dale.
Donald J Friteh and her com mittee for a pleasant social inter ludo, following which Mrs.
Speaking on the topic “Broadcasting 1961 he made his listeners aware of the problem faced by a broadcaster in trying to satisfy the broadest pos sible segment of the listening public.
In tracing the history of broad casting, Mr O’Friel amused his audience by relating that in the early days, his own station was run by the plant manager and the office boy in their after-work hours.
But as the popularity of ra dio grew, the necessity for assigned broadcasting frequencies became more and more evident.
The pro blem was how to make best use of the new medium and still not al low it to be completely under gov ernment cotrol.
In the best American democratic tradition, the answer evolved was freedom under licensing.
This solution has worked so well that today broadcasting reaches more people, at their own invitation, than has any other means of communication in history.
The speaker went on to empha size that the public must exercise its right of choice in order to make this mass medium effective.
It is not necessary to qtrengtben gov eminent control to achieve desired programming; the competitive ele ment of the industry works toward the same end.
The broadcaster must learn to know and trust the public he serves, reach a rapport with it, then give it a good blend of the type of programs it wants even if this includes the rock and roll at which so many adults groan.
Apart from its entertainment function, radio has a unique role to fill in the instantaneous report ing of ""local news.
Lightweight portable, electronic equipment to day makes timely presentation of the news a fact of life.
Mr O’Friel touched on the com plex problems that need to be translated in order that the public may see, hear, and understand.
He stressed also that radio and television must be put into proper perspective as mirrors of our present day society.
Mr O’Friel concluded by emphasizing that the viewer is needed by the broadcaster to bring in the new era which can come, the new era of public enlightenment, education, and improvement.
Since this is the only money making project of the year spoil sored by the Parents’ Association, the group hopes that the enthusiastic support given the dance in the past will be equalled or even surpassed this year.
Robert Tesar, dance chairman, and her committee are completing plans for a gala evening complete with a European cafe atmosphere, door prizes, corsages for the ladies, und featuring music by Roger Carpenter and the favorite Meltones.
Get your ticket now from the ticket mother of your child's class, or phone Mrs.
Frongillo then presented the Venerable of the Men’s Lodge, Frank “Boss” Dattilo who congratulated chairman Robert Fiore and his committee for such a successful banquet.
He was also happy to see ho many of his members supporting this function and others held throughout the year.
He continued to congratulate the Sons of Italy championship team in the Town Softball League.
The newlyformed golf teams were also congratulated for the fine start they had in its initial year of play with no less than twenty participants teeing off each week.
Michael D Saraco, president of the Aberjona Civic Organization, was then introduced and lie, too, congratulated the Columbus Day banquet committee for a job well done and expressed his keen interest in being a part of an organization showing varied interests for the benefit of its members and community.
The A.C.A. has the responsibilities of setting up the rules and regulations of the Sons of Italy organization and urged the members to continue their loyal support in all activities undertaken by the club.
Next asked to take a bow was the Exalted Ruler of Winchester’s Lodge of Elks, 1445, Nicholas DiZio.
Frongillo called the attention of those in attendance to bow their heads for a moment of silence in memory of those deceased members of the Winchester Sons of Italy.
Joe is a member of the champion Softball team, one of the high bowlers in the S.O.I., and a true member of the organization.
Joe, we will miss you and wish you loads of luck and happiness and want you to know that your membership card will be awaiting you upon your return to civilian life.
Maietta expressed his sincere congratulations to the committee and S.O.I. for the wonderful way they have succeeded in their undertaking.
He encouraged all to continue to support the S.O.I. and all that it plans.
Maietta wrote the Sons of Italy song about thirty years ago and it is sung at each meeting of the organization.
He is also the originator of the degree team, which performs a very interesting and impressive ceremony for the installation of officers in the Winchester Lodges and organizations all over the state.
Last to be introduced in the program was past venerable and chairman of the Sports Committee, Anthony “Chick” Vespucci.
Chairman Vespucci expressed his best wishes to the champion Softball Team and members of the Golf League for their fine efforts in the first year of organization.
He then presented sweaters to the softball champions and encouraged manager Frank Procopio to make plans for another team next summer.
Frongillo thanked all for coming, hoped all enjoyed the wonderful dinner served by Shaw Catering Co. of Lynn and invited all to remain and enjoy the facilities of the organization.
Library Staff Delegates Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club As has been the custom for many years several members of the | \ staff of the Winchester Public Library attended meetings of the New England Library Association at the New Ocean House in Swampscott during the four day convention that was held there from October 4 through 7.
She spoke most informatively about the development jf New England folklore through a blending of Indian legends with the stories brought by the colonists from their homelands.
In these days we must have inspired leadership respect for law, and the power of self-restraint if our constitutional democracy is to survive.
Ralph E Lapp spoke most entertainingly at the second general session and opened awe-inspiring horizons of future scientific developments in the space age.
Louise Hall Tharpe charmed her audience at the final luncheon as she thanked librarians for their assistance in the research she does before writing one of her biographies.
Helen Mallery, Miss Elva Nelson, Miss Suzanne Nicot, Miss Elizabeth Russell, Mrs.
Theodore von Rosenvinge, president, presided over the business meeting, and attention was directed to the Musi cal Moods evening October 27.
James W Blackham Jr., program chairman, introduced the director of Crittenton-Hastings House, Miss Zeta Jayal, who enlightened us to the social, economic, legal, and moral problems dealt with.
Questions and informal discussions followed, while cider and doughnuts served by Mrs.
Connor will show how stained glass medallions are made, and will explain the tools and materials used.
Other members that day will demonstrate weaving, rug making, painting in all its phases, canvases as well as tole ware; leather, woodworking, jewelry, needlework, and many others.
The Noonan School Chapter of the Community Schools of Winchester met on Tuesday, October 10 for their first business meeting and for the reception for the teachers.
He spoke very informally about the schools of Winchester in helping the child achieve his educational goals.
He pointed out that j there were two types of problem students, the parent motivated child, which has serious repercussions, and the child who has ability but does not use it, which is less serious.
As the teachers entered the auditorium after school, each was presented with a beautiful corsage of Autumn flowers and leaves, as were Miss Minnetta Jurgenson, the Principal, and Mrs.
John J Sullivan, secretary, poured at an attractive table set with flowers and refreshments by Mrs.
Charles Watson were third with 84, and Carl Sit tinger paired with the Darrell Root’s son Steve at 80.
Winning the “status symbols of suburbia” in the EW field were James Byrne and Gerald Barrett with 86% points, Mr and Mrs Darrell Root with 82, Dr. and Mrs Robert Blaekler with 79, and Mr and Mrs.
Guy Mingolelli with 76 Also above average were the Wheelocks at 74 and the Smiths at 73 Section B played 20 boards for a 90 point average.
Arnold Kleinbecker, 94 Ann Dean and Kay Dunn, 89% It should be of interest to club members to know lhat, at awosession mixed pair championship tournament at Lincoln Laboratory held on October 3rd and 10th, the Darrell Roots and Richard Smiths finished one-two to capture top lau rels.
At the first session, WDBC pairs held six of the twelve win nimr positions, which is indicative or the caliber of our players a gainst outside competition.
It’s a pleasure to call on Gerry Lawrence for this week’s bridge fCaturette.
She is not only an as tute and well disciplined tournament player, but has the enviable facility of scoring well with a number of different partners.
PASS INTERFERENCE North A A V 6 ♦ A Q 10 9 3 2 * A K Q 10 4 West East A J 8 5 4 3 A K Q 10 2 VK74 V Q J 10 9 ♦ 74 ♦KJ8 6 5 * 9 6 6 * South * 9 7 6 V A 8 5 3 2 ♦ * J 8 7 3 2 This was an interesting board on two counts; unusual distribution and, , as an example of how interference bidding can cut down the opponents’ bidding space and prevent them from reaching the best ultimate contract.
Saucy little shell, pointing the way to fashion v r ia newly needled toes.
With a double wishbone strap to bring a girl good fortune wherever she goes.
N— 2D, Rdble, 3C, 6C E— Dbl, P, P, P, S— P, 2H, 4C, P W—P, P, P, dbl This NS pair were lucky enough to get a double on a 6 cold contract to earn them a next-to-top or the board.
As I said before, unusual distribution and interference bidding made for interesting results.
Tryouts For New Male Quartet Last week's announcement in the Star concerning a new male quartet being formed in Winchester brought a number of applications from singers in this and neighboring towns.
The quartet is being sponsored by Winchester’s male double quartet, The Two By Fours.
Try-outs are scheduled for 8:30 Monday evening, October 23, 11 Wildwood Street.
Tom Worthen, The Two By Fours leader, points out that the new quartet will not affect the activities of the original double quartet, although the new men will be coached in many of the popular Two By Four arrangements as well as new numbers.
The Fortnightly Members of The Fortnightly are looking forward to Guest Night on Monday, October 23 at Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall, beginning with dessert at 7:30m.
There will be very fine musical program featuring the popular Salvy and Dan Cavicchio, who will give an extensive repertoire of popular, classical and semi-classical music.
They have been on radio frequently and played in Hotel Statler Terrace room and Cafe Rouge regularly on the marimba and accordion.
Joseph H MacMillan, with their two children, Stephen and Debra, have returned home after spending two years in Formosa.
Winchester Girl Chosen Mis; Gail Si grid Nickerson, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Mortimer H Nickerson of 34 Thornherry Road, is one of 23 freshmen at Elmira College who have been selected to take part in a Special Studies Program at Elmira Collge on “The Impact of Science on Society” which was organized this fall.
Special Studies students attend seminars three hours a week throughout their four college years if they choose to remain with the group.
They attend other classes in accordance with the regular currifields of study each semester.
A new ; four-year program is started from I incoming freshmen each fall.
JFW VWWVW WW W VVVV W V W VVV ► “The Finest Home Away from Home” ► FOR LADIES AND GENTLEMEN The ride to the aristocrat of nursing homes * is certainly justifiable.
Stock Up Nowt < T HE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 19, 1961 Page Five To Attend Council Luncheon Mrs.
McDonald, a member of the Council on the Em* ployment of the Aging, under the State Department of Labor and Industries, will attend a luncheon meeting of that committee tomorrow, Friday, October 20, at 12 o'clock noon, at tf rational and Industrie Boylston Street, Boston.
Have an evening of fun. j Refreshments will be served after the social.
W The Ladies’ Auxiliary to Aherjona Post 3719, V.F.W. will bold a dance at the Bedford Veterans Hospital on Thursday evening, October 26.
Anyone interested in dancing please meet at the Post Home, 16 White Street, at 7:00m., where a bus will pick us up and take us to the Hospital.
Member ALLIED VAN LINES, World’s Largest Long Distance Movers Arlington Storage Warehouse 20 MILL STREET, ARLINGTON Mission 8-060S On Sunday, October 22, at 7:00 m.
All interested high school students are invited to attend this lecture, and to participate in the discussion following it.
Mr Mo Reynolds is the field secretary of the War Resistor’s League, an editor of Liberation Maguzine.
Mr Me Reynold’s analysis of current events do much to explain the reasons for his active participation in the peace movement.
He often has access to information not included in most newspaper ac| counts of controversial issues.
Mr McReynolds presents his facts and ideas in an interesting ; and lively manner, too, so that j students need not he afraid of being bored.
We hope that many stuI dents will take this opportunity to (come and listen, and to air their views on topics of current interest.
H Newton Clay, Pastor of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, will be the guest speaker this Sunday at 9:15m. in Ripley Chapel at the First Congregational Church.
With his warm personal interest in young people Mr Clay is one of Forum’s very popular guests.
Harold M Twombly entertained the Committee of Safety Chapter, D.A.R. at her home on Lawson Road.
During the remainder of October Forum members will he engaged in “Work Days for Christ” a national project for young people in the United Church of Christ.
This year Congregational young people in Massachusetts aim to raise between $9,000 and $10,000 for the building of a community library at Mt.
Members of Forum will find jobs and turn their earnings in at the October 29 supper meeting.
Everett Kidder reminded members that Hillside School in Marlborough would be our guests and give a program for our November meeting.
At that time gifts of clothing, games, and money for their Christmas should bp brought to the meeting.
William W Goodhue gave an interesting report on the Fall State Meeting in Chicopee, October 3 and 4, and of the wonderful speakers and program.
Mary’s School in Springfield, S.D. is for girls, training them for homemakers and nurses especially.
The Indians are restor ing their old church at Mashpee by their own labor and through do nations.
The Hours Together, by Clara Winston The Long Gainer, by William Raymond Manchester Night, by Francis Pollini The Old Woman, the Wife and the Archer, by Donald Keene, ed.
Point of Impact, by Robert Franklin Mirvish Soul Clap Hands and Sing, by Paule Marshall Stephen Morris, by Nevil Shute, pseud.
Three Cases for Mr Campion, by Margery Allingham Twelve Short Novels, by Thomas B Costain, comp.
Community Children To Present Dramas Old friends from the book shelv es will come to life this season since The Community School As sociation has chosen to work close ly with Mrs.
The Community School Asso ciation has long believed that theatre for children fills a definite need in their lives.
In this respect, Mrs Samoiloff proves her versatility as a teacher since her pupils not only act but create the scenery which is used in their productions.
They design the sets after judging the best art work from among their own painting impressions.
They vote on the cast of characters after watching each other, and rehearse during a ten-to-twelve week period.
The results are so amazing that it is no wonder that the Boston Arts Festival invited this Children’s Theatre Group to per form their “Noah’s Ark” which was so successful here in town last season.
The Community School Association has selected December 1 as the date to present these stories, and the program will prove to he entertaining and exciting to both boys and girls.
Republican Town Committee The monthly meeting of the Republican Town Committee will be held in the East Room of the Town Hall on October 26, Thursday.
Phillip Woodward, Director of Continuity of Government, Office of Emergency Planning, Area 1.
Her subject “Hope of Survival” will cover civilian survival in nuclear war.
The Ascent of Gasherbrum IV, by Fosco Maria ni Last Things First, by Sydney J Harris A Matter of Life and Death, by Virgilia Peterson Memoirs of a Medico, by E Martinez Alonso The Mentally Disturbed Teacher, by Joseph T Shipley Nobody Knows My Name, by James Baldwin One Night in July, by Jonathan Root The Ordeal of Captain Boeder, by Franz Roeder Poems of Solitude, by Jerome Ch’en, ed.
Palmerston, by Brian Connell The Shadow of the Dam, by David A Howarth The Social Basis of American Communism, by Nathan Glazer War in the Desert, by John Bagot Glubb Wild Flower Guide, by Edgar T Wherry The Wilderness Cabin, by Calvin Rutstrum Lincoln School Notes On a beautiful springlike Tuesday October 10th the Mother’s Association of the Lincoln School held its Fall meeting in the school auditorium.
Richard Preston, president gave a welcoming speech to the parents and faculty, then introduced her board for the coming year.
A brief business meeting followed and the meeting was turned over to Mrs.
George Goethals, program chairman, who introduced the guest speaker Mr Richard Desjarlais, Asst.
Miss Martha Cunningham, Prinipal,‘ introduced her staff of teachers with a quip about each one which brought many smiles from the mothers.
In conclusion mothers and faculty met for tea •md delicious refreshments served by Social Chairman Mrs.
Mary Sullivan, teacher of Grade 1 at Lincoln School who was sincerely missed at the meeting but due to illness was unable to attend.
Il gives you the kind of heat you like -long binning, even, economical.
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 19, 1961 Page Six The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore PWilson, Sr.
It has asked nothing' in particular of any one, hut before we dismiss it completely it might lx well to think a hit about the part your newspaper plays in your life and the welfare of the community in which you live.
You pick up your paper, your hometown weekly, and you learn that there is to be a special session of town meeting to decide an issue that can add a dollar to your tax rate.
You learn the reasons for the meeting and the pros and cons of the issue to he decided.
You also learn that the home town high school won a glorious football victory over a hated rival.
An account of the game is before you, with a description of play and the lineups of the teams.
An account, with pictures, of a fatal automobile accident at a bad intersection in town is reported and on the editorial page is jx'rhaps an editorial reiterating the paper’s feeling that more effective safety precautions should be taken there.
Elsewhere in the issue is the church page with its schedule of church services and events, at another place, an advertisement of a sale at a local store.
Still further on is a notice of the death of a neighbor’s mother, or the marriage of a girl you used to know when she was in town.
Home town news for home town folks is the province of the home town paper.
Its columns are always o|>en to those who wish to express themselves, on town affairs, or for officials of the town who wish to call the community’s attention to some important civic matter; or for correspondents wishing to report the activities of their organizations.
On the pages of your newspaper are plans for drives and announcements of meetings, social, educational or civic.
We are not attempting to convey the impression that a newspaper exists solely for the altruistic purpose of serving the public.
It does serve the public, well for the most part, or not so well, according to its abilities and more to the point, according to what the community it serves asks of it.
Hut your worth while publisher, your publisher who turns out a paper worthy of the name is primarily concerned with truth, both in his news ami his advertising.
I le demands objectivity in reporting, honesty in his advertising. lie has his problems.
Very fe\v have any conception of what it takes to put out a paper, especially a small town paper; the hours that go into reporting, editing and the. mechanical end of publication ; of the reason this bit of news or a certain advertisement gets in and others do not.
Often with the very best will in the world the publisher is unable to do either what he, or his correspondent or advertiser wishes.
Ask yourself the next time you are riled with the editor or publisher of your home town paper what it would be like without one.
Stop and think what no newspapers would mean to the country, what it would be like if the newspapers were controlled by the government and there was no free press.
Here publishers of papers print what they want consistent with the laws of libel.
The Star is proud to be a part, if just a small part, of that free press.
It appreciates the support that has enabled us to come out each week for that length of time.
The Star salutes its surrounding contemporaries during Newspaper Week, and asks its readers, advertisers and friends especially to remember us, kindly if they can, before October 21 goes by.
And believe us when we say we are trying to give you all the town news possible as fairly and accurately as we can.
Storer, minister of the Unitarian Church, in a recent sermon dealing with the threat of nuclear war made a statement it seems to the Star to be worth emphasizing.
Without attempting to cpiote him he said that instead of accepting the belief that war and human destruction are inevitable and instead of building places in which to hide from the holocaust we should devote our minds and energies toward the building of a world in which there is no need to hide.
In this thought lies the only hope for a continuation of the civilization man has built for himself.
If he as master of so much can not master himself to outlaw the mass murder that goes under the name of war. then everything he has accomplished through the ages is as nothing and man will end as he began, in a cave.
We shudder as we look back on the excesses of the barbarians, on the scourge of Attila and his Huns and the conquests of Alexander.
Nearer home we recall the Nazis of Hitler, the war into which they plunged the world 'and the gas chamber murders, concentration camps, woe and destruction they worked upon mankind.
Yet the worst of the horrors of all time would pale into insignificance in the face of the total destruction that will come to 11 s all in an atomic war if man forgets he has risen above the beasts and is a rational human being, if man refuses to negotiate his differences with other men and insists upon force to settle national issues.
The time is at hand when we must not forget, must not forget what nuclear warfare means; for if we do, we will have nothing left to remember.
A Postcard From Margery One thousand angry Nigerian students rallied this week to protest a postcard written by a Foxboro Peace Corps girl to her boy friend in America.
Everyone except us lives in the streets, cooks in the streets, and even goes to bathrooms in the street.
Only lack of thought could have obscured from Miss Michelmore the devastating effect such a postcard would have on the minds of Nigerian youth who are only too painfully aware of the increasing gap between their nation and America. ne cannot help wondering, however, what defects in our college education and in Peace C orps indoctrination could have blinded so brilliant a scholar to the conditions she would find in Africa.
It would seem to the Star that anyone even fairly well-read in world affairs jollv well should have known about these conditions before accepting an assignment to work amidst them.
Nor should our concern be merely to justify her error, nr to save face.
The damage has been done, and will be exploited by our opponents from the Near East to the Fur Fast, from Stockholm to Capetown.
The nonwhite people of the world will be assured by our enemies that Margery’s unfortunate postal reveals at once our materialistic smugness and our true racial feeling toward them.
Richard Nixon’s visit to Latin I America, and blame this anti -American feeling on the Communists.
The Communists will surely exploit this incident for their purposes; but the mistake was Margery’s, and ours, just begging for exploitation.
Well, number one, we can sit up and take notice of just how |>oor most of the world’s people are and lend them a more generous hand than we have so far.
And we’re not talking about financial aid to the self-serving ruling elites that govern so much of the world.
We’re talking about .making sure that our money reaches the people Margery wrote about, people who have to sleep in the streets.
Some of our money, now geared to making bombs, could be spent on helping Mexico to cover its sewers, or putting clothes on Iranians so poor that they’ve been reduced to nakedness.
We might also have given some thought to the children of Cuba under Batista who regularly choked to death with five foot long intestinal worms at the age of five because they lacked sanitation.
We might now extend a Christian band to the world’s countless women for whom prostitution is the only guarantee of one meal a day.
It’s a bitter, starving world beyond the Golden Cate and the Statue of Liberty, a world, which unlike America, was not spared the bombs of war, a world that looks with increasing wrath at our growing prosperity.
Unless our objective is morally higher than protecting our economic interests abroad, unless we take seriously the teaching of Him who urged us to give to those who are sick and hungry, we bad better prepare ourselves, for defeat in the cold war.
M e should share what we have with humility not merely to win this cold war, as such, but because all men, under the one Father, are brothers. < )ne last point.
It is sometimes said that the world is more critical of America’s errors than those of the Soviets.
We are judged more rigidly because of the ideals we have set before ourselves.
The distance between these ideals and what we do is sometimes inexcusably great.
Auxiliary Police Chief Fred Wicr, left, pins poM chief’s hatke on retiring Auxiliary Police Chief M Moffett as Police Chief Joseph J Derro smiles approval.
The petition asks that the people of Plymouth be given the right to vote at the .next state election on whether to continue with the limited town meeting form of government, or return to the old open form, at which any citizen of the town can vote.
The selectman, who voted against the proposal does not oppose the people’s right to say what sort of government they want, but felt that there should be some assurance of public support of a town wide vote, such as a petition, before asking legislative action.
Plymouth has had the limited town meeting form of government for nine years.
It did not. like most towns, adopt it because of a lack of room for all citizens to attend, but because of the voter apathy which was resulting in limited town meetings that were not representative of the entire town.
Seeking Legislative permission to vote on* t lie continuation of the representative town meeting was prompted by the fact that two recent referenda, one on a school bond issue and the other on the proposal to build a parking lot set aside the precinct delegates’ votes on these questions. pponents of the limited town meeting claim that the precinct delegates’ decisions do not represent the feeling of the entire town on vital matters.
The petition to the General Court is being vigorously opposed by the Plymouth League of W omen Voters, an organization the local branch of which has strongly supported the limited form of town meeting in Winchester.
There are those in this town who have never felt that the Winchester precinct delegates truly reflect the thinking of the precincts they represent at our town meetings.
This is especially true of controversial matters, and they, too, can point to referenda, in which town-wide votes have set aside those of the limited town meeting.
Changes have been made in our town meeting referenda clause that are going to make it much more difficult for dissenters to set aside limited town meeting votes.
Three per cent of the electorates now required to invoke referendum, only a majority vote of those casting ballots is necessary to sustain a town meeting vote, and unless the total vote cast in a referendum equals 20 per cent of those on the voting list, no action of the limited town meeting may be set aside.
These changes, recommended by a committee who studied our town meeting act and accepted by the town meeting, were sustained in a townwide referendum in which only 30 per cent of the electorate took the trouble to vote.
To be sure there were very few times when there was not room for all to get in who wanted to, but there were a few such times.
Limited town meeting votes may not he representative of the entire town as opponents of this form of government contend, but they probably are no less so than those of the old open form when it was possible to pack a meeting to put over a given project.
It is done now, under the representative town meeting form, but in a different way.
Only a drastic reduction in town meeting members at large and an unusually fortunate selection of precinct delegates can obviate votes arranged in advance of meetings.
After all it is the same procedure as that under which our state and national governments function.
The trouble, if there is one, lies with us, the voters, who often do not know for whom we are to vote as precinct members until we enter the voting booths, and then know them only as names on the ballot.
W e do not go to town meeting or inform ourselves on important issues to be decided there.
We do not inform our precinct representatives how we feel on controversial questions in which we have a vital interest, and finally we do not raise our voices in town meeting against proposals we believe not in the town’s interest.
Special privilege is not so much the result of conniving as of voter apathy.
The Legislature would have to approve the vote and pass enabling legislation. \\ e have always supposed that as a matter of policy the Legislature has been reluctant to permit a return to the old open form of town meeting, once the limited form has been accepted.
Here in Winchester we have always been told that if we do not like the limited town meeting form, our next move is to the city form with a mayor and aldermen.
This form has failed to win favor in the past, but it lias a lot more advocates than the city form.
There have also been moves tending toward the manager form such as consolidating the offices of collector of taxes and treasurer, and central purchasing.
It is proitd of the town’s heritage of devoted service by dedicated citizens.
As long as we can continue to get such service let us avail oursleves of it.
It is interesting to hear of Plymouth's decision to question tin* limited town meeting form, but before we decide to follow suit, if indeed we can, let us make sure that the trouble with our present form of government does not lie with us.
Not So Bad, After All With the completion of the Wedgcwood Apartments on the Lake Street shore of W edge Pond the town has an opportunity to appraise the structure in the light of its general appearance and effect ujkui the neighborhood.
While old timers may well regret the razing of the historic old Admiral 'Thatcher house to make room for the apartments, a fair minded person must, we believe, admit that the new look is a distinct improvement.
The new buildings are undeniably attractive, and may easily result in further improvement in the district.
As a matter of fact none of the apartments in Winchester have in appearance or 'operation proved objectionable, though there were people when each was built who sincerely believed that they would he.
Many persons informed in the trend of real estate development believe that for economic reasons resulting from zoning regulations requiring larger and larger lots for private homes more and more apartment or group houses are going to be built.
There is in some quarters in Winchester strong opposition to apartment houses of any kind and in any dumber.
The Star is sure no one wants to see Winchester even approach the status of an apartment house town, vet there are also those who would like to six mure apartment or group house facilities here.
The I 'landing Board made an unsuccessful attempt recently to open the way for apartment houses under townwide control by proposing the establishment of apartment house zones at the pleasure of the town meeting, in which only apartment houses could he built.
Under this plan any one wanting to build an apartment or group house outside the business district, where they are now permitted by zoning ordinance, must first get the town to change the zoning map to establish the proposed site of the building as an apartment bouse zone.
Under the present zoning a prospective builder of an apartment house outside the business zone must have the site changed to a business district.
I here is danger in this, for if for any reason the apartments are not built the land remains zoned for business and open to the owner or other purchaser for business use. \\ e have to face the probability that the construction of apartment houses will increase.
I hose we have now in \\ inchester have, the Star believes, proved to he assets. ur care now should he that any further construction of this sort is in the public in Iciest. notebook THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ERRORS By WILSON SULLIVAN Slips of the tongue are not accidental, nor do we mislay objects or forget names by mistake, writes Sigmund Freud.
These errors he says, have their source in our subconscious and are induced by repressed memory, feeling, and intention.
A A Brill, this paperback deals brilliantly with such widespread “errors” as forgetting to mail letters, to losing one’s wedding hand on one’s honeymoon.
Freud tells us thathve forget names because they are associated, however indirectly, with an unpleasant experience or fear.
For example, you might forget the name of a man named “Carroll,” because a girl named “Carol” once did you dirt.
Similarly, you may “forget” the name of a man bearing the same name as your potential rival.
The act of “forgetting” prevents the awakening of pain through memory or anticipation.
Mistakes in speech, or “slips of the tongue,” are not accidental, Freud says, hut are unintended confessions of our inner thoughts and attitudes.
Virchow,” hes, says Freud, revealing his subconscious wish that he were Dr.
In each case the so-called “error” reveals the^ person’s true concern or intention.
We were giving a dinner party for two very dear friends who were about to leave for Mexico.
After dinner the conversation got around to the comparative quality of American and Mexican fabrics.
My wife, impressed by the latter, asked her friend to pick up a certain amount of fabric in Mexico City or Guatemala.
Our friend, who is a psychologist, burst into a gorgeous laughter in which all joined.
We recognized immediately that the “slip of the tongue” revealed a wide difference in taste, we preferring the conservative and she the more vivid patterns and hues.
We also make mistakes in reading and writing that reveal our motives and concerns.
A woman desperate to have children will read storks for stocks in her financial column.
The fact that such “errors” are not accidental, Freud says, is not the special discovery of the psychologist.
Quite the contrary, he writes, people in general realize full well that when a man is late for an appointment he doesn’t think too much of the person he’s meeting.
Similarly a man who forgets to return books may merely he revealing an unconscious desire to possess more, and a man who “forgets” to pay for his cigarettes at the drug store may, unknown to himself, have a larcenous corner in his soul that is usually held in check.
Again, we may leave an expensive item on a streetcar, Freud says, because we want to punish ourselves for our extravagance.
We fail to mail a letter continually because for some reason we don’t want to send it.
If the law of cause and effect governs all aspects of life, then surely Freud’s theory is incontestable.
A very exciting concept, which could free us of many of the false excuses we now give for irrational behavior.
Richard A Hakanson, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 • 1954 The Winchester Star, left at your Kesidenca for one year, $4.00 in Advancs Single Copies.
Ten Cents The Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements but will publish without charge a correction in the next issue, or republish that portiou oi the advertisement which is incorrect.
Telephone PArkview 9-0029 OLDEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED r N WINCHESTER Serving the Community 81 Years Largest Sworn Circulation REPRESENTING WINCHESTER Senators in Congress Leverett Saltonstall Benjamin Smith Congressman 5th District F Bradford Morse Senator 6th Middlesex District C Eugene Farnam Representative in General Court Harrison Chadwick County Commissioners Edward L Buckley, chairman William G Andrew Thomas B Brenuttn 4 4 THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 19.
Where this co-operation is not forth-coming sterner measures i are needed, and are indeed desirnoticing more and more elderly able.
I heard on my radic that California gives their aged, one hundred dollars monthly and a decent self respecting place to live such as units on the first floor.
This is a selfish attitude as they would have to make new friends and upset all their lives.
I read with interest your editorial “Why We are Concerned” in the October 12 issue of the Star, and would like to congratulate you on it.
While we in Winchester have no reason to expect a series of riots akin to those which occurred Columbus Day in Boston, we do have a problem, which, though smaller is quite serious.
This revolves basically around the small group of youngsters you spoke of, and the example they set their contemporaries.
It would seem that leniency on the part of the police, and remonstrations by parents have not been enough for at least some of these youngsters.
Some will say it is unfair to saddle these youngsters with a court record, and in many cases this is true, hut I am sure Chief Derro and his men would have no trouble identifying the habitual offenders upon whom warnings have had no effect.
Once an example is made of these cases others will quickly take heed and mend their ways.
The young have always spoken a language mystifying, maddening and untranslatable to adults.
Sociologists confuse things further by saying that this form of selfexpression fulfills a need for individual self-expression in an adult society, while at the same time giving youth a sense of belonging to a group.
Not too many years ago “Pig Latin,” in which words were pronounced backwards, was all the rage.
Adults, on the other hand, might sneer that such a code as “Arp,” is beyond present day youth who have been accused of not knowing a vowel from a consonant.
Today’s “Flip Talk” is colorful, often highly descriptive and though they might cringe at the thought, much of it was being spoken by adults at least twenty years ago.
Today’s “Cats” are speaking a language that has been in common usage among jazz musicians and in other entertainment fields for many years.
Such words as “Square,” “Cool,” “Cat,” “Hip,” ( it was “Hep” not too many years ago), “Fake it,” “Chick,” “Dad” or “Daddy-O,” “Mickey Mouse,” and other expressions have taken nearly two decades to trickle down to common usage among teenagers.
While this evidence may be dis illusioning to teenagers who thought they were speaking a new language, it will probably be a relief to parents to find they can blame someone besides their offspring for the puzzling jargon they hear at the dinner table.
Priced from SI 2.08 to $10.95 RonePs CHILDRENS SHOP Open Friday Evening 23 25 Thompson Street PA 9-1708 ship list.
The first dinner committee and the waiters will select from the officers and directors* of the club.
With the interesting list of speakers which the program committee has prepared, there is no reason why town-wide participation in this club could not paral lei the results obtained in Lexington.
Congregational Men’s Club Program for 1961-1962 Our season will get under way on October 26, when Winchester’s representatives.
Harrison Chadwick, discuss the pros and cons of the Massachusetts 1961 Legislature.
Tuesday, November 28, 1961 — Forum Night, a special program catering to the high school group and their fathers Wednesday, January 17, 1962 “The Athletic Program — Winchester Style,” a discussion of the responsibilities and activities of the Winchester school system in the field of sports, by Henry T Knowlton, director, Department of Physical Education and Athletics Tuesday, February 27, 1962 — “In Your Defense,” a presentation of our semi-automatic Ground Environment System earlywarning radar screen by the New England Telephone & Telegraph Company.
Tuesday, March 27, 1962 — “Manned Space Flight,” a discussion of the accomplishments and potentialities of the Space Age, by Dr.
Mac C Adams, associate technical director, AVCO Research and Advanced Development Division.
Tuesday, April 24, 1962 — Ladies’ Night, “The Population Explosion,” a discussion of mounting urban and suburban problems as a result of rapidly shifting populations in and around our metropolitan cities, by Dr.
Wednesday, May 23, 1962 — “Africa A Lightening Continent,” ap analysis of the rapidly enlightened progress of the Dark Continent, as seen by a former consultant to Emperor Haile Selassie, Prof.
If you live in Winchester, and are interested, come and bring your friends.
Dinner arrangements may be made by calling Philip D Cabot, dinner chairman, PA 9-5135, at least three days in advance. (gHtifttarirs John W Thornton Moffett The highlight of the evening was the sincere address and presentation of a gold badge to Joe by our auxiliary chief, Fred Wier.
PraiBe must be given to the men of the banquet committee, who provided us was a splendid dinner and dance band.
If a prize had been awarded for the most talented feet, John Collins would have nailed it.
ANNE R WILD 45 Church Street PA 9-3268 novS-tf John William Thornton of 1 Indian Hill Road, for thirty-five years a resident of Winchester, died Sunday afternoon, October 15, quietly, at the Winchester Hospital where he had been readmitted, recently, at the end of more than twelve years of heart disease.
Mr Thornton was the son of William N and Annie Thornton, both natives of Leeds.
He was born in East Boston, February 10, 1886. beginning his education there and at the Boston Latin School.
During a long, active life in the shoe trade, Mr Thornton was associated with the John A Frye Shoe Co., of Marlboro, for thirtyeight years before his retirement in 1948 as a result of illhess.
Recognition of the respect with which he was regarded within the shoe industry is to he found in his record of twenty-five years as the Secretary-Treasurer of the Boston Shoe Associates.
He was a dedicated member of the Church of the Epiphany where he served on the vestry.
After ten years of singing as tenor soloist in the King's Chapel male choir, he continued his interest in church music at the Epiphany Church and at the First Congregational Church here.
In addition to his activities in music, Mr Thornton maintained interest in the Masonic Orders.
In 1914 Mr Thornton married Winifred A Harrington, also of East Boston, by whom he is survived.
Funeral services were held Tuesday afternoon at the church of the Epiphany with the Reverend Mr Ralph B Putney, B.D., officiating.
WMHA Plans First Meeting On Recreation With the current local interest in recreational facilities for teenagers in mind, the Winchester Mental Health Association has designed its first meeting of the year to hear on this subject.
Osier Peterson, 1 Yale Street, Wednesday morning, October 28, at 9:45m.
That the contribution oi. the local Mental Health Association on this topic should be to further the understanding of the behavior of teenagers is the thinking of its program committee, under the direction of Mrs.
A member of the Town Recreational Committee has been invited to attend the meeting and discussion after the talk should relate to some of the plans the Committee has under consideration.
This morning will start the fourth year of service to the town for the Winchester Mental Health Association, which is a branch of the Mystic Valley Mental Health Association, and an affiliate of the Massachusetts Association for Mental Health.
Coffee will be served from 9:45 until 10:15, when the speaker will begin.
Serving on the Program Committee with the above chairmen are the hostess, Mrs.
Planning Mr Chadwick, our representative in the General Court, will present the larger planning picture as it affects the entire metropolitan area.
In 1956, Mr (’had wick introduced the first Metropolitan Planning Bill which was designed to establish art advisory planning agency.
Although this bill was reported out favorably by the Metropolitan Affairs Committee lust winter, it was “killed” by the device of turning off the microphone without allowing either discussion or vote.
Rather, it will he a joint discussion exploring the problems of planning, the advantages of planning, and Winchester’s relationship to the Metropolitan Boston area.
In this exchange of views, both men stand out as experts devoted to the best interests of Winchester.
William S Bramhall Word has been received here of the death, suddenly, in Berlin.
N.IL, on October 11, of William S Bramhall, a former resident of Winchester.
A department store manager, he came to Winchester in 1949 and made his home on Ardley Place until he left town to go to Maine in 1952.
Ruth I Bramhall; a daughter, Judith B Getchell; and a son, Peter I Bramhall.
Warning Another innovation is that the teacher may give out a warning at any time during the term he or she thinks one is warranted.
By this move the students are being asked increasingly to take the measure of their own failures and to see what they themselves can, do to correct them.
Washington School Harvest Hop Autumn is here again and school year activities begin in earnest.
To herald in the new season comes the annual George Washington School dance, aptly entitled this year the Harvest Hop.
The informal affair will he held tomorrow night, Oetohet 20, in the school auditorium from 9 to 1.
Samuel Perkins, have been working hard all month and promise a gala evefor all those attending.
In addition to the music provided by Robert Fiore and his orchestra, guests will be treated, to eye-filling decorations, punch, coffee, and light refreshments.
Remember, guests are welcome and there will be a special “Get Acquainted” table for new members and last-minute dicisionmakers.
Put on your dancin’ shoes and we’ll see you tomorrow night at the Harvest Hop.
Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf Funeral Services For Gustave Johnson Funeral services for Gustave Johnson of 31 Englewood Road were held Tuesday, October 10, at the Kimball Chapel.
He was born August 3, 1903, in Brookline, son of Sven, and Marie Johnson.
He had made his home in Winchester for 20 years, and until his recent retirement had been a maintenance man for 35 years at the Ford plant in Somerville.
For Rent WEDGEW00D APARTMENTS On the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center are the newly completed Wedgewood Apartments, where yon may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living.
Call Mission 8-6250 Monday through Friday. oct6-tf Boxed books, travel, diaries, guest and baby’s books, baby photo books, scrap books, brides’ books and others, drastically reduced at the Winchester Star.
SALESMEN & SALESMANAGERS $500 to $700 a month for qualified men We are looking for two men to work out of our Reading office in Middlesex County.
Salary and expenses paid during your training period First year bonus $2,040 Group insurance and retirement program for a secure future.
This unusual home consists of a large living room with fireplace, full dining room, extralarge kitchen with laundry area, plus four twin bedrooms and two ceramic-tile baths.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors S3 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone n umbers P A 9-1966, 9-3355, 9-6213, 9-5972, 9-4136 ATTRACTIVE NEW LISTING Almost new nine-room home on large wooded lot.
Charming fi rep laced living room, dining room, a 11electric kitchen with breakfast area, four bedrooms and den or fifth bedroom, plus panelled family room, three baths, two-car garage.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6660 Kathryn P Davis BK 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp PA 9-0373 Jean Gibb PA 9-3808 HORACE FORD — Realtor PA 9-5887 WINCHESTER EXCLUSIVE For gracious family living, we have an older home, well maintained, of ten rooms, threo-and-one-half baths, in an excellent West Side location.
Many extras go with the property, which we will gladly show by appointment.
WHITTEMORE, Realtor 38 Church Street PA 9-3320, 0047, 5612, 2672. 1164, 5046, and EX 5-1784 WINCHESTER On the Bus Line.
Three bedrooms, IMj ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining room, good living room with fireplace.
Colonial in secluded Fells location features long living room, screened porch, patio, modern kitchen, four bedrooms, lots of charm.
Attractive firepluced living room, family dining room, large all-electric built-in kitchen, tiled bath, three twin bedrooms on one level.
Lower level offers fire placed family room, bedroom, luvatory, and garage.
Exclusive Brokers BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 24 ThompHon Street PArkview 9-4240 FINE WINCHESTER COLONIAL — $26,900 If you are in the market for a well-laid-out six-room Colonial on the West Side, here is your opportunity.
All large rooms, l l A baths, plus a play room, screened porch and putio.
JOSEPHSON Real Estate 5 Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 WINCHESTER All-brick (’ape-ranch in a quiet secluded setting, yet handy to the center and schools.
Treasurer DIRECTORS George L Billman Sidney C Blanchard Dudley H Bradlee, II Henry L Clark, Jr.
Alfred D Elliott Morris B Kerr Frederick W McCormack Charles A Murphy Curtis W Nash ' Stanley E Neill STAFF Elizabeth A Kehoe Martha C Ellis Anne G Shaw John G Perry SECURITY COMMITTEE George L Billman Charles A Murphy Alfred D Elliott CLERK OF THE BOARD Morris B Kerr ATTORNEY Curtis W Nash Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street Tree Planting Newsy Paragraphs Processing by Kodak at the Winchester Camera Shop.
H Newton Clay, pastor of the Crawford Memorial Church, came in to the Star Office last week Friday with a sprig of forsythia in bloom.
He picked the sprig from a bush at the parsonage and said there were many others on the bush.
All our 1962 calendar refills, diaries, scenic calendars and Phillips Brooks calendars are in stock.
Mr William Falzano, known locally as “Bill” the Taximan, is at Cambridge City Hospital recovering from major surgery performed last Wednesday.
The operation was necessary for repairs from his near-fatal accident last February.
EX 5-6265. janl9-tf The Misses Elaine Maienza of Ginn Road, Anne Hogan of Salem Street and Kathleen Cahill of Boston flew Pan American Jet to Bermuda where they will spend 10 days vacationing at the Elbow Beach Surf Club.
LONG'S AUTO SCHOOL WEIIs 3-3339 Res. july27-ti Newsy Paragraphs When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf Mrs.
States as distant from the campus as Hawaii and California were among those represented.
Steve Wilson, student at Fryeburg Academy, Fryeburg, Maine scored a goal in a recent home soccer game against North Yarmouth Academy.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf A /2c John P Mawn has returned to his duties at Bolling Air Force Base, Washington, D C., after spending ten days leave with his family.
Charles School, Woburn, 1955, and of Keith Academy, Lowell, 1959, and entered the service March 15, 1960.
Second in aeriea of Winahenter Morning"", presented by Winchester Wellesley Club in Hadley Hall, Church of th« Epiphany.
October 20, Friday, College Club Art Group will meet at the De Cordova Museum in Lincoln promptly at 10:15m.
Monday evening at 7 :30m, Guest night of The Fortnightly at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall.
Salvy and Dan Cavfcchio, marimba, xylophone, and accordion artists, October 24, Friends of Winchester Hospital, Volunteer Training Program for ALL HOSPITAL VOLUNTEERS, 8m Wyman School.
October 25, Wednesday, 8m., Vinson Owen School Parents’ Association Meeting.
October 28, Saturday, 10:15m., Children’s Film Program, Rich Room, Public Library.
The Fortnightly presents Gordon Bennett’s Tickle-um Theatre Marionettes to children and grown-ups at the McCall Junior High School Auditorium.
October 30, Monday, Huge AUCTION Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church, with Ted Langdell, auctioneer.
November 2, Thursday, Winchester Historical Society at 7 :30m. in Library in Rich Room.
Newsy Paragraphs For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. tf Mrs.
Ruth Russell Crosby, bookkeeper at the Winchester National Bank, started her vacation on Monday of this week.
A new resident in Winchester offering Beauty Counselor products and service.
A former Winchester high grid performer, Jim stands 5ft.in. and tips the beam at 176.
J Paul Marcous of Winchester was one of 15 community chairmen who reported record breaking Heart Fund years in the annual report of the Massachusetts Heart Association’s Greater Boston Chapter.
According to the report these 15 cities and towns surpassed all previous years in raising funds during the annual Heart Fund drive in February.
PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf Miss Sally Clark, daughter of Mrs.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Cards received this week from Peter Marchesi report that he and Michele Bdlino, father of the famous football playing family, are traveling all over Italy, visiting Sicily, Naples, Potenza, Salerno, Mt.
Mr Bellino went to Italy primarily to see his aged mother in that country.
James Stewart, president of the \\ inchester Girl Scout Council, at the tree-planting ceremony on the common October 11.
Harold Butters, Mr MacDonnell, Alexander Heimlich, landscape architect in charge of common beautification plan, Mrs.
Next March will be the actual birthday, so we plant this laburnum or golden chain tree now in order that it may bear its lovely golden blossoms next spring.
The first link in the chain is a Brownie, with her bright enthusiasm and eagerness to learn.
The second link in the chain is an Intermediate, with her growing knowledge and increase in skills.
The third link is a Senior with her emphasis on service, who willingly shares her knowledge with the younger girls.
The next link is the adult Scout who gives her time and interest to leadership and administration, serving youth.
Today is soon tomorrow, And all our tomorrows Lie in the hands of youth.
Her gift to youth was Girl Scouting, And her dream, a tree of fellowship Grown from a tiny seed.
New Season It is true that Richard Mulligan’s waltzy “Method” techniques as Billy Brown and director Michael Murray’s acceptance of O’Neill’s eleven scene changes do nothing to clear the clutter.
It is also true that the stage settings and properties are too consciously poor.
But the primary fault is ""Brown’s,” O’Neill’s attempt to be mystical and classic with a story that is more in the tradition of Stella Dallas than Electra.
Greek masks are effective in Greek drama; they are merely arty and “avant” in this weary little tableau of 80-proof pathos. / i 'i Off and on, when O’Neill isn’t trying to replace the old gods with new, “Brown” is concerned with the whiskey-laced fortunes of one Dion Anthony, confident that he will be a great artist because his mother thinks he can.
Ripped asunder by internal agony never adequately explained, he staggers from boyhood to manhood, from mama’s to wifey’s lap, weeping, hooting and hollering about the Philistine world that doesn’t understand him and denies him as much money as it pays mere merchants.
Perpetually half-in-the-bag, Dion moves from the expectation that he’ll rank with Titian to the conviction that he’s nothing-nohow, $100 away from skid row.
All the while, of course, Dion’s wife, serving at once as mother, lover, and confessor, urges her “little boy” onward and upward.
When Dion’s toots exhaust the cash from the sale of the old homestead, wife Peggy turns to her former lover and Dion’s college room mate, Bill Brown.
Bill, of course, is terribly successful, which is to say evil, owner of a thriving architectural firm.
He agree to take Dion on for old school tie, and Dion grandly sacrifices art and integrity on the great God Brown’s high altar of business.
His only relief, save making a drunken ass of himself blaming every one for his failure, seems to be in the boudoir of one Cybel, the conventional good-hearted, rough-hewn whore, who, down deep, is still seeking true love.
Cybel possesses in large measure that special divinity dispensed by O’Neill to drunks and derelicts, as the dull sober people, graceless and fatuous, await the word. 1 i i This trite little plot is made “classic” and “complex” through the introduction of masks, slapped on and off by the actors as O’Neill makes his clumpy distinctions between the “real man” and the face he shows to the world.
The thing becomes really profound when Billy Brown, fed up with Dion’s charges that he’s palming off his drawings as his own, does Dion in, steals his mask, takes his wife without her guessing the difference and is shot for the murder of himself when someone sees Dion’s mask on him and ‘his on the new dead Dion.
It’s part of the mystery O’Neill considered it the principal business of drama to make more mysterious fit “Brown” proves something else about O’Neill.
He is too serious too lacking in that philosophic humor without which the outlines of tragedy cannot be seen.
This play is so terribly “sad,” that a single titter over one or two funny phrases has the effect of partial catharsis.
It is certainly its humor more than its sermonettes that makes “The Iceman Cometh” a moving play.
Harry Hope tells us a good deal more of the human condition than Larry Slade.
There remain still three points to be made about the Charles pro duction.
First, one is grateful for the all-too-brief appearance of Edward Finnegan in two bit parts.
It is a painful reminder of the Charles’ best work and of Mr Finnegan’s supreme acting skill.
No gesture, no word, no movement, no glance is separable from the dramatic effect Mr Finnegan intends and conveys.
He is superb and the Charles should schedule at least one play per season in which he leads or supports.
Second, let us hope that the Charles drops O’Neill for a while, and Miller, too.
Moliere is not dead, nor Shakespeare, Brecht, Lorca, Strindberg, Pirandello, Hauptmann, or Marlowe.
And there seems to me no good reason why the attempt can’t be made to do a premiere of something like Sartre’s “The Condemned of Altona,” still to be produced in America after two years in Europe.
In too many plays at Boston’s theater of ideas, Nora is still walking out of her doll house.
Finally, Boston should be ashamed of itself that the Charles Playhouse is having difficulty raising $5,0000 to keep itself going.
I looked for Winchester people at the theater Friday night, without success.
Surely with our level of income and culture wc can help finance our only serious theater.
After all, even when the play lets them down, the Charles Players give us a drama to think about.
Remain* of rur af ter being badly burned Monday evening oil Ridge j Street near Lockelnnd Road.
The owner, John L O'Connor of l<><) Seituate Street, Arlington, had left the car after having ignition trouble and gone to Arlington for help.
Albert T MoDougall, president of Winchester Chapter, Guild of the Infant Saviour, announces upon word from Europe that Mrs.
Joseph P Kennedy, mother of the President and matriarch of the fabulous Kennedy clan, will he in Winchester on Sunday afternoon, November 19.
Kennedy will lecture on her experience for the benefit of the Guild, at McCall Junior High School Auditorium at 2:30.
John F Fitzgerald, Mayor of Boston, has been in the forefront of three generations of New’ England, national and international public affairs.
James, she accompanied him to England, and in her illustrated lecture will show some of the high lights of those extremely turbulent prewar years.
Kennedy has been very active in guiding the careers, bhth in and out of public life, of her sizeable family.
These activities reached their culmination last year with the inauguration of her son, John, as President of the United States.
Newsy Paragraphs Officer David Boyle removed a cow belonging to Mr Rotondi last Friday afternoon from the driveway of 22 Laurell Hill Lane.
Officers Cogan and D Boyle removed a horse from the B & M tracks at the Center depot just before noon last Friday.
You can now order Eaton’s personalized stationery at the Winchester Star.
Ranch Type automobiles with Standard Transmission in which there is room for a collapsible cot stretcher making same a Cruiser Ambulance.
Cars to be equipped with switch to corttrol underthe-hood radio speakers.
The Board reserves the right to reject any or all bids or to accept such bids as may be for the best interests of the Town of Winchester, Mass.
That the zoning by-laws be hereby amended by changing or altering tlu* map incorporated therein and made a part thereof and a portion of that certain distinct indicated and identified therein as a general residence district so that the following described area will be changed from a general residence district to an industrial district.
Mystic Builders Supply, one hundred feet, more or less; and containing 9700 square feet, more or less, described in plan of “Town of Winchester, Mass., Plan of Zoning Changes, Jan., 1961.
Meeting of June 19, 1961, and approved by the Attorney General of Massachusetts on October 10, 1961.
Workers 32 Church Street • FREE DELIVERY • PArkview 9-4700 — Ample Parking At Rear Of Store — Specials Run Thursday through Saturday, October 19, 20, 21 Photo by Ryerson Mrs.
WORKERS being enrolled as a volunteer worker for the Residential Chairman Janies F Quine and hi Fund agencies to fill every human j need.
Those wishing to serve as volunteers should call United Fund Headquarters at RI 2-2010.
Soc. for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, Winchester Hospital, Winchester Visiting Visiting Nurse Association. your personal Pendleton' Winchester were served by agencies sharing in the Greater Boston United Fund, according to the lastest figures released by the United Fund for this fall’s ‘‘People Helping People” campaign.
Patients admitted to United Fund aided community and Boston Hospitals numbered 1921.
In addition, United Fund health and rehabilitation agencies provided 1576 Winchester citizens with further treatment and prosthetic There's such a parade of plaids, patterns and plain colors in the new Pendleton jackets, yoifre certain to find the one that suits you perfectly.
Lightweight yet amazingly warm, Pendleton jackets are perfect for indoors or out.
Here’s rich virgin wool . • • dyed, spun and woven by Pendleton to give you years of proud service.
Neighborhood Service Teams and Volunteer Trainers will find many stimulating subjects discussed in their fields of endeavor, and lively question and answer periods are expected.
The instruction, given by notable Scout Leaders will enlarge upon those given in local councils, and in many cases, will give training that is omitted in many areas.
Eugley. — GROCERIES — JOHN ALDEN APPLE SAUCE NESTLE S EVER READY SWEET MILK COCOA NESTLE S EVER READY SWEET MILK COCOA JOHN ALDEN GRAPE JELLY PETER PIPER PEACHES JOHN ALDEN RICE PETER PIPER FRUIT COCKTAIL JOHN ALDEN GUEST PEAS GEISHA TUNA JOHN ALDEN OLIVES PERCER SARDINES ALWAYS VIRGIN WOOL Keel heather clinics, camps, guidance centers, homes, nurseries and neighborhood houses helped fill the needs of 42 children, and some 2085 Winchester youngsters participated in programs and activities of United Fund supported youth agencies.
Over 2 million people live in the 50 communities being served by the United Fund of Greater Boston.
Last year more than 500,000 families and persons sought and received aid from hospitals, health and rehabilitation facilities, family and relief services, homes for houses, Men’s, Boys’ and Ladies’ Shops 6 Mt.
Vernon Street, Winchester PArkview 9-3070 Open Daily 9 to 5:30 Friday Evenings Until 9:00 the aged, neighborhood children’s services and youth agencies supported wholly or partly by the United Fund.
Census H fine liquors vintage wines choice beer and ale rent Population Survey sample panel will be asked special questions on consumer plans to purchase automobiles, television sets, washing machines, and refrigerators.
This is part of a quarterly survey being made at the request of the Federal Reserve Board for use in a national study of consumer buying trends.
The questions on education and consumer buying plans are in addition to the regular inquiries on employment and unemployment which are asked each month in the Current Population Survey.
P Women Plan Panel ^4t the OfouSe Of (jootl Spirits "" HIGH STREET BEVERAGE CO — FRUIT and VEGETABLES FRESH MUSHROOMS CALIFORNIA SWEET ORANGES FRESH CALIFORNIA BROCCOLI The Massachusetts Federation of Republican Women is planning a “know your congressman” panel, to be held in Worcester on October 27 at the Hotel Bancroft beginning at 10m.
Luncheon is scheduled for 12:30, at which time the guest speaker will be lion.
C CAMEO CREAM SANDWICH COOKIES EDUCATOR DUTCH STYLE CASHEW COOKIES EDUCATOR SESAME CRACKERS SUNSHINE CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIES SUNSHINE LADY JANE SHORTBREAD COOKIES Collision Work Our Specialty Service Phono Radio Further information rej reservations may be had by Mrs.
It’s a good game, and you can get it and other new games at the Win Chester Star.
OCTOBER 19, 1961 TWO DAYS ONLY FRIDAY & SATURDAY Long and G rannon SALE 11.90 Reg..95 u Big Winners At W 15.
HereV a beautifully low-Htarked leather-beel shoe that oilers you |H*rfed support.
Made on our fammi.M romhinution last lor perfeet lit . . . greater eomfort.
Gome in Friday and Saturday and get your share of these marvelous savings.
I Cafeteria Menu Bowling League The Emeralds maintain their position in first place, while the second place Diamonds lost 4 points resulting in a drop to fifth place.
Top honors once again to our chairlady, Captain Ginger Maggio of the Emeralds.
Setting higher goals for herself it will be interesting to watch “Ginger” in action.
Our jovial Virginia Maeinanti of the Rubies is back on the top ten list.
Also on the same team and bowling quite well is our newcomer, Mary Fiorelli.
A fine performance was given by Florence Ciarcia of the Pearls with a total three string of 269.
Being the spark plug helped her team win 4 points and thus defeat the 2nd place Diamond team.
Captain Louise Vigorita of the Diamonds was the recipient of a gift by the members of her team, Gert Fiore, Angie Dattilo, Emma Provinzano, and Phil Marrone.
Prior to leaving to make her home in California, her daughter Ann Melaragni was hostess at a social gathering for many of Louise's friends.
A dance to be held on Saturday, the eleventh of November, at the Sons of Italy Home.
Everyone is welcome for a nite of fun, dancing and relaxation under the most pleasant conditions.
Tuesday — Turkey pot pie, mashed potatoes, hot biscuit, cranberry sauce, or beef broth, peanut butter and jelly sandwich, celery sticks, brown betty and sauce, milk.
Wednesday — Baked lamb chop, potato pulf, green beans, apple jelly, date mulfin, or Chinese chow mein, buttered rice-noodles, date muffin, raspberry square, milk.
Thursday — Boiled frankfort, roll, baked beans, relish-catsup-mustard, cabbage salad, corn bread, or chicken noodle soup, frankfort in roll, cabbage salad, fudge cake, cocoanut frosting, milk.
Friday — Baked macaroni and cheese, tomato-lettuce salad, coffee cake, or orange and grapefruit juice, tunafish salad sandwich, butterscotch pudding, milk Sandwiches — Sliced cheese, egg salad.
When the bell rings for Trick or Treat for UNICEF, please support the young pegple.
As many streets as possible will be canvassed, but if you do not see the collectors, please call the President of the Senior group, Norman Stafford, PA 90538, and someone will call.
The Young People doing the canvassing will wear tags to identify them and they will travel in pairs.
John Carroll, big reserve tackle on the Holy Cross football team, was admitted to St.
John A Carroll of 8 Bonud Road, is through with football for this year.
Before enrolling at The Cross he starred in the line for Malden Catholic High School.
He has been doing well at Worcester which makes his loss to the team the more regrettable.
Rod Long and John Gannon were the “big winners” this week end .it the Winchester Boat Club annual awards banquet Saturday.
The two, who made a pail in the Snipe fleet two years ago, having since gone their own separate ways, walked off with the two most coveted trophies at the Winchester Boat Club; the overall point score championship.
After a delicious turkey dinner, served, by the way, to a full house, ex-commodore Ralph Swanson proceeded to award the numerous trophies and prizes to the enthusiastic sailers, Rob Dannenherg , Rod Long , and Terry Cronburg , drew the highlights in the Snipe awards for the three major 10-race series of the year.
John Berger , Barbara Dannenherg , Alton Jones , and ClarkBartell did likewise in the Turnabout fleets four series.
After the awards had been distributed, the new officers for the 1962 season were announced.
In the Snipe fleet they are captain, Russ Cook, first mate, Rob Dannenberg, and purser, Geoffrey Kerrigan.
In the Turnabout fleet they are captain, Dick Preston, first mate, Roy Sunesonr, purser, Paul Sanderson, and junior first mate, Ron Bartell.
Snipe Fleet Awards “A” series — 1, Rob Dannenherg; 2, Norman Towle; 3, Dick Ivers.
New at the Star office, three-hole Accropress genuine ring binders, assorted colors, excellent for theme or thesis, 80 cents each.
Sam Brllino, “Choppers” Gangi, “Moose” Bellino, Procopio, manager, William Fiore.
Standing, Venerable Frank Dattilo, I ony Lueei, Tony Chefalo, Pete Gilbert!, Dick Tofuri, Richie Bucci, Joe Berardi, iareia, Don Kinton, Bob Fiore, Chirk Vespucci.
Belmont Hill Youth Hockey The popular Belmont Hill Youth Hockey program will commence Dec. this year and continue through Feb. at the Belmont Hill School artificial rink with sessions each Saturday morning.
To be eligible a boy must have been seven years old Aug., 1961, and under 15 as of Nov., 1961.
If conditions necessitate those directing the program reserve the right to decline applications.
The program will definitely be limited in size which means that applications are received on a first-come first-serve basis.
Application blanks may be secured at the Sport Shop and should be filled out and mailed at once with a check for $16 to cover ice cost and accident insurance.
The first session will be devoted to hockey and skating drills, and the second session, to a four-team league with 1 hour of ice time per game.
First session will be devoted to hockey and skating drills and the second, to a six-team league (seven games | plus father-son) 1 hour of ice time per game.
The first session will be devoted to skating and hockey fundamentals and the second, to a six team league of five games.
Mail a jigsaw puzzle postcard of Winchester to your friends, 26 cents each at the Winchester Star Tray Painting Classes Stenciling, Oil Painting, Gold Leafing on Furniture, Tinware and YVooden articles.
McCall Junior High School Auditorium Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street Tickets on sale at the door — 50 cents The Middlesex II ockey League announced at a recent meeting of its principals and athletic directors that it plans to use the proposed hockey arena in Wakefield as the home of all league games in the 1962-63 season.
John Donovan of Concord High, president of the league principals’ group, said that the Middlesex schools will fulfill their one-year contract obligation with the North Shore Sports, Center in Lynn this winter, but hope the Wakefield arena will he ready for the league by November of next year.
A spokesman for the trustees of the Wakefield ice center, reported that if present plans follow in order,* construction should begin in early spring and be completed a year from next month.
The $500,000 enterprise, which will serve ice hockey, figure skating, pleasure skating and exhibition needs of the area, is to be located on North Avenue, olf Route 128, in Wakefield.
Mr Donovan said, “The league's officials look with keen interest to this new arena.
Those schools in the Middlesex Hockey League, created only last year, are Belmont, Reading, Stoneham, Melrose, Winchester, Wakefield, Lexington and Watertown.
Concord does not have a hockey squad, though it has hopes of organizing one in the near future.
No service contracts, no tanks, no unexpected repair bills Gas is competitive in price with other automatic heating fuels.
Clean warm heat . . . faithful service . . . and no trips to the basement to check fuel supplies.
You’ll get a FREE ESTIMATE for changing as well as an estimate of heating costs.
If at the end of one heating season a home owner is not completely satisfied, we will remove the burner and refund every cent paid on it.
Going into the fifth week, it seems that Pat Bruno will hold onto the low score of 30 because as the weeks go by the bowlers seem to he improving their scores.
If Roger Maris can break a longstanding record, so can a record be broken right here in our own league.
Because up-to-date scores and standings were given a week ago and we had no action the past week, you will be brought up to date in this column next week.
It was also a good night for Strike Lanes who climbed into second place.
It is being used to give the weaker teams a better chance and also to avoid a roll off in case of a tie string by giving each team a single point.
The league as a whole is still very strong with 56 r /c of the men still maintaining a 90 or better average.
League Standings W L American Legion 1 36 6 Strike Lanes 32 8 American Legion 2 30 10 K of C 26 14 Brothers-in-law 26 14 Post Office 2 Atlantic Gelatin 49er’s St.
Winn Post Office 2 Hobo’s Pinfall 7298 7009 7337 6735 6707 6910 7048 6929 6648 6454 5316 6397 High single for night, R Russo, 134.
Lexington came to Winchester unbeaten in three games, including a win over Stonchatn, conqueror of Winchester, 22-8, in a previous league engagement.
Saturday’s win was a must for Winchester since another defeat would have just about ended the Sachems’ championship hopes.
The high school student body | — ■ — Our l\ew Teachers hnld a pre-Rame rally and marched into the end zone.
Captain Mike Bell ino, 35, and Dan Mahoney, go for loose hall in Winchester-Lexington game last Saturday.
P Ark view 9-1931 ""QuJih Ji Our nu precious -Asset” Winchester Invades Melrose Oil Saturday for League Tilt W inchester’s embattled Sachems, braced by victories over Cambridge Latin and Lexington, return to the war path in real earnest Saturday when they invade Melrose for a League football game with Melrose High.
Winchester needs another victory to remain in Middlesex League competition.
On the other hand, Stoneham beat Winchester 22-8, while losing to Melrose, 14-0.
The Raiders have always been tough for the Sachems and Saturday’s game looms as a toss-up with the breaks having a lot to do with the final outcome.
Melrose is not as good as usual this fall, and in spite of the Stoneham debacle, Coach Knowlton rates his Sachems better than a year ago when they battled the Raiders to a tie.
Winchester had that one all but hung in the trophy room when a blocked kick in the closing minutes of play gave Melrose a chance to tie, and then only a missed field goal prevented the Raiders from winning.
Last Saturday against Lexington Winchester showed its best form of the season, and the Sachems should be no worse than an even choice against Melrose Saturday.
Kickoff is at 1:30 and with the Lexington victory as a stimulus it is expected that a big crowd of local rooters will make the trip to Melrose.
A 1960 graduate of Winchester High School, Steve played varsity basketball, served as president of the Philosophy Club, and was a member of the National Honor Soiety.
M Virginia Biggey, co-ordinator of elementary education in Concord, upon her election as president of Pi Lambda Theta, a national honor and professional association for wumen in education.
The tea will be held Saturday, October 21, at the Parker House in Boston and a distinguished list of invited guests will attend.
Francis *L McGarrahan, 25 Glen Green, is among freshmen at The College of Saint Rose who will be invested with the academic cap and gown at a ceremony October 25 in the college chapel.
The event will mark the formal reception of the freshmen as members of the student body.
The academic attire is worn by the students on all PHYLLIS A ROGDE Miss Phyllis A Rogde, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Arthur T Rogde of 15 Foxcroft Road, and Miss Leslie Forbes Usher, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
W Lawrence Usher of 8 Grove Street, are members of the freshman class at Wheaton College, Norton.
Lexington brought big group of rooters to Winchester and the opening kickoff found both stands tense with excitement.
The visitors after 35 years without a win over the Sachems were very confident.
The Minuteboys scored first in the opening period when after working the ball to the Winchester 27 yard line the Lexington quarterback, Pete Brock passed to Greg Jones for a touchdown.
Tom Mooney broke through to block the try for the extra point from placement.
Winchester took the ensuing kickoff and drove steadily up the field, completing five first downs and reaching the Lexington two yard line.
The Minuteboys fumbled in turn and Jim Menucci came up with the ball at the Lexington three.
Qellino on a fullback sweep right went over for the touchdown, but failed in an attempt to add two points by a buck up the middle.
The Sachems went out in front in the opening minutes of the second quarter.
Starting at its 26 Winchester racked up two first downs to the Lexington 31.
A three yard try by Benincasa put the ball on the 28, and Bellino got outside at the right for a gallop to the eight.
Again on a fullback sweep right Bellino drove into the end zone for a touchdown, but the try for extra points by passing was no good.
Adzigian reached the nine for an other first down and then Brock again hit Jones with a pass out in the right fiat for the score.
In the closing moments of the second quarter Winchester had the ball deep in its own territory when Clough, Lexington center, intercepted a Bellino pass at the Winchester 30.
With time running out Dave Adzigian off a sweep threw a pass to Richard Olsen who grabbed the ball in the end zone, out-jumping three Winchester defenders for the score.
An attempted kick for the extra point was missed but Winchester was offside on the play and from the one yard line Adzigian bucked his way over the line for two points.
Winchester picked up four, but a holding penalty put the ball back on the 25.
Benincasa on a nice run got back 16 yards, and on the next play Colliander completed a pass out in the ight flat to Rich Rowe who lost his footing and fell while in the clear at the Lexington 43.
Colliander then threw, this time to Bellino who was hauled down at the Lexington 19.
On the first play Lexington was offside and the ball moved ahead to the 14, Benincasa bucked for three, but Bellino was stopped without gain.
Colliander again hit Bellino at the Lexington six and Captain Mike slithered over for the touchdown.
Bellino then on a power sweep right got over for the two point premium that tied the score at 20.
Lexington got no nearer than the Winchester 19 in the third chukka and they had the ball at the 19 when the final quarter began.
The Minutemen advanced to the ten, but on fourth down a pass fell incomplete and Winchester took over.
Bellino and Rowe made first down at the 30, hut here a sweep went bad and the Sachems wore pushed back to the Lexington 35.
On a belt off tackle, Bellino got some good blocking and swung into the clear, legging it all the Bellino on his patented sweep right rushed in the extra points.
Here a fumble was recovered by the Sachems, who then drove to the Lexington six.
Tom Mooney, Sachem center, intercepted his second aerial of the season and again ran the ball into the end zone.
Macdonald failed to add the extra points on a sweep and soon after the final whistle blew.
Lexington — Le, Olsen, Harridan ; It, Carpentino, Malcolm; 1 r, Napoli, Petrie ; c, Clough, Stein ; rg, Calvert.
Winchester G 6 X 14—34 Lexington 0 14 0 0 — 20 Touchdowns — Bellino 4, Mooney, Jones 2, Olaen.
New among Winchester’s teachers this fall is Miss Gail Murray, elementary art supervisor in kindergarten and through grade 6 in all schools.
W* Photo by Ryereoii MISS GAIL MURRAY This is Miss Murray’s first year of teaching, though she practice taught at the Lincoln School in the fall of 1960.
Born in Winthrop, Miss Murray moved to Melrose as a girl and graduated from the Academy of Our Lady of Nazareth in Wakefield.
She holds the degree of Bachelor of Science in Education, which she received in June from the Massachusetts College of Art.
V Soccer Opponents Saturday Two Winchester boys, Guild “Bucky*’ Nichols, son of Mr and Mrs.
Kezar Nichols of Hillcrest Parkway, and -John Swift, son of Mr and Mrs.
The boys arc friends of long standing and were classmates at high school until John left to enter Holderness School.
Seek High School Coach of Year The New Enghind football officials organization is now in process of selecting a high school coach in Eastern Massachusetts for its third annual Memorial Award.
This coach will be selected for maintaining the high ethical standards demanded of the football coaching professions, and who is devoted to teaching the game of American football to boys so that they become men of true American sportsmanship.
Any fan, player, coach or official may submit a letter nominating any high school coach of hus choice.
Neither victories nor losses nor the division in which your selection is classified will affect the choice.
Please submit all letters as soon as possible to the president of the N E. football officials organization, Jan J Kozlowski, 21 Cotter Road, Waban 68, Mass.
The award will be made at the officials annual banquet Monday evening, Nov., at the Hotel New Brunswick on Massachusetts Avenue in Boston.
October 29 — Open November 5 — Winchester at Woburn Coaches Don Mac PI wee, Bill Sipp, and PM Gravalese are working hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needham.
Shop Early for a CHRISTMAS GIFT FOR MOTHER OR DAD ☆ Hand-Made Florentine Leather Desk Appointment and Memo Pad.
It s teen-ape apparel, gowns, and furs modeled by students and mothers, I Autumn in New Hampshire lets Hats also will be shown. the viewer accompany a young A lovely Emba mutation mink ' couple on a tour of that state in cape stole will be on chances.
A typical a beautiful door prize and other L ounty fair is ono of aevera i st op S gifts will be drawn during the evj . » t , n j n ^ r made as the trip propresses from Mrs.
Mrs. | tains resplendent in their fall foliJohn Dobbs of Watertown and ape, Mrs.
Donald McGinnis of Medford , a short film entitled Bridges are co-chairmen. j will be enjoyed particularly by Mrs.
Daniel Zenpa are Winchester I principles of construction of variCommittee members.
Y.P.F. is sponsorinp the only showinp, this year at Epiphany of Don Sheehan’s Beauty of Epiphany.
Mr Sheehan’s colored slides of details of the church’s interior with musical sound accompaniment enriches the knowledpe and appreciation of this edifice.
The Parish and friends in Winchester are cordially invited to attend this special event Sunday, October 22, at 5:00m. in Hadley Hall.
What becomes of a younp bad per who stumbles onto the hollow lop home of a mother skunk is amusinply recounted in A Badper’s Bad Day.
The Friday nipht propram and its accompanyinp display of books is desipned for families.
Frank C Laubach b to teach the illiterates to read, r while a missionary in the Philip> pines.
Mr Laubach will also attempt to teach the audience to read a sentence in Ethiopian the way they employ the system to teach the people English.
This meeting is open to anyone interested in hearing Mr Laubach’s talk and will take the place of the regular November meeting.
It will be held in the church hall and there will be no admission charge.
He might well ask why so many Christians who claim this do not agree on the meaning of the Scriptures.
Christ, of course, wrote nothing, excepting on one occasion — and then only in dust.
The Bible itself does not claim to be the Inspired and complete word of God.
The answer is, of course, that the only living authority is the Catholic Church . . . the Apostolic Church , . . the Church whose traditions, beginning with Peter, hear reliable witness down the pathway of time from Christ to this very moment.
It can present the testimony of such secondcentury writers as Clement of Alexandria.
Irenaeus, Tertullian and Origen; and from the third and fourth centuries Cyprian and Ambrose and Eusebius and Cyril, and many others.
All these bear witness to the vital importance of the Apostolic tradition.
The Catholic Church was preaching the Gospel of Christ years before the last book of the Bible was written . . . centuries before its writings were combined into a single book . . . nearly 1,500 years before the Bible gained worldwide distribution.
If you want to know more about the Church and the earliest followers of Jesus Christ ... if you want convincing proof to support your Christian convictions . . . write today for our free pamphlet giving a brief but dramatic story in the words of the fourth-century historian, Eusebius.
ST, LOUIS 8, MISSOURI Waltz Evening Committees Many people contributed to the success of The Camelot Ball, this year’s Waltz Evening, held last Friday and Saturday.
In addition to those who attended the dance, the loeal merchants who contributed prizes, and those who served as Patrons and Patronesses, were the many who worked on the dance committee.
The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very grateful to the following who gave so generously of their time and efforts.
Dietz To Brief ( Ion tractors Chidley ontinued from page 1 ) i This new honor for Mra.
Dietz of 19 I will come as no surprise to her Cambridge Street, Professor of many Winchester friends who are Building Engineering at Massu quit'* familiar with her work in chusetts Institute of Technology, j the dramatic arts both locally and is one of two members of the M.I.nationally.
But we doubt if even T faculty who will brief contractj her friends realize how interesting or members of the Associated Gen■ a life Mrs.
Chidley has led and eral Contractors of Massachusetts j just how much she has done for and their staffs at a meeting being 1 our Town, held this evening at Charterhouse Mrs.
Chidley, the former Frances Motor Inn in Waltham. j Elder, an energetic 77, has lived all S, Peter Volpe, executive viceher life in Winchester.
She was, in president and treasnrer of the fact, horn on Church Street.
After John A Volpe Construction Com| attending the Bellows School in pany and president of the AssociBoston she graduated from the ated General Contractors of Massachusetts, will preside.
Dietz and J Lloyd Cut. cliffe of Boston, instructor in Building Engineering and Con struction Management at M.I.T. will brief the contractors on a new construction management system being developed to meet the increasing need for exacting scientific procedures to plan, estimate schedule and control the complex building construction projects which are today to be seen springing from the ground in every community of the state.
Auxiliary To Meet Here On October 30 the first District 18 meeting of the Ladies Auxiliary, Veterans of Foreign Wars, will be held at the Aberjona Post Home, 15 White Street at 8:00 m.
Department President Margaret Eikrem will be present for the purpose of obligating new members.
At present a drive has been started to increase membership in the Auxiliaries in District 18.
It is hoped ladies from Winchester and surrounding cities and towns will attend this social.
Crittenton Circle To Meet The Winchester Circle of the Florence Crittenton League will hold its first meeting of the 1961 ’62 season tomorrow, Friday, October 20, 1961.
Derail Hintlian, 7 Wood Lane, and will begin with a dessert and coffee party followed by the business meeting and program.
Helen E Terkelsen, Protestant Chaplain, Crittenton Hastings House, will be the speaker.
Waltz Evening Patrons And Patronesses The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very appreciative of the large number of people who served as Patrons and Patronesses for Waltz Evening last week end.
Lewis L Wadsworth Troop 9 STOP FOR 1 DAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE ON ALL CHRYSLER BUILT CARS ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc.
Friday afternoon there was a mass campfire of all the girls camping at Cedar Hill.
They are now planning a program for the Friendship Guild of the Congregational Church in November.
Conservatory, the Pacific Theological Seminary in Berkeley, Calif., and the Gloucester School of the Little Theatre.
Chidley was a pioneer in obtaining suffrage for women, active in the movement ten years before suffrage was granted.
She served as president of the Winchester Women’s Suffrage Association and was on the executive board of the Massachusetts Women’s Suffrage Association.
When women’s suffrage was granted, she was appointed to the Massachusetts Republican State Committee and organized the party’s women’s activities in the 16th Middlesex District, which includes Winchester, Arlington, Medford, Stoneham, Wakefield, and Woburn.
In the state league she supervised a study of living costs in Massachusetts, preparing a brochure on this subject with Prof.
Schlesinger of Harvard and Daniel Bloomfield of the Boston Chamber of Commerce.
In 1917 she was assigned to the Fort Devens base hospi tal as a Red Cross medical worker in which position she served for two years.
After the war, as the 26th Division returned she was appointed as a casualty searcher in which capacity she interviewed hundreds of men of the 26th in the hope of learning facts about men of the livision who were missing in ac tion.
Army Hospital in West Roxbury, where she was assigned to a closed ward of shell-shocked patients in addition to work with patients in two open wards.
She also served as a medical social worker at the Chelsea Naval Hospital.
In 1909, following x rigid test on the narrowest streets of Boston, she became the first Winchester woman to get an automobile license, which she has held continuously ever since, with no accident decided against her.
In view of the fact that she has driven 500,000 miles, this is rather a record.
She is an aficionado of horseback riding and kept her own saddle horse for many years.
In addition, she was runner-up for three years in the women’s tennis championship of the Winchester Country Club.
For two years she played on the third women’s golf club team at the Country Club, playing matches in surrounding towns.
Howard J Chidley, pastor-emeritus of the First ConOVER 1000 ORIENTAL RUGS From sizes 1.6'x2.6' to 14.6'x30', including a selection of new, used, antique and semi antique in all qualities and colors.
Mon. through Kri., 8 A.M. 5 I'M. — Sat, 8 noon 8 gregational Church of Winchester, and took over the duties of homo maker and mother to her two step daughters, Elizabeth and Barbara Chidley.
She was commissioner of th« Winchester Girl Scouts for two years, founded The Parish Players, 35-year-old church drama group, was a founding member of the Winton Club, served as vice president of the Women’s Republican (’luh and was active in the Winchester League of Women Voters.
She also organized the Social Workers’ Advisory Committee, on which she was able to utilize her medical social worker’s training helping the pastor in aiding people who needed assistance.
During her thirty years as wife of the First Congregational Church pastor, Mrs.
Chidley has entertained constantly, giving yearly teas to the new women of the parish, entertaining the choir, Sunday School teachers, the deacons and church committees and their wives, the Senior Forum, the Parish Players, and the women’s organizations.
Chidley’s retirement from the pastorate in 1953, she devoted herself to looking after many of the needy cases of the church and became active in New England theatre work.
She was a founding member of the New England Theatre Conference and served as chapman of the Community Theatre Division of that organization for six years.
She served the organization as chairman of the special projects division for two years and as vice president for three years.
A former member of the Executive Board of the Massachusetts Council of Churches, Mrs.
She is a member of the United World Federalists and was appointed alternate delegate to the Stockholm Convention in 1954.
She is also a member of the Atlantic Union, the United Nations Association, the English Speaking Union, the National Child Labor Committee, the American National Theatre and Academy, the American Educational Theatre Association, and, of course, the New England Theatre Conference.
Chidley has traveled extensively in this country and in Europe and has also visited Mexico, Alaska, and Latin America.
She spent four months at the Hague in Holland, when her father, Samuel J Elder, was senior counsel for the United States in the Newfoundland Fisheries arbitration with Great Britain.
Chidley’s interest in international relations stems, she believes, from this engrossing experience.
It is an interest that has taken her over the Atlantic, by sea and air, eighteen times.
Her friends have very much enjoyed the illustrated talks based on these travels.
Chidley has indeed lived an interesting life, in the Winchester tradition of community service.
Her friends congratulate her on her honour and wish her all the best in the coming years.
Auxiliary Gifts Move Attend Meeting Under the capable direction of Mr William B Schmink of 21 Mystic Valley Parkway, the Win Chester Advance Gifts solicitation for the 1962 United Fund Drive is now underway.
Mr Schmink has a large and very able group assisting him in •this vital task of soliciting.
On Mr Schmink’s list of solicitors are Richard M Alt, Edward H Bailey, Richard E Bennink,; Bradford M Bentley, Dudley H Bradlee, Austin Broadhurst, Allan T Buros, William Davies, Thomas M Downes, Henry B Harris, Carleton F Heard, Alfred R Higgins, Gilbert H Hood, Jr.
Edmund A Merriam, Jr., Howard P Richardson, Dana D Sawyer, Arthur P Schmidt, Hiram L Smith, Jr.
Girl Scout News On Wednesday, October 11, in the First Congregational Church, 7th Grade Troop 9 from Neighborho<*I 1 were hostesses to 6th Grade Troop 33 of the Mystic School.
In preparation for our first overnight camping trip, our sister Scouts of Troop 9 were kind enough to show us some camping skills.
Group instruction for officers was held during the second half of the program.
Two skits were presented by Helen Rideout of Medford, Department Historian.
Members of District 18 taking part in the skit were Mary Thorne, President; Helen Rideout Jr. vicepresident; Florence Friend, President 1012 Medford; Marie DeLena 1012, Medford; Nellie Bolivar, President 3719, Winchester; and Mary Harrold, Past President, 3719, Winchester.
Also attending from Aberjona Auxiliary, Winchester, was Senior Vice President Gertrude Horn and Chaplain Anna Notemyer.
The next workshop will be held on October 21 at the William A Davitt Post, 625, in Chicopee.
Louis C Carey of Arlington, welcomed as a new member from Watertown, Mrs.
Alfred Frock, who husband teaches chemistry in the School of Liberal Arts, Mrs.
Ivy Winterton, Vice-President of the BU Women’s Guild, stressed the importance of procur ing warm clothing and footwear for the foreign students and for showing them American hospitality through invitation to individual homes.
Avenue, Arlington Mission 3-8770 Open Evenings 7 9 P M. marl2-tf Wanted Women I With Smiles I The crisp efficient Red Cross JCiay I.Jldi* 1 of Winchester, Bedford Veterans and Chelsea Naval 1 Hospitals are dedicated women volunteering their services every day I even Sunday.
There is an urgent need for more of these dedicated women “to help make the monotonous life of patients a little more bearable.
But they cheerfully do just about anything from feeding a patient to boosting his morale with a gentle touch of kindness.
One patient recently discharged after a long hospitalization wrote — “A little love and understanding still is part of the battle for recovery.
What made it extra special was that these women were there because they wanted to be.
A Red Cross Gray Lady course is being held at the American Legion Hall in Bedford November 2 from 9:45 to 2:30.
The Winchester Red Cross Chapter is providing transportation to and from Bedford.
We’d like to meet you before then to answer any questions and let you know more about the course.
Robert Margeson, PA 9-4845 or the Winchester Red Cross Chapter, PA 92300.
Reading Singing Group Wants Members A new singing group, the Reading Community Chorus, will meet Wednesday, November 1, at 8:00 m. to start rehearsals for “A Century of Showstoppers,” the first production of the season.
Anyone interested in participating in this production in any way is cordially invited to attend this meeting at the home of Mrs.
SPECIALS GENUINE BLACK FOX COLLARS S I9.95 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats CASHMERE SWEATERS WITH MINK COLLARS AND LINED *47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED INTO A \ CAPE, STOLE or CAPELET at a labor charge of s 20 SWARTZ FURRIER 24 College Avenue Davis Square Somerville SOmerset 5-3399 oct5-eow FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST SCIENTIST, WINCHESTER III Church Street Sunday Sendee at 11:00m.
Salvation is attained through spiritual awakening, growth, and progress.
This is a theme of the I,t*sson-Sermon entitled “Probation After Death"" which will be presented at Christian Science churches Sunday.
Metcalf Union meeting for High School young people; speaker is Mr David McKeynolds.
WElls 3-3077 NEW HOPE BAPTIST CHURCH Cross Street near Washington Street Rev.
Parker, Esterbrook, and Scripto pens and fillers available at /the Stax office, 8 Church Street. 9:80ra.
A most cordial welcome to this meeting is extended to Friends and their friends in Reading, Wilmington, and surrounding towns, as well as to those in Winchester. oct5-3t Eaton's personalized stationery for men and women.
I0.00000000000000000 o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o Visit us soon and take a Rambler Discovery Drive in a l%2 American, Classic 6, or Ambassador V-8.
Widest choice, of compacts anvichrrc — all with Rambler Excellence and economy.
Mr Kerrigan and his committee will he responsible for the activities of Tufts and Jackson graduates in the Reading:, Winchester, Wakefield, and Woburn areas.
Service Of Dedication Photo by RyerHon ire shown with CHILDREN FROM THE PRIMARY DEPARTMENT of the Unitarian Church Mrs.
Although quite a few early birds came, we hope for a better turn out next time.
Next Sunday the Y.P.F. will begin its program on Alcohol and Alcoholism.
The first session will be concerned with the personal and social damage which alcohol can lead to.
There will be four sessions one every week, followed by a session on Young Marriages.
We are very pleased with our new members and the terrific show of enthusiasm from the sophomore class.
Approximately forty mothers arrived and enjoyed listening to Mr Handy, the principal, explain the curriculum and the facilities available to our young people.
Claude Callaham were in charge of the excellent refreshments; and the Home Economics room was very attractively decorated with pumpkins set in pine branches and lovely bouquets of chrysanthemums.
The executive board wishes to thank all who participated in this first social hour and to give special thanks to the Junior High girls who helped to make the hour go so smoothly.
KERRIGAN A native of Woburn and a graduate of Stoneham High, Mr Kerrigan was graduated from Tufts in 1 1948.
He | is an executive with the Boston agency of the Union Central Life Insurance Company.
Leaders of the national campaign are Carl J Gilbert, chair man of the board of the Gillette Company, and Albert W Vanderhoof, president.
Mr Kerrigan is a Navy veteran of World War II and has achieved national distinction in the insurance field.
OILS PAPER i SURRA T TEXACO TEXAS GF UNION UNIVOIL KIM CLK ST REG I S ATCHSON d Co.
Senior, junior and sophomore high school students, their parents and school guidance personnel are cordially invited to attend.
Royal J Gardner, O.P., associate dean of admissions at Providence College will be the guest speaker.
Following Father Gardner’s talk, guests may visit booths of the colleges represented and speak with members of the alumni associations.
William W Davies III, 11 Sanborn Street, opera chairman of the Boston Vassar Club, has arranged today’s metropolitan preview of the new opera “Command Performance,” that will have its World premiere in November.
The pre-view is being presented at the Midtown Motel, Boston, for Vassar Alumnae and friends, featuring the composer at the piano, accompanying a few of the soloists, with the librettist and producer adding interesting highlights.
The story of the opera is based on a charming bit of Elizabethan adventure and intrigue, involving the plight of a young musician whom the queen dispatched to Turkey with an elaborate organ for the sultan.
The sultan accepted both with such verve that the young man had quite a time escaping, to make his way back to England to report to the queen.
The composition of this opera was made possible by an anonymous donor as a tribute to VassalCollege on the occasion of its centennial year.
Davies has announced that first choice of seats for opening night, Friday, Nov., at Kresge Auditorium in Cambridge, will he available to, and through, Vassar Alumnae for one week following today’s pre-view, before becoming available to the general public.
Chamberlain Windows Last Sunday morning, a service of dedication was held at the Unitarian Church in the Michelsen Room.
These are a gift of Mr Edward H Chamberlain in memory of his wife, Grace Caverly Chamberlain, who died last February.
The windows will serve as a background for the worship center of the children of the first, second and third grades.
The eighteen window panes depict the brightness of the universe and tell the story of the wonderful works of God.
The sun, the moon, the planets, the stars, the birds of the air, the flowers of the field, the animals of the forest and the fish of the sea are represented in lovely color.
These window panes are arranged in a design that permits the outside scene to come through.
A quotation from the writings of Joseph Addison is used as a memorial legend.
The firm of Wilbur H Burnham and Wilbur H Burnham, Jr., of Boston, designed these beautiful windows.
Mr Burnham and his son also designed the windows in Meyer Chapel and the windows devoted I to the theme of the Red Cross in the Cloister, which were placed in | memory of Dawn Bartlett Kelley.
The public is cordially invited to ' visit the church and see the Burni ham windows.
Then come to Hadley Hall, Parish of the Epiphany, Wednesday evening, October 25.
On Thursday the 26th the bazaar will re-open with a flourish Come one, cpme all.
A special children’s luncheon, pony rides, movies and a room set aside for the young shopper with articles priced for his pocketbook.
And, after the tired mother has spent almost her last cent for aprons, candy, knit articles and “knick-knacks” at the White Elephant table she can sink gratefully down and spend her last cent for tea.
Miss Plummer also announced that Miss Olivia Gagnon, a student in the graduate nurse program at Boston College is now working with the local agency to gain field experience in public health nursing.
Purtle, President, conducted the business meeting calling for reports by committee chairmen.
Jr., presented the following names for election as members at large; Mrs.
Dieterich, Corresponding Secretary, was instructed to inform the new members of their election.
As a final note, volunteers are urgently needed for transportation, autoclaving, and for clinics.
Eugene M Pollard will welcome calls offering assistance in any of these departments.
Surely not the price you pay for medicine that relieves pain and quickly restores good health.
Nothing else so vital to your well-being costs so little as prescribed medicine.
PArkview 9-4572 janl9-tf CLEANING WINCHESTER CLEANING SERVICE Storm Windows, Floors, Paint Washing, Rubbish Disposal.
WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 oot5-4l ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
Well over $40,000 house, reduced to *36,900 for quirk sd*' For appointment rail owner and builder BI 4-3247.
HIGHEST CASH PRICES Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Raffs, also Rubbish Removal.
PA 9-2835 apr6-tf MASON WORK DAVID J SPER0 & SON BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE MASONS Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls Brick Flower Boxes New and Repair Work Satisfaction Guaranteed Free Estimates MI 8-2751 octl9-8t PICTURE FRAMING | Picture * | Framing 2 at ; Winslow Press 2A Mt.
For the finest, most dependable TVRADIOHI-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMB0S l i TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing.
FOR SALE -1954 Ford Convertible, excellent .condition, used as second car.
WElls 60570. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because wo use remnants.
Hnverty, WElls 3-5389. sept 12-tf FOR SALE— 1958 Volkswagen blk. ww. tires, 16.000 miles, $1,095.
Must '(ell immaculate I960 Volkswagen sedan, carnation blue, white walls, 5.500 mileage.
FOR SALE — Four-burner Ultramutic Caloric Gus Range, excellent condition, $45.
FOR KAI.E — 1953 DoSoto sedan. good engine, 4 good tires and new spare, plus 2 snow tires.
FOR SALE— 1961 Cadillac Convertible, white, mileage 19,000, excellent condition.
FOR RENT FOR RENT — Five room apartment, modern buth, oil heat, near Center.
Garage Call PA 9-5285. octl2-4t FOR RENT — Professional office space with parking on grounds, central location.
Call WElls 3-2384. se>p21-tf FOR RENT — Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments. $190 up.
First floor has 3 large rooms with modern kitchen und pantry.nd floor has 3 nice bedrooms, den, and modern bath.
Hlllcrest 65521. octl9-tf WANTED WANTED — Ride from Stonoluim Square to Wakefield Square.:80m.
WANTED— Would like week day ride to Harvard Square, to arrive at Harvard by 9 and leave ut 5.
Hours arranged to fit your s e li e d u 1 Telephone Mr Proctor for appointment.
W Ells 3-3300 HELP WANTED WANTED — Experienced Imby sitter, ♦nuill children.
WANTED Reliable woman for baby sitting, one or two days u week, (’all pa 9-6623.
WANTED Secretary for Church School office. thirty-five hour week, 50 wt*eks, 2 weeks paid vneation.
POSITION WANTED — Experienced woman secretary would like part-time office position or will do typinff at home and cnll for and deliver work.
Dargle, Master of Music, NO 2-9020. octl9-4t * SEWING MACHINE SERVICE SEWING MACHINE SERVICE— Electric Sewing Machine Repair Service.
All makes including Japanese manufacture, 36 years of prompt, courteous service.
WElls 3-0052. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS WINCHESTER EMPLOYMENT — 10.00 to 12m., 4:00 to 9:00m.
Coll PA 93132. octl2-3t * PLUMBING — Heating, Oil-burner sales and service.
TeL WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There is a way out.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and ull Over The World can be mude at tariff rates by calling your Authorized Travel Agent.
Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out with you.
That a public hearing he held thereon in the office of the Building Commissioner, 9 Mt.
By the Board of Appeal Gilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V French Daniel T Chane CK*tl 9-2t Improve your bridge game with Autobridge, the game you play by yourself anywhere with champions as partners.
Report of condition of C~JL Winchester National / BAN K FOR SALE FOR SALE 1955 Ford Fairlane, 4-dr.
Sedan, fully power equipped, including Fordomatic drive, pow. steer., brakes, windows, and a 4way seat.
FOR SALE Modern 3-bedroom Ranch home; 2 baths, living room, dining room, all-electric kitchen, 2-car g a r a g e, completely finished basement.
MASSACHUSETTS of Winchester, in the State of Massachusetts, at the close of business on SEPTEMBER 27, 1961 Published fn response to call made by Comptroller of the Currency, under Section 5211.
I, Willium D Sullivan, Cashier, of the above-numed bunk .do hereby declare that this report of condition Is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.
WILLIAM D SULLIVAN We. the undersigned directors attest the correctness of this report of condition and declare that it has been examined by us and to the best of our knowledge und belief is true and correct.
Revised Statutes Report as of September 27, 1961, of Winchester National Bank • Building Trust.
The capital stock of the Winchester National Bank Building TruBt is owned by the Winchester Nutional Bank.
None I, Leelic J Scott, Treasurer of Winchester National Bank Building Trust, do solemnly swear that the above statement is true, to the beet of my knowledge und belief.
Leslie J Scott Sworn to and subscribed before me this fill du> of October.61.
Shnwmut Association owns 13,360 shares of the outstanding shares of the Winchester National Bank, Winchester Massachusetts.
Tyler, Vice President of Shuwmut Association, do solemnly sweat that the above statement is true, to the beat of my knowledge and belief.
David A Thomas, Notary Public. , Legal Notices COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS | Middlesex, ss.
I To all parson* interested in the estate of MABEL L VINTON late of Winchester in I said County, deceased.
A petition lut* been presented to said | Court for probate of u certain instrument j purporting to he the last will of said deceased by ROLAND R CARTER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed executor thereof, without giving a surety on his bond.
Witness, John C Leggut, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this third day of October 1961.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by PHILIP BOONE of Winchester in the County of Middleaex praying that he be appointed executor thereof without giving a surety on his bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-fifth day of September 1961.
To all persons interested in the estate of CHARLES E YOUNG, formerly known as CHARLES E YOUNG, JUNIOR late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition lias been presented to said Court for probate of n certain instrument purporting to ho the last will of said deceased by ALICE E YOUNG of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof witiiout giving a surety on her bond.
John V Harvey, Register. octl2-8t BUTTERW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 Opposite Parkin# Lot and Embassy Laundry july€-tf COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, hh.
To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES SIDNEY ALLEN, also known aa JAMES S ALLEN late of Winchester in said C<rtinty, deceased.
A petition lias been present'd to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by BKADLKE E CAGE of Amherst iri the County of Hampshire and SANFORD T A BULK of Gloucester in tins County of Essex praying that they be ap[»oint(*d executors thereof without giving u surety on their bonds.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty -eighth day of September 1961.
To all persons Interested in the estate of JAMES SHERMAN KENNEDY, also known as JAMES S KENNEDY and J SHERMAN KENNEDY late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by LOTTIE G KENNEDY of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she bo appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
Register. oct5-3t TO THE BOARD OP APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS October 2, 1901’ The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to giant permission to add a room to existing dwelling numbered 06 Grove Street, locating the same less than fifteen feet from the lot line.
Of course, if you are unknown to us, references are properly required* After your first deposit is accepted, you receive a checkbook for use in making your withdrawals and keeping records of your payments.
Friendship Guild The Friendship Guild, of the First Congregational Church, will meet Tuesday evening, October 4, at 8:00m. in the Palmer room.
A skit, “And You Never Know,” which is supplied by the Mental Health Program, is planned.
Gloria Keville, psychologist by background, and School Adjustment Councilor for Winchester Public elementary schools, will also lead a discussion period.
Manning C Morrill, chairman of Waltz Evening; Mr Richard Champagne, judge.
When Mr Khrushchev speaks of peace, he means a piece of the Congo, a piece of Laos, a piece of Berlin, and a piece of America.
Attended Rollins Workshop David Lawrence Conner of Winchester participated in the Florida Bankers Association Workshop October 12 on the Rollins College campus.
A sophomore business administration major at the college, David was one of six students in a money and banking course invited to the annual FBA session.
Nites to 9 P.M. aprl3-tf CYO Holy Hour And Dance A Holy Hour for high schoolers on Saturday, October 28, at 7m. signals the kickoff of National Catholic Youth Week hereabouts.
Monsignor John P Carroll, archdiocesan CYO director, will conduct the Holy Hour.
Richard Casalinuovo, Fred Fiumara, Patricia Overacker, Richard Rowe, George Nowell, Kathleen Kelley, Helen Nash, Gail Snelling, Betty Jean Kennedy, and Paul McCarthy.
Three Gates If you are tempted to reveal A tale someone to you has told About another, make it pass Before you speak, three gates of gold.
And if to reach your lips at last It passes through these portals three, Then you may tell, and never fear What the result of speech may be. something inherently dramatic.
Their doings make the headlines of the evening papers, and act as a sort of mental catnip for tired conformists who, after a hard day's work, are taking the 6.14 home to their wives and families.
Few plays would be written if people were uniformly good; there would be a drastic dearth of good plot material.
Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton Over our mantle we have this j n Boston.
They Tidbits were 1960 winners of the NorthSome of today’s movies are so eastern District Quartet Championlong that it takes less time to j ship, competing against quartets Bill Blackham Contest Winner Janies W Blackham, III, of 33 Canterbury Road won two tickets to the Hamid-Morton Circus at the Boston Arena as a result of his prize-winning entry in the Herald-Traveler’s “Name the Kangaroos Contest” sponsored by the Aleppo Temple of the Shrine.
Bill’s was one of the 53 prizewinning entries to find the two most appropriate names for a pair of kangaroos the Shriners are presenting to the Franklin Park Zoo.
His entry was selected from more than 10,000 received from all parts of New England in the kangaroo-naming competition.
Sometimes We Wonder Ever since Biblical days it’s been the prodigal son for whom they kill the fatted calf.
Verbal plaudits of a good man seldom occur until his funeral, but appreciation of a bad one comes at the time of his reformation.
Perhaps it is because there is in wayward or wicked individuals Learn the Play Way “Flash I Cards” now on sale at the Winj Chester Star.
One day Charlie Jones of Wichita, Kansas, got on a plane to fly eastward.
Louis the plane came down and a little red truck rolled out to refuel it.
The plane came down next at Celeveland and once more a red truck came to refuel it.
The plane was on the ground again at Albany, once more being refueled from a red truck, when Charlie Former Selectman William N looked at his watch and observed.
The new assistant in the optical-goods store was being instructed by the proprietor.
Then you pause, and again you wait. the sponsors for the building campaign being undertaken at Tabor Academy “Bill”, a member of next year’s forty-year class at the Academy, attended a sponsors meeting last Saturday at Tabor for the discussion of plans for the drive.
While at the academy he participated in rowing He graduated from Harvard and Harvard Law School and has practiced law in Winchester for many years For the high schooler, faculty or student, stationery imprinted with the Winchester Sachem in red.
PArkview 9-1062 Two Irishmen stood in front of | the kangaroo’s cage in the Bronx Zoo.
Nites to 9 P.M. aprl3-tl FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
Expert Service and Repairs Mirak's complete shop facilities (one of the largc>t service and body shops in V F I oilers skillful service ami repairs on all makes.
S Senior Hass West Berlin Student Likes Studying Here “I like America very much, and I love Winchester.
So said Gisela Von Klocke, the German girl from West Berlin, who is living in Winchester and spending the school year as an exchange student at Winchester High School, sponsored by the School's ParentFaculty Association.
Photo by Ryereon GISELA VON KLOCKE Gisela spoke of her liking for Winchester and America during a recent visit to the Star Office.
Pleasant Street and the Waldron’s three children, Susan, a junior at high school; Judy in the eighth grade at McCall Junior High and Brad, a pupil at the Lincoln School.
Her introduction to American teen-age fun was at a big party in Bedford, former home town of the Waldrons, to which she went with Susan.
We need the addresses of the servicemen and women who have entered the service since last December because we do not have any record of them.
We do not want to miss anyone from Winchester who is serving our country, th erf ore, we need the help of their families to be sure wehave the latest correct name, rank, and address.
Meeting On Shelters Tonight A meeting designed to better inform the people of Winchester on civil defense problems will be held at the Vinson-Owen School, Johnson Road, on Thursday evening, October 2(5.
Miss Lanigan has been asked to discuss school safety in the event of a nuclear attack.
It is felt that this program will answer questions in the minds of all of us as to how we can best protect our families in an emer-^ gency.
A class will be held at the Bedford American Legion Hall November 2 from 9:45 to 2:30.
For more information cal PA 9-4845 or your Winchester Red Cross Chapter PA 9-2300.
Stole School Money Youths Found Guilty Of Break; Sent To House Of Correction A ttended Heritage Day Program An outstanding junior high student, Robert Callahan, son of Mr and Mrs.
James Callahan of 11 Richardson Street, was chosen to represent the Immaculate Conception School in the Massachusetts Heritage Day Program at Plymouth, Saturday, October 21.
He was accompanied by Sister Mary Rosanna, principal of the school, and Sister Mary Alisa, his teacher.
Henchey Monday mortiWobtirn District Court to the Billerica House of Correction after they had previously been found guilty of breaking and entering with intent to commit larceny, larceny from a building and malicious damage to a school house.
The two youths, one 19 and the other IS were arrested early in the morning of October 5 at the Lynch Junior High School at the Well Field site.
Officers Archie O’Connell and John Farrell found the pair while making a routine check of the building.
When they were picked up the youths had a crowbar, a pinchbar and a combination pick-axe and adz with a short handle.
The vouths were taken to the Big Green At Reading Dartmouth’s varsity football team, en route to meet Harvard at the Stadium Saturday, will practice Friday afternoon at 2 o’clock at the new Reading High School athletic field above the square.
Dana Kelly, former Winchester High grid star, is one of the quarterbacks with the team.
Police say the youths admitted they had previously on the night of their arrest broken into the McCall Junior High School and had stolen $100 from various school funds at the building.
Damage estimated by the police as amounting to several hundred dollars was done the school.
Money stolen included insurance money, candy money, bus ticket money, towel money and other sums.
A revolver used for starting races was also taken, and as yet the police have not been able to locate this.
The two youths appeared later in the morning of October 5 before Judge Henchey in the Woburn Court, at which time a continuance was asked and granted.
The case was continued until October 13 when Judge Henchey found the youths guilty as charged.
Attorney for the pair asked for probation, but neither the Judge nor Police Chief Joseph J Derro would agree.
YOUTHS, continued on page 7 Winchester Girls Named Williston Scholars at Mt.
Ilolyoke Two Winchester girls recently were named Sarah Williston Scholars at Mount Ilolyoke College.
T hey are Miss Phyllis L Rutter of 78 xford Street and Miss Marcia Anne Smith of 92 Lawson Road.
Both are members of the junior class, and graduates of Winchester High School.
Frank W Rutter, last year received the French Government Prize for excellence in the study of French.
Robert M Smith, received the Bernice Mac Lean Prize for special projects in basic zoology in 1960.
Sarah Williston scholars are those students who made a high academic record in their freshman and sophomore years at Mount Holyoke.
Sarah Williston prizes are awarded to the five scholars who stand highest in their class at the end of their second, third, and fourth years.
The awards are named for the first woman elected to Mount Holyoke’s Board of Trustees, in 1884.
More United Nations Fund Workers Needed Winchester United Fund leaders have reported that 41.2% of residential solicitors and 50% of small business solicitors have been enrolled for this fall’s United Fund campaign.
Volunteers are still welcome, Fund leaders report, to help make this year’s campaign succeed.
To fill the urgent financial needs of United Fund agencies, to keep them open and able to serve, they must have more dollars.
Call your local leader, or call United Fund Headquarters at Richmond 2-2010.
Board W aits School Data No Town Meeting As Yet The Board of Selectmen at its meeting Monday evening set no date for a special town meeting to consider the request of the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee for more money than the appropriation voted by the town to build the school.
The Building Committee has written the Selectmen asking them to call a special town meeting to appropriate at least $11,000 in addition to the $9,000 remaining in the original budget.
The committee has estimated that at least $20,000 will be necessary to complete the school.
The Selectmen have met with | — — — — Home From Ghana, Nigeria; Attends UNESCO Conference the School Building Committee to discuss the additional funds required, but at these meetings a complete list of necessary items with exact costs was not available, and the Selectmen have been unwilling to call a special town meeting to consider the matter until they have more exact knowledge of what is now lacking at the school and just what it will cost to complete the job there.
The school has been in use since the opening of the school year in September, and in addition to the pupils attending school there, the new building houses the offices of the Superintendent of Schools.
In general the Building Committee has mentioned that the new school needs books for its library, science equipment, aids to teaching, furnishings for the teachers’ room and School Committee room and racks for the storage of lumber and metal for the woodworking and metal working shops.
It is also possible that some changes in the school ventilating system will be necessary.
One of the requisites to transferring the land on which the school is located from the Water and Sewer Board to the School Committee was the erection of a fence around the well fields remaining at the site.
As yet this fence has not been built, which raises the question whether this land is not still under the jurisdiction of the Water and Sewer Board.
The School Building Committee is presently reviewing its requirements to complete the work at the school with costs of the items necessary.
The Selectmen are awaiting this information before calling the special town meeting requested.
More than 1000 persons representing a cross section of the country’s educational, cultural and scientific life are attending the conference.
Mr Spaulding is a member of the United States National Commission for UNESCO and is a National Commission consultant for the Panel on Educational Systems.
A member of the hoard of Franklin Publications, he is also educational consultant to the group.
SPAULDING, continued page 8 Christmas Seal Chairman New Parking Regulations Police Chief Joseph J Derro has announced that complaints of a serious traffic hazard existing in the vicinity of the Winchester Hospital have prompted a “no parking” restriction for the westerly side of Highland Avenue from Fairmount Street to Maple Road.
I Conditions in this location during peak traffic have been such that neither fire apparatus nor an am| bulance could get through on an 1 emergency errand.
Arthur l\ Bonney of Winchester, English teacher at Stone-ham High School, has been invited to present her material on a linguistic approach to spelling in secondary school to a Linguistic Workshop in Philadelphia, November 21, 22 and 23.
Auditorium, Cambridge, on November Bill Davies’ musical career began in the Mystic School Band.
He played in the high school band while still in junior high, and earned his letter before going on to lead the band at Deerfield Academy.
Since graduation, he has been playing regularly with such civic symphony orchestras as Quincy, Concord and Boston, and has “arranged” for Herb Pomeroy.
In Winchester, Davies has been a regular member of the Unitarian Church Choir and the annual May Musicale, and has played character roles in productions of the Unitarian Players.
William W just been engaged to play the forthcoming new opera its world premiere at her 17 and 18. represents the Sultan of Turkey, requiring great virtuosity of the player as well as dramatic experience.
This unique event was made possible by an anonymous friend of Vassal* College, in honor of its centennial.
J Churchill Ilindcs, retired Winchester dentist and supporter extraordinary ot all high school teams, have donated the handsome trophy in his honor, and none at all acquainted with high school athletics, especially football, can think of any one more deserving.
If for no other reason, this should make the trophy doubly worth the winning.
A native Vermonter, “Doc” graduated from Vermont Academy at Saxton’s River and played his first organized football there as a left halfback on the Academy eleven.
Those were the days when it didn’t cost well over $100 to equip a boy to play football.
You let your hair grow long to protect your head and wore the knit turtle-neck of a jersey around your ears to them intact.
Shoulder pads were sewn to the outside of the jersey and pants were also padded at the hips and knees, with deluxe models having rattan guards at the thighs.
If your nose and shins were tender, you wore a rubber nose guard and shin guards of canvas-covered rattan.
AWARD, continued on page 11 “The Show Toppers,” an exciting group of six young singers, have been returned by popular demand for their third triumphant season at the Terrace Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton in Boston.
They have also won acclaim in Bermuda where they appeared this past summer.
Tomorrow night they will present a program of songs from top Broadway shows, both past and present, accompanied by the music of Ruby Newman.
They are the top barbershop quartet in New England and have also placed high in international competition.
I lie new “Doe” llindes football I ropb\ promted to \\ inebester j the leader of the group, is a rosilligli School by friends ol l)r.
J Churchill Hindus, retired d< ‘iili.-t and staunch supporter of high,dent of our neighboring eity of school teams.
I he trophy is awarded yearly to a member of the iootbull team lor '’Outbiuiidiilg Woburn.
Many parties have been planned interested in this phase of teaching high school English and has spent several years developing her procedures with her students.
Bonney will presently complete the requirements for the degree of Master of Education for Experienced Teachers in English.
She has been granted a three day leave of absence by Stoneham High School to attend this meeting.
Bonney resides at 10 Norwood Street with her husband and three children, Alfred, James, and Mercer.
SHERMAN B RUSSELL Sherman B Russell of 1 Wolcott Road has been reappointed Winchester chairman for the 1961-02 Christmas Seal Campaign.
Opening date of the 55th Annual TB Christmas Seal Campaign is Monday, November 13, and letters with TB Christmas Seals enclosed should reach all Winchester residents by that date.
Mr Russell will be working closely with Miss Anne Foley of Woburn, volunteer campaign director during the next few weeks.
Set Clocks Back Daylight Saving officially ends Sunday morning, October 29, hut you set your clocks and watches hack w’hen you turn in Saturday night.
That hour you lost last April when you set the time pieces ahead for the benefit of the gardeners and sportsmen comes back to you next Sunday.
You won’t need to grope around in the dark when you get up to go to work from now on; that is, unless your rising schedule is unusually early.
Of course it is going to be dark an hour earlier and Motor Vehicles Registrar Clement A Riley has issued a warning to motorists that their driving vision won’t be as good as it has been on the way home.
He cautions drivers to look out for wet leaves and meandering pedestrians.
In addition to enjoying an excellent show, those who attend “Musical Moods,” will have an opportunity to win as a door prize an evening for two, all expenses paid, at the Statler Hilton Terrace Room.
The committee members, who have been working under the direction of Mrs.
Richard T Preston, chairman, to bring this top musical talent to Winchester, are Mrs.
Don’t miss this fine show, which I is being sponsored by tlu* Winchester Junior Circle of Florence Criti teuton.
A record total of 14,113 depositors will share in our highest dividend payment f* are happy to ufitiounre the latest di\i»lend payable October l l L UMl, in the amount of $336,355. marking a rerun I dividend to a record mimher of depositors which now has reached a total of 11.113 accounts in regular and school savings.
This is a fitting climax to our *)th year of service to \V inchester savers and home-owners.
Other Assets Cash and Deposits in Ranks S 6.171,81 1.66 1.161,126,84 13,788.843.71 61 1 .696.39 20.888.
Allen O Eaton C harles S Eaton Maurice T Freeman 1871-1961 Our 90th Year Edward V French Ralph W Hatch Waldon B Hersey Charles T Main, 2nd Charles L Moore Herman F Pike William J Speers, Jr.
Philip P Wadsworth James B Willing Joseph W Wort hen latest dividend per annum Bay State Historical League There was a large attendance at the State House on Saturday, October 21, for the Autumn meeting of the Bay State Historical League.
The new Archives Building, with its many valuable documents and exhibits beautifully displayed in the Edward J Cronin Hall, were most interestingly explained by Dr.
Later members of the State House Police took groupB on guided tours of the many offices and corridors, pointing out portraits and statues of many celebrities, as well as showing the Massachusetts battle flags from the War of 1812 to the present in the Hall of Flags.
The afternoon meeting was held in the House of Representatives, with its white mahogany paneled wall and above the rostrum are five murals entitled “Milestones on the Road to Freedom in Massachusetts,” painted by Albert Herter, father of former Governor Christian Herter.
Hale introduced them for Secretary of State Kenwin White, who later graciously greeted the League at his office.
Mr Richard F Lufkin gave some pertinent historical facts concerning the building, saying that the comer stone was laid July 4, 1796 by Gov.
Director Edward P Logue spoke on “Some Historical Aspects of Boston’s Redevelopment,” saying thut Historical Societies should work with the Development project.
There are Colonial, Revolutionary and Victorian buildings and most should be preserved in their location or redistributed, and not destroyed.
In the Library were Governor William Bradford’s manuscript of the History of the Plymouth Colony, Commission to Sir Edmund Andros as Royal Governor of New England, jeweled gold medal from Government of Haiti, and the sword and chair of Governor Endicott.
The Fortnightly Woman’s Club Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall was decorated with Halloween colors for the Guest Night of The Fortnightly on Monday, October 23.
John B Wills had decorated the coffee table with beautiful autumn foliage, making it most attractive.
Frank White were very efficient chairmen of the Social Committee, who served the delicious dessert, which carried out the color scheme.
Ralph W Hatch, President, and Mr Hatch greeted all just inside the Hall.
This was followed by the Salute to the Flag, and by the singing of “America the Beautiful” with Mrs.
The well-known musicians Salvy Cavicchio (marimba-xylophone artist) and Dan Cavicchio (accordion soloist) gave a delightful program of popular, semi-classic and a few classic numbers.
Four ladies and four men volunteers came to stage and each were given what looked like a small pipe of an organ, and played the “Bells of Saint Mary’s,” with the assistance of Salvy Cavicchio.
It was announced that the Literature Group invited all members of the Fortnightly to their program in the Rich Room on Wednesday, November 1.
Eva Henderson speaking on the “Middle East” to be held November 10 at the home of Mrs.
Adolescents And Parents Workshop Theme Adolescents and Their Parents will be the topic of an open workshop to be held November 9 at the auditorium * of the Massachusetts Mental Health Center at 74 Fenwood.
Registration will start at nine and sessions will continue till after luncheon.
The meeting is being sponsored by the ladies of the Massachusetts Mental Health Center Auxiliary. t The keynote address will be given by Dr.
Wermer is a training analyst of the Boston Psychoanalytic Institute, a member of the staffs of the Children’s Hospital and the McLean Hospital and a member of the faculty of the Harvard Medical School.
There will be small workshop discussions in which visitors may participate.
The leaders of these small groups will include eminent local psychiatrists whose work has been with young patients.
A panel will then review the conclusions reached during the workshop’s day.
UNICEF Sunday The young people of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church have a very busy weekend planned.
UNICEF, operated entirely under the direction of the United Natoins, provides milk and food for children in many under-privileged parts of the world and has saved the lives of untold numbers of children.
Also, it has provided tools and instruction in agriculture to provide further relief in these stricken lands.
The young people will leave the church, two by two, on Sunday afternoon at three o’clock.
When they have completed their assignments they will return to the church for a “snack supper” and a brief devotional service.
The program is headed by Norman Stafford, president of the senior M.Y.F and Calvin Keeler and the Rev.
Richard L McGuire, adult advisers. ss (Japp Speaker In Mornings Series On Thursday , October 19, in Hadley Hall, a very large group of Winchester Mornings subscribers turned out to hear Miss Margaret Clapp, president of Wellesley College.
M iss Clapp spoke of four basic facts which are influencing our education in this transition period, namely, the tremendous increase in population; the explosion of knowledge; the shortage of teachers; and the shrinking world.
She spoke of the problems and confusions which face us and of the great tasks which lie ahead in the field of education.
We must be wary of impatience and short cuts and realize that there are diverse needs and many roads to meet them and that we should be concerned not with theories but with the individual.
We have to realize that in the not too distant future our secondary-school student may be facing a world which has very little resemblance to that of today.
She spoke of the marvelous revisions in curriculum which have alroady been achieved, especially in the secondary schools.
In the fields of mathematics and science great strides have been and are being made and there are the beginnings of a change in the teaching of history and a new emphasis »n language and literature.
We can no longer consider a Western world and an Eastern world, but we must learn to think in terms of one world.
The need for teachers is tremendous, teachers who have enthusiasm and something to communicate, teachers with the sort of character we would like to have our young people imitate.
This is not an easy order Miss Clapp admitted, but such we must have if we are to make progress in achieving our goal.
In the light of the importance of education in our world and of its increasing cost, Miss Clapp feels that we should re-examine our expenditures of time and money, both personal and civic.
Developments in the suburbs are encouraging, she said, but they cannot live in isolation and whatever happens in the poorer sections of our cities is going to affect the suburbs.
The problems and the dangers are many and we must keep in mind that education is not for greed, not for the purpose of outdoing one’s neighbor, hut for the benefit of all.
Subscribers are reminded that Mr Saville R Davis will speak in Hadley Hall on Thursday, November 30.
Toastmistress Club The Winchester Toastmistress Club met Monday evening October 23, at the home of Mrs.
Barbara Harrington, president, presiding, and introduced the guests for the evening, who were Mrs.
Alice Coldwell of Reading was Toastmistress for the evening and very graciously introduced the two 5 to 7 minute speakers.
Doris Dagnese, Medford, a new member gave her maiden speech about “The Clock,” and Mrs.
Inez Yagjian, Winchester, was the Topic Mistress and passed each member unusual topics of interest for the impromptu speeches.
Beulah Thompson, Medford, was general evaluator and pointed out many common errors used in the speeches.
Phyllis Thorensen, Malden, timed the speeches and proved that good Toastmistresses abide by the “Golden Rule” not to talk overtime and put everyone to sleep.
Members were called upon to demonstrate the many different ways gestures could be used and to be aware of the gestures used by speakers in public &b well as on television.
Every member of a Toastmistress Club has an opportunity to participate in all meetings which is part of the training program the club affords.
The club meets every two weeks on Monday evening and to be uble to think on ones feet is the prime objective.
Don’t be a poor Susie, and get all frustrated when asked to speuk to people at your clubs next special occasion; visit Toastmistress and observe how one can gain poise and diplomacy that is so important in todays rhnotJr world.
For more information call Mi 3-9630. *e*'' * * ft'* eo%y to bewitch the family with wonderful meal* when you Jo your weekly shopping at Converge.
Old Testament Scholar At Second Church WhA Snow y W, 2b, Jownes Winchester Home And Garden Club The Winchester Home and Gar1 den Club opened its year’s proi Next Sunday morninfr, Dr.
Miss Sandra Motwm L nor offortyawards, gave ave| lev Snow, to Gregory Downes, son I r y beaut,fuI and outstanding illusgational Church.
He has served as Field Secretary of the American Schools of Oriental Research.
He was professor of Old Testament History and Theology at McCormick Seminary before he came to Harvard Dr.
Wright is the Archaeological Director of the Drew-McCorniick Archaeological Expedition to ancient Shechem in Jordan.
Fuller), and other books which have contributed signifi cantly to the field of the Old Testament and un understanding of its history and relevance for the present church.
Paul C Dunn of Grove Street, located in Ashburnham, burned down last week Monday.
The Dunns had spent the week-end at the cottage and left everything in order.
A defective chimney is believed to have been responsible for the delayed fire.
Glamour Tips For the extra glamourous touch to your hairdo trv streaking.
These little pin points of light throughout your coiffure give it a highfashion look.
Heimlich showed member of the senior class at| how each problem was solved and Wheaton College.
A debutante of the 1958-59 season, she was presented to society at the Debutante Cotillion and the Country Ball.
J Edward Downes of Cambridge Street, prepared at the Belmont Hill School for Harvard from which he was graduated cum laude in the class of 1981.
He was a member of the Delphic Club, the Hasty Pudding-Institute of 1770, and the Varsity Club.
Memorial Hospitals DIANA MAUREEN CONNOR Miss Diana Maureen Connor, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Frederick A Connor of Sheffield West, ecent graduate of the Massachusetts Memorial Hospitals School of Nursing.
The attractive feature this year is a fabulous 17 day excursion through Italy with all expenses paid, for two, or the equivalent in money.
As usual there will be a large number of articles for sale ranging from hand knit items; imported religious objects; plants and flowers; attractive aprons, books or foodstuffs and stunning holiday decorations.
Pumpkins Stolen John Fallon of 61 Hutchinson Road reported to the police that shortly before 11:30 last Thursday night two men got out of a ear and stole two Hallowe’en pumpkins from his porch, driving away.
Yesterday morning a Westland Avenue mother phoned the Star that two pumpkins she had carved for her youngsters had been smashd by boys on her front steps.
She bonders what fun boys get out of spoiling children’s fun, and the Star wonders too.
Kirsten Travel Agency 29 Thompson Street, Winchester — PA 9-5410 extraordinarily beautiful gardens created, enhancing the beauty and livableness of the home.
He outlined the changing schools of thought regarding placement of plantings and general effects desired.
After World War II two schools of thought emerged, one emphasizing “massed effects;” the other, restraint, topography, apd beautiful lawns.
At the present, the trend is away from large plantings massed against the house, instead there is developing as strong emphasis toward beginning with the outer edge of one’s property and creating a picture effect that one can enjoy from one’s own windows.
Mr Heimlich’s lesson in wall building was simple and practical He showed by his pictures how to begin a wall, starting always with a broad base of rocksand tapering upward, then adding the plantings in two parts of loam and one part of sand.
This combination will insure years of slow steady root growth so essential to a beautiful Alpine wall or rock garden.
Harold S Lewis for the secretary’s report of the spring meeting, and upon Mrs.
Vaccaro announced the Certificate Service Award given the club by the Veterans Administration hospital at Bedford for out standing volunteer service to the hospital.
The committee in charge of this project consisted of Mesdames Ray Brown, John Wills, and Harold Twombly.
Letters of appreciation were read from the Board of Trustees of the Winchester Library for the memorial gift in memory of Mrs.
Stewart Chaffe, and from Blind Handicraft Shop for the volunteer work given on behalf of the Sale for the Blind.
Announcement was made regarding the Christmas Greens Sale to be held December 6 at the First Baptist Church.
Granville M OilPatrick’s lovely home for the making of Christmas decorations and wreaths.
Cones and all other materials that can he used for the sale, are needed and may he left at the home of Mrs.
John Baylies and Miss Sylvia Parker for their devoted work of solicitation of flowers and fruits for the Boston Flower Mission.
A newly developed member participation project centering around a theme for the month, was explained by Mrs.
Two beautiful arrangements depicting the fall theme were on display, arranged by Mrs.
Russell P Pearl, social chairman, assisted by Mesdames John J Hefferman, Lorenzo Della Femina, Clifton Shea, Edward Devlin, and Miss Sylvia Parker.
Cr eaut owner '/ WalLon _ QooJrou, 3, f ran$on -Mi •99 "" ,J Van Zife J<c eegcui There is Winchester interest in The marriage of Nona Rae Hig Miss Irene Louise Keegan, the marriage Which took place at /gins of Brookline to Paul Edmund ; daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Susan will represent Lexington and \\ inchester in tin* Miss Massachusetts Pageant at Lexington this spring.
Winner of this contest will vie for Miss America honors at Atlantic Citv.
Roger C Bainbridge of 23732 East LeBost Drive, Novi, Mich., are the parents of a daughter, Robin Beth, born October 17, at the Henry Ford Memorial Hospital, Detroit, Mich.
James Faieta of Malden announce the birth of a son, Janies Faieta, III, on October 20.
William McLaughlin of Flint Avenue, Stoneham announce the birth of son, William McLaughlin at Winchester Hospital, October 5.
Frank Frongillo of Kugler of Washington, D.C. an-*C,inn Road and Mr and Mrs.
William J Gallagher, Jr., of Wollaston, formerly of 40 Church Street, Winchester, announce the birth of a son, William Joseph, HI. at St.
Gallagher is the former Madelyne Moynihan, The grandparents arc Mr and Mrs.
Edward D Fitzgerald, Jr., , of 15 Church Street announce the birth of a second daughter, Karen Mary, on October 10 at the Winchester Hospital.
Edward D Fitzgerald, Sr., all of Winchester. rge McLaughlin, Summer Street, Stoneham.
Joseph Nastasi of 41 Leslie Road recently gave a pre-nuptial tea and cocktail party in honor of Miss Camille G Gravellese of 20 Ledyard Road, who is soon to marry Mr Salvatore Caraviello, Jr., of West Medford.
The refreshment table was beautifully decorated in white and red and lavish flower arrangements made an attractive setting for the party.
Miss Gravallese will be honored at several pre-nuptial parties before her marriage, which is to take place on December 2. when Miss Marcia Louise Good row, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
The Papal Blessing was imparted at the 10 o’clock ceremony, which took place in a setting of white and pink gladiolas and chrysanthemums.
Daniel Cavanaugh, who was also celebrant of the Nuptial Mass which followed.
Church of the Advent in Boston, j Mary’s Church to Richard Ralph The Rev.
Junior High Fellowship The Junior High Fellowship of the First Congregational Church will meet in Chid ley Hall on Friday, October 27 at 7:30m.
Each Junior High person is asked to bring a gift for men who are confined to Nursing Homes such as tooth brushes, tooth paste, razor blades, face cloths, handkerchiefs, pocket kleenex, postal cards and stamps.
She wore a gown of silk organza over taffeta with Chantilly lace appliques, a matching lace chapel length train and long organza sleeves.
Her French illusion veil was caught to a crown of sequins and pearls and she carried a white missal topped with an orchid and having streamers of stephanotis.
Miss Ellen C Lamplough of Arlington was maid of honor and the bridesmaids were Mrs.
Howard R Goodrow of Mansfield Center, Conn.; sister-in-law of the bride and Miss Eleanor Murphy of Medford.
All the bridal attendants wore dresses of emerald green peau de soie with hell-shaped skirts and matching how headdresses with short veils.
Goodrow, mother of the bride, wore light blue lace over mauve silk with matching accessories and white orchids.
Mathson, mother of the bridegroom, also wore white orchids with her Dior blue crepe dress with lace top and matching accessories.
The bride, a teller at Winchester National Bank, is a graduate of Matignon High School in Cambridge.
Mr Mathson is a graduate of Woburn High School and is associated with the Polaroid Corporation in Waltham. o’clock ceremony was performmarriage ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Martin J Dolphin, who was also celebrant of tho Nuptial Mass which followed.
PAUL FRANSON The bride, who was attended by her sister, Miss Bobbe Morse of Needham, wore a gown of heavy ivory satin, embroidered with lace and pearls and fashioned with a sweetheart neck, Victorian waistline and a chapel train.
Her fingertip veil of illusion fell from a crown of pearls and she carried a white prayerbook topped with stephanotis and white orchids.
The bridesmaid wore a princess style red velvet dress with a boat neckline, three-quarter length sleeves and a semi-full skirt.
Her headpiece was of white pearls and she carried a cascade bouquet of white chrysanthemums.
On her wedding journey to the Pocono Mountains in Pennsylvania the bride wore a grey and blue Chesterfield suit with a matching grey hat, black accessories and a white orchid.
She is a member of the . veiyet frock with matching shoes Chi Omega sorority.
VAN ZILE Miss Keegan was given in marriage by her father, and attended by her sister, Miss Gail Ann Keegan of Winchester, as maid of honor.
Miss Patricia Witham of Jamaica Plain was flower girl and bridesmaids were Miss Rose-Marie LaBreque of Lowell, Miss Jane Bahhin of Arlington and Miss Roberta Davis of Framingham.
The bride wore a gown of Alencon lace and net with a pearl neckline and a matching veil caught to a headpiece of pearls.
She carried a white missal topped with orchids and having streamers of valley lilies.
The honor maid wore a tangerine velvet dress with matching headpiece and shoes.
Christopher DiFranco of 58 North Border Road announce the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Ann, to Mr Salvatore Colozzi of Somerville.
Kimball of Woburn, and Rye, N II., have the honor to announce the marriage of Mrs.
Kimball’s daughter, Josephine Frances Avcndano to Garrett Mullins, the son of Dr.
Nadine Mullins of Concord, N H., on Saturday, August 19th in Los Angeles, California.
Mr Mullins graduated from Wil liston Academy and attended Mid dlebury College.
MISS ELIZABETH DiFRANCO Miss DiFraneo is a graduate of Winchester High School, class of 1961, and' is employed at Raytheon.
Mr Colozzi is stationed with the Air Force at Lowry AFB in Denver, Colo.
George H Peckham of 20 Euclid Avenue celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary on Saturday, October 21, at the home of Mr and Mrs.
Peek ham, Jr., and Mr Richard T Peckham, all of Winchester; Mr and Mrs.
Beckham, who observed their )0th \>ed* grandchildren and two greatJ ding anniversary October 21, grandchildren.
Annual Church Fair The annual fair at Old South Methodist Church in Reading, will be held on Thursday and Friday, November 2 and 3, and will be in the colorful setting of a Harvest Festival.
The timely motif of our bounty of New England in the fall will he carried out throughout the spacious church buildings under the direction of Mrs.
There will lu\ a variety of arrangements and plants at the plant center.
The festival will be climaxed by a delicious roast beef dinner to be served at 6:30 on Friday evening by the Rachel Circle.
The bride graduated from Matignon High School in 1958 ami from Burdett.
Monsignor Manion, the Spiritual Director opened the meeting with a prayer.
President Ruth Sylvester then held the business meeting, and the Country Store to be held November 8 at St.
The refreshments for the evening were supplied by the Mothers of the School in the form of a “pot luck” supper.
What marvelous cooks we have, Betty Crocker could take a few lessons, the casseroles, salads, and desserts were something to behold.
Eleanor Stygles and hen* committee along with the mothers are to be complimented on a job “well done,” certainly nobody went home hungry.
Spring 4*6600 i THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 26, 1961 Page Four •(Olittitarirs — i Frank J Burns Frank J Hums of 2 Wyman Court, retired cut-sole manufacturer, died at his home shortly after midnight Saturday morning, October 21, following an illness extending over eight years.
Anselm’s College in Manchester N H. lie spent more than 50 years in the cut-sole manufacturing field, and was for many years president of the Burns Cut Sole Leather Co. in Boston, retiring eight years ago because of failing health.
He was a member of the Charitable Irish Association of Boston, the Hatherley Golf Club of North Scituate, and the Scituate HarborYacht Club.
On August 29, 1921, Mr Burns married Bessie McCHllis of Bridgewater, who survives with three daughters, Miss Justine Burns of Winchester, Mrs.
Ernest J Mansmann Jr., of Alexandria Va.; a son, Edward M Burns of Winchester, seven grandchildren, a brother, Rev.
Raymond Bums, O.S.B., of Manchester, N.H.; and two sisters Miss Rose Burns and Mrs.
The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the late residence with Solemn Requiem High Mass at St.
Thomas Lane of the Immaculate Conception Church, Newburyport, was celebrant; Rev.
Betsey F Nutter Miss Betsey F Nutter, a member of the family at the Home for Aged People and a Winchester resident for nearly 60 years, died Tuesday morning, October 24, at the Reading Nursing Home in Reading after a month's illness.
She was born September 10, 1877, in Salem, and attended the Salem schools, graduating from Salem High School.
She came to Winchester in 1902, at that time making her home on the Parkway with her mother and her sister, Lillian.
Harry Y Nutter, a dentist in Winchester and later for many years, Town Treasurer, died in 1953.
As a young woman she worked as a clerk for the Boston & Maine Railroad, later being a secretary for an accountant in Arlington.
She last worked as a bookkeeper for the Winchester express and furniture moving firm of Kelley & Hawes, and their successor, William Kuhn.
Miss Nutter retired from this position and in July of 1958 entered the Home for Aged People.
She was actively identified with the First Congregational Church and a member of its Business and Professional Womens’ Club.
Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at 2:30 at the Kimball Chapel with Dr.
William E Gross of Winchester is USAF Senior Advisor to the 8310th Air Force Reserve Group which is a part of the Air Force Reserve’s new recovery mission.
It is believed this mission can save millions of lives throughout the nation in the event of war.
She was horn December 12, 1895, in Lockport, Illinois, blit lived as a girl in Winchester in Glengarry, graduating from Winchester High School in the class of 1§13.
Funeral services were held Friday afternoon at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister.
Margaret E Aiken of Stetson Hall, widow of Daniel Aiken and mother of Professor Howard H Aiken of Winchester, died early Thursday morning, October 19, after an illness of three years.
Died Suddenly On Business Trip Emanuel F Marascia, 41, of 5 Laurel Hill Lane, an accountant with offices in Malden, died suddenly Tuesday, October 24, in the Rockville Hospital in Rockville, Conn.
He was on a business trip in Connecticut and became ill while driving his car.
His death which occurred an hour after his admission, was attributed to a heart attack.
He was born in Hartford, Conn., and had lived in Winchester for the past seven years.
During World War II he served as a lieutenant, junior grade, in the United States Coast Guard.
He leaves his wife, Ruth V (Sullivan) Marascia; his mother, living in Cromwell, Conn.; a son, John, 15, of Winchester; and four sisters, all in Connecticut.
The funeral will be Saturday morning at 9 o'clock from the Owen P Doonan Sons Funeral Home in Malden.
OVER 1000 ORIENTAL RUGS From sizes 1.6'x2.6* to 14.6'x30*, including a selection ot new. used, antique and semi antique in all qualities and colors.
David Baird was awarded a gold and silver arrow, William Byford, a gold arrow and Robert Shannon was awarded his seventh silver arrow and Bear Badge.
Robert Gilpatric, Clifford Letty, Bevill Lambert, Reed Sullivan, Dean Hakanson, Bruce Clark, Curtiss Clark, Frank Cullen, John DeVries, Dana Smith, Michael Smith, Robert Thompson.
Paul Visconti, Douglas DeNatale, James Mulcare, Aathur Page, Timothy Price, Ralph Roberto, Kurt Woodward, Richard Bannister, Marc Harrington, Stephen Lanigan, Larry Spang, David Swiedler, Peter Visconti, Jay Bradley, Jr., Mark Carlson, John Cummings, Nicholas Rowse, Richard Tambone, Thorpe Thompson, Stephen Washburn and Don West water.
Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club All roads appear In lead to Winchester on Wednesday evenings, as the WDBC continues to draw players from all over the greater Boston area.
Club master point night on October 18th was attended by visitors from Lexington, Medford, Arlington, Belmont, Stoneham, Everett, Dorchester, Waltham, Framingham, Lincoln, Wellesley, Cambridge, Wakefield, Burlington, Newton.
Section A completed 22 boards at 11 tables for an average score of 110.
Our guest editor of last, week, Gerry Lawrence, paired with Betty Yeomans to out-distance everyone in both fields by a healthy margin.
This tournament attracts more interest than any other type, and is generally considered to be the major event of the year.
Today, this column welcomes its 19th guest editor, in the person of Guy MingolelH, who will hold forth on the necromantic aspects of the game as he discusses the hand that appeared to be quicker than the eye.
BRIDGE MAGIC A good magician can perform his wizardry before an alert audience.
The not so good magician must rely on a not so alert audience or a bit of confusion such as the babble of voices which attends a friendly duplicate session.
It was i played 5 times by EW at heart I contracts, 3 of which were set.
Our 1 hero, one of the more ambitious, | played and fulfilled a contract of j 3 hearts.
North A J V A 7 5 4 3 2 ♦ 10 6 2 A 10 9 8 West East A 8 A A 96 5 2 V K Q J 10 9 V 8 H ♦ 9 r> ♦ 8 1 3 A A J 5 3 2 A Q 6 4 South A K Q 10 7 4 2 V ♦ A K Q J 7 A K 7 West — III, 2C, 2H, 3H North— P, P, P, P, East— IS, P, P, p South dble, 2D, 2S, P The spade bid by E was very important in that it prevented all but one NS pair from arriving at an unbeatable 3S contract.
VV tested the heart situation, forcing the AH, and learned about the had trump distribution.
N returned the singleton JS (a heart return would have ruined the trick) which was taken in dummy.
Our friend reached deep into his hag of tricks and led a low club finessing his jack, picked up the K with his A and made dummy’s Q good.
A spade was ruffed by declarer and a club led to the eight of hearts to complete the sleight of hand.
First National Stores GREEN STAMPS Orange Juice Valencia 6 oz can Sweet Peas Tender lOozpkg Corn Whole Kernel, Golden lOozpkg Broccoli Chopped lOozpkg Spinach Leaf or Chopped lOozpkg Grape Juice Concord Var. oz can.
Cracker Barrel — Sharp Kraft Cheese Supplies ""All-Morning"" Energy Quaker Oats 2 LB 10 OZ STICK Hershey, Nestle's, Milky Way, Sky Bar, Waleejo, M&M's, Bolster, Schrafft's.
Your neighslated governments match the aid hor’s son or daughter will ring received at least two and a half your boll and chant, “Trick or times.
It is hoped that everyone will cooperate with the young people in their efforts to he useful and constructive on their fun night.
Last year the small coins collected Trick or Treating for the Children’s Fund totalled $1,750,000.
PA 9-2990 TV Service Phono Radio Winchester Appliance Co. aprl3-tf Open House At High School The annual open house at the senior high school will be on Thursday, November 2, at 7:45m.
Once again the ParentFaculty Association hus planned a program enabling parents to become directly acquainted with a typical daily schedule of a high school student On that evening, parents will follow their son’s or daughter’s program and pass to classes according to a special bell schedule.
Teachers will meet with their various class es and supply pertinent informa tion concerning their area of study Informality will be the keynote in the school cafeteria where refreshments will be served through out the evening.
At the end of the class schedule, there will be a very brief business meeting of the Parent-Faculty Association in the cafeteria to vote on changes in the constitutional by-laws.
Mulhall. acting manager; Marguerite MeCarron and Paul Donahue, members of tin' executive committee.
More than forty members of the club will participate in the show, which is under the capable direction of Mae and George Kean.
Chairman for the evening’s fes tivities was Marion Manone; cochairman, Julia Petitti, ably assisted by hostesses Gerri Buzzotta Ven.
Gussie Fiore, Ann Dunbar Marie Pizzo, Vi Bruno, Jennie Am ieo, Joanne Mistretta.
An evening of fun and dancing was enjoyed by all to the music of Billy Radd’s Orchestra.
Set Sauce Pans S*49 Q7 Val. v/c Bob Pins 25 c Val. 9c Picture Frames $1.00 66 69c 47c Kubbcr Mats 3 .oo i 77 Val.
Playing the disks on a record player enables the blind to hear and absorb the spoken words.
Telephone Pioneers of America Celebrate 50th Anniversary Chairman of the Board of Selectmen, Sherman Salt marsh, has proclaimed Pioneer Week beginning October 29 as the Telephone Pioneers of America celebrate the oOth Anniversary of the founding of that nationwide organization at the Hotel Somerset in Boston on November 2, 1911.
In observance of this anniversary the North Council is presenting a bronze plaque to the city of Cambridge during Pioneer Week commemorating the first long-distance two-way telephone conversation by Alexander Graham Bell and Thomas A Watson from Boston to Cambridgeport.
On October 31, the Council will hold an Open House at the formal opening of the new Pioneer Lounge and Work Shop in Winchester.
They have also entered a float in the Woburn Lions Club Halloween shire.
She is now teaching chil Parade held annually on this date, dren who have normal vision.
This On November 2 at the Ilillview board member was Charles A FarCountry Club in North Reading, rar from Winchester whose daughthe members and guests of the j ter is Norma Farrar.
This was the beginning of what is believed to be the oldest contin uous Community Service project in the Pioneer Association through out the country.
In the first year, the Council purchased two recording machines and cut approximately 1,200 records.
Since that time, three additional machines have been purchased, and in 1960, seventy-five North Council volunteers cut 6,600 records.
The machines are now installed in five air-conditioned soundproof recording booths at the National Braille Press of Boston, where the records are cut.
Just last week the Council produced a musical revue oalled “Sentimental Journey” at the Arlington High School Auditorium as a fund-raising project.
Two more recording machines have been purchased and will be installed in the new Winchester Lounge, thus broadening the opportunities to assist the blind.
The Work Shop will take on an additional responsibility of repairing and helping to keep the many machines used by the blind in good working order.
Plans for the dinner will include dancing, enter tainment and a hobby show.
The guest speaker will be Thomas M Hennessey, vice president of Public Relations of the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company, a widely known resident of Winchester.
After joining the Telephone Company he held several administrative posts until 1944 when he was appointed assistant vice president in charge of Public Relations and in 1956 was elected vice president.
In 1947 he was Greater Boston general chairman of the U.S.O., and has been a member of the New England and Boston Development Commission and of the United Fund.
In addition he has held several positions on Boards and Committees for the Town of Winchester.
The Telephone Pioneers of America is an association open to all men and women working in the telephone industry who have spent at least 21 years in the business.
The other 200,000 members of the organization, the largest social fraternal organization of its kind in the world, not only provide close ties with their fellow members, both employed and retired, but are Actively engaged in such community-minded projects as repair of ‘talking book” machines for the blind and hospital volunteer work.
He had larned Braille in an effort to help his daughter who had become totally blind.
Through the Massachusetts' Division of the Blind, a group of these Pioneers learned of “Talkhai rr scuaFFiiei & MARX gathers the clans for a parade of this season’s handsomest suits From Scotland’s glens comes the inspiration for HS&M’s parade of fall patterns.
Our HS&M suit collection is wide and varied for a particularly personal choice of model, fabric and color.
He is married to the former Sandra Merrill Nelson, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Helen E Terkelsen, Protestant chaplain at the Crittenton Hastings House in Brighton, was the featured speaker at the first meeting of the Winchester Circle of the Florence Crittenton League.
Terkelsen acquainted the circle with some of the problems and joys associated with her position at the Home, as well as discussing the factors which in general, are responsible for the difficulties the girls at the Home find themselves in.
Terkelsen, an attractive woman and a delightful speaker, raised three sons before enrolling at Andover-Newton Theological Seminary from which she graduated with honors.
She proved herself eminently gratified to handle the spiritual phase of the program at Crittenton Hastings House.
Maxwell McCreery, president, welcomed the large group of new and old members to the meeting held in the beautiful home of Mrs.
Bradford Bentley led a short devotional period which was followed by the reading of the secretary’s report by Mrs.
Paul LaMarche introduced the twenty-five new members who were cordially received by Mrs.
William G Urmson, chairman of the Bazaar Committee, gave a detailed report of her committee’s work and plans for the Winchester table at the annual Florence Crittenton Bazaar to be held at John Hancock Hall on Wednesday, November 29.
Urmson also invited all members to attend the pre-sale to be held on November 15 at the home of Mrs.
Baptist Couples Club to Hold Square Dance The next meeting of the First Baptist Couples Club, originally scheduled for October 28th, has been moved ahead to Saturday, November 11th, so that all club members and their friends may enjoy a gala square dance in the Social Hall of the church at 7:45 m.
Each year, the club’s square dances, featuring Winchester’s favorite caller, “Mickey” Meurling, grow more popular.
And this one promises to be the biggest yet, with more couples than ever before joining hands in a good time.
All Baptist couples, or any Winchester couple who would like to join the group for an evening of fun, frolic and refreshments are cordially invited to phone Virginia Butterworth, PA 9-1519, for reservations.
Irene Brigham, chairlady of this event, and her committee have worked very hard to make this a success, which we are sure it will be.
There will be a table of special prizes worth $5.00 donated by the business firms.
There are also penny tables, toy tables, hand made articles and refreshments.
Everyone is cordially invited and welcome, not only will it be fun but you can get a head-start on your Christmas shopping.
Tickets will be on sale Thursday and Friday, October 26 and 27, at Converse Market.
Walter G Overacker announced the first sewing meeting to be held on Thursday, November 9 at 10:00m. at the home of Mrs.
This report gives the members a first-hand account of daily doings at the Home.
Richard R Pettingell arranged the program for the day and introduced the speaker to the group.
James P O’Brien, 27 Governors Avenue, has been elected secretary of her class j at Addison Gilbert Nurses Training school at Gloucester, Mass.
John Dolan and Officer William Haggerty picked up a girl whom they found hiding on the railroad overpass in the center.
Edward F Bowler, giving several names and addresses that were obviously fictitious.
Bowler called the Lexington police and learned that the girl lived in that town, was 17 and a confirmed runaway.
She was held at headquarters and given into the custody of her father later in the morning.
The doors will open that evening at 7 o’clock, and bidding starts promptly at 7 :30.
During the evening there will be an old fashioned snack bar, with doughnuts, coffee, cider for sale, to keep bargain hunters refreshed.
Interesting antiques,* tables, lamps, china, pewter will be auctioned off, as well as many oddities that make any auction fun to watch.
We will do thi' hard, dirty work, which is removing the old finish, and then you eon do the fun port of putting on a new finish.
In fact, we will demonstrate our new KY’EN-KYEN Wood Stain and Wood Finish, both of which apply with just a cloth to produce a rich, beautiful finish just about as easy as (lusting.
PA 9-0902 I Page Six THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 26, 1961 The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr.
Not too many did, but those who were in the auditorium heard a lot of things about communism crystalled by one who as a counter spy for the FBI was a member of a communist cell for nine years. 1 is knowledge of his subject was first hand.
Upon how we, the western peoples meet this crisis depends our very existence.
In support of this thinking the speaker said that when the communism we know came into being with the overthrow of the Czarist regime in Russia not more than one per cent of the world’s population was communist.
Now onethird of all the peoples of the world are communist and one-<|uarter of the globe is under communist domination.
The communists are continuing to take over territory at the rate of a thousand square miles each day.
In Mr Philbrick’s opinion there is no “cold war” between democracy and communism.
There is also no such thing as a “good communist,” except in the communist sense.
A communist has only one goal, the overthrow of the free world hy communism.
The communists with whom lie associated in bis communist cell in Cambridge were almost invariably well to do and included business and professional men, college professors, physicians ; well educated persons who were leaders in their communities.
Communist propaganda is disseminated to the masses, the poor, the down-trodden, the underprivileged.
Support of communism often comes from such people, but the real communists are not of this strata, according to Mr Philbrick.
Communists in Massachusetts said Mr Philbrick number some 300, and in the whole of the United States, only 10,000.
There is little consolation in these figures for the communists are very careful to have none hut true party followers enrolled in their ranks, working on the assumption that one real communist at the right time and in the right place is all that is necessary for their world conquest.
Not a few have found comfort in the often heard statement that the Red Chinese and Russian Soviets do not like each other and are likely to grow wider apart through the years.
Mr Philbrick pricked that bubble by saying that recent pictures of Red Chinese troops show the men wearing Russian made helmets and hoots and carrying rifles made in Yugo-Slavia.
Russia would hardly he arming a huge nation it may have to tight some day.
They both have the same plans for all free peoples. their conquest by the proletariat.
China wants to move violently against the west, meaning the L nited States at once.
American apathy and stupidity will land the nation in its sphere without violence.
Our government, in Mr Philhrick’s opinion, is getting nowhere in its opposition to the communist campaign against the free peoples.
It is failing he said primarily because it has no clear conception of what action it is necessary to take and because of what he said baldly is sheer stupidity. 1 he speaker does not believe that communism is making its inroads in our country because of treason in high places, though there has been sot lie of this.
Inept handling of our campaign and poor salesmanship throughout the neutral world are to blame for our failure more effectively to combat communism to date.
As an example the speaker said that this country is supplying airplanes and arms to Yugoslavia. which in turn are being sent to Cuba to aid the communist campaign against us there.
Some in the Philbrick audience recalled the scrap iron and steel sent to Japan during World War II to kill our soldiers in the Orient.
He is not the jxx>r cane cutter many suppose, a leader springing from the down-trodden.
He comes from one of the wealthiest families in pre-revolution Cuba and is well educated.
Because our government, Mr Philbrick finds, is failing in its effort to combat communism, it is now necessary to take the fight to the people at the grass roots.
They are in his opinion the last hope. nce they get a clear conception of the danger to their freedom posed by communism they will effectively oppose it.
Most of all in this connection Mr Philbrick believes education is the key.
On every side are conflicting claims, many of them communist-inspired to becloud issues and further confuse those ignorant of communist procedures.
Our first duty as citizens is to learn all we can about communism, to learn exactly what a communist is, exactly what he believes, how he works and toward what goals.
A communist thinks that anything that promotes communism is good, that only with world communism will come peace.
Accordingly anything communism can do to further its interests is a step toward peace; anything that brings al>out world dominance by communism is a movement toward peace.
Through this reasoning Mr Philbrick said the communist party violently denounced as murder, the execution of two persons in this country convicted bv a court of law of treason while holding up as in the interest of peace the wholesale execution, after a farcical trial, of people in a satellite country accused of sedition by Soviet spies.
Though concerned and apprehensive over our failure to combat communism more effectively Mr Philbrick is far from hopeless about it all, and he warned his audience not to panic or to take a defeatist attitude.
We do not have to he “red” or “dead,” but we do have to wake up and know communism for what it is and combat it wherever possible.
Talk about communism, tell your friends about communism, see to it that our schools arc not inadvertently teaching communism.
Mr Philbrick expressed himself as concerned over the fact that New England, the Cradle of Liberty, is perhaps the section of the country most apathetic to the threat of communism.
In the middle west and on the west coast big crowds turned out to hear him.
In the south and west emphasis is being laid on patriotism and the American wav of life in schools.
The speaker expressed himself as pleased to see many young people in the audience.
One of the youngsters asked a question sufficiently pertinent to indicate lie had followed Mr Philbrick’s remarks closely.
Elsewhere in a hall a small group of teen-agers talked and laughed during much of the latter part of his talk.
This was ironic because Mr Philbrick and Nikita Khrushchev, Russian premier, agree that unless America wakes up our young people will grow up under communism.
The young people in the hall last Thursday were the ones who will he most terribly affected hy a successful communist conquest of this country.
It was good to see that most teen-agers present paid the closest attention.
Mr Philbrick, using as a slide rule the rate of communist take-over in the past, predicted that we have 1 2 years of free society left us, UNLESS we wake up, stop our confused thinking and take positive steps to defend America. lie is confident this will he done.
He believes the same vision Washington had in those dark hours and the same courage and devotion to duty shown there hy his freezing, starving troops will keep this nation, what it has always been since the Revolution, the greatest country on the earth.
Let’s Keep Channel 2 How often we hear TV programs critizcd as being of little value, even as entertainment.
Many have said they would he glad t<» have paid TV if through that instrumentality they could he sure of getting worth while programs.
I and a lot of hearts sink with the smoking embers as those who had appreciated what tlu* station had been doing educationally and culturally contemplated no further programs, at least for a time, from that source.
The Catholic Television Center in Boston and other channels made it possible for Channel 2 to continue its programs the very day after the tire.
Individuals and business responded with financial donations and many persons have promised to initiate community-wide drives for contributions.
LIFE Magazine last month called Channel 2 “'Hie most prestigious station, and NI AVSW ELK devoted a full page in reviewing a recent program.
World renowned, hardly a week passes without several overseas visitors, most at the ministerial level, touring the W ( d»l 1 studios.
As news spread of the W (dll I disaster, messages flooded the area from across the nation.
Manv of these states viewed Channel 2 programs on the National Education Television Network and wired pledges of financial supjxjrt.
W(iBH officials stress that the station must literally rebuild from the ground up new studios, new offices, “new everything”, at a cost of $ 1 ,500,000.
The sooner this goal is reached the more quickly \\(»BH can resume its significant cultural role.
The development of the town manager method of administration in Massachusetts must he divided into two distinct periods based on the “weak manager” concept, stem ming from the Norwood act of 1914, and the “strong manager” form created hy the Saugus act of 1947.
The Towns of Norwood, Stoughton, Middleborough, Orange and Mansfield fall under the first category, and the towns which have accepted town manager enabling legislation since 1947 come within the latter classification.
While the origin of the council manager plan is uncertain, Staunton, Virginia, is usually mentioned as the first community to utilize this form.
In 1908, Staunton, by ordinance hired a “general manager” to serve as a full-time administrator under an old-fashioned weak mayor and bicameral council system.
A committee of seven was ap pointed and after due deliveration presented a report.
Since it was believed, however, that the existing form of government did not lend itself to such a project, the committee was enlarged and charged with the creation of a scheme of government that would be in harmony with the new office.
The activities of this committee led subsequently to the adoption of the Norwood Town Manager Act of 1914.
Although the adoption of this was indeed a major step for a Massachusetts community to take, by today’s standards it illustrates weak manager administration.
The special act concentrated more essential managerial authority in the selectmen than in the manager.
Under the act, the moderator, five selectmen, five school committeemen, the town treasurer and collector, the finance committee, library trustees, the planning hoard, and the board of health were all elected.
Furthermore, the selectmen appointed the town clerk, town accountant, physician, fire chief, building inspector, sealer of weights and measures, forest and fire warden, fish and game warden, boards of assessors, public welfare and appeals, and the registrars of voters.
The selectmen were given the powers of the board of public welfare, highway surveyors, water, sewer, and park commissioners, municipal light board, and tree warden.
They fixed the salary of the manager, assessors, town clerk, and town accountant.
Specifically, however, he was to organize, continue or discontinue such divisions or departments from time to time as may be determined by vote of the selectmen or in the absence of such vote as may be determined hy the general manager.
He had the power to appoint and remove all superintendents or chiefs of departments and all subordinate officers and employees in such departments and to fix thensalaries and wages.
He was to attend all selectmen meetings and give recommendations of the needs of the town.
He prepared budgets for the departments under his control, was responsible for the maintenance of town buildings, and was the purchasing agent for all town departments except schools.
Finally, he had control and supervision of the police department subject to the direction of the selectmen.
The special acts establishing town managers in Stoughton , Mansfield , and Middleborough were essentially the same as the Norwood act.
In Mansfield and Middleborough the finance committee was abolished and its duties transferred to the selectmen, while in Stoughton a five-man elected finance committee, which also acted as a planning hoard, received the budget estimates from the town manager.
The town treasurer and the collector of taxes were elected in Middleborough and appointed by the manager in Mansfield.
The selectmen, however, continued to exercise control over the major appointments as well as supervise the administration of departments ostensibly under the town manaKer.
The answer is to be found in analyses of the charters which seem to indicate that certain principles of public administration are being violated.
The list is actually so long one wonders just what that section referring to his power to appoint superintendents and subordinates really means.
Secondly, the phrase “subject to the direction and supervision of the selectmen,” which was used in practically all sections dealing with the manager’s powers and duties, tends to violate the separation which should exist between politics and administrationif the manager plan is to be successful.
If “direction and supervision” are interpreted to mean interference in the day-to-day administration of municipal departments, then the authority and responsibility of the manager is irrevocably undermined.
Like all modifications in government, the changes that are involved in the adoption of a town manager charter are very slowly accepted by the general citizenry and it would be foolhardy, indeed, to expect any Massachusetts community to accept a strong manager charter at such an early date when the plan itself was relatively unknown and untested.
Full acceptance was given to the strong manager concept with the introduction of a town manager charter for Saugus in the General Court in 1947; the bill subsequently passed and the citizens of Saugus ratified it in 1948.
The fact that it had been 17 years since Orange had accepted the town manager method is important because it reopened consideration of the plan as one method of improving a town’s management.
Further, the Saugus bill tended to correct some of the shortcomings of the previous charters granted to Norwood, Stoughton, Mansfield, Middleborough and Orange.
The town manager’s power to appoint was extended to such positions as a planning board, a board of welfare, a board of health, a board of playground commissioners, a board of cemetery commissioners, a board of fire engineers, three qualified assessors, a town clerk, town treasurer town collector, town accountant, a superintendent of public works, and a town counsel.
The selectmen were limited to appointing members of the board of appeals, board of library trustees, election officers, registrars of voters, and the town manager.
It is certainly fitting and proper that the selectmen have the appointing power over these boards since they are quasijudicial and are not concerned with day to day administration.
He was further authorized to reorganize, consolidate, or abolish those departments, commissions, and boards within his province, and he could also establish new departments, transfer duties, powers, and appropriations.
Although it appears that too many boards still existed, it is obvious that the town manager established by this legislation was, indeed, the chief administrative officer of the town and had the authority commensurate with his responsibilities.
From the explanation of the two types of manager plans, the reader, who is cognizant of the place that the office of selectman has in Massachusetts town government, may think that this “ancient and honorable” position is being reduced to impotence under a strong manager charter.
We shall endeavour to point out, however, that the role of the selectman is being redefined in the light of modern pressures on town government and upon the office of selectman in particular.
As a practicing hypochondriac, I am constantly confounded hy the number of jicoplc I meet who never visit a doctor.
Many of us lesser souls will wind up unnecessarily dead long before anyone conies around to ask us the secret of our longevity.
Some of tis will get knocked off playing the great American game of Detroit Roulette.
You know the figures as well as 1, and it’s a measure of our callousness today that forty thousand annual deaths on the highways bother us somewhat less than having the TV set blow out.
But there’s a bigger and more dreadful and more wasteful figure than that.
A quarter of a million Americans will die this year who don’t have to die, because they’ll have had cancer and won’t know it until too late.
Two hundred and fifty thousand people — equal to about two-fifths of the population of Boston — will he gone twelve months from now because they didn’t get a checkup in time.
This word “checkup” has had a lot of lip service. but most of us haven’t given it much thought.
To many it sounds like a corrective procedure, so they don’t get one because they feel fine.
A proper anti-cancer physical examination is devoted to finding cancer, or conditions which may lead to cancer, in its early stages.
This is virtually the only weapon we now have against this killer, and it’s nut used often enough.
And it’s best and most thoroughly practiced at a new type of clinic of which there are some two hundred already established throughout the country.
Our local one is the Massachusetts Cancer Detection Clinic, at 1095 Beacon Street, Brookline, a non-profit, voluntary organization chartered and licensed by the Commonwealth.
Norman Lenson, a surgeon who saw one hopeless case too many and resolved to do something about it.
The clinic is staffed by nine part-time doctors who receive just a token fee for their examination, and volunteer professional nurses and lab technicians who serve without pay.
There, in two visits taking a total of about three hours, you can get a thorough-going physical examination that will amaze — and, I trust — delight you.
Fees scale down from a maximum of twentyfive dollars, according to the examinee’s ability to pay.
Massachusetts and many other states require at least a cursory physical examination for your car twice a year.
There is no law I know of, however, that says you have to do something about preserving your own life.
A postcard or phone call to the Clinic at BEacoti 2-191“ will bring you all the information.
Richard A Haknnson, Publisher James H PenaTigan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor end Publisher 1919 1954 The Winchester Star, left at your Residence for one year, $4.00 in Advance Single Copies, Ten Cents The Winchester Star assume* no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements but will publish without 'harge a correction in the neat issue, or republish that portion oi the advertisement which is incorrect.
At i Police Chief Derro producing the lettf parents of children Washington School cipal.
To provide for the best traffic safety for our pupils, we need your assistance in eliminating the hazards.
We will appreciate any support that you can give us in this phase of the child's education.
N urn burger is at Forest Street and Highland Avenue at the foot of Hie hospital hill.
Mr Lambiase directs traffic at the Kenwin Road and Washington Street crossing.
Despite warnings from both home and school, Some children criss-cross the roads and walk in the streets with no regard for their own safety.
Accidents can occur in less time than it takes to mention the possibility.
A certain number of our pupils favor short-cuts where there is no officer on duty.
We must make a concerted effort to see that they cross in the proper places.
Because of the hospital construction, great caution must be exercised on Fairmount Street.
They require a wide swing when they enter and leave the hospital grounds.
On rainy days, those of you who drive to school are aware of the congested traffic.
Although there are no one-way streets in the school area, it will help if you enter Reservoir Street and circle around to Appalachian Road.
The officer cannot control the situation when cars are going in both directions on Appalachian Road.
Please caution children not to dash out between parked cars when they see your car.
We request that you do not park your car near the Highland Avenue and Kenwin Road crossing at dismissal hours since the full view of the children who are proceeding to the crossing is obstructed, when cars are too close to the corner.
We suggest that you allow approximately fifty feet from the intersection before you park to wait for children.
We Two years ago this week Dr cannot overemphasize the need for Sylvester died and after being euj greater caution when pupils are en route to and from school.
Sincerely yours, Leonor M Rich, Principal (»ct>iue Washington School (Ed.
This is a statement made by Herbert Philbrick last Thursday evening to the half filled High School Auditorium of Winchester that showed an interest in learning more about communism, how it works and how best to combat it.
Mr Philbrick’s statement was based on the take-over rate by communists since 1945 and projected to conclusion, 1973.
It is a sobering thought if we all just take a few moments to consider what it would mean to each and every freedom we now enjoy.
It is indeed more sobering if we consider how close the timetable could be.
Mr Philbrick stated that the forces without and within our shores were one and the same and the 10,000 party members operatin our country are truly a dedicated and efficient team.
I therefor submit that one important place to start this knowledge is in our own school system.
This is not a proposal to administer an entirely new course in our school curriculum.
However it does make sense to me that in this apparent late hour a study of some book on how to understand and combat communism should be more important than “A Midsummer Night’s Dream.” with due respect to Mr Shakespeare.
Farnum, 7 Edgehill Road I logigcd by the priest for his goodness to these poor people, he was buried, as he had wished, amongst them.
And as we turned away from his prairie grave in the shadow of the snow-capped Rocky Mountains, an old Indian came up to us and said, “We see Dr.
A year ago last June, when Governor Furcolo was attending a conference of United States Governors at Glacier National Park in Montana, 1 wrote to His Excellency and asked if he were anywhere near Browning, would he please visit my brother’s grave.
A short time later, I received a beautiful letter from Mr Furcolo in which he enclosed colored photos, one of which showed the primitive cross inscribed with the name Dr.
Corrigan and also a little circle of flowers planted there by his beloved Indiana with whom, even in death, he shared a common bond of affection.
My thought today is to ask you readers to please have a little prayer for this Doctor and a kind thought for the ex -Governor.
The writer believes that when a I specific situation is met with such j good judgement our police officers should be backed and commended.
Last week there was a horse galloping north on the railroad overpass between the two local stations.
On behalf of the League of \ V < The Judge, in refusing leniency, strongly condemned the actions of the youths and warned others that he did not baby-sit or take by the hand these young ttien.
He said that both young men had been given every opportunity to go straight and pointed out that recent crimes they had committed came while one was on probation and other awaiting trial on a continued case.
Sylvester Corrigan, not only to have been a graduate of Harvard Medical School but also, for a number of years, a chief medical officer amongst the Blackfoot Indians in Browning, Montana.
Members Neui York, and Boston Stock Exchanges, American Exchange INVESTMENT SERVICE FOR MORE THAN 60 YEARS RONEL’SGirls’ STRETCH SKI PANTS Made of 100% Stretch-Nylon If atcr-Rcpellcnt IN RED, NAVY, LODEN, ami BLACK Sizes 3 to (>x, $8.98 Sizes 7 to 14, §104)8 ALSO For Cold If (Hither Ahead GIRLS’ JACKETS In Fancy * Prints , Stripes , or Solid C'olors with Orion Pile linings or quilted linings.
Many, many thanks to your good paper for publicizing M.S.P.C.A.’s recent fashion show by Monet Through your columns we now extend appreciation to the ladies of Winchester for supporting this event so enthusiastically.
Grateful appreciation from the committee goes to our loyal patronesses; to patrons McCormack’s Apothecary, Dr.
The committee also sincerely thanks the donors of our door priz* es, who include Arthur of Boylston Street, Avon Cosmetics, Chitel’s, Miss Mae Bennett Brown, Emerson Rugs, McGhee’s, Happy House, Kays of Newport, Kyanize Paints, Mr George Warren Smith and Mrs.
Kay Longworth, Fashion Show Chairman Mary Knox, Fashion Show co-Chairman Kay Cardin, Pres.
Winchester Auxiliary, M.S.P.C.A. to express our gratitude to the j tolerate actions such as these any townspeople who made contribu‘ >°nger.
Ho expressed himself as tions to the league during our res, * rr V *° r the youths’ parents, who cent tinance drive. j saM * had tried to control their Since our own league members oT ’ s * provide two-thirds of our income i At the conclusion of his stiff through their dues and additional address Judge Henchey sentenced gifts, only a relatively small | the youths to three months in the amount of financial support has been sought from our publie-spir ited friends.
However, this extra amount does make possible many of our unique services to Winchester voters.
The faithful support and encouragement from individuals throughout the town is greatly appreciated by our hard-working volunteer members.
Such readiness to give to our league is surely a sign that Winchester citizens share our concern for good government.
Such cooperation must be an endorsement of the non-partisan, informed approach to governmental problems characteristic of league program.
I had expected that several would appear in print commending Officer John Frongillo for the way he handled the “litter-bugging” on the common one Sunday afternoon a few weeks ago.
A lazy man would have looked the other way, but Officer Frongillo not only went into action but used excellent judgement in the manner in which he handled the situation.
I hope he was officially commended, for the town and its officials should let it be known that such alert and intelligent work is appreciated.
Last winter, when snow was on the ground, some youngsters waiting for a bus at the common got a little too exuberant and were at the point of damaging property when a police officer came upon the scene and ordered the children to walk home.
The walk to the farthest point in the town of Winchester would not hurt any one of these active boys, but I have been told that for his efforts, and in my judgement, a sane punishment that was fitting to the situation, this officer was not commended but a complaint was actually received at headquarters from some kindly Civil Defense Stresses Shelters On Wednesday, October 18, 19G1, a staff meeting of the Winchester Civil Defense was held at the town hall with Mr Theodore J Boecker presiding.
A very important question was brought before the staff by Mr Joseph Dolben of the school committee.
After considerable discussion it was decided that all school children be sent home immediately.
Civil defense authorities state that there will be at least a twenty minute warning before attack and that would provide ample time for children to reach their homes.
Schools in Winchester do not have ample shelter space or supplies to care for the students for fourteen days.
As you can see the only conceivable plan would be to instruct the children to get home as soon as possible.
Something that bothers the civil defense staff in this community is the “Wait and See” attitude of the citizens.
In most cities and towns public opinion has definitely assisted the preparedness of their respective communities.
It will be interesting to see if the “Wait and See” attitude can be changed to a public spirited preparedness unsurpassed in this state.
House of Correction on each of the three counts against them, ttie sentences to run concurrently.
T he youths appealed and were held in $500 bail for appearance in Superior Court Monday morning, however, the youths again appeared in court before Judge Henchey and waived their appeal.
They were taken to the House of Correction in Billerica by Officers Baird and Frongillo of the Winchester Police.
Officer John Frongillo found upon arrival a born mongrel in the act of killing a chicken in the Ericson chicken coop.
Officer Frongillo succeeded in getting a rope on the dog and took him to Headquarters.
J a, j W 3lnn & ANNOUNCES Co. a new REAL ESTATE OFFICE ar 5S5 Main Street, Winchester Tel.
On the last Sunday of the month Forum members attend service and are represented in the leadership of the service by a chaplain, deacons, ushers and choir.
Frank Curtis, president of Forum, will serve as chaplain this month, with the following boys also acting, as deacons; Steve Emery.
James Gustin, Neal Baker, David Bird, Neal Kirkpatrick, Alan Hodge and Peter Carletdn; and as ushers.
Bob Stewart, Axel Boehrke, Bruce Carpenter, Scott Erskine, Peter Fisher, and Bill Gaffney.
The Forum Choir has as its chairman, Judy McKinley with Mr Robert White as director, Mr Robert Mulford, organist and assistant director, and Mrs.
The October supper meeting will be held in Chid ley Hall at 8:00 Y-m. this Sunday.
Mr Hotzapple was one of the leaders of Spring Conference last April and proved to be a most stimulating person.
Much interested in social issues and the relation of religious faith upon them, Mr Holtzapple will lead Forum members in their thinking about problems of segregation which do not readily appear as local problems.
The annual Work Day for Christ contributions will be brought to the October supper meeting.
A service of dedication will be led by Linda Carter and Jane Hood, cochairmen.
The goal of Massachusetts Congregational young people this year through their Work Days is the providing of a community library for Mt.
Silinda, Southern Rhodesia. the nearby riding stables in Medford out looking for those greener pastures, hut ending up trapped in the cement northbound waiting area of the Wedgemere station by the combined efforts of officers i Boyle, Cogan, Buzzotta, Pronski, several nearby residents and a j mounted rider from its home stable.
Not however, before it had slowed the 1 1 :23 down to a creep and caused its conductor to wonder if Indian raids were coming back to the Aberjona run.
Constructed with four rubber tired wheels for running on the roads, four smaller inner steel wheels for gripping the tracks and a steering apparatus which adjusts to either use.
This “truck” spent the day last Friday testing both branch lines running into Winchester.
It was seen in the middle of the town progressing very slowly south and then backing hell bent for leather to get out of the way of the same 1 1 :‘23 which had so politely deferred to the horse a few days before.
Library Film Program The film program at the Public Library this week end will feature one half-hour color film.
Old Order Amish is a most interesting study of the Amish folk of Pennsylvania Dutch country.
Their resistance both to influences from and to assimilation by contemporary society is shown most graphically as they are shown living their daily life on farms and attending oneroom schools.
Completing the program will be Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale of the Steadfast Tin Soldier.
The Friday night program and its accompanying display of books is designed for families.
Saturday morning school age children may get tickets in the Boys’ and Girls’ Room at 10, and the program begins at 10:15.
Margaret Healey of 18 Robinhood Road had last Thursday forenoon with her lost pocketbook containing $73.00 and personal effects.
The pocketbook was found at the junction of Cambridge and Church Streets by Mrs.
Clarence Roberts of 20 Westland Avenue, who took it to police headquarters.
Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf For Rent WEDGEW00D APARTMENTS On the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center are the newly completed Wedgewood Apartments, where you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living.
Each upurtment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bed rooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area.
Situated on a large and lovely lot, this four-bed room, i two-bath home offers real value.
All this, plus a two-car garage, sun porch and convenient locale will sell this house.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers Richard If.
Beautifully proportioned living room, study, dining room, kitchen and lavatory on first floor, two bedrooms, nursery and tile bath on second.
COLONIALS ANI) RANCHES Several new homes in choice locations nearing completion.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Barbara DeCamp Jean Gibb Kathryn P IXaviB BR 2-3499 PA 9-0373 HORACE FORD PA 9-5887 PA 9-3808 Realtor Let WINCHESTER Capes Ranches Colonials 2 -3 -4-5 BEDROOMS FROM 17,000 UP. us help you solve your housing problems.
RANCH — Three chambers, 2Vfc ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage.
Three bedrooms, 1 ceramic-tile baths, lovely famJ ily dining room, good living room with fireplace.
Eight room home in the modern manner on West Side Hill with five bedrooms — two baths — modern kitchen — den — secluded yard with patio.-car gar.
One-room efficiency apartment with private bath suitable for Business woman or widow.
Attractive fireplaced living room, family dining room, large all-electric built-in kitchen, tiled bath, three twin bedrooms on one level.
Exclusive Brokt>rs BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 24 Thompson Street PArkview 9-4240 FINE WINCHESTER COLONIAL — $26,900 If you are In the market for a wcdl-laid-out six-room Colonial or\ the West Side, here is your opportunity.
JOSEPHSON Real Estate 6 Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 WINCHESTER All-brick Cape-ranch in a quiet secluded setting, yet handy to the center and schools, in its muny fine features this homo shows that it was custom built.
Guaranty Fund Surplus Other Reserves $263,417.46 169.718.06 131.776.07 $ 564,910.59 $6,752,207.31 OFFICERS Curtis W Nash Sidney C Blanchard George L Billman Concetta F Derro President Vice-President Treasurer Asst.
Alfred D Elliott Morris B Kerr Frederick W McCormack Charles A Murphy Curtis W Nash Stanley E Neill STAFF Elizabeth A Kehoe Martha C Ellis Anne G Shaw John G Perry SECURITY COMMITTEE George L Billman Charles A Murphy Alfred D Elliott CLERK OF THE BOARD Morris B Kerr ATTORNEY Curtis W Nash Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street Newsy Paragraphs Processing by Kodak at the Winchester Camera Shop.
Charles E Greene of 7 Lewis Road is among the Winchester residents attending the 8th National Conference of the United States National Commission for UNESCO in Boston this week.
Greene, former chairman of the School Committee, is registered for the discussion panel on adult education.
David B Thoms of Maxwell Road left Boston last Sunday to fly to San Juan in Puerto Rico on a business trip for the Wayland Plant of Raytheon.
Get your unusual party centerpiece and favors rirthday, shower, bon voyage, and special holiday decorations, at Friendship Fiesta.
Tel EXport 6-3349 after 6m. apcr27-eow Leslie J Scott of Wildwood Street, president of the Winchester National Bank, attended last week’s convention of the American Bankers Association in Los Angeles, California.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf The police were notified Saturday afternoon that smoking by pupils at the Lynch Junior High School, during and after school, is creating a fire hazard in a growth of pines near Ardley Road.
WE 5-0570. iuly6-tf Auction Monday evening October 30 at 7:00 Ted Langdell, auctioneer.
Last Saturday afternoon at 4:53 the Fire Department was called to put out a grass fire along Route 93 in the Highlands.
For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. tf Bill Cleary, electrical contractor, wiring and repairs.
Included in this amount is the re ta inage fee of $6,450 held against the contract for a year, The sum of $22,623.64 includes a reduction of $663 in payment for hot-topping the school basketball court, this work having been done and now paid for.
When the money to pay the out standing school bills was finally appropriated by the town meeting, it was stipulated at the behest of the Legislative enabling aet that no hills should be paid unless and until they had been approved by the Town Aecountant and State Department of Accounts.
Authority to pay the bills was vested in the Board of Selectmen, who have already allowed the payment of some bills outstanding hut have others still under investigation.
Less the money for the retainage fee, the amount of bills outstanding is some $15,995.32.
This amount seems destined to go to arbitration, though Chairman Saltmarsh of the Board of Select men told the Star there is always a chance of agreement before arbitration is reached.
Meanwhile Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke is attempting to work out a method of arbitration that will be acceptable to the town and the contractor, the Keystone Construction Company.
Mr Saltmarsh in discussing payment with the Star reiterated his previous statment, ""that all just debts owed the contractor should be paid as soon as possible.
Miss Carlene Hatehell, a member of the class of 1965 at Smith College, has been elected freshman representative for Franklin King House.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf If you need light bulbS, call Winchester Lions, PA 9-6584 or PA 93548.
Menu Old favorite chicken loaf, with tasty cream sauce, jellied salad, hot homemade rolls, homemade chiffon cake and coffee.
The new office will do business under the name of Jay M Finn & Co Photo by Rycrson JAY M FINN Many in Winchester know Mr Finn through his association of the past eight years with the Winchester Theatre as manager.
Loew, Theatre Inc., and worked for him at theatres in Connecticut, Springfield, Virginia and elsewhere in the South.
He ushered, sold tickets, swept up, and generally learned the theatre business the hard way.
Mr Finn is married to the former Sally Sherburne of Winchester, who before her marriage was a secretary in the Winchester Edison office.
Dodi von Velsen, from Germany, fit""' 'of ""the* “winchester ""chapter, attend inp Melrose High School T i i i> I i t 1 w/m f U /\ n « old have been announced by the local sponsor, Bonnoll Motors, Winchester distributors of Ford motor cars and trucks.
The contest, postponed once because of had weather, was held at Manchester Field last Sunday afternoon with Charles “Sarto” Walsh, former Winchester High and Harvard football star, acting as judge.
First-place winners in the respective classes received a National Football League uniform, second place winners, a National Football League warmup jacket; and third-place winners, an official football.
In addition the scores compiled here Sunday will he sent on to regional headquarters of the contest, where those sufficiently high will enable those who made the score to participate in the regional contests.
Winners of the regionals go on to the finals, with announcement of those eligible for this contest to be announced December 10.
Ellsworth West, 116% *A point is awarded for every foot covered, minus a point for every foot off center.
October 27, Friday, 7 :30m., Family Night Film Program, Rich Room, Public Library.
The Fortnightly present* Gordon Rennett’a Tickle-um Theatre Marionettes to children and grown-up* at the McCall Junior High School Auditorium.
Monday, Huge AUCTION in Chidlcy Hall, First Congregational Church, with Tod T>angdell, auctioneer.
October 30, 1 :30m., the History Group of the College Club will meet at the home of Mrs.
November 1, Wednesday, “Friendship Fiesta,” First Congregational Church.
Wednesday, The Fortnightly Literature Group nt Rich Room, Library at 2m.
November 2, Thursday, at 7:30m., Winchester Historical Society, RichRoom, Winchester Public Library.
November 2, Thursday, ""Friendship Fiesta,” First Congregational Church.
Joseph P Kennedy, mother of President Kennedy, will give an llustrated lecture entitled “An Ambassador’s Wife” for the bene1 Cafeteria Menu Week of October 30 November 3 Monday — American chop suey, chef’s salad, corn bread, baked raisin rice pudding, milk.
Tuesday — Juice, cheeseburger on roll, sliced onions, saltines, peach upside down cake, cream, milk.
Wednesday — Soup, dagwood, French roll, celery sticks, apple square, milk.
Thursday — Chicken a la king, mashed potatoes, cranberry sauce, coffee cake, apricots, milk.
Friday — Scalloped macaroni and cheese, crisp cole slaw, hot muffin, chocolate fudge pudding, sauce, milk.
To or Treat For UNICEF Young people who will he wearing a UNICEF tag (United Nations Children Fund) on October 29 know that each coin they collect means health and hope for hildren who would lead a short, siek and hungry life if they received no help.
Think about this and give willingly when the Methodist Youth iuild of the Infant Saviour, at McCall Junior High School Sunday ifternoon, November 19, at 2:30.
Eric Johnson, first vice president, is in charge of tickets, assisted by Mrs.
Jung Jo Choi, from Korea, attending New r ton High School Leena Maria Palosuo, a native of Finland, attending Stoneham High School Use Holitschke, a native of Germany, attending Melrose High School Saturday afternoon they will attend the Winchester High School football game with members of the Fellowships.
Martin Garnis, Fred Josephson, Janet Butterworth and Mr Ronald Ondrejka and his Christian Citizenship World Outreach Committee.
Sunday morning the guest students will visit in the church school and attend Morning Worship at eleven o’clock.
They will be overnight and Sunday dinner guests in the homes of members of the Fellowships, and will be returned to their respective homes Sunday afternoon.
Quick Work Early Sunday afternoon Police Headquarters was notified by Mrs Ruth Grainger of 42 Highland Avenue that a taxi had run into car parked in front of her house and had driven away without the driver making himself known.
Officers William Nash and David Boyle went to the scene, and i message was put on the air to al ert police of the affair.
The call was picked up by Officer Mario Buzzotta in a cruiser and he stopped the taxi at Forest Street and Laurel Hill Lane.
The driver was booked for drunk enness and driving while under the influence of liquor.
He was admitted to bail and ordered to appear in the Woburn Court Monday.
Monday Fuller failed to appear in court and Police say he had been arrested Sunday night in Lowell.
He appeared in Woburn Tuesday morning, at which time his case was continued for a week.
Wyman Teachers’ Luncheon A delicious luncheon was served at the home of Mrs.
Earle F Spencer, 26 Ginn Road, for the teachers of the Wyman School on Tuesday, October 24th.
Gilson, supt of schools; the music supervisors; the art supervisors; Mr Frederick Murray.
When OffiII eer Boyle arrived he found the mvnIKHllll ill tOIl 1 (,f tht * animal had removed her • from the Penta premises.
Officer Due to open house at the high Boyle’s feelings were not made school there will he no badminton , public so we wouldn’t know if he on Thursday, November 2. was relieved.
AVAILABLE NEXT WEEK AT THE WINCHESTER STAR “NAVY’S JOE BELLINO” hj C uni Li a and Wllluun Kurc A BRAND NEW BOOK ABOUT WINCHESTERS ALL AMERICA FOOTBALL STAR K 777/ u m ILLLSTK mays s 3.50 Community School Association The executive board of the Community School Association held its first meeting of the year at the home of the new president, Mrs.
Gay, the reports of the Secretary and Treasurer were read and accepted.
Charles Raffi, Theater chairman, announced the program of “The Children’s Theater School” under the direction of Mrs.
Gay then called the attention of the Board to the fact that many of the boys and girls attending the Friday afternoon and evening sessions of Mr Curry’s Dancing Classes have been arriving too early and have been causing a disturbance both in and outside the Town Hall.
Mr Curry urgently requests all parents to make sure the young people arrive at the appointed time of their lesson to avoid any further complication.
With the notice of a coming meeting to be held with the School Board, Mrs.
Spaulding Mr Spaulding went to Ghana and Nigeria to make a survey with a view to the possibility of opening a branch office there for Franklin Publications.
Police say the Pontiac had stopped to enter the hospital drive when the accident occurred.
The driver of the Cadillac told the police her car skidded when she attempted to stop.
Material which cannot be burned at the Incinerator but which may be disposed of on the ground at the Incinerator Site Stoves Washing Machines Springs and spring mattresses Automobile parts Wooden or metal chairs Meat Grinders Refrigerators Metal Poles No municipal incinerator is designed to burn these materials but the disposal of the above items is effected by contract with a Junk Dealer to remove them from the Incinerator Site.
Procedure at Incinerator All Trucks and Trailers of over one half ton size using the Incinerator must be equipped with a dumping mechanism.
Any spillage at the dumping door or at the conveyor must be shoveled into the storage pit or on the conveyor.
Private Collections Board of Health Rules for Transporting Over Highways All private trucks using the Incinerator shall display a sticker which may be obtained from the Board of Health.
All private trucks hauling refuse shall use a tarpaulin or other form of covering to prevent littering of highways and Incinerator grounds.
All private vehicles shall display a sticker which may be obtained from the Board of Health for the transporting of refuse over the streets.
Refuse from Other Towns Under no condition will refuse collected outside the Town of Winchester be accepted at the Incinerator.
All truck and car drivers should expect to be questioned by the Incinerator personnel as to the source of their loads, and if required, shall produce a document showing that the refuse is from the Town of Winchester.
Enforcement Incinerator personnel are authorized to reject any truck or car w hose operator fails in any way to conform to these rules and regulations.
Continued neglect by such operator of the rules and regulations may result in suspension of permission to use the Winchester Incinerator and for an indefinite period of time.
Cooperation The Town of Winchester has spent nearly a half million dollars on the Incinerator and all concerned must give fullest cooperation.
Please separate allowable non-combustibles from combustibles so that each may be placed in the proper location at the Incinerator Site.
Culling out of non-combustible materials in the Incinerator storage pit is an impossible task and if non-combustibles get into the Incinerator furnace they may well cause a breakdown which will affect the refuse disposal of the entire Town.
These regulations do not apply to the collection or disposal of Garbage which is now disposed of out of Town.
It is absolutely essential to the proper operation of the Winchester Incinerator that these Rules and Regulations be followed by each ami every resident and private collector.
He is a magna cum laude graduate of Tufts and secretary of the Tufts Alumni Interfraternity Council, and a member of the Tufts Alumni Council.
In Operation “Sea Shell” Charles R Moran Jr., boatI swain’s mate third class, USN, son of Mr and Mrs.
PA 9-1981 nov3-tf A large audience turned out at the Winchester Theatre last Thursday for Winchester Auxiliary of M.S.P.C.A.’s lush fashion show of Monet’s strikingly high style creations.
Lighted candles, (lowers and gleaming ‘silverware on snowy tablecloths transformed the lobby where Mrs.
Fred Cardin welcomed the enthusiastic audience, then turned the “mike” over to Mrs.
Winthrop Knox, chairman of the show, who brought commentator Julie Dane to the spotlight.
Miss Dane of WHDH was chic in severely simple oatmeal wool and sable hat.
The show opened with several stunning variations of the walking suit, so smart this year, many of the coats were fur lined and the blouses vividly colored.
Later a flame red cocktail sheath with multi-colored bead trim and a full-skirted cerise chiffon dinner dress received a big hand.
In contrast to these was an all black jacket dress of cut velvet on satin.
A gorgeous ball gown, mid-calf length in front, with a small train, silver straps and silver bead trim in a star design brought down the house.
Fashions by Boston designer Cynthia Michael included a floor length pink taffeta ball gown with pink lace beaded jacket worn by Mrs.
Walter Wilcox of Arlington and an emerald green theatre cape over a black velvet sheath modeled by Mrs.
Lovely little eight year old Mayan Wilcox, Jr., wore a Trudy Geismar original — a black velvet princess frock with yellow daisy trim.
In a wide choice of 4-color herringbone squares, the Pendleton Doughnut Skirt is a full 64"" diameter, falling into a free ’n’ whirly drape from an extension-tab waistline. ± j Pendlefleece Slipover can be color-mated yjr perfectly in auv of the colors in the skirt.
Harold N Stevens of Stowell Road, assistant to plant manager, Everett Operations Monsanto Chemical Co., has been appointed to the newly created Air Pollution Committee of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts.
The group has been formed to provide assistance in alleviating health or property damage that might result from air pollution.
In announcing the Committee, Robert A Chadbourne, A.I.M. executive vice president said the group would concern itself with encouraging voluntary cooperation between industry, government and the public in solving air pollution problems, and in actively assisting in the development of legislation and administrative regulations designed to control air pollution.
Kelley K Davis, W’ellesley pediatrician, at the October meeting of the Boston Association for Childbirth Education.
The meeting will he held on Monday, October 30, at 8m., in the third floor lecture hall at Phillips Brooks House, in the northwest corner of Harvard yard, off Kirkland Street, Cambridge.
Davis is on the staffs of the Children’s Hospital, Newton-Wellesley Hospital and the Boston Lying-In Hospital.
A non-profit, non-sectarian organization of parents and professional people, the association’s aim is to make pregnancy, delivery and parenthood a more informed and satisfying family experience.
A CHANCE TO HELP Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Thanksgiving and Christmas if these holidays are to be happy occasions in accordance with the American tradition.
To help our less fortunate Winchester friends during the holiday season, gifts of money, food and clothing are earnestly solicited.
Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
Harold Pyne, chairman service to over a hundred health and welfare agencies.
The Recognition Program, held in the Rotch Auditorium of Red Feather headquarters in Boston featured Rev.
Students from Winchester participating in “Operation Kindness** included Lynn Anderson, Karen Armstrong, Hope Barker, Debby Berger, Marilyn Beckley, Charlene Bertolucci, Betty Bowes, Judy Carr, Lindy Carr, and Jackie Cartier.
Also participating were Victoria Cass, Sarah Clark, Linda Dennehy, Leslie Dube, Gwen Eugley, Nancy Falznno, Elizabeth Folkers, Claudia Gordon, and Ann Grant.
Prudy Griffith, Susan Haley, Pamela Hall, Margo Harmon, Debby Harrison, Mary Frances Henry, Nancy Hollinshead, Karen Dale, Jane Hood, Suzanne Hussey, Laurel Ingraham, Elizabeth Jackson Karen James, Jill Johnson, Mary Ann Johnson, Sue Johnson.
Beth Kaufmann, Sue Keppler, Marcia Kimball, Roberta Kirkpatrick, Ann LaPointe, Wendy Lewis Marilyn Long, Martha Maloney Sue Manimon, Lina Maroney, Laurie McLean, Mae Mumma, Paula Murphy, Ellen Myette.
Barbara Monsen, Debby Nichols Janet Niles, Suzanne O’Claire, Joyce Pettingell, Sylvia Pirotta Carol Preston, Pamela Raymond, Ellen Richardson, Kate Rubinson.
Susan Tully, Terry Vercolloni, Sue Wallace, Sue Waldron, Joan Wheeler, and Dorothy Williams.
Agencies served were the Margaret Fuller House, Cambridge, the Massachusetts Mental Health Center, Boston, and Winchester Hospital.
Schools attended by these volunteers include Belmont Hill School; Cambridge School, Weston; Clark School.
Mary’s, Nashua; McCall Junior High, Winchester; Our Lady of Nazareth, Wakefield; Radcliffe, Newton College of the Sacred Heart and Winchester High School. expects tend. two representatives to at Lawrence Honored Cadet David Lawrence, son of Mr and Mrs.
On recommendation of the Command Board at the Academy, he was appointed to the rank of Cadet Ensign.
This commission indicates that Cadet Lawrence has demonstrated exceptional ability and overall aptitude in both studies and leadership at the Academy.
Upon graduation in August 1962, Cadet Lawrence will receive a license as Third Mate in the Merchant Marine, a Bachelor ol Science Degree, and a commission as Ensign in the United States Naval Reserve.
As Battalion Welfare and Recreation Officer, his new duties during his final year in the Cadet Corps will consist of supervising and directing the four Regimental Balls.
He takes care of many other functions for the welfare and recreution of his Battalion.
ROUND-UP SELECTIONS WEEK-END Nine senior Girl Scouts who have applied for National Round Up at Button Bay State Park in Vermont for the summer of 1962 will have a selections meeting at Cedar Hill October 27, 28, 29.
James Stewart Jr., president, they will spend three days camping, one of the requirements for selection Campcraft, personal interviews social graces along with written applications are the basis on which four girls will be chosen to attend the Round-up and five girls will be chosen as alternates.
Our four delegates will join four delegates from Reading to make a patrol which will be trained by Mrs.
Greta Uhlig, Gwen Eugley, Diane Dube, Elaine Sullivan, Nancy Robinson, Rita Gramzow, Mary Frances Henry, Janet Niles, Carol Butters, Carolyn Carr.
COLLEGE OF GIRL SCOUTING ASSEMBLY PROGRAM The Winchester Council of Girl Scouting opened the College of Girl Scouting Inst Thursday in Boston Latin School by supplying the Assembly program, a flag ceremony and a Dramalogue written by Mrs.
Carol Butters, Kate Robinson, Mary Frances Henry, Joyce Pettingill, Debbi Harrison, Sue Waldron, Judy Zimmerman, Paula Murphy, May Mumma, Sue Bryant, Gwen Eugley, Rita Gram zow, Diane Dube’, Beth Gilpatrick, Elaine Sullivan, Martha Kimball, Diane Kittredge.
A varied program has been planned, including music and exhibits, election of permanent officers, and a keynote address by Dr.
The newly formed Association invites the membership of teachers in all branches of music, both from school staffs, and from private teachers.
Bateson points out that nev or before in the nation’s history has it been so essential for Ameri can soldiers to know qnd understand other people throughout the world.
Also, demand for soldier scl entists and technicians has risen steadily.
The Army has met this requirement by a comprehensive civil schools program, by increased em phasis upon language training and by provding on-duty and off-duty educational opportunities in every relevant field of study.
Each year, the Army sends hundreds of commissioned and enlisted personnel to leading colleges and universities on full duty status for study to fulfill Army training requirements.
Thousands more are enrolled in voluntary off-duty courses through the Army’s General Educational Development Program.
In each overseas command, branches of leading American universities furnish facilities for full resident credit studies conducted during the soldier’s off-duty free time.
Trained educational advisors are available at unit level to help soldiers plan their educational program.
The Army library system offers the same reference and other facilities soldiers would find in their home town.
In the Army’s own service schools, the curricula are modified and improved constantly to meet ver-changing requirements.
For example in I960, a major revision of the curriculum at the United States Military Academy was made as the result of recommendations of the Academic Board and the superintendent of the Academy.
Similar up-dating of the instruction is always in the process at the higher level Army schools, the Command and General Staff College and the Army War College.
Today’s Army offers greater opportunity for a more varied education, at less personal cost than any soldier could find in civilian life.
Almost 65% of Army enlisted personnel are high school graduates or have also attended college.
Of our Army officers, who now constitute one of the most highly ducated groups in the nation, 90% have had some college work, and nearly 60% hold at least one coL lege degree.
Reading Here Saturday; To Meet Sachems Winchester faces another tntighie in its Middlesex League series.
Saturday afternoon when the Red Rockets of Reading utme to Manchester Field to meet the Sachems in the annual football game between these two great rivals The game looms a toss-up, likely to go either way.
Teachers’ Association Fall Slipper Last Tuesday the Winchester Teachers’ Association held its annual fall supper at the Girl Scout Camp with eighty-six in attendance.
Miss Sybil Daniels, president of the association, welcomed the special guests, Mrs.
Mary M Brink chairman of the school committee, Mr Austin Broadhurst, a member of the school committee, Dr.
Harry V Gilson, superintendent of schools, and all other guests present.
The delicious supper consisted of Bar-B-Q chicken, potato salad tossed salad, pickles, hot buttered rolls, ice cream, and coffee.
The association extended its hearty thanks to Miss Patricia Doherty and her splendid committee for a very delightful evening.
The Rockets lost heavily by graduation, especially in the hackfield, and their one star hack holding over from last year Graham Gernrde has hud to be used sparingly this year because of injuries.
Gerarde is a real speed boy, who last year, running with such backs as Ilorton and Runge, was very effective outside.
This year with less help from his mates and hobbled by injuries he has not done so well.
If he is in shape to go all out against Winchester, the Sachems will have to watch him closely.
Reading has a veteran line, but several key men in last year’s great frontier played their last ball a year ago, and so far Reading up forward hasn’t been as good as usual.
Winchester has only two veterans from last year, Joe Dattilo, guard; and Captain Mike Bellino, one of the best backs in the league.
Coach Knowlton rates his team this year superior to last year’s eleven, and at times the current edition has looked very good.
The Sachems lost Tom Mooney, first string center, against Melrose and also Jim Menucci, reserve lineman, who has been playing well on defense.
Mooney’s loss will definitely hurt as he has been a key defensive player all year, and also passed well.
Reading always plays its best game against Winchester, while the Sachems are seldom in top form for the Rockets.
Veterans Day Plans Announced The Commonwealth of Massachusetts will observe Veterans Day with ceremonies to be held at 10:30m. on Saturday, November 11, at the Hall of Flags in the State House, Boston, it was announced today by the Chairman, Charles N Collatos, State Commissioner of Veterans’ Services.
Willard Paul, former Commanding General of the famed 26th Yankee Division, will be the principal speaker and Governor John A Volpe will give the ndress.
Paul is serving as President of Gettysburg College in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
Nineteen veterans organizations j with their auxiliaries will particiI pate in the ceremonies and will present memorial wreaths to the j Commonwealth to be placed in the j Hall of Flags.
CYO Week National Catholic Youth Week begins Saturday evening, October 28, at 7:00m. with a Holy Hour in St.
Top target for the week is every CYOer at the Communion Rail the perfect link between youth and the Divine Source of Strength on Sunday, October 29, the Feast of Christ the King.
Following the 10:15 Mass this year’s Youth Council officers elect will take part in an installation ceremony.
Monday, for greater holiness in youth; Tuesday, for help in the choice of a state of life; Wednesday, in honor of all the Saints and for the Souls in Purgatory who will be saints in the future; Thursday, for the increase of religious vocations among youth; Friday, for parents and family happiness; and Saturday, in honor of Our Blessed Mother, for purity in youth.
Sign up for these teams will take place at the Police Station for one week.
The teams will be organized at the close of the week ending the period for sign up.
The series will open today, Octoj her 26, with an assembly program to be presented by Mrs.
Ruth Townsend und Roland Darling, occupational information specialists at Northeastern.
Once a month during the school year speakers will visit the school to present a total of 15 different career programs.
As they attend the meetings in this series, the students will be provided with facts about careers in such fields as office work, build-’ ing construction, electronics, engineering, beauty culture, education, nursing and medical technology.
Don’t Put Off —Send $1.50 for ITCH-AID Now— PHARMACY GIRL, Inc., Labs Fifth Ave., Brookfield, Conn.
L Dance The Winchester Police Athletic League Recreation Committee has changed its dance planned for October 28 fio November 3.
Be the Picture of a Well-Groomed Man YOU ARE INVITED TO THE OPENING OF RED BARN SHOP AND GARDENS 9 Bedford St. at Rte.A Burlington, Maas.
Tel.5-0116 VitoGRO COMPLETE NUTRITIONAL TREATMENT FOR GRASS Builds deep roots to v vigorous and well fed during hibernation. i ter # Keeps grass greener far longer this fall — gets it green quicker next spring.
Rosemary Ford Layzer recently attended the Alumnae Council Weekend, October 13 to 1 • » , at Wheaton College, Norton.
Burrows of 5 Oneida Circle, Winchester, attended the Council as a delegate from the class of 1937.
Miss Hood of 6 Everett Avenue Winchester, attended the Council as the Regional Scholarship Chairman from the Boston Wheaton Club.
She is a medical secretary at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
Layzer of 2 New Meadows Road, Winchester, attended the Council as Reunion Chairman for her class.
PAULINE WHEELOCK PA 9-1304 octn-4t (JIBbS, 9 girlS ’T*nn |jQp Responsible jobs — and important promotions— go to girls with outstanding Gibbs secretarial training.
OLiver 8-2071 WE ID 3-2117 I lie Garden of Eden Country Club it* being built in Wilmington with the opening date planned for next spring, wishes to announce that a limited number of membership applications will be considered from surrounding communities at this time.
Whether you want to save, cash checks, or borrow — this is the full-service bank you can rely on.
Bowling League Aft^r the fifth round of play Notre Dame jumped from third place to the top of the league by taking four points from Harvard, dropping that team from second to third place.
Bowling for Notre Dame are Tony Bavuso, Sam Bellino, Dan Mistretta, Roundy Fiore, Johnny Dattilo, Tony Saraco and Ed Amico.
Although Navy took second-plac California 3-1 they remained in fifth place.
Maryland, in taking fou from Holy Cross, went from eighth to seventh, while the latter team dropped to eleventh place.
In the top ten Bob Fiore and Frank Gangi changed first and second places for the only change in that category.
In the individual high three Frank Gangi took over from Moose Bellino by two pins.
Tonight first-place Notre Dame meets third place Alabama; secondplace California takes on thirdplace Harvard.
League Standings Maryland 11 9 8126 Yale 9 11 8186 Bates 8 12 7958 Boston College 7 13 8156 Holy Cross 6 14 8109 St.
SHLUAM CASHES \ COLUMBIA PICTURES RELEASE | Also James Stewart TWO RODE TOGETHER STARTS WED, NOV. 1st JOSHUA LOGAN WJfi 7 PRODUCTION \y TECHNICOLOR* fmWARNER BROS F Gangi 107.
I Bowling League This week marks the halfway point in our first half of bowling.
To add some spice to the situation the Emeralds and Rubies roll off against each other this week, which should prove truly interesting.
Top scorer for the evening was Gloria Monterisi of the Jades with a three-string total of 269.
It is ususual that many of the girls, although bowling consistently, are not hitting the century mark.
Everybody’s sweetheart, smiling Angie Dattilo, was selected to assume the captaincy for team two, the Diamonds.
A friendly reminder to reserve Saturday evening, November II, for the fall social dance sponsored by the sports committee.
S RED AND BLACK SCARVES $4.95 YOUNGSTERS' NAVY HOODED SWEATSHIRTS Sizes 8, 12, 14, 16 — $2.95 SLEEPING BAGS FOR FALL CAMPING 11.95 to $30 BINOCULARS FOR BIRD WATCHING, FOOTBALL GAMES, etc.
Janet Niles, Sue Waldron and Gwen Eugley. loft to right, build shower from watering can, three ponchos, two saplings and twine.
Award This was the uniform of the old days of mass football with their wedge plays, center rush, guards back and tandem plays.
The ball was a lot bigger and heavier and a much greater premium was placed on kicking in those ante-passing days.
Football Background That’s the sort of football “Doc’ knew as a player, but he has known all kinds since, for he has been a close follower and a real student of the game.
He had no time for the game while studying dentistry at Harvard, from which he received his degree in 1898.
J CHURCHILL HINDES Honored by New Football Trophy at Winchester High School.
There were few of the big games that “Doc” missed in the days when Harvard, Yale, Princeton and Penn were football power-houses.
He saw many of the big names of football perform and through the years he has seen all kinds of football, college, professional and high school.
For years “Doc” followed the HarvardYale rivalry closely and was regularly a member of a group of enthusiats who, each year the game was in New Haven, had a eserved car on the HarvardYale special train for the game, going lown the night before and sleeping and eating in the ear.
Winchester Fan Since his retirement “Doc” has missed few Winchester games or practice sessions.
His loyalty to both has been constant and he i always ready to defend Winches ter football against all comers.
During the years “Doc’s” interest in local players hasn’t been cen tered in the stars, though he ha been quick to acclaim them.
He’ watched the freshmen and the seconds and gotten a real kick out of seeing some of the less promising players at first develop into varsity performers.
At the games he watches the blocking and tackling, the following of the ball and the carrying out of assignments.
He notes the instructions the boys get at practice and watches to see how they follow these instructions in the games.
He has no excuse for the hoy who isn’t trying, but the boy who gives it everything he has, and loses, will never he criticized by him.
He knows that the stars are not always the ones who do most for team morale and that is why those who are giving the trophy in his name made outstanding loyalty, effort and team spirit, not stardom, the criteria necessary to win it.
Handsome Trophy The trophy is a handsome black walnut shield with a bronze shield shaped plaque at the top on which is engraved the name of the trophy and pertinent data.
Ranged below are 20 bronze rectangles on which will be engraved the names and years of the winners.
This trophy will remain at high school in the trophy case, and the winner will receive a replica of the bronze marker at the top of the shield, mounted on wood and engraved with his name.
The trophy will be awarded this year for the first time, the choice of the recipient, at the request of the donors, to be made by Coach Henry Knowlton who has been directing Winchester football since 1940.
Assisting him in the selection will be the members of his football coaching staff.
The permanent and individual trophies will be on display at the Star Office for a short time.
Pledged to Frats At Dartmouth Four Dartmouth College sophomores from Winchester were pledged to fraternities at Dartmouth during the rushing period.
Theodore L Freeman of 11 Lockcland Road, was pledged to Phi Delta Alpha; Dana J Kelly, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs.
Dana J Kelly Eif 21 Mystic Avenue, Phi Gamma Delta; Peter E Luitwieler, son of Mr and Mrs.
Clarence S Luitwieler of 89 Cambridge Street, Phi Delta Alpha; and Thomas H Sieminski, son of Mrs.
Roughed It At Frost Pond W inchester Senior Girl Scouts recently spent five days at Frost Pond, Jeffrey, N H., as part of ninety-five teenage scouts, half of whom will be chosen by their councils to attend the national encampment at Button Bay on Lake Champlain in Vermont next summer.
Jenness Eugley accompanied the girls in this forerunner of training for encampment.
The girls lived in tents, cooked with charcoal and kept clean with hand-fashioned wash stands and showers.
The game was a tough one for the Sachems to lose for after a shaky start they played Melrose better than ever.
Two questionable decisions hurt Winchester badly, and either called the other way could have meant a different hall game.
Lowe, a high school principal in Nashville, Tennessee, and Lucille Carroll, a high school teacher in Wooster, Ohio.
Presented by the British Broadcasting Corporation, T h c Blue and the Gray is an exciting narration of the Civil War enhanced by music of the era.
Winchester had one 15 yard penalty while Melrose lost 45 yards to the officials.
Melrose fumbled three times recovering twice, while Winchester fumbled twice, recovering once.
For a time the game looked like a replica of the Stoneham defeat, with Melrose scoring twice before Winchester could rack up a tally, but their touchdown as the first half ran out seemed to steady the Sachems and they appeared to much better advantage the second half.
Just how the big Red got the wind at its back too no one seemed to know, but such was the case, and Winchester’s opening kickoff went only to the Melrose 41.
The Raiders scored on the first sequence of plays, starting at their 41, making much of their yardage off the tackles and on reverse sweeps.
A 20 yard romp by Hardy to the Winchester 39 got the Big Red away nicely and from there, with Quinn doing much of the carrying the Raiders moved steadily down the field to a first down at the Winchester 10 The Melrose backs got some good blocking on this march and used their interference skillfully.
Quinn in two rushes reached the Winchester one yard line and Cargill on a quarterback sneak got over.
Bellino on a fullback sweep got outside for 34 yards to the Melrose 36, and on the next play the Raiders were offside, the ball going to the 31.
Bad Break for Sachems Benincasa then broke outside tackle to cut back and reach the Melrose 20 where he was dropped for what appeared to be the end of the play.
He turned over and put down the ball as most carriers do, but in dropping the ball, it squirted away to the Melrose 11 where a Melrose boy recovered it.
The official ruled he had not blown the play dead when Benincasa was tackled and permitted the Raiders to keep the ball, a great break for them and a bad blow to the Sachems, who looked like they would score quite easily right then.
Melrose moved the ball rapidly away from their deep territory, and aided by a 15 yard penalty for roughness against Winchester had a first down at the Winchester 29.
A holding penalty stalled the Raiders in turn and with fourth and nine a pass was grounded and Winchester took over at its 29.
The teams had just changed goals for the second quarter when Colliander hit Bellino for a first down at the Winchester 43.
After two line plays had gained only a yard, Colliander passed to Timpone, and a pass interference ruling gave Winchester a first down at the Melrose 39.
Rowe on a fake kick and handoff reached only the Melose 33 and the Raiders took over.
Melrose Scores Aagain After Quinn picked up two Cargill lofted a pass out to the right which Bellino knocked from the Melrose receiver’s hands, saving assure touchdown.
Cargill, in two tries went to the 18, and from there Hardy went all the way, starting off to the right and cutting back nicely.
Benincasa ran the kickoff back to his 36, and then added four off tackle.
Bellino got outside to the right to the Melrose 34 and first down, Rowe picking up six at tackle.
A try at center was piled up for no gain, but Colliander hit Bellino for a first down at the Melrose 18, and the Winchester stands came alive.
Bellino on a sweep was knocked outside at the 11 and Benincasa broke through to first down at the eight.
Bellino Scores for Sachems Bellino drove through to the one and then bucked over off his own right tackle.
Captain Mike then swept over at right end for the added points and it was 16-8, Melrose.
The Sachems braced defensively after the score and contained Melrose in its own territory, finally recovering a fumble at the Melrose 25 just before the half.
With time running out Colliander tried a pass which was intercepted by Melrose at the seven.
Bellino ran the kickoff back to the 30, and then turned the corner for a gallop to the Melrose 46.
Rowe picked up two at the line, and Benincasa was piled up at tackle for a three yard loss.
Colliander passed to Benincasa for a first down at the Melrose 25, and after Bellino had been held for no gain at center, another pass was grabbed by Benincasa at the Melrose 16. (»reat Effort By Benincasa Apparently stopped at that point, Benincasa twisted away from two tacklers, dodged another, regained his balance and straightening out, drove into the end zone standing up for a great individual effort.
Bellino rushed in the extra points on a sweep and it was all tied up at 16.
Here Melrose got a big break when on the ensuing kickoff, the receiver fumbled at the Melrose 48 and the ball was recovered by Winchester.
The referee this time ruled the whistle had blown and the Raiders retained the pigskin.
The fumble occurred on the tackle and no one on the Winchester side of the field agreed with the call which was loudly booed for an appreciable length of time.
As things turned out this decision meant the ball game for with Hardy, Umile, and Quinn gaining steadily the Raiders worked the ball to the Winchester 11, first down.
Another for Melrose Quinn picked up four to the seven and Umile drove over for the touchdown.
Hardy hit tackle for the extra two points,but a loosened helmet helped plenty as he was partially stopped by Benincasa just outside the goal line and met squarely at the line by Bellino.
Mike tried a high tackle to push Hardy back but Hardy’s helmet came off in his grasp and the Melrose boy twisted away, just falling into the end zone for the two points that won.
Richie Casalinuovo made a nice runback of the kickoff to the Winchester 45.
Bellino picked up four and Rowe took a pitchout to scamper to the Melrose 26 and first down.
With third and one Bellino was twice sent into the line and failed to make it, Melrose taking over at its 17 on the second play of the final quarter.
Jim Menucci, a good defensive guard, also went out early in the game with a cracked bone in his hand.
Sutherland ; r, Lomltn nielli, Lockhart, rg, Holden ; rt, Fucci, Delaney; re.
Score by periods 1 2 :i 4 Total Melrose S H X 0 24 Winchester 0 X 8 6 22 TD’s — Cargill, W Hardy, Umile, Bellino 2, Benincasa.
Town Bowling League Last Tuesday night showed very little change in the team standings.
It still looks as though this is going to be a tough year to predict who will be the outstanding bowlers.
The team standings are also close and even the last three teams are likely to start moving up very soon.
W’inn is also starting with some new men so once these three teams start to click it could be a real close race between all 12 teams.
Another pass was inAtlantic Gelatin 28 20 8418 complete and Winchester faced a Brothers-in-Law-1 28 20 8034 fourth down and 12 situation. 49er’s oo 26 8337 Passes Aid Sachem Score St.
A pitchout to Bellino followed R Russo 105. by a long pass fell incomplete in A Anderson.
Bellino belted into the line, R Tofuri 98. reaching the one foot mark, but J Canty 96. on second and third downs, the A Griswold 96. big Melrose forwards stopped Mikey dead.
On fourth down with a short yard to go Bellino swept left nd simply ran away into the end zone without a hand being laid upon him.
On the big try for the extra points that would have tied the score Bellino hit inside his own ight tackle and just failed to make it.
The game ended soon after with Melrose once penalized for stalling to run out the clock.
Shop Early for a CHRISTMAS GIFT FOR MOTHER OR DAD ☆ lland-Madc Florentine Leather Desk Appointment and Memo Pad.
School Committee this week spent a good deal of time with executive hoard of the Community School Association on the protection of school children from fallout.
In tho framework of a regular meeting planned to take place with these parent representatives when subject matter warrants, the f; out question was one of five items the Committee presented to the group, and was the one which stimulated the most expression It was elicited from the Commit tee that at the moment there, is no plan of organization for this very complex problem.
It was pointed out that the plan for children at hool is only a part of the overall the the utbOn Monday evening, October 30, at 7ni., the doors of Chidley Hall will be opened for an auction to be conducted by auctioneer, Mr Ted | Langdell of New Hampshire.
Wednesday evening, November I 1, dessert and coffee will be served between 7:15 and 0:00m.
We are introducing | subject were discussed without any clear answers forthcoming.
How ever, some constructive action sug gestions came from the meeting — that the Community School Associ ation members should return to their respective parents’ groups and formulate therein the consen sus on what parents want most to have done; that the Association might volunteer groups to work with Civil Defense officials; and that the Selectmen should be ap proached on the subject.
These two school oriented groups also discussed school transporta tion, the pros and cons of the inschool banking program, the rea sons for further consolidating the present junior high level foreign language program before considering one for the elementary level and the present policy basis for kindergarten assignment.
We are glad to announce that we will again have our vast supply of sample dolls’ clothes to fit all sized dolls, at moderate prices.
Ha old Pyne has fashioned attractive gifts in copper, many of which bear the Sachem seal.
Aram Mouradian will have Paklave (Armenian pastry) among the goodies at the Pantry Shelf.
Frank Hawkins will have beautiful and unusual hand-made colored glass for those of. you who wish to add a piece to your collection.
See the gaily decorated tree ornaments at the Christmas Decorations booth.
On Thursday morning, November 2, the doors to Friendship Fiesta will re-open at 10m.
A coffee bar for your convenience and pleasure will be in operation until 11m.
An old favorite chicken loaf with tasty cream sauce will be the main course.
A children’s hot-dog lunch will be served from 11:30 to 12:30 in the old vestry.
Robert White and her committee will provide gifts, grabs, food, games and movies at modest prices.
Baby-sitting service will be in the nursery and checkroom service will be supplied to add to your comfort while partaking Friendship Fiesta.
Reformation Sunday Reformation Sunday, commonly referred to as the birthday of the Protestant Church, will be observed next Sunday at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church.
The Youth Choir will participate in the service for the first time this season singing, “Saviour, Hear Us, We Pray.” by Brahms, as a Prayer Response.
The Prelude will be “Toccata” by Frescobaldi and the Postlude, “Festal March” by Calkin.
Bird Field Trips To Sudbury An opportunity to brush up on your waterfowl will be presented this fall by the Massachusetts Audubon Society.
The trips will be to the Sudbury Valley, and Mr Baird will give a short, intensive review of both local and migrant waterfowl.
Given as part of the Hatheway School of Conservation’s adult education program, the fee for the two field trips is $5.00, or $4.00 to members of Massachusetts Audubon.
Mr Baird is special assistant to Mr Allen H Morgan of Wayland, the society’s executive vice president, and comes to Massachusetts from Rhode Island where he was director of the Norman Bird Sanctuary.
STOP FOR 1 DAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE ON ALL CHRYSLER BUILT CARS ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc.
Children in large numbers are expected to fill the auditorium of the McCall Junior High School on Saturday, October 28, at 10:30m.
This will be one of the most outstanding attractions coming this year to Winchester for children and is sponsored by The Fortnightly, Winchester Woman’s Club.
Chairman Fd McManus and hi committee have planned a galu evening for all in attendance.
There will be three prizes awarded, one for the best woman in costume, one the best man in costume, and one for the best original costume.
Music will be provided by Bob Fiore’s Tr.io, and dancing will be from 8m. till midnight.
With the newly passed by-laws on dances, only two hundred people will be admitted.
Next month’s dance on November 18 will feature the drawing of twenty 15-pound turkeys for Thanksgiving dinners to the luckynumber holders.
There is a new committee for visiting the sick and shut-in worn en of the parish.
He stressed that each individual member is responsible for the dynamic society of the church today.
Mr Kennedy returned at the end of August from an extensive visit to the South American countries and has a stimulating presentation of what he saw and found there which has already been heard by other audiences both adult and school.
His talk to the local high school group has come about through the public service interest of John J Spang of Cox Road.
Her home is in West Berlin at Stauffcnburg Strasse, where she lives in an apartment with her mother, Mrs.
Ingeborg Vdn Klocke, her older sister, Marie Luise, 23, and her brother, Rudolf, who is 27 and in the German Army.
Her father lost his life while serving with the German Army during the war.
Her mother and her sister and brother had been evacuated there during World War 2 because the cities were being bombed.
Gisela was born April 24, 1944, and had not had her first birthday when she went hack to Berlin from the farm with her mother, brother and sister.
She was taken in a baby carriage, but the others walked, 60 kilometers or about 36 miles.
Growing up in Berlin, or West Berlin, Gisela went first to the elementary school which includes grades up to the sixth, then to the oberschule or gymnasium.
She had completed her 11th year in the gymnasium last April before coming to Winchester.
When she gets back to Germany she will take examinations to see whether the work she has done in our high school will enable her to go into grade 13.
If she is unsuccessful in her examinations she will repeat this year’s work in the 12th grade of the gymnasium.
In the German schools the pupils remain in their rooms and the teachers go from room to room.
German is taught in all grades, also history, music, art and gymnastics.
Commencing with the fifth grade there is English, French, courses begin with the seventh grade, and Latin, with the ninth.
From the first to the sixth grade the German school children have what they call Rechnen, which is sort of basic mathematics, followed by mathematics in the high school.
The mathematics instruction ditfers from ours in that it aims at an over all knowledge of the subject, though some branches of mathematics are emphasized more than others; Commencing with the seventh grade there is physics and from the seventh to the eleventh grades, chemistry.
JOSEPH CONSTRUCTION 17 CHESTNUT ST., ARLINGTON — Ml 6-8315 24 HOUR PHONE SERVICE [ nro elementary school subjects | though general science would probj ably be a better name than biology.
From the first through the eleventh grades all pupils are required to study religion unless the the parents request in writing that their children be excused.
After the 11th grade religion is optional and con«erns itself with the philosophy md problems underlying all roliI gion.
Gisela thinks her German schools are more strict than those in Winchester and that the tests are more difficult.
Here most tests are on the home work of the moment while in the German schools the tests cover the pupils’ knowledge of the entire subject to date.
The schools in West Berlin are in session from 8 o’clock in the morning to 1 :30 in the afternoon six days a week.
The school year is from April to April with five to six weeks vacation in the summer usually partly in July and partly in August.
There is a vacation of a week or ten days when the school reports come out in October and there is a two weeks vacation at Christmas, starting December 23.
There is another two weeks vacation when the final reports come out at the end of the school year in April.
Gisela likes to read in her spare time, and school children in Germany go a lot to the theatre because of special cards give them in school.
Speaking about conditions in West Berlin, Gisela said that the people there took the partition of the city pretty much in stride.
Recent developments have however increased the tension which recent letters have indicated has continued to mount.
Here in Winchester the 17-yearold German girl is in the senior Insurance Benefits Increased For School Pupils ompetitive bids by several companies, th<* town a student insurance program which increases the provision to $5,000 for all students who accepted the plan including those who participate in athletics.
Accidental death is covered for $1,500 and a schedule of dismemberment benefitprovides amounts tip to $7,500.
Following recently selector medical expense The plan covers the students while attending school, during the hours and on the days when school is in session, travel directly to and f mm the student’s residence, while the sured at town expense for football section of the policy.
Due to an unfortunate misunderstanding, many parents thought | that the town was also paying for participating in and attendm* thc student , K)licy This wa ' n ,"" the school sponsored and supervised ae tivities during the regular school term, attending religious services during the months school is regularly in session, including travel where the services are held and while participating in play or practice of any school sponsored sport including Junior High football either at or away from school.
The policy has some of the usual limitations and exclusions of all insurance contracts but there are one or two provisions with which all parents of students in the plan should be familiar.
There is no limit except the policy limit for X-rays if there is a fracture, but if there is no fracture, there is a limit of $5.00.
For any minor injury not requiring surgery, the medical care is limited to one doctor’s visit per day at the rate of $5.00 for the first visit and $3.00 for additional visits.
For major injuries requiring surgery or hospital care, there is no limit except that of the policy.
The town wishes to emphasize that the student insurance is not comHomcfronters The Homefronters met at the home of Mrs.
Following a delightful coffee hour, the meeting was called to order by our executive-chairman, Mrs.
English IV, United States History, Fundamentals of Speech, French IV and Music Appreciation.
The Star enjoyed its visit with Gisela and hopes she will drop in often. the right to insure his or her child under his own personal insurance, j If parents wish the student covered for all sports, they must have the student policy, and in the case of Senior High football, they must have the student policy in order to secure football protection.
Rprl 8-tf for Senior High football with the student policy covering all other areas.
Due to the company requirement that all football players carry the student policy in order to be covered for football, the tryout squad and the final squad were in’ WWVWWVWWWWWWWWWW “The Finest Home Away from Home” FOR LADIES AND GENTLEMEN The ride to the aristocrat of nursing homes is certainly justifiable.
West Medford — HUnter 8-7117 Miss Bridie Burke, Resident Manager ii WHOLESALE PRICES ALCOA ALUMINUM 3-CHANNEL COMBINATION WINDOW Screen is self storing.
That's why flameless electricity is smart America's favorite way of drying clothes.
Because that's the only way to get modern automatic convenience without flame and products of combustion.
That's the only way to have outdoors-fresh clothes in every kind of weather.
Winchester residents who are members of Park Street Church will be meeting with residents of Arlington and West Medford at 8:00m. to enjoy a program of song and inspiration.
Mr Thomas A Erickson, assist ant minister of Park Street Church, Boston, will be the speak er.
Monmouth, by Charles B Flood The Minstrel Boy, by David Cort Second Semester, by Helen Swift Submarine Wolf pack, by Wil liam Hardy The Sudden Lady, by Marjorie Lowe NON-FICTION The Ago of Reason Begins, by Will Durant The American Short Story the Twenties, by Austin Wright Behind the Green Curtains, by Sean O’Casey Discovery of the Elements, 6th ed., by Mary E Weeks Encyclopedia of Bullfighting, by Bamaby Conrad Guns of the Old West, by Charles E Chapel A Handbook for Independent School Operation, by William Johnson, ed.
Those who can bring their papers to the church on Wednesday, Thursday or Friday evening are requested to do so.
Last spring the young poeple collected almost ight tons of paper but to do this with small cars and station wa gons is a heavy job for a few; so those who can bring their dona tions to the church will help greatly.
Those who cannot do this may 3end a card with full information as to address, etc. and their papers will be picked up on Saturday morning.
Phone calls will be received at the church from 8 o’clock Saturday morning.
Through these paper drives the high school age young people of the Methodist Church make their own program self-supporting.
This In The Sunday Churches WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev.
There will be a Social Hour following the sei-vice in the Alliance Room. c hurch of the epiphany Rrv.
Senior Choir rehearsal, at 75 Bacon Street, Wednesday, November 1. 7:30m.
How to avoid the m intakes of the past will be brought out Sunday in all Christian Science churches.
The divine method of paying sin’s wages involves unwinding one’s snarls, anti learning from experience how to divide between sense and Soul.” (p.
SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH Washington Street at Kenwin Road The Church in the Highlands” Rev.
Religion Classes for Hi-School Pupils each Monday at 7 for boys ; each Tuesday at 7 for girls.
Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-3000 mori-tf Sunday, October 29.
Carlton Helgerson, PaBtor Baptistic Evangelistic Non Denominatipnal 9:80m.
Martin Luther Film The film, “Martin Luther,’’ will be shown at the Second Congregational Church this Sunday night at 7:0Um.
This is an excellent movie depicting the life and work of this leader of the Protestant Reformation.
Everyone in the community is invited to attend this Family Night” activity at the church.
They will return to the church for a attack supper and u short Devotional Service.
Remember When This week’s picture in the Star’s “Remember When” series shows the delivery wagon of Alexander MacDonald in front of his provision store on Main Street near the center railroad crossing.
Next to the crossing at the corner of Main Street and the walk that led along the outbound tracks from Winchester Station to the center was the shoe store of James McLaughlin.
Foley, and finally to Thompson Street where it was located when the owner sold to Morris L Snyder, the present proprietor.
Mr MacDonald’s market was well known in the old days and he continued in the provision business in Winchester for many years during the nineties and early nineteen hundreds.
Older residents will recall ‘him as a tall bearded man, pleasant of manner with a good sense of humor.
He was active in hurch and civic work, liked to sing and had a good bass voice.
After his days as a provision dealer he was until his retirement Superintendent of Parks under the late George T Davidson.
Many will still recall his tall figure and tan sleeveless leather jacket which he wore in cool weather.
Whether the man on the delivery j art in the picture is Mr MaeDonj aid the Star can not say, nor could j one of our “Remember When” authorities, Roland Simonds.
Perhaps some one who sees the picture will recognize the driver, and write in.
The Welcome Wagon Hostess Will Knock on Your Door with Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors and Your Civic and Social \V elf are Leaders ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies Charlotte L Dodge HUnter 8-2882 No Cost or Obligation Charming, useful, and quaint are the new 1962 “calendar towels.” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star.
Paul Walters of 5 Nassau Drive is working; on plans now being 1 completed for an Open Workshop on the topic of “Adolescents and Their Parents” to be held November 9th at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center, 74 Fenwood Road, Boston.
Henry Wcrmer, director of Child Psychiatry at Beth Israel Hospital, will he the key speaker.
Graham Blaine, Preston Munter, Paul Walters, Shepherd Ginandes, Robert Reid, Donald Gair, Helen Wallach, Louis Mogul, artd Shirley Weisenfeld.
The program is being sponsored by the Massachusetts Mental Health Center Auxiliary, in which Mrs.
Preston Munter of Beacon Hill are in charge of the program arrangements.
The meeting will be open to into rested people from all of the communities that the Mental Health Center serves.
Registration starts at 9:00m. and is to be followed by welcoming speeches, a coffee hour, the keynote address, group discussions in which all will participate, luncheon and a panel discussion of the results of the workshops that will close at 2:00 nt.
Holiday Fair The Second Congregational Church will hold its annual church fair on Friday.
On the different I Holiday tables will be found Christ| mas gifts, aprons, plants, baked j goods and jewelry.
There will also | be a white elephant table and a taI ble of children’s items.
Come and spend the full day. j There will be a “morning coffee,” | a snack table, and an afternoon | tea.
The doors will open at 10:00 m. and the activities will continue until after the supper.
Nites to 9 P.M. aprI3-tf MaribeFs Hausfraus Carry On Wednesday morning November 1, figure-skating classes will start again at the Boston Arena for all the housewives whom Maribel Vinson Owen so devotedly taught for many years.
Tommy McGinnis, who substituted for Maribel when she had to be away, is taking over the classes.
All work performed by Storm Shield with over 12 yrs. manufacturing experience.
Everett DUnkirk 7-8000 Women’s Republican Club Thursday evening, October 11), will he an evening long remembered by the many people who came to hear Mr Herbert Philbrick.
We thank the Winchester Star for the splendid publicity it gave the thought provoking evening.
Mr Philbrick said, “I am not worried about you people here, it is the ones not here.
From this start and the realization that youth was being indoctrinated without an understanding of what was happening.
Reporting to the F.B.I., he then did his regular work during the day, went “under ground” at night to learn all he could and to find out who the instigators were in this world absorbing menace.
The National Council for Soviet Friendship raised fifty million dollars in a year.
That word has double meaning, just as the word Peace, which we hear at every turn, has one meaning for most Americans and another for men who in 45 years, now have control over one billion people.
Fear, confusion, double talk and lack of awareness are rampant in the world.
Just one person in a group, a church or organization can lead toward socialistic ideas and undermine the whole structure.
Study, thought and reading can alert one and we list below some material for this purpose.
Sherman W Saltmarsh, Jr., were hosts to the executive board and their husbands.
This gave an op portunity for personal questions and Mr Philbrick had many thought-provoking answers.
Training For Encampment Red Barn Shop And Gardens Turkey Whist The Malden Hospital Alumnae Association is holding a turkey The renovated Red Barn Shop whist for tho benefit of needy nttrsand Gardens will have a grand and stude ""t nurses at K of C opening Saturday October 28 from I™* 11 on Mt Vernon Street Thurs1:00m. to 9:00m.
Natalie Mambuca TRAINING FOR ENCAMPMENT. sink out of saplings lashed together Mary Frances Henry, Sally Brown.
Photo by Rycrson Winchester Senior Girl Scouts at Frost Pond, N H., make with twine.
Rosemary Leary, To Send Surplus Foods To Hungry Overseas A special appeal to be launched during the Thanksgiving season will ask American Protestants and Eastern Orthodox church members for $979,380 to finance the 1962 Share Our Surplus Program through which more than 20 milhungry persons overseas will rereceive life-saving United States surplus foods.
Value of SOS foodstuffs, wheat, flour, bulgar (a processed, quickly prepared wheat derivative), corn meal, powdered milk and cooking oils, scheduled for distribution to the world’s hungry in 39 areas of Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America, is estimated at more than $30 million.
Since 1952, SOS foods sent over seas by the churches have been given to disaster victims, in supplemental feeding programs for widows, orphans, school children, hospital patients and the aged, and in assistance to refugees and others in distress.
Hundreds of thousands of church goers will contribute to the appeal at Thanksgiving Week Community Services as well as through activities of the Christian Rural Overseas Program of Church World Service, and through observances of individual churches, United Church Women’s groups, church youth organizations, etc.
Social Agencies Meeting The Winchester Council of Social Agencies met recently at the Public Library with the president, Mr Bernard Silva of the High School Guidance Department, presiding.
The film was produced by the library cx tension programs of the six New England states.
It showed the areas which should be covered by our library if we are to meet the needs of our community.
The social agencies represented were the High School and Junior High School Guidance Departments, Public Welfare, Visiting Nurses, Hospital, Red Cross and the Library.
On Convocation Committee Word comes from Bradford Junior College, Bradford, that Mr Wayne Davis, 9 Marshall Road, has accepted an invitation from the college to serve* on the committee planning for the convocation to be held at the college November 3 and 4.
This conference is to mark Bradford’s inauguration this fall of a new plan of education and the beginning of a new lorg range program for the improvement of campus facilities.
Several men and women of national prominence will speak or appear on discussion panels.
As a friend of the college Mr Davis is at work on the public reitions sub-committee.
Mr Clarke has been with Dewey and Almy since 1960 as assistant to the vice president in charge of the Polyfibron Division.
In his new post, he will be responsible for developing markets for new products outside established product lines.
Mr Clarke was formerly with Chemical Products Corporation, Providence, R 1.
He is a member of the Winchester Country Club, Agawam Hunt Club, Providence, and the Harvard Club of Boston.
Gather up the children and come to Hadley Hall, Parish of the Epiphany.
Do your Christmas shopping early while the small fiy are riding the ponies, viewing the movies or off in their very own room to buy their own surprises with their very own allowances.
What does the weather matter, good or bad there is fun for all ages and sizes.
Maurice T Freeman of 11 Lorena Road are among the patrons for a series of Christian Culture Lectures, sponsored by the Paulist Fathers of the Catholic Information Center at 5 Park Street in Boston.
Robert F Quinn, C.S.P., who is in charge of the series, has announced that the lectures will discuss the intellectual and cultural problems facing the world today.
Monsignor George Casey, columnist of the Boston “Pilot,” will moderate the lecture on October 30.
M assachusetts with a degree Landscape Architecture and sonin-law of Mr and Mrs.
Robert Smail, owners of the Art Gallery, has used his knowledge and his artistic ability to create and beautify both the inside and outside.
The Gallery has attracted thousands of visitors that understood or loved Fine Arts.
With the addition of indoor plants, artist supplies, gifts such as pottery, glass, wooden ware and hand screened linen, Country Prints by Robert Darr Wert, things for children, jewelry and many articles designed and executed for the Red Barn Shop and Gardens exclusively.
The new location of the Bettie Donald Corset and Maternity Shop will be in the Locatelli Building at 3 Winchester Terrace off Thompson Street.
Opening day will he Thursday October 26 and everyone is cordially invited to drop in and say hello.
The same personal service will, as always, continue to be our policy and two roomy fitting rooms will add to customers comfort and shopping pleasure.
Bulldozer — Shoveldozer Cellar Excavating — Grading PArkview 9-5067 — 9-1531 augl2-ti DRESSMAKING ALTERATIONS See this number jot it down.
PIANOS JUNK DEALERS Winchester and Woburn JUNK DEALER HIGHEST PRICES PAID For Rags, Puper and Metal Call Ed.
PLUMBING & HEATING FOR SALE 'V ANTED Ride from Highland Avenue, Winchester to vicinity of Broad Street, j Boston, week day* about 8 a m , returning | 5m.
Call PA 9.5946 "" WANTED— Plano in stood condition nt :iM*nable price C.iII PA 9-3*27.
Hujhos Farms, Bernardstown, Mass. oct26-3t FOR SALE — 1955 Chevrolet sport coupe VH, automatic transmission, radio, good condition.
FOR SALE — Lady's desk, $10; new upholstered Morris chair, $15; floor lamps, $10 each; table lamps, $2 each; wall shelves. $5; antique straight chair, $8; mahogany straight chair. $8 ; mirrors, $2 each, also aquarium ami aerator.
LANDSCAPING o*t$-4t ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AM1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
TeL WElls 50570. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants.
FOR SALE-1959 Renault Dnuphine, 18,000 miles, excellent condition, radio and heater, good tires.
TeL PArkview 9-3128 augiS-tf Borgeson & Gustafson PAINTING & DECORATING Interior & Exterior FREE ESTIMATES WE 3-6069 BR 2-3437 augl2-tf TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing.
FOR SALE — Set green velvet fiiH>r to ceiling draw drupes, 74x96 each drape, complete with rods, original cost $225, priced fov quick sale, $66.
I vers and Pond piano; antique Jove sent and matching chair: library table.
FOR SALE — Full length ranch mink coat, $4,600, new ; will noil for $1,200.
Solid rock maple twin-size bed. flat spring and Simmons inner-spring mattress.
FOR RENT — Attractive room in private home, near center, kitchenette if desired.
HELP WANTED WANTED— A practical nurse or capable woman for the care of invttlid woman three evenings a week.
WANTED -Young Indy for part, time work in Yarn Shop, knowledge of knitting anti newlng requiretk Apply 33 Thompson Street.
WANTED — High school ifirl for two or three days « week from 3:16 to 5:00m. for 6-year-old boy.
WORK WANTED POSITION WANTED — Experienced woman wants baby sitting, good references.
Ma 3 tcr of Music, NO 2-9020. octl9-4t * SEWING MACHINE SERVICE SEWING MACHINE SERVICE— Electric Sewing Machine Repair Service.
All makes inaluding Japanese manufacture, 36 years of prompt, courteous service.
NOrmandy 5-4520. jun22-tf DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home nnd industrial use.
WElls 3-0052. aug7-tf IWISCELlANtOUS WINCHESTER EMPLOYMENT — 10:00 to 12m., 4:00 to 9:00m.
Call PA 93132. octl2-8t * PLUMBING — Heating, Oil-burner sales and service.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be mnde at tariff rates by calling your Authorized Travel Agent.
Let ua know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out with you.
Youth Concerts At Symphony Tickets are still available for the third season of Youth Concerts at Symphony Hall.
Harry Ellis Dickson, a membe of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and assistant conductor of the Boston “Pops” has planned an interesting series of programs for this season.
He will present the first of these on November 4 at 1 1m., when, under his direction, 60 members of the Boston Symphony Orchestra will illustrate the difference between classical and modern music The same program will he repeated on Saturday, November 11, at IIm., and will be followed by concerts on January 6 und 13, and March 3 and 10.
To all pbrsons interested In the estate of CARMEI.A MOLEA, sometimes culled CARMELA MU LEA. and CARMEI.A MOLA1K late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of certain instruments purporting to be the Inst will and codicil of said deceased by MARY LORRAINE FORGIONE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
Witness, John C I.eggat, Esquire, First Judge of $aid Court, this tenth day of October 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. oct26-3t BUTTERW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry july6-t.f COMMONWEALTH OP MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of RICHARD M BINSW ANGER late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The executors of the will of said R|< HARI) M IlINSWANGKR have prroon ted to said Court for allowance their first account.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written appearmice in said Court nt Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the tenth day of November.61, the return day of this citation.
Witness, John C I.eggat, Esquire, First Judge „f said Court, this sixteenth day of October, 1961.
To all persons interested in the rotate of CHARLES E YOUNG, formerly known as CHARLES E YOUNG, JUNIOR lata of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of n certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ALICE E YOUNG of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex, praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving n surety on her bomd.
John V Hatvey, Register. octl2-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
Probate Court, To all persons interested in the trust estate under Article Ten of the will of WILLIAM A KNEELAND late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of FLORENCE L KNEELAND and others.
The trustees of said estate have presented to saici Court for allowance their fourth and fifth accounts.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this nineteenth day of October 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. oct26-3t FOR RENT — Comfortable room in a new ranch home.
FOR KENT — Furnished apartment, flrepiuced living room, bedroom, kitchen, full bath, am) garage For 'appointment please call PA 9-0441.
Call PA 9-5286. octl2-4t FOR RENT— Prof eeslonal ollico space with purking on grounds, centruJ location.
Call WElls 3-2334. aep21-tf WANTED WANTED Antiques — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc.
First floor has 3 largo rooms with modern kitchen and pantry.nd floor has 3 nice bedrooms, den, and modern bath.
This duplex bus everything ; nice quiet neighborhood, good yard, screens, storm windows, screened porch, oil heat, good closets, parking, schools und so forth.
HHJcrost 56621. octl9-tf FOR SALE POODLE PUPS Lovely, deep-apricot standards.
CR 4-7259 Tree Talk Autumn leaves raked up once a week can be composted and return ed to the soil in the form of mineral-rich humus.
But it is wasteful, says Edward J Duda, acting director of the Bartlett Tree Research laboratories.
Leaves from a single mature tree when turned to compost may be worth as much as $15 to $20.
In suburbs where leaf burning is permitted, burn only those known to be infected with diseases.
Never start a bonfire beneath a tree; the heat may scorch and kill the lower branches.
Go-carts that rake up leaves have removed the chore from this autumn task.
These are acid and can be used as mulch for azalea, andromeda, laurel, rhododendron and other acidloving plants.
Dogwood Tip Dieback Due To Muggy Weather Tips of branches are dying back on many dogwood trees.
It’s due in part to muggy weather, according to Roy C Beckwith of the Bartlett Tree Research Laboratories.
This year, however, weeks of humid weather in summer and fall brought it on in quantity.
This infection is best controlled with a fungicidal spray in the spring.
But pruning out killed tips now will prevent the infection from spreading into branches.
To till persons interested in the estate of JOHN W THORNTON late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by WINIFRED AMELIA THORNTON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-third day of October 1961.
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS To nil persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M ALICE MASON late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of JOHN S MASON and others.
The trustee of mid estate has presented to said Court for allowance its first and second accounts.
Enquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-third day of October 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. oct26-3t TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS October 17, 1961 The undersigned being the owner of a single residence building located at 76 Sheridan Circle, in a general residence district established by the Zoning By-Law, hereby makes application for permission to alter the aforesaid house for two family use.
That the zoning by-laws be hereby amended by changing or altering the map incorporated therein und made a part thereof and a portion of that certain district indicated and identified therein as a general residence district so that the following described area will be changed from a general residence district to an industrial district.
I hereby certify that the foregoing is u true copy of an amendment to the Zoning By-Luws adopted by the Town of Winchester, Massachusetts, at the Special Representative Town Meeting of June 19, 1901, and approved by the Attorney General of Massachusetts on October 10, 1961.
K wtmm i i I i x| M As a matter of course, hanks like ours make many types of loans at low cost.
Life insurance policies, savings account balances, good marketable securities are acceptable collateral for loans here at low rates.
VERNON STREET 35 CHURCH STREET Serving the Community Since 1897 WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS MEMBER FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION MEMBER FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM BANKING HOURS — 8 A.M. to 2 PAL Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon At Mt.
Deborah Donovan, a senior is enrolled in the airline stewardess course.
Deborah Wadsworth is in the medical secretary course and Ellen Lorraine De Vries is majoring in retailing.
George Makechnie of 19 Percy Road, Lexington, was a former Winchester woman among the hostesses.
JOHN B MERCURIO “INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED ” HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage at Less Cost PA 9-3400 novl0-tf COLONIAL Package Store / Inc.
Four Corners Shopping Center Woburn WE 5-2322 Finger In The Pie Internationally Speaking Some days the crisis is on, some days it’s off, and some days things are just ordinarily dismal.
Because one-third of the world is dedicated to destroy the way of life of another third, and because onethird of the world has elevated to the status of dogma the exploitation of civil strife as a means to an end.
If memory fails not, other magazine articles in the past have set forth in similar detail the key cities of our strategic defense, the location of our atomic plants, and other vital data.
In short, information concerning Russia that we can only obtain, piecemeal, in the most hazardous fashion (witness the U-2 flights) may be had about us by any interested Russian at almost any newstand at the cost of a current magazine.
Asa S Knowles, Northeastern president, who introduced the Governor; Governor V olpe; and Dr.
William C \\ lute, university provost, who presided. standing of what it means to each and every one of us.
Then let prove ourselves worthy of our free society, and strive to build and maintain its values.
It’s the very foundation of our way of life, the means by which the wise men of our nation’s infancy managed to perpetuate the freedom they had won at such cost.
Daffy nit ions Colon — two periods going steady Subway — a place so crowded that even the men can’t all get seats.
It works only because it has been cherished, upheld, and obeyed by generations of Americans who believed in it.
In short, survival of the ideal for which this nation stands is far from inevitable.
It may survive, if only enough Americans care enough about it to cherish it, to uphold and obey and defend it.
And now more than ever, when our sense of purpose, our vitality, and our creativity as a people is under challenge.
Passing time and inevitable ohan ges wrought by progress have proven the falsity of many key Marxist doctrines — induced, indeed, certain radical changes by the Rus sians themselves — but they have only added lustre to the sagacious wisdom and remarkable foresight of America’s founding fathers.
As one step in the right direction let all of us get better acquainted with this remarkable document and seek to cultivate deeper underDough — a misnomer for money Dough sticks to your hands.
Nudist; — a person who goes coatless and vestless, and wears trousers to match.
When they are married, their brides get the presents and the publicity.
And when they die, their wives get the insurance and the winters in Florida.
PA.90654 AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENV LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER'S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET Res.
A Hollywood producer’s wife wanted her portrait painted by a local artist.
Art Show In Red Barn The old Red Barn in Burlington has been renovated since the fire which occurred in September of 1960, and the re-opening of the Burlington Art Gallery on Bedford Street in Burlington will be held there on Sunday October 29 in the afternoon from 1:00 to 5:00m.
The public is cordially invited to attend this event and the continuous exhibitions to be held during the year.
The current exhibition will feature the works of eminent professional artists from the New England Artist Group.
S., Otis Cook, Harry Ballinger, Robert Douglas Hunter, William Meyerowitz, N A., Marguerite Pearson, Margaret Fitzhugh Browne, Gunnar Bjareby, Marion Williams Steele, Don Stone and many others.
Robert Smail purchased this property 17 years ago and 10 years ago made the barn into an Art Gallery where the guest books show an enormous interest in this gallery.
Smail and Roger Curtis both outstanding artists and teachers of art at the Gallery.
Special exhibitions will feature all Landscape, Marine and Portrait shows.
Unitarian Bazaar For almost a year the Bazaar Committee of the Women’s Alliance of the Winchester Unitarian Society, headed by Mrs.
Wednesday, November 15, from 2:00m. to 9:00m., and Thursday, November 16, from 10:00m. to 5:00m.
Pre-school children will he cared for in the Nursery during the daytime until 5:00m. on both days.
Besides all the beautiful things for sale at the fair tables, ’ there will he plenty of opportunity for refreshments and sociability.
Robert A Storer, the minister, and the men of the church will serve supper at two sittings, 6:00 m. and 7:00m.
Their culinary ability and masculine efficiency have been demonstrated and need no further comment.
Also in the Gourmet Room” on Thursday you may have luncheon, served by Mrs.
All sorts of delicious baked goods to delight the eye and tickle the palate will be found at “The Gingerbread House, under Mrs.
For an added treat to take home, visit the “Sugar Plum Tree” for home-made and penny candy.
Mr Lufkin is known to Winchester audiences, having given a talk on “Abraham Lincoln in Boston” to the Society last year.
Mr Lufkin is president of the Bostonian Society; treasurer of the Lincoln Group of Boston; a director of the Bay State Historical League; curator of the Medford Historical Society and a member of the Civil War Study Group in Winchester.
His illustrated lecture makes a tour of the Boston Peninsula as it developed from 1630-1880.
The subject seems particularly timely in view of the extensive Boston re-development projects currently underway.
Mr Arthur Keehn, as president of the Winchester Historical Society, extends a cordial invitation to attend to anyone interested in the subject, or in the Winchester Historical Society.
Your old sfovfeds worth OFF cn this VVnirlpccI Gaslfencfe FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
TALL ORDER Unusual prescriptions calling for rare drugs or in difficult to dispense forms present no problem to us.
Designed with all controls grouped efficiently on the top of the range . . . gives it a slim, trim, squared-away look.
Other features include smokeless broiling, oven light, surface light. 4s little as Reg. price, $349.50.
Francis Smith of 1 Wolcott Terrace, was recently honored for her outstanding achievements in work for blind persons.
On October 18 she was awarded a plaque by the Mater Dei Guild of the Catholic Guild for All the Blind at a morning ceremony which took place at the Woodlavvn Golf Club, New ton.
Smith who recently completed 36 years of volunteer reading to blind students, was dean of volunteer readers in this area.
She was one of the first persons to respond to an appeal advertised over a quarter of a century ago for volunteers to read to blind students attending local universities.
Thirtyfive of the current clients are students registered at schools and colleges in this vicinity.
For the past five years this program has been under the administration of the Catholic Guild for All the Blind.
When the Guild, at the* request of the United Community Services, took over this activity; Mrs.
In this time she has contributed over 1,100 hours of volunteer reading.
Smith has for many years transcribed text books into braille specializing in foreign language books.
FRANCIS SMITH responsible for hundreds of blind men and women being able to take advantage of the rich, educational opportunities this area offers.
Sullivan, general chairman of the 1962 Winchester United Fund campaign, rejwrts that this week his committee completed enrollment of volunteer campaign workers.
Also this week, the local campaign began with solicitation of small business firms.
Solicitors kits have been distributed through residential captains; this phase of the campaign begins November 3rd.
This year’s Winchester committee is considerably larger than that suggested by Boston United Fund headquarters, Bill Sullivan informs us, to give more effective coverage of all phases of the once-a-year effort.
Much of the paperwork involved has also been streamlined to relieve the load on solicitors and administrative workers.
Changes are based on recommendations made by Herbert Bixj ler, 1061 Winchester campaign general chairman.
Local campaign headquarters is at the Red Cross building, as in the I past.
The Red Cross staff this year is giving additional assistance with clerical and certain administrative details.
General chairman Sullivan provided the following list of committee chairmen and district directors.
Residential chairman, .lames Quine; small business chairman, Bennett Wightman; administrative chairman, John Harrison; Public Relations chairman, Edward Crabtree; training chairman, Herbert Bixler; clubs and organizations chairman, Margaret Way.
FUND, continued on page i) 1 Nil hi) 1*1 Nl) DOS I hKS were delivered to stores and businesses around low n by these Scouts of Dark 500, Den I on Saturday morning.
Officer Anthony Pronski halted traffic momentarily while the line marched acros* Main Street.
Left to right, William Everett, Ernest CrabUcc, Jack i'upudiuia, Juiin Uccello, Wuyue Padula, Peter Knight.
The Boston consulting engineering firm’s announcement was made by Harrison D Eddy, Jr.
Eliassen was head., of the sanitary engineering program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and was active in teaching, research and consulting work, llis research in the fields of water treatment and radioactive wastes disposal has been recognized internationally.
He has served as a consultant to the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, the World Health Organization in Geneva, the United States Publie Health Service, the Department of Defense, the White House Office, as well as to many state and municipal agencies; and has had published more than ‘JO p ro fessional pa pe rs.
He has also been President of Rolf Eliassen Associates, Inc., of Winchester, I Mass., consultants to chemical, textile, paper, petroleum, and eleetronie industries on problems of industrial wastes.
From 1942 to 1946 Rolf Elias1 sen served in the Army’s Corps of | Engineers, attaining the rank of major.
He is a member of the Board of Consultants to the Lake Tahoe Area Council and continues to serve as a consultant to several governmental and international agencies.
H Funds The Board of Selectmen has set Monday, November 2U the Monday after Thanksgiving, as the date for the special town meeting at which the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee will seek additional funds to complete the building.
It has been reported that some $11,000 will he needed in addition to the $9,<mo remaining in the budget frohi the original appropriation voted by the town.
The additional amount to complete the school must come from the town’s Excess and Deliccticy Account since money can not he raised at this time bv taxation.
Day’s Receipts Saved In Holdup Attempt Quick thinking on the part of “Randy” Kazazian. clerk at Xcno’s Market at 32 Swanton Street, thwarted an attempted holdup in the parking lot of the market last Friday evening shortly be1 ore 8 o’clock.
As he did so the dome light of the car came on and he saw a man crouched on the floor of the back seat compartment.
As the light came on and he saw the man “Randy” asked him what he was doing in his car.
Instead of complying with the holdup man’s order, “Randy” slammed the door and ran back into the market, taking the store money with him.
A call was sent in to Police Headquarters and Sergeant Andrew Crawford with Officers Roland Roy.
Archie O’Connell, William Haggerty, John Reardon and James Flaherty rushed to the scene.
A woman customer, who entered the market parking lot shortly after the attempted holdup told the police she saw a short man run through the lot in the direction of Oak Street.
The Police combed the surrounding neighborhood but were unable to locate any suspicious persons.
Mr Kazazian believed the holdup man to be 30 to 35 years old, dark complexioned and wearing a dark coat.
HOLDUP, continued on page 8 Commended In Merit Test On the basis of their high performance in the National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Tests given to juniors in over 15,000 High Schools last spring, two Winchester boys were among the seven Belmont Hill School seniors to receive letters of Commendation from the Scholarship Corporation.
Daniel F Barnard of 16 Taft Drive and Robert F Stewart, son of Mr and Mrs.
The students who received these letters are part of a group of 25,000 high school seniors who did well enough on the test to be awarded this recognition.
Together with the 10,000, semi finalists who qualified for the final stages of the competition these students constituted less than 2 per cent of all high school seniors.
Named VP Of Metal Trades Association John H Lyman, President of Geartronics Corporation of Woburn, has been elected vice presi dent of the National Metal Trades Association, it was announced by the association.
JOHN H LYMAN Composed of more than 1500 manufacturers, in the metal working and reJatecLimiustries, the 61year old association is primarily engaged in the field of labor-management relations.
Mr Lyman is a past president of the association’s Boston Branch and has served as a national director and also on many national committees of the organization.
Clark presents gift to retired physician Milton J Quinn at a dinner in his honor, given by friends and former associates of the medical profession.
After research on parole and higher education made it apparent that the administrators of a service are the real key to the s uccess or failure of that service, the League embarked on a two-year study of the Merit System in Massachusetts.
Not only the local League, but Leagues throughout the state cooperated in a major effort to determine what the merits of the “merit system” are, and whether or not Civil Service in Massachusetts could be improved upon.
The result is a scholarly and comprehensive booklet which has just been published by the State League, 10,000 copies of which are now being distributed.
Quinn On Wednesday evening, October 25, the Medical Staff of the Winchester Hospital gave a Testimonial Reception and Dinner at the W inchester Country Club in honor of Dr.
Milton J Quinn who had retired on September 22 after 3(i years of practice in Winchester.
Fifty doctors and representatives Open House Dates For School Parents November 2 Senior High School November 7 Mystic and Parkhurst Schools November 8 Lincoln and Lynch Junior High Schools November 9 Washington and Wyman Schools November 14 McCall Junior High Noonan and Vinson-Owen Schools “Prayers For Peace” “Prayers for Peace” will be the special observance in the First Congregational Church at both the nine-fifteen and eleven o’clock services next Sunday morning.
Believing that fear is not the answer to these days of tension, the people of the Church and of the Community are invited to turn to spiritual resources and look again at the heritage of faith upon which this nation was founded.
In these days when civilization itself hangs in the balance the urge is upon us all to unite in turning minds and hearts toward every constructive and deepening of the hospital gathered to pay town one year before Dr.
Quinn, who had servI William J Speers, Jr., president ed as president of the medical staff.
I 0 * hospital trustees, expressed chief of staff, and chief of its medical service, as well as president of the Middlesex East District Medical Society, in addition to holding other hospital staff appointments, and membership in numerous other scientific societies.
Quinn dating back to his early days in the practice of medicine, and with newspaper headlines printed for the occasion lamenting the Quinns’ departure from Winchester to retirement in Nashua, New Hampshire.
Nelson Fontneau, who led the group in a succession of song parodies appropriate to the occasion.
Reese E James, hospital administrator, told the group of the heip I the best wishes of the trustees to the Quinns in retirement, and thanked Dr.
Richard Stiles presented an engraved Paul Revere bowl to Dr Quinn from the Women’s Auxiliary to the Middlesex East District Society in grateful recognition for all he had done for the organization which was founded during Dr.
Richard J Clark, president of the medical staff, presented a large engraved Paul Revere bowl as a gift from his colleagues.
Quinn then thanked the staff, spoke about his years of pleasant association with the hospital in his years of practice, and told of his plans for retirement in Nashua.
He was reminded that he was voted unanimously an honorary member of the staff of the Winchester Hospital, and will always be welcome Mrs.
Francis Smith Receives Honor _ at its meetings and functions, resource of peace.
Following the singing of “Auld this Sunday the ministers of the | chief of staff. j Lang Syne,” and the taking of Church will lead the congregation i Dr.
Richard Sheehy spoke of Dr. j many photographs to be presented in a special “Prayers for Peace” j Quinn's early years of practice in to Dr.
Quinn in album form, Dr In this connection the second of the two articles in the warrant for the special town meeting will seek permission to transfer the sum of $3,500, appropriated at the 1959 annual meeting in connection with the Wadleigh School and School Administrative offices, to the Lynch Junior High School Building and Equipment Account to be expended under the direction of the Building Committee for Enlarged Facilities for Senior and Junior High Schools and School Administrative Offices.
The Selectmen have not as yet received from the School Building Committee the exact amount that will be necessary to complete the new school, which incidentally has been in use since the beginning of the school year last September.
Not only is the building functioning as a school but it is also housing the offices of the Superintedent of Schools.
The School Building Committee is preparing figures for the coming town meeting and have been urged to include all necessary items to complete the building and furnish it properly, this to enable the town to have the benefit of state aid in connection with the expense, amounting to about 30c on each dollar.
Generally speaking the additional expenditure at the school is to provide hooks for the library, science equipment, aids to teaching, furnishings for the teachers' and School Committee rooms and racks for the storage of lumber and metal for the woodworking and metal working shops.
It is also possible that some changes will have to be made in the school ventilating system, and it is reported additional work will have to be done on the school playground.
Winchester Lions Club Sponsoring “What My Eyesight Means to Me” Police Institute Graduate Sgt.
John P McHugh of the Winchester Police Department was one of 43 law enforcement officers from five New England states and Maryland who received graduation certificates lest Friday, October 27, upon completion of a week-long course in “Police Interrogation” at the New England Police Institute.
Traffic Lights At West Side Danger Spot The operation of the traffic lights it the intersection of Cambridge and Wildwood Streets, for which the Board of Selectmen has been asking the State Department of Public Works for several years, finally began this week.
Previously the lights have been operating there merely as warning flasher beacons.
Experts from across the country served as guest faculty members, teaching the psychology and methods of questioning suspects, witnesses, juveniles, and victims.
Boys and girls in grades one through six are eligible to participate and the contest will run from November 1 through December 4.
All essays must he in on or before December 4, and may be left at the Star Office.
Essays must be submitted on 8V& x llin. paper, written in ink and on one side of the paper only.
William C f’usack of 2 Lakeview Road is serving as chairman of the judges, the others being Mr Robert Nyere of 4 Squanto Road and Mrs.
The boy and girl adjudged winners of the contest will each receive as a prize a fine English Raleigh bicycle.
The bikes are being donated for the contest by Peter Marchesi, through the Cott Beverage Company.
The bikes will be on display next week in the windows of Hevey’s Pharmacy, and will be awarded just before Christmas.
Winchester Drive For Channel 2 Winchester has responded to WGBII -Channel 2’s appeal for help in rebuilding the station destroyed by fire October 14 by planning a community-wide drive for funds.
The value of the educational station to Winchester is well known to all.
The many informative, musical and dramatic programs are followed with great interest in this community.
As the temporary, emergency arrangements for operating the station cost more than the normal operating expenses, an immediate response to the educational station’s appeal for help is imperative.
Please give generously to keep WGBH and Channel 2 in our _ _ . . ... , August 13, 1951.
Since that time observance and the sermon will be Winchester, as did Dr.
Roger BurQuinn’s many friends chatted with the Board has continually sought directed to this theme. goyne, who opened his office in this him long after the dinner was over.
LIGHTS, continued on page 4 including agents from the United States schools and homes.
Contributions Food and Drug Administration and may be sent immediately to Stathe United States Treasury, were in the tion WGBII Channel 2 at Camclass. bridge 42, Mass.
Treasurer RALPH W HATCH A ssistan t T reasu rer NELLIE L RALPH Clerk of Corporation Austin Broadhurst A* Trustees F*aul F Avery Shailer Avery C linton W Bennett James W Black ham Austin Broadhurst Dr.
Area parties are designed to introduce Matrons from all departments and laboratories in their particular town, and to help the Newcomer become oriented more easily into her community.
The Technology Matrons Association is made up of the wives of faculty and stuff at M.I.T. and its associated laboratories.
In earlier years the Matrons was a small group which met for social purposes, only.
As the Institute grew, so did the Matrons, whose eligible membership now numbers over 2,000, and whose objectives are to foster friendly relations, to share mutual interests, and to furnish effective service to the Institute.
She has asked each sponsor to arrange for an informal gathering of the Matrons in her community.
Leo L Beranek, 7 Ledgewood Road, entertained the Matrons at a morning coffee on Wednesday, November l at her home.
A young man, once a resident of this town, he has lectured up and down the Eastern Seaboard on a subject of which many of us read but know little else about.
It is the only bulwark between the integrity of the U S. judicial system and the invasion of foreign power under the guise of the In ternational Court.
Any action to eliminate the amendment would seriously impair the sovereignty of our coun try by vesting potential power over fully domestic matters by a foreign tribunal.
All members are seriously urged to let nothing interfere with their attendance at this meeting.
Receiving awards were Helen Rideout, Malden Auxiliary, also department historian; Rose Reardon, president of Malden Auxiliary; and Genevieve Waldon, secretary of Stoneham Auxiliary.
These ladies are to be congratulated for their work, and it is hoped more from this district will get such an award next year.
Herman F Pike opened her lovely home on Arlington Street Thursday, October 2G, for the first fall meeting of the Winchester Garden Club.
Robert G Richards for the guest speaker at the November meeting, to be held at the home of Mrs.
J Edward Downes; also that the December meeting this year would be an innovation, in that the program would be a tour of members’ homes, which would be decorated for Christmas, and that this meeting would be opened to guests.
Mr Allgrove gave an interesting background on how terrariums came into existence.
They were used to bring back tropical plants to the homeland after a voyage.
Mr Allgrove started in making terrariums himself shortly after World War II as a business, though he had made themfor pleasure since he was a small boy.
While giving his lecture, Mr Allgrove made a terrarium, lecturing as he worked.
The members found him a most interesting and informal speaker as well as most instructive.
The first group ikeeting for all j hospital volunteers, sponsored by ' the Friends of the Winchester Hospital, was held at the Wyman School on Tuesday evening, October 24th.
Robert Grenzeback, chairman of volunteers, who introduced the three speakers for the evening.
Mr Reese James, hospital administrator, spoke of the volunteers from the administrative point of view.
He mentioned the beginnings of the Winchester Hospital in 1912 by volunteers and their continued work through the years as directors, members of the medical staff, building committees, fund raising committees, and members of Winton Club, En Ka, and the Friends.
All of these make up a j team to provide the best medical care possible.
Mr James spoke of the prestige of being a volunteer and the ingredients that make a good one, interest, understanding, willingness to accept responsibility, tact, judgment, and consideration.
He also explained that with volunteers it is quality not quantity to look for.
Miss Marjorie Snyder, director of nurses, stressed the volunteer’s role as part of the patient care team, which includes registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and aides.
Each member of this team must understand her duties and responsibilities and work with the others for the complete satisfaction of the patient.
Richard Clark, president of the medical staff, brought greetings from them.
He briefly mentioned the beginnings of Social Service work and spoke of the tremendous changes that have taken place in volunteer services since that time.
Clark spoke particularly of the sanctity of personal and professional relations of the patients and how volunteers especially must respect the confidences they may see or hear.
He stressed the mass psychology of a pleasant greeting, a cheery smile, and a silent tongue.
Clark also brought the appreciation of the medical staff for the work being done by the volunteers.
Grenzeback summarized the program with the words quality, responsibility, and dedication.
A brief question period concluded the first and most successful meeting of volunteers of the Winchester Hospital.
Winthrop Knox Jr., will open her home at 1 Curtis Circle, and on Friday, November 17, Mrs.
D Reid Weedon, Jr., is in charge of refreshments; Mrs, Philip Parsons Jr., decorations; Mrs.
Parsons showed how different candles may be used with flowers to enhance the beauty of both.
Don Orione “Friends’* Formed The Winchester friends of the /JeJefte i “OINK of a MNir WE BUY AND SELF, ESTATES, DIAMONDS and COLLECTORS’ ITEMS Expert Appraiser MAKER and DESIGNER of EXQUISITE JEWELRY Repairing 47 Bromlield St., Boston, Mass.
Angelo L Maietta is chairman of this committee, assisted by Leonard Barbo, Police Chief Joseph Derro, Mr and Mrs.
Orione Home for the Aged. i Discount on Christmas cards up Leo Barbo, to make plans for a to December I at the Winchester fiesta to be held later in the Star.
Donald W Kitchin of 1(> Chesterford Road drove to Pocono Manor, Pennsylvania Sunday for the annual meeting of the conference on Electrical Insulation of the National Research Council.
Mr Kitchin who is Senior Scientist at Simplex Wire & Cable Co. of Cambridge, presented an irivited paper which he prepared with 0.
Mr j Kitchin has been associated with the National Research Council ' since 1929.
The Winchester Art Association announces its second meeting and lecture of the year on Tuesday, November 7, in the Rich Room of the library, at 7:15, and invites all residents interested in learning about art, or in promoting art appreciation in the community., or in meeting others of like interests, to become members at that time.
In keeping with this year’s theme, “Art and the Community, Jane Miller, start* lecturer at the famed DeCordova Museum, Lincoln, will lecture on the development of the Community Art Center.
She will bring with her works from the children and adult classes to illustrate one phase of the museum’s activities.
As a lecturer, she follows a family tradition; her parents are well-known travel lecturers, and much of her own travel experience has been in their company.
The pictures which will hang in the North Reading Room for the month of November will be paintings and woodcuts by Robert Grady.
Mr Grady has studied at the Massachusetts College of Art, at the School of the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, at the Academie Colarossi, Ecole des Beaux Arts, Paris, and received his master’s degree from the Cranbrook Academy of Art.
DeCordova Museum in Lincoln, Gallerie de France in Paris, Library of Congress in Washington, and the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.
Mr Grady now teaches drawing and watercolor at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
He also teaches the Wednesday morning class of the Winchester Studio Guild.
Donald Van Roosen, in arrangements for this meeting and the exhibition.
A0IN YOUNG TENDER LAMB hen it comes to meat there is NO substitute for quality.
Bakery Specials DATE NUT BREAD V 49* JELLY ROLL \7 4* $ e af. ° °d s Pe cial SLICED Swordfish Mowtell P Slide.
SUE 41c GIANT SIZE 79C BETTY CROCKER MUFFIN MIXES ORANGE DATE RAISIN 33c pkg.
LUX FLAKES LARGE SIZE 34c GIANT SUE SlC BETTY CROCKER MUFFIN MIX BLUEBERRY 39c pkg.
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1961 Page Three Officer O’Connell Retires Officer Archie T O’Connell, veteran patrolman of the Winchester Police Department, made his final tour of duty Sunday night when he retired after a service record of .'17 years.
Greer Co., of Wilmington, manufacturers of processing equipment for the food industry, was elected president of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts on Thursday, October 26, at the 46th annual meeting of the association at the Statler Hilton Hotel in Boston.
O’CONNELL He was appointed June 16, 1024, and went on duty June 22 of that year for the usual probationary period.
During his years on the force he served under four chiefs, William I McIntosh, William H Rogers, Charles J Harrold and Joseph J Derro.
Most of Officer O’Connell’s service has been at night, and he was known as a fearless officer, held in respect by those who liked to give a cop a hard time.
Years ago he captured a “lone wolf’’ housebreaker and his moll after a break at a house on Everett Avenue, and only recently he was commended by Chief Derro for his part in the apprehension of intruders at the Lynch Junior High School.
Born in Winchester October 8, 1896, Officer O’Connell is the son of the late Edward and Catherine O’Connell.
Graf Waldersee, making six round trips between Hoboken, N J., and Brest in Fiance.
Officer O’Connell and his wife,, Lucy make their home at .30 Lincoln Street.
Widely known in Winchester, Mr Greer was a member of the finance committee from 1948 to 1951, serving as vice chairman in 1951.
He served as selectman from 1951 to 1953, being chairman of the board in 1953, and he was also on the insurance committee from 1951 to 1954.
He was a member of the fiscal survey committee from 1956 until it was dissolved in 1960, serving as chairman of the group for three years.
Mr Greer is vice-president of the Wire Belt Company of Winchester, also vice president and director of the Winchester Trust Company and the Boston Filter Company of Charlestown.
He has been a director of the Cambridge YMCA and first reader of the First Church of Christ Scientist in Winchester.
Winchester Wellesley Club On Thursday evening, October 26, the Winchester Wellesley Club held its fall meeting in the charming home of Mrs.
Miss Molly Hodge and her committee served a delicious dessert, with coffee, af| ter which the president, Mrs.
The entertainment of the evening was provided by two members of the club, Mrs.
Carr has a fascinating collection of baskets of all sizes and kinds from many parts of the country.
Many of these shfe had on display and explained their var ous oi igins and uses and the difTer ent methods of construction.
Stone has done a great deal of restoring of antiques and is an expert in that field.
She had on ex hibition several period chair which she had renewed, many trays of all sizes and shapes and most interesting collection of old hand-decorated fireplace bellows many of them French in origin.
It is indeed an art to take these love ly things of another era and re store them to their original beauty as Mrs.
This will be an evening meeting planned for the benefit of the mothers who are unable to attend afternoon meetings.
The faculty will be in their homerooms to talk to the mothers from 7:00 to 8:30m.
Bernadette Moriarty of Arlington will give a demonstration on Christmas decorations.
Mr Cornoni is a member of the Cambridge Rotary Club, Cam bridge Chamber of Commerce, Am erican Welding Society, Nationa Metal Trades Association.
He i also a member of the Wincheste Country Club, on the Board of Managers of the Middlesex County National Bank, and a director of Caravan Society for Crippled Cliil dren.
Robert Francis DeRoehe of 14 Walnut Street, Wakefield, and Margaret Ann Coburn of 3 Albamont Road.
We have what is, we think, an exceptional collection of domestic and imported fall clothing men ami women. and Do sec conic in for yourseJ IT V CHURCH STREET The teaching staff of the George Washington School were entertain ed at a luncheon Thursday, Octo ber 26, by the members of the Mothers’ Association for that school.
Mary Ciroli opened her lovely North Border Road home for the event which is enjoyed each year by teachers and mothers alike.
Barbara Hancock, Miss Angeline Hamilton, Miss Penelope Potter, Miss Phyllis Roberts, Mrs.
I School of Police Administration which is being conducted with the cooperation of the Committee on Law Enforcement Education, New England Association of Chiefs of Police, Inc.
The school is being held at the ohn Hancock Building, Boston, and among those attending from surrounding communities are Chief Paul J Lynch, Wilmington; Chief Merritt J Wenzel, Wakefield; (’apt.
Bernard C Vacon, Stoneham; Chief Roland E Ellis, Reading; Chief Malcolm J MacEacheron, Burlington; and Col.
Chiefs from Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Maine and Vermont are also in attendance.
The party was really held to acquaint the trade and the press with the unusual facilities that are a part of the corporation’s fine new display headquarters.
The party was pleasingly informal with plenty of good food i and good fellowship.
Wyman Dance Friday Evening 3, at Dog Caused Crash Sunday, shortly after noon a Dodge station wagon, driven by leorge E Jay of 25 Stoddard Road, Woburn, and a Pontiac sedan, driven by Salvatore Bonasera of 88 Sheridan Circle, were in collision on Main Street at Prospect Street.
The Woburn driver told the police that as he was driving north on Main Street a dog ran into the path of his wagon.
In an attempt avoid striking the animal he made a quick stop and his wagon was hit in the rear by the Pontiac.
Whether the dog was injured is not known as he had been taken to a veterinarian before the police arrived.
Plans are in full swing for the Wyman Parents Association’s Con tinental Capers scheduled for this I* riday evening, November Wyman School.
Roger Carpenter and his famous dance group, the Meltones, will again this year be the feature at' traction of the evening.
Whether your taste in music favors the con ventional or the unusual, this or chestra will entice you to the floor with their toe-tapping rhythms.
Robert Tesar and her dance committee guarantee a gala eve ning in a colorful European atrno sphere.
So leave the kitchen and the office for a refreshing change and step into an “Evening in Paris ’ at Wyman School Friday eve ning.
Exam Here A new supervisory examination was held last Saturday at the Winchester Post Office to establish new registers for postal personnel for promotion to first line supervisory positions at the local office.
Assistant Postmaster Alfred Barnard was in charge of the examination, held for the first time in Winchester.
The examination was open to all regular employees with at least five years postal experience.
Eaton’s Ko-Rec-Type enables you to correct mistakes in typing without erasing.
Kirsten Travel Agency 29 Thompson Street, Winchester — PA 9-5410 Wyman Halloween The first assembly of the year at Wyman School featured Halloween fun and safety in an appropriate play in which a Halloween pumpkin and a black cat, each found a friend.
It was given of course on October 31st and the class which so well entertained parents and friends in the auditorium was Miss Louise H Bond’s section of Grade H The program concluded with a selection, Le Secret, played by the Rhythm Band.
Announcer, Kathy Mahoney; Reader, Thomas Raleigh; Pumpkin, Billy Hudson; Kitten, Mary Tambone; Woodcutter, Steven Spang; Carpenter, Robert Stevens; Little Boy, Granville Harris; Little Girl, Patrice Duffy; Farmer, Richard Murphy; Sun, Elinor Reeves; Rain, Joan Hovnanian; WitchesRobin Patterson, Ellen Corderman, Agalia Rutherford; Brownies Judith Russell, James Dillon, Steven Bradley; Ghosts Brian Croft, Paul Harvey, Daisy Morton, Chris Kinton; and Cats Erie Hansen, Mary Alice Witham.
Adult Education Conference The Adult Education Association in Massachusetts will hold its annual conference on November 3 and 4 at the New Ocean House, Swampseott.
Other touchdowns for the Sachems were scored by Danny McGee and Marty O'Donnell with Choo Choo scoring a total of two.
Outstanding players of the day were Peter Mawn, Jim Mumma, Tom Martin, Brian Collins, Sal Pizzano, and Eddie Gravalese.
The only touchdown was made by Choo Choo Collins on a sixty yard run aided by a key block thrown by John Martin, who took three men out of the play.
In this writer’s opinion, player of the game award would go to Peter Mawn who although playing brilliantly all year put in his best performance by sparking up the entire Sachem defense to a point where they were infalliable.
Other players that were outstanding were Steve Waters, Larry Keppler, Peter Grant, Paul Eaton, Ed and Dave Choate, Paul Blanch and Paul Collins.
Next Sunday at 1:45m. one of the biggest games of the year will take place in Woburn.
Both Winchester and Woburn have identical records and have played almost evenly against the some opponents.
Everybody associated with Pap Warner is grateful for the wonderful support that the townspeople have given us this year and are expecting the biggest turnout yet.
John S Anderson of Niles Lane announce the engagement of their daughter, Mary Jane, to Mr L William Errico, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs.
Joseph L Mullen of 8 16 Main Street announced the engagement of their daughter, Anita Louise, to Lieutenant Joseph P Mi rabile, son of Mr and I Mrs.
Nicolo A Mirabile of Medford. at a tea held recently at the home of Mr and Mrs.
MISS MARY JANE ANDERSON Miss Anderson is a graduate of Winchester High School and Lowell Academy.
Mr Errico is a graduate of Winchester High School and attended Wentworth Institute.
Dartmouth Men To Hear Roberts Ernest A Roberts, director of sports information at Dartmouth College and a former Boston sports editor, will be the feature speaker it a meeting of the Mystic Valley Dartmouth Club to be held on Wednesday evening, November 8, at Simeone’s White Spot on Route 3, Woburn.
A social hour will be held from six to seven o’clock, followed by a steak dinner.
Motion pictures of all Dartmouth games played to date this season, will be a feature of the evening.
In addition, Director Roberts will give a first-hand report on some of the “behind-the-scenes” activities, and will also discuss the outlook for some of the other athletic teams.
This will provide a real treat for alumni in the area who unable to attend as many athletic contests as they would like.
He is chairman of the Boston Football Writers’ Association, and a director of the United States Basketball Writers’ Association.
He is also a charter member of the College Hockey Writers’ Association, and is a member of the U.S.G.A. golf Writers’ Group.
He served on the staff of the Boston Globe as a sports editor prior to being elected to his present position at Dartmouth twelve years ago.
Mary’s CYO this week, Catholic Youth Week, has been the selection of Miss Kathleen Kelley, 2 Marchant Road, as one of the outstanding Catholic youth in the Woburn Deanery.
A plaque was also pretraining project on the use of the discussion method in stimulating I sented to Mrs.
Eleanor Giannotti interest in economic and other isfor her fine work as adult CYO sues, and will describe the work of | chairman at St.
Winchester High School, has been Anyone interested in attending elected youth council officer in the should register with Kathleen Helocal CYO group for three conseffttrty, conference chairman.
Boseutive years. ton Public Library, by phoning KE 1 Congratulations, Kathy and 5-5400, Ext.6.
Announcement \\ itli great pleasure \vr announce the return of miss uniform lo ilu* stall id tlu* Ross Hair Styling Salon FOR II lopipson / iSHH) \ , / ISIT OL R SALON Street P A 0-27 P> Women’s S 0.
I Bowling League This week in first-place team standings are the Jades, captained by Ann Caggiano, and supported by Gloria Mbnterisi, Mae Rotondi, Vi Bruno, and Bette Cammarata.
Each bowler performing extremely well enabled Lhi.^ team to score four points and thus take the lead from the Emeralds.
The Emeralds having strong competition, lost three points to the Rubies, and it proved to be the most exciting match of the season.
The Rubies, captained by Rose De Teso, and supported by Virginia Macinanti, Jennie Amico, Anita Dollotr, and Mary Fiorello, are in second place, but once again will he under pressure as they compete against the Jades this week.
In the spotlight this week is Terry Nappa, who bowled a three string total of 290.
Terry also takes the lead in high average, and bowled the high sing le of the night with a score of 3 04.
The bowling team was fortunate to have two fine workers, Secretary Grace Del Solio and committee member Cusi Fiore, who, although they do not bowl, are doing a splendid job towards maintaining a well-organized league.
Little League Meeting There will be a meeting of the Winchester Little League Board of Directors, Thursday, November 9, at 8:00m. at the Unitarian Church Hall for the nomination of officers for 1962.
Shoplifter Caught As a result of complaints from local storekeepers Officers Mario Buzzotta and James Cogan arrested a 51-year-old Melrose man in the center last Friday afternoon on charge of shoplifting.
He appeared in the Woburn Court Saturday morning and was given a suspended sentence.
Police say they found some of the articles the man had picked up on his person and others in the trunk of his automobile.
Hockey Team Wins Three, Loses Three With a record of three wins, three losses, and one tie, the Winchester High School Field Hockey team enters the last week of its season.
The team, under the leadership of co-captains, Carole Lawson and Jane Hess, defeated Newton 2-1, Lexington 3-0, Belmont 4-1, and tied Arlington 1-1.
Scoring twice in the last four minutes of play, LincolnSudbury defeated Winchester 3-2.
Trieia Buros, Debbie Harrison, Carole Lawson, Betty Bixler, Joanne Hess, Jackie Cartier, Jane Hess, Martha Dodge, Patti Tofuri, Nancy Carter, Joyce Pettingell, and Marie Scallese.
Winchester will play Milton Academy tomorrow, Concord on Tuesday and Newton South on Thursday.
New at the Star office, three-hole Accropress genuine ring binders, Dads Night At Washington School The Mothers’ Association of the George Washington School will sponsor their annual open house for all parents on Thursday night, November 9, at 7 o’clock.
This informal reception is given to acquaint the parents with the classroom techniques employed in teaching their children and to acquaint parents with the teachers themselves.
All of the children have prepared special work directed to their fathers and are eagerly awaiting their reactions.
This inspection opportunity is especially apt this year coinciding as it does with National Education Week.
After the classroom visits refreshments will be served in the auditorium.
PARTIES • ENTERTAINING FAMILY DINNERS CROWN ROOM • TERRACE LOUNGE • LION & UNICORN ROOMS Anytime you're eating out Head F OR — T\um 0 mnt Quality Courts MOTOR INN and RESTAURANT • DANVERS, MASSL On Rte.
SPring 4-6800 I I Page Four THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1961 (Obituaries F Meredith Cooper Larry Cooper Francis Meredith Cooper of 4 Wedge Pond Road, a teacher in the Winchester High School 1938 and a widely known resident of the town, died early Friday af ternoon at his home after several months illness.
He underwent syr gery at the Winchester Hospital during May and June and had been critically ill for some time.
He was born Aug., 1911 in Montpelier, Vermont hut grew up in East Haven, Connecticut, graduating from Hillhouse High School in New Haven.
He received his Bachelor of Arts degree from Yale in 1932 and his Master’s Degree from Yale in 193d.
He began teaching as an assistant at Yale in 1934, and the next year taught junior high school English at State School in Meriden, Conn.
For two years, 1936-37 he taught History at high school in East Haven, Conn.
In 1938 Mr Cooper married Mar garet Turton of Meriden, Conn, and came with his wife to Winchester in the fall of that year.
He entered the School Department here in 1938 ns a teacher of Social Studies in the high school and was made head of the department in the fall of 1955.
He served as faculty advisor to the Student Council and had also been publicity director for the high school.
He was “Larry” Cooper to everyone, and his legion of friends was numbered from persons of all walks in life as well as from high school pupils and faculty members.
He was known and esteemed as an able teacher, a hard working, self effacing friendly citizen, a fine husband and father.
He was a Former president of First Congregational Church Men’s Club and of the New’ England Association of Social Science Teachers.
He had been a town meeting member for Precinct 5 for the past eight years and had served on the town’s Youth Activities Committee from 1956 until its discharge in 1961, acting as chairman in 1956, 1957 and 1958.
Mr Cooper leaves his wife, two sons, Robert, a sophomore at Brown, and Richard, a student at Winchester High School; his father in East Haven, Conn.; a sister, Mrs.
A private committal service was conducted last Saturday afternoon at East Lawn Cemetery in East Haven, Conn., by the Rev.
Wesley A Mallery, associate minister of the First Congregational Church A memorial service was held Tuesday afternoon at the First Congregational Church with the minister Dr.
Daniel C Dennett (A tribute by Principal W How|nrd Niblock, read at an assembly of the Winchester High School student body.
Daniel Clement Dennett of 7 W ashington Street, dean of Winchester’s medical men at 93 years, died Sunday morning, October 29 at his home after a long period of failing health.
Herbert W Smith Herbert W Smith of 75 Middlesex Street, a salesman for Cody Distributing Company of Dorchester and a resident of Winchester for the past 20 years, died early Saturday morning at his home after an illness of more than two years.
He was born July 12, 1902, in Roxbury but spent his early life in Medford and was married there to Viola L Forshner of Medford Aug., 1923.
They came to Winchester after their marriage and had lived on Middlesex Street during their en tire residence in town.
Mr Smith was a very successful salesman for the Cody Distributing Company for the past 13 years and previously had been associated in a similar capacity with the Boston office of the Budweiser Company.
Services were held Tuesday forenoon at the Costello-Moffett Funeral Home.
Besides her parents, Louise Ann leaves a sister, Linda M., three bfrothers, P Christian, Paul J., and Gregory F Iannacei; also her grandparents, Mr and Mrs.
Funeral services were held Wednesday forenoon at 11 o’clock ut the Lane Funeral Home with Rev.
He was born May 29, 1868, in Westbrook, Me., was graduated from Deering High School in Portland, Me., and attended Western State Normal School before beginning the study of Medicine.
He studied at Portland School of Medical Instruction and was graduated from Bowdoin College Medical School.
He first practiced in Bradford, Me., leaving to become a voluntary assistant at the Massachusetts (general Hospital in the nose and throat department.
He was licensed to practice in Massachusetts in 1897 and that same year received an appointment as house officer at the Carney Hospital in South Boston.
He joined the Massachusetts Medical Society in 1898, and soon after came to Winchester to establish himself in practice.
Dennett never hesitated to use the newer adjuncts of medicine as they developed, appraising each carefully and applying those that merited use with professional skill.
He was one of the earliest users of X-ray and was especially interested in the field of eye, ear, nose and throat.
Generations of Winchester people had their first glasses from him and returned to him regularly for the care of their eyes.
Dennett was the oldest livng member of the Middlesex East District Medical Society .and was present at the society’s 50th anniversary celebration.
He was also a principal speaker and chairman of the committee in charge of arrangements for the 75th anniversary program and was still active at the society’s centennial in 1950.
Dennett was for two years on the editorial staff of the Portland Daily Express.
He commanded a virile and facile pen, and his frequent letters to the Star and the metropolitan press reflected his fearless devotion to principle.
Keenly interested in town affairs, this same courageousness often led him to support causes not generally popular, but he never dropped them for that reason.
He loved the out-of-doors and wrote sym pathetically of the Maine Woods, of the old logging days on the Kennebec River, and of the fishing camps at Moosehead.
Some of his writing on death, life and human nature was especially sensitive and many commended his study of “The Old Clock” in his pamphlet of essays.
Dennett’s gardens were things of beauty under his skillful care, and he was happiest when sharing them with others.
Dennett enlisted in the Medical Corps and was first assigned to the Camp Dix Base Hospital in the department of head surgery.
He later was transferred to Camp Crane in Allentown, Pa., awaiting overseas assignment, which did not come before the cessation of hostilities.
Dennett married Elizabeth Goodwin Redfern, a native of Winchester, who died April 13, 1959.
One of the doctor’s two sons, Mahlon W Dennett, was killed in World War I The second, and younger, Daniel C Dennett, Jr., died in Africa in a plane crash while serving with the State Department in 1947.
The doctor leaves three grandhildren, Cynthia, Daniel and Charlotte, all of Winchester; and a sister, Miss Abbie Dennett of Portland, Maine.
Private funeral services were held at the late residence on Tueslay with the Rev.
We are all aware that we cannot express adequately in words our sense of loss at the passing of one who has served us and the community of Winchester so faithfully and well as Mr Cooper.
No man exemplified better the qualities of integrity, compassion, sincerity and dedication to teaching as a profession.
He served 51 s head of the history department of the high school for the last seven years.
Only last year he received the signal honor of being elected head of the New England Association of Social Studies Teachers, which includes both college and high school teachers of history and social studies.
As a town meeting member for three terms he practiced democratic responsibi lity, and he never shrank from stating his opinion in the public forum.
The school administration never had a more loyal and helpful co worker.
Teaching has lost a great teach er, and we have lost a real friend, May the inspiration of his life strengthen us that we may carry on his work with the same integrity and dedication.
He was bom July 1893, in Winchester and grew up in town, attending the Winchester schools and Winchester High School.
As a young man he was a sales man for the Barta Press, then own ed by the late Louis Barta, former ly of Winchester.
Mr Donaghy was a 32nd degree Scottish Rite Mason, a member of William Parkman Lodge and a life member of Aleppo Temple of the Shrine.
He was also a member of the First Congregational Church and a former member of Winchester Post, 97, the American Legion, During World War I he served overseas with the Marines.
He leaves his wife, the former Bertie Taylor; a daughter, Joan, of Boston; a son, Arthur R Jr., of Sandy Hook, Conn.; two grandchildren, Paige Ellen, and Gretchen Taylor Donaghy; also a brother, George Donaghy of Stoneham.
Service were held Monday afternoon at the Eastman Funeral Home with the Rev.
John Snook, Jr., of Reading, former pastor of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, officiating.
Mabel Premont, wife of Arthur Premont, of 21 Eaton Street, died Friday, October 27, at the Holy Ghost Hospital in Cambridge after a long illness.
Premont was a lifelong resident of the town, attending the Winchester schools and being particularly active in the affairs of the Sodality of St.
She leaves her husband, two sons, Archie, of Malden, and Joseph, of Somerville; two grandchildren and two great-grandchildren; a sister, Sister Gabriella of the Sisters of Mercy, stationed in Manchester, N H.; and a brother, Omer LaForte, formerly of Winchester.
The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the Costello-Moffett Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at St.
He was born June 4, 1902, in Athol and for a time had a Ford sales and service agency in Winthrop.
During World War I Mr Totman served four years in the United States Navy as a shipfitter.
Amy Purslow Totman; a son, Glenn R Totman of Billerica; six grandchildren; two brothers, Clarence D., of Irvington, N Y., and Herbert L Totman of Athol; and five sis ters, Mrs.
Funeral services will be held Thursday afternoon at the Lane Funeral Home with Dr.
Miss Helen Twombly Miss Helen Maria Twombly of 93 Wildwood Street, who died Sunday, October 29, was a member of an old line Winchester family.
Miss Twombly was the daughter of W’illiam A., and Malvina (Fuller) Twombly.
Her grandfather, Samuel Twombly, was a Selectman and prominent citizen of the town during his lifetime.
Bom March 15, 1879, in Winchester, Miss IVombly grew up and spent her entire life in the town, attending the Winchester schools and Winchester High School.
Miss Twombly was the last of her immediate family, her brother, William A Twombly, Jr., having died December 19, 1960.
After cremation burial will be in the family lot in Wildwood Ceme tery.
Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club Unusually keen competition, relatively low top scores, and (fenerJ tion a Rran( , slam . eiRht ally small <li crenccs in match others were set on their slain bids, points prcvailinn between the hi K hAt thp othcr en<1 of thp „ ca , e arp tH "" th(1 hands that depart so far from play at WDBC Ion Wednesday evellv „ lw , lhat the point count Min*, October 2fv As usual two secconsistently leads to unmaketions were conducted.
Section A j a kj e with nine tables and Section B j n eight tables, both Catherine Hargrove Miss Catherine E Hargrove, who died Wednesday, October 25, in Wilmington, was a native of Winchester and spent her early life in this town.
Much of her adult life was spent in Woburn, she having been a resident of Wilmington for the past 14 years.
The Fortnightly On Saturday morning, October 28, the Auditorium of McCall Junior High School was filled (children being in the large majority) for the Tickle-um Theatre Marionettes by Gordon Bennett of Sturbridge.
The second part of the program was a variety show featuring wellknown “Cartoon” characters, with two monkeys on roller-skates proving especially popular.
The proceeds will swell the Fortnightly Philanthropy Funds, which will be used largely for local charities this year.
LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE OF EVERY DESCRIPTION with eight tables, both sections working against an average of 63 match points.
The high “batting averages” ranged from .563 to .621 contrasted with last week’s high of .670.
As far as we can recall, no pair has ever reached .750 during our two years’ existence, although i few have come rather close to that figure.
SECTION A North-South Audrey Glavin and Ellen Scho field, 71 Mr and Mrs.
Herbert Wood, 67 % James Byrne and Robert Has kell, 64% East-West Ted Atkinson and Gerry Barrett, 71% Mr and Mrs.
Dick Smith, 66 % H Morgan and F Gove, 65 SECTION B The Darrell Roots, one of the few remaining weak no-trump and short-club openers, dominated the entire field.
On his coming trip to South America, “Miggs” will accompany Darrell as far as Bermu da, where they expect to participate in some of the Bermuda Bridge Sectional events.
Darrell Root, 78% Ralph Atkinson and Fredna Perkins, 77 Richard Herlihy and Edward Sullivan, 75% Gertrude Cox and Jo Dingwell, 72 B Haigh and S Leven, 70 East-West Jean Roundey and Philippa Young, 74 Helen McDonald and Mary Dev aney, 68 Dorothy MacDonald and Blanche Wetmore, 66 % James Bradley and Steve Root, 63% Hand of the Week Because of other duties, neither your editor or your editor-in-relief, were able to participate in the playing this week, nor was any one willing to undertake the discussion of a particular hand.
It therefore has become incumbent on the writer once more to dig up something of value.
The weekly examination and correction of fifty or more “traveling scores” is really quite revealing as to bidding and defense, as well as to the personalities involved.
There also is the palliative effect of mentally reconstructing certain scores to determine how many points might have been gained on low boards with a different or correct line of bidding, lead, play or defense.
Perhaps the most revealing of all is when one group of players take in enough tricks for a game or slam, but fail to bid it, while those who bid the same hand to the hilt are invariably set.
The defense, in the latter case, for some reason or other seems to become inoculated, and tightens up considerably.
In perusing the traveling scores at the current session, it appears that an unusually large number of possible slam hands showed up in both sections.
Representing over half the boards played, these 27 hands have quite a sand-papering effect on the scoring, accounting undoubtedly for the low winning scores and small winning differentials.
With this mass of pyrotechnics, it seems rather difficult for the nonparticipant to pick out a hand with a lesson or otherwise worth discussing.
Pass-Out or Open It is not often that miserable hands which, at rubber bridge would be only too quickly passed and discarded for the next deal, become of enough importance, in reality to determine the actual winners.
This does decry the importance of every hand, but to realize that such rubbish as contained in Board 22 Section B could have any effect whatever on the ultimate standing is not generally appreci ated, even by the duplicate players themselves.
The writer and his partner recently were the victims of such a hand in another event, ending up in third place instead of first for a swing of ten points on a board average of five.
At one table West became the bidder at one no-trump making two for a top, probably reaching that bid with a third-hand 12 -point diamond opening and a one-over-one spade take-out.
At the other two tables East arrived at three no-trump in spite of only 21 high-card points in the combined hands, undoubtedly being pushed to sacrifice by interference bidding, down one.
The effect of these three bids presented one NS pair with 3 match points, four others with % point, and penalized two others at 2 and 3 points respectively, the reverse being the case for East and West.
Located in the strategic position, it is easy to see what the effect could be on the relative standing of the first four or even five top positions.
West East 10 5 * K J 6 2 K 8 4 3 ¥ 6 2 K J 10 9 2 ♦ Q 7 6 K J * A 10 5 2 Parkhurst Tea Mrs.
Warren D Wells, fourth grade teacher at Parkhurst School, on Friday, November 3, at 3:30m.
This will be a social tea to have mother and teacher meet and become better acquainted.
Gilbert Hood, 6 Everett Avenue COFFEE TEA Lights to have the Department of Public Works authorize regular traffic lights there.
For two days, commencing Wednesday, the lights are to operate on a time standard, with certain times allowed for red and green lights.
After these two days the lights will be on trip control, with the lights remaining green on Cambridge Street except when a car approaching the intersection causes them to change to red for a passing.
Precinct 1, David Burke; Precinct 2, Philip Ives; Precinct 3, Leroy and William Martin; Precinct 4, Allan Simmons; Precinct 5, John Broughton; Precinct 6 , Ralph Norton, Jr., and j Arthur Carr.
Halloween Quiet Here Winchester had a very quiet ITalloweeh Tuesday with a minimum of complaints received by the police and no false alarms.
Boys were reported throwing pumpkins at a house on Wedgemere Avenue, and on Highland Avenue the police were called to disperse a group of boys who had refused to move for a woman householder.
Ten minutes later apparatus was called via police radio to put out burning leaves at Copley and Warren Streets.
Brink Captain Mike Brink, former star football lineman at Winchester High School and son of Captain and Mrs.
Second Congregational Church Booths, Snack Bar, and a “New England Boiled Dinner’* at 6:30m.
Stamps Dk w ^ t a ,5 Finast Donuts — Cinnamon Extra Stamps p ^ of «, Finast Cinnamon Buns CHICKENS Fryers and Broilers V/i-V/i Lb Avg First National famous qualify chickens are WHOLE strictly fresh, Grade A birds, with plenty of tasty, tender meat.
Teaching About Communism In Schools 1 lerlicrt ITiilbrick, in his recent address at the high school on the threat of communism stressed the fact strongly that only through educating ourselves on communism and how it operates can we hope successfully to defeat this insidious threat to our freedom.
There is, we suppose, always the danger of misunderstanding by the pupils, or over-enthusiastic presentations of communism by teachers who set' in such teaching only the academic aspects of the subject.
Inc., in its October issue, finds that in recent months an increasing number of organizations have been urging the public schools to include specific courses on communism in their curriculums.
The American Bar Association has passed a resolution asking the teaching of communism and demanding the “highest quality” of instruction.
The American Legion has been working with the National Education Association to provide a model course for such a study • in the public schools.
Peace Corps, no less a personage than President Kennedy having indicated his support of her and urged her to carry on.
Margery is of course the Smith College Magna Cum Laude who aroused the resentment of Nigerian students and others in that country by certain statements she 'made on a postcard intended for a young man friend at home which unfortunately got into the hands of Nigerian young people.
M e can of course forget the fact that it isn't cricket to read other people's mail.
The statements made by the young Peace Corps member were unfortunate, to say the least, and the fact that they were written without thinking isn’t really much of an excuse.
There surely is no less thoughtlessness now in these days of the atom bomb and deficit spending.
Let’s grant for the sake of argument that Margery should have known better, but aren’t the times and customs of today equally to blame with the thoughtlessness she admits.
Nor are they only statesmen and people in high places who fail to think of how their remarks can sound to the other fellow.
Bovs and girls of today freely discuss together matters that their fathers and mothers would not have dreamed of talking over in mixed company.
In the case of Margery Michelmore her freely expressed opinion of sanitary conditions in Nigeria got her into a mess and did not help the cause she was espousing.
The whole business could not have happened years ago, because there were such things as amenities then, and gilds didn’t write their hoy friends about going to the bathroom, on postcards or anywhere else.
Miss Michelmore was as much the victim of the times she lives in as of her regrettable thoughtlessness.
Magna Cum Laude graduates of leading colleges should he sufficiently intelligent to profit by their mistakes.
And that is the way this particular lesson in international tact was brought home to Margery.
A Good Move The Star learns that a movement is afoot to do something about the old Shore Road Athletic Field, which for some time now has been an eyesore.
Situated as it is beside the Skillings Bypass on the way into town it does not create a favorable impression to the passer by.
As we hear it, the proposal has been made that the field he transferred from the jurisdiction of the Park Department to the School Department to he used as a >itt* for junior high athletics and physical education. 1 here is a real need for such a field.
The increasing size of high school teams and physical education classes have made clearly apparent the lack of room for all wanted outdoor activity at Manchester Meld.
This fall an attempt was made to use Shore Road for junior high school football activity, but the attempt had to he abandoned because the field in its present condition is unsuitable.
A complete resurfacing job must be done before it can safely be used as a playground or athletic field.
Shore Road was constructed during the days of the NR A on a site that had always been swampy.
Informed persons always felt that the construction plan was faulty and subsequent events have proven them right.
The field continued to settle after construction until at one time there was a slope of several feet uphill from the center of the football gridiron to the westerly goal line.
The turf was always slippery and treacherous and the field was finally abandoned when rival schools refused to play there.
Since that time it has been idle though playground space has been badly needed by the School Department.
It is going to cost some money to fix the field up, hut investigation by those who should know reveal that the settling is over, and that drains, resurfacing and fencing should make it very suitable for playground use.
The Star has been told that it is planned to have an article in the warrant for the annual town meeting to transfer the land to the School Department and fix it up for the use of the junior high boys and girls, whose teams are now being crammed into unused corners of over-crowded Manchester Field.
The money at the market in question was being taken to the night depository of a hank.
M bile >uch an escort docs not guarantee complete safety it docs act as a strong deterrent for those with anti-social ideas.
There is something about that stalwart man in blue coat and brass buttons walking beside the store man that gives the would-hc robber pause.
Police escorts are available for all store keepers who are going to the hank with sizeable deposits.
It is understandable that some business men hesitate to avail themselves of this service, hut they need have no question of police feelings in the matter.
Your little brush with a would-be holdup man may not turn out as well as that one last Fridav.
Herbert K A Driscoll last week-end we commended him upon the interest that the hoys and girls ot his Immaculate C onception Parish are taking in the Parish Bugle and Drum C orps and drill teams.
He agreed when we said the teenagers must give a lot of time and effort to practice and drilling with these crack organizations, hut he took exceptions to our subsequent remark that their drum corps and drill team activity keeps the youngsters off the street.
Me like to say that we are keeping our hoys and girls busy in their free time, giving them something constructive to do, rather than in preventing them from doing something, even though that something is not a good activity in which to engage.
Psychologically this approach to the youth problem is much the better, even though both have the same end in view.
Coming To Winchester MM ' ft jgfe. scribe, or plan to issue, separate materials on communism for use in the social studies curriculum.
The approach also ranged from apparently well documented scholarly teaching to at least one example of ultra right wing instruction.
In other words the approach to the problem is from an objective investigation of the conflict between communism and free world ideology to the idea of social welfare measures as a part of the threat of communism.
Apparently the Times said nothing about a left wing approach to the teaching of the subject which at least ought to he as had as an approach from the right, at least so far as bias goes.
In Massachusetts for the past nine years a special division of civic education has provided instruction concerning communism to undergraduates in teacher-training colleges and to teachers in in-service courses.
Louisiana is reported to have acted with the greatest enthusiasm in planning to introduce special materials on -the subject. ther states that treat problems of communism as part of the regular social science studies curriculum arc North Carolina, Georgia, Virginia, New Mexico, South Dakota, Kansas, Minnesota, Utah and Iowa.
Heidi {played by Mary Wadsworth i and goal IVter (played by Brian MacDonald} rehearse on a sunny hillside with live goats, will also appear on the stage of the W inrhester High School, Fridav.
December 1st, against colorful Swiss mountain scenery painted by the children in the play.
The Community School Association is presenting this well-loved story, along with lively versions of “Robinson Crusoe” (where the frolicking goats will climb over Ins cave} and “Midsummer Night's Dream” all three produced by the Children’s Theatre School of Winchester.
The emphasis in this study is focused primarily upon the weaknesses of the State Personnel system, and upon suggestions for strengthening it so that it will work more effectively.
First, a review of all available literature on the history of the merit system was made, and the written information was supplemented by interviews with specialists in public administration.
Then an examination of all known reports in the field of public personnel systems done since 1926 was made.
Thirdly, League members analyzed replies given by all State Departments, Agencies, and Institutions during a “Self-survey” conducted within the government in 1960.
Then, information about personnel administration from other states — either hecause their problems were similar to those of Massachusetts or because of the success of their existing personnel program — was gathered.
Next, laws, rules, regulations and reports on Merit System organization and administration in Massachusetts were examined.
Finally, interviews with people of varied backgrounds were conducted, including those with local officials, legislators, taxpayers, employee representatives and members of the League who had been employed in the State Service.
From this great mass of informational chaos, the League began to build a book.
The findings were then summarized, and recommendations for improving the Commonwealth’s Personnel Program were made.
The section on “Recruitment for the Public Service” is of special interest to Winchester people because the local Civil Service Committee of the League did all of the research for this chapter in collection of material from other states.
Eugene Rochow and Miss Grace Wills devoted countless hours to this part of the project.
This is about the sixth year of this kind of program at the High School.
For many who are going right to work after High School here was a chance to assess their present plans in relation to the scope of total possibilities.
To those who plan to go for one to even six or seven years of study here were guidelines for their present and often changing thinking.
For the sophomores, here for the first time was the working world staring them in the face right within the confines of their own High School.
This all-school assembly is the first of a series of career meetings sponsored by the Northeastern group which run through the year and the remainder of which will be on special fields of work and open to those interested in the specialty.
What Mr Darling did for them in a staccato yet very comprehensive way was to show them the whole job picture.
Speaking to those going on to :lo on ( Jctober 26, the 02 S students School enrollment put their books, out of their minds and focused on id for all of them — a job. further education he exhorted them to have pre-planned their finances for school or college.
The film he showed to the group was prepared by many local firms and local branches of national firms.
It gave the students rapid glimpses into the tremendous present-day job picture, running from insurance to store buying and decorating, general business and secretarial to teaching and all the many health services, forestry to food processing.
Mr Darling reminded them that coming to the high school later in the year are special programs on the subjects of office work, electronic plant jobs, jobs with the federal government, nursing, engineering, teaching, medical technology, business administration, beauty culture and the all-important job interview.
The assembly was sponsored by the high school guidance department members, Miss M Constance Trickett, Bernard J Silva and John J Stevens; and a large part of their job is the follow-through on interest stimulated at just such over-all presentations.
Since this League booklet is unique in that it is the only comprehensive study of this kind made by an organization in Massachusetts, and is the only study now available to the public on Massachusetts Personnel Administration, it is required reading for the informed citizen.
Storing H-bombs 1,000 times more powerful than the single A-bomb that destroyed Hiroshima, preparing continent-smashing missiles that cross vast oceans in 15 minutes, man appears able to protect himself against everything hut his own intelligence.
His food, his bones, his very genetic substance have been poisoned and assaulted by radioactive fallout.
On the brink of genocidal nuclear war, his will is imprisoned by a futile nuclear arms race in which increased “security” through more deadly weapons actually increases the horror and likelihood of war.
If too long and quite labored, Mr Cousins’ hook is nonetheless a gripping review of man’s insane modern war machine.
Mr Cousins confronts us with the 20-megaton H-bomb, containing the explosive power of a mountain of T.N.T. four times the height of the Empire State Building.
This bomb is capable of incinerating an area from Brooklyn to Bridgeport, Ct., killing all within its scorching radius, hurling human missiles and shards of glass for thousands of square miles.
Cousins writes, would seriously injure people even on the outer fringe of a 2,000-square-mile area.
An actual nuclear attack, however, would scarcely be limited to one 20-megaton bomb.
There is not enough manufactured oxygen for deep underground shelters, which, in any case, are not beyond reach of nuclear explosions.
Existing shelters, equipped with air vents, would be turned into hot-air furnaces in a nuclear attack, while only one-third of attacking missiles need get by our anti-missile installations to annihilate us.
But man faces a threat to survival not only from potential nuclear attacks.
At this very moment, Cousins points out, human life is imperilled by radioactive fallout from nuclear tests already suspended, like Strontium 90, which retains 50% of its energy after 28 years.
Cousins writes, now' contains detectable traces of leukemia-inducing genetically crippling radioactive Strontium in his bones.
By 1956, even with no further nuclear tests, the average diet of Americans will contain over 50 Strontium units, or 17 over the safe limit.
Similarly Cesium 137, also present in existing fallout, is assaulting human genes with gamma rays, and will result in malformations and stillbirths.
The nation-state, as presently organized, Cousins argues, can no longer protect our lives and freedom, but is in fact the prime source of the tensions and anarchy that threaten nuclear holocaust.
Like the frontiersmen of old, Cousins writes, we as nations are powerless to defend ourselves unless we unite and submit to a new and higher authority than our own conflicting wishes.
S4.00 in Advance Single Copies, Ten Cents The Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typngrahpiral errors in advertisements but will publish without charge a correction in the next issue, or republish that portion oi the advertisement which is incorrect.
District Attorney Ted Kennedy reflects badly upon the judgment of Winchester’s administrators of public schools.
Misuse* of school assemblies for politi-| cal publicity may set a precedent to be repented at leisure.
I do not believe be has a consuming or expert interest in Latin America or Winchester high school students.
I do believe he is conducting an unannounced campaign for higher public office.
He is using a saturation technique of personal appearances where a smile and a handshake can mean votes.
Minors traditionally receive special attention Mr Kennedy has not been alone in this activity, but he especially has turned up like a rash at all sorts of recent gatherings across the commonwealth — so obviously that a national news magazine in the past week devoted a couple of columns to his hopping around.
In view of recent news disclosures that must he piling up the public legal business at his office, I wonder how he finds time for these extra activities.
If school officers are going to permit disguised politicking at high school assemblies with required student attendance, other candidates for election ought to have a chance to lecture on travel and adventure under similar ar rangements.
Otherwise it seems fair to infer that this assembly is a sign of Winchester educators’ personal endorsement or intimidation.
We would like to express our sincere thanks to the Red Cross Blood Bank for coming to us in our hour of need.
Being affiliated with Winchester Lodge of Elks, the members of which have made donations of blood to the Blood Bank, we are now in a position to know at first hand how these donations are used and to appreciate how much they mean when they are needed.
Once again, our sincere thanks to the Red Cross for their fast response and eagerness to help.
Congratulations on your excellent editorial covering Herbert A Philbrick’s speech at the High School auditorium on October 19.
The treatment which you gave the talk indicates that you are doing and will continue to do your part to insure that people do not just go away and casually forget what was revealed about the urgency of the situation which we face.
All of us are at times tempted to feel that things cannot possibly be so bad as we are told they are In this connection, it was indeed thought-provoking to hear Mr Philbrick mention issues which have been raised from time to time by organizations such as the House Un-American Activities Committee, the Senate Internal Security Sub-Committee, the John Birch Society, the American Council of Christian Churches, and Dr.
While Mr Philbrick did not always agree with a specific organization’s deductions as to the cause of a certain situation, his talk in large measure confirm'd that circumstances are indeed what groups like these have been saying they are.
Carol Y McRae 20*1 Pond Street 1 not because they’re not welcome in the United Fund.
Some day enough of us will support the United Fund generously enough, and refuse other appeals steadfastly enough, so that there will he only one appeal.
Seven per cent is th United Fund’s cost of collection and administration, a remarkably good record in comparison with other drives.
Do that, give generously to your church, and your conscience can he clear regardless of your re sponse to other appeals.
Herbert E Bixler 31 Fells Road There are college ipecifie difference | a student within four or five I weeks; 2.
I member; and ,n ■ addition, Unitarian Bazaar Nov. and 16 The annual Unitarian Fair, thif year’s version being the “Storypreferred lists.
When the United Fund solicitor is greeted thus at he door of an obviously prosper>us home he is hound to be saddened at the lack of understanding >f what the United Fund is.
He knows it is not stinginess but lack >f understanding that brings about the inedaquate response which some people (fortunately now a minority) produce.
The true widow’s mite, of which there are always many, is heartwarming and inspiring as the response of a generous and responsible person whose contribution increases an important sum of money, and even more important, warms the cockles of the hearts of those who work at the important business of the United Fund.
By the use of strategy, placing sufficient fighting strength in the right place, at the right time, together with the element of skill and luck makes this an exciting battle game for all ages.
On October 31, 1961, the Russians exploded yet another in their series of nuclear bomb tests.
The implications of this activity as they affect the future lives of our children stagger the imagination.
Yet on the same day at a school here in Winchester a primary grade “tea” was held solely for social purposes.
Instead of using the hour for a constructive, informative meeting of parents and teachers for the purpose of improving the children’s home-school relationship and understanding, the precious time was wasted with small talk and refreshments.
Perhaps this affair was an isolated case, but many of the reports of the various community-school organizations as they appear in the Star show little Indication of a sense of urgency to improve our schools.
I think that it’s high time the Winchester Community School Association joined the National Congress of Parents and Teachers in order to equip our children more effectively for their future in this uncertain world.
Mary’s Mothers’ Club will be held Wednesday evening, November 8, at St.
Don’t forget the date, all the committees planning this big event have been most active.
The major award is a $200 lady’s wardrobe, winner’s own choice for any season within the year from Neal’s of California.
Penny tables, home made articles, toy table for hildren and refreshments.
This and otner | admission stimulating comments launched the Parent-Faculty Advisory Council’s activities For the present , school year on the evening of Oc tober 25 in the senior high school auditorium.
Knowles stressed that education is undergoing a revolution, propelled by the critical age in which we live and the increasing trend towards urbanization.
Education is becoming a part of national defense, and urban institutions are cast in larger roles, particularly with the expansion of public colleges.
Urbanization has become so influential in educational trends that in ten to fifteen years community colleges in various urban areas will be created to satisfy the demand for higher education in these areas.
Knowles’ belief that colleges are going to expand to such a degree that they will let the two-year colleges do the experimenting; with the fouryear colleges concentrating on junior-senior and first-year graduate work.
Furthermore, it was stated that the big schools should concentrate on the professional and graduate level.
Knowles also expressed a desire to have government-supported international universities in this country.
Knowles referred to the Boston area as richly endowed with a great concentration of institutions of higher learning.
Even here, however, responsibility for success rests primarily with the individual student.
Mr Silva offset a number of rumors with facts and figures about Winchester High School.
Rumor number one maintains that school and college* admission is decreasing.
Actually, 71 f r of the graduating class in 1955 went on to higher education, with 75 '7 for the class of 19(51.
Mr Silva stated that it is rumored that a large percentage withdraw during the first year of college.
A third rumor claims that an increasing number of students in grades 9 to 12 transfer to private schools.
Simple figures show that 5. % of the class of 1949 left and 5.8% of the class of 1953.
Mr Silva disclosed that presently there are no real prob lems with college admissions, since colleges judge students on idivid ual bases.
In fact, the class of 1961 was the best group with respect to college admissions.
Seventy-five percent continued their education — 50% of them in a four-year college.
Erieson, chairman of the ParentFaculty Advisory (’ouncil, suggested that the audience divide into two groups to meet with Miss M Constance Trickett, guidance supervisor for girls, and Mr Silva.
A group question and answer period closed the evening’s activities with parents anticipating future meetings in which to peruse important school matters.
Remember When This week's picture in the Star’s “Remember When” series is of the old Winchester High School on Church Street, known during its final years as the Prince School.
This building stood opposite Rangeley on Church Street at School Street, the school yard extending through to Dix Street, with a small grove of trees at the rear.
The town, though its population did not require one, had a high school from its incorporation in 1850, but the actual high school rooms were on the upper floor of a large center school on Church Street opposite the Common.
Children from the primary schools old enough to go to grammar school went to this building.
In 1865 it became necessary to have better and more commodious quarters for the high school and the plot of land described above was purchased next to the then James Converse house, built soon after 1(550.
As the picture in this week’s Star shows the old building stood well above the street and was reached by a flight of granite steps at the southerly end of the lot on Church Street.
The buliding served as a high school for nearly forty years, or until the present McCall Junior High School was built for a high school.
At that time the name of the school was changed to the Prince School, after Frederick O Prince, a prominent old time citizen and school committeeman, and was used a sixth grade building, to which children from all over town went for a year, after completing elementary school and before entering Wadleigh Grammar School.
After the building program of 1922-24 which resulted in the erection of four new six grade schools the old Prince School was abandoned as a school building, though it continued to house the office of the Superintendent of Schools for a time.
Eventually it was torn down and its site is now occupied by the homes of Dr. and Mrs.
On making | Thursday, November 16, the hours are from 10:00m. to 5:00m.
If you would like to own an original work of art, don’t fail to bid in the silent auction held at the Art Gallery, where you will find paintings and other “ohjets d’art” made by some of our own famous craftsmen.
Bouldin G Burbank will be glad to show you both used and new clothing, all in excel lent condition and some in the latest styles.
For decorations and flowers, vis it “House and Garden” in the Michel son Room.
At “The Work Box” you will find household items and an especially fine assortment of hand-made ap rons, always in demand.
Ralph D Larson hope you will not fail to find “Ye Okie Curiosity Shoppe,” formerly known as the more prosaic White Elephant table, but always the source of unexpected treasures.
A good place to find that unusual gift you may be seeking is the Christmas table, where Mrs.
And for the women who will be busy beavers on Wednesday morning preparing for the 2:00m. opening of the fair, Mrs.
Robert H Gregory will prepare a Workers’ Lunch, which will undoubtedly be most welcome.
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts By His Excellency JOHN A VOLPE Governor A PROCLAMATION 1961 WHEREAS, After the close of World War 1, November 11 was celebrated for some time as Armistice Day, to observe the end of hostilities and the hope of establishing a permanent peace.
GIVEN at the Executive Chumber in Boston, this sixth day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and sixtyone, and of the Independence of the United States of America, the one hundred and eighty-sixth.
Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov8-tf NEW TO MARKET Attractive Cape in t lie Johnson Road School area.
Spurious h rep laced living room, dining room, modem kitehen wtih breakfast area, lavatory and panelled breezeway on first floor.
Euch apartment lias a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors 38 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1 SI 0 Gertrude It.
PA 9-3355 Florence M Salyer, PA 9-1966 WINCHESTER Attractive Cape in Mystic School area.
COLONIALS AM) RANCHES Several new homes in choice locations neuring completion.
RANCH — Three chambers, 2Vz ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage.
Three bedrooms, IV 2 ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining room, good living room with fireplace.
Brand-New Garrison Colonial in woodsy section with 2 Mi baths, three bedrooms, den, screened porch, two-car garage.
PA 9-3268, PA 9-5550, PA 9-2790 Seldom available but always in demand English brick Colonial.
Sailing, swimming or skating at edge of property; close to Country Club, Boat Club and transportation.
Large fireplaeed living room, heated sun room, built-in kitchen, two large bedrooms with room for more, lMi tile baths, two-car attached garage, dressing cubicles and shower in basement.
Exclusive Brokers BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 24 Thompson Street PArkview 9-4240 A TRULY FINE COLONIAL Wo are pleased to offer this exquisite brick and frame residence on one of our best streets, suitable for the most discerning buyer who demands gracious living.
Some of the features are a first-floor den, step-down living room, modern kitchen, four master bedrooms and 2 Mi baths.
JOSEPHSON Real Estate 6 Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview.-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 WINCHESTER Eight-Room Garrison Colonial as modern as tomorrow and completely equipped for easy living.
Five bedrooms, or four and a den, 2 Mi ceramic-tile buths, punelled gume room with fireplace and two-cur garage.
Guaranty Fund Surplus Other Reserves $263,417.46 160.718.06 131.775.07 $ 564,910.59 $6,752,207.31 OFFICERS Curtiz W Nash Sidney C Blanchard George L Billman Concetta F Derro President Vice-President Treasurer Asst.
Alfred D Elliott Morris B Kerr Frederick W McCormack Charles A Murphy Curtis W Nash Stanley E Neill Elizabeth A Kehoe Anne G Shaw STAFF Martha C Ellis John G Perry SECURITY COMMITTEE George L Billman Charles A Murphy Alfred D Elliott CLERK OF THE BOARD Morris B Kerr ATTORNEY Curtig W Nash Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street To Aid With Dance Newsy Paragraphs Ralph R Macaulay, Vacuum Cleaner Sales and Service.
EX 5-6265. janl9-tf John J Griffin of 31 Lincoln Street has been elected vice-president of the Freshman Class at Boston College, Chestnut Hill.
The police made a total of 24 ambulance trips during the month of October, most of which were for private calls.
PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf John F Hogan, Jr., of 38 Salem Street and Emily H Marks of 32 Foxcroft Road have been drawn by the selectmen to serve as traverse jurors, commencing December 4.
Nancy C.uciirtillo; Carolyn Marchesi: Beverly Robbins; Jean Ann Titilah; Carol Gilbcrto. director.
Newsy Paragraphs Paul Wilson Sullivan, assistant editor of the Star, who has been ill at his home for the past two weeks, is expected to return to his desk on Monday.
Any one who may have a copy and has no further use for it will confer a real favor if he will leave it at the Star Office.
For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. tf Mr and Mrs.
Ralph CL Norton of Middlebury, Vt., spent the weekend in Winchester with their son, Ralph G Norton, Jr., of Holton Street and his family.
They came down from Vermont for the II arvard-I)artmouth football game.
When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf Officer John Farrell of the Police Department, who has been at the Winchester Hospital following an accident in which he was involved ast week, was reported as the Star went to press, to be getting along satisfactorily.
We will deliver. fe2-tf Shortly after 11 o’clock last Friday forenoon a Chevrolet sedan, driven by Mrs.
Marion L McNevin of 6 Garden Street, Woburn, was in collision on Main Street at Canal Street with a Ford driven by Arthur Raby of Marcel inc, Saskatchewan, Canada.
McNevin told the police she was parked facing south and was pulling out into the traveled way when the collision took place.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Three new tiers of bleacher seats have been built in front of the east stand on Manchester Field at midfield for the use of the Winchester football players.
This will obviate the danger of players tripping over the old sideline benches, and will not interfere with the view of the fans in the stands.
For Muscular Dystrophy Police Athletic League Recreation committee with the assistance of the WCYC (Winchester Community youth club) will sponsor a dance to help the Muscular Dystrophy fund.
The dance will he held on November 3, 1961 in the Winchester High School Gymnasium.
Over a period of years the wasting and resulting becomes more and more apparent in the patient and confines him to the wheelchair and eventually to his bed.
Research, however, has indicated that it may be due to metabolism of the muscles, related to their inability to utilize vitamin E All proceeds from the dance will be donated to the Muscular Dystrophy Fund.
Contributions that were given on October 9 will be used for the many patients who are sent to summer camp from two to five weeks, which at times is the only opportunity they have to leave the confines of their homes.
George Denham will disc-jockey the dance and free records will be given to the lucky winners.
Photo by Kyerson ;K OF AUTOMOBILE driven hy Firelighter Herbert O’Donnell, after striking two bland Avenue Tuesday.
Firelighter O'Donnell was hospitalized as the result of the Lynch Junior High Notes Thanks to Mr and Mrs.
Rolland Robison and their helpers, all those who attended the square dance last Thursday evening had a wonderful time.
Mr Meurling was in top form; and even teachers showed they could shine in more than classroom subjects.
A reminder to all parents that open house will be held Wednesday, November 8, at 7:30m.
Come and meet the teachers, see the new building, and find out how well you’d score with the new junior high curriculum.
Voluntary dues of 50c per family will be received at the time; and refreshments will be served in the cafetorium following the evening program.
Baptists To Hear Governor Volpe Governor John A Volpe will be the keynote speaker at the 96th annual Ladies* Night dinner program of the Boston Baptist Social Union on Monday, November 6, in the Dorothy Quincy Suite of the Hancock Building in Boston.
The president of the Union, Lewis Foster of Lloyd Street, will act as toastmaster and will introduce the Governor.
Joseph E O’Donnell, pastor of the First Baptist Church, will be among the head table guests.
O’Donnell of 28 Lebanon Street, a member of the Fire Department and driver of the department’s hire Alarm Truck, was seriously injured shortly before 10:30 'Tuesday forenoon when the left front tire of his Dodge sedan blew out while he was headed north on Highland Avenue near Grayson Road. j According to the police Firefighter O’Donnell was on the way to the Winchester Hospital to pick up his wife, who had been a patient at the hospital and had been discharged.
The blowout caused the car to swerve sharply through the southbound lane and leave the road, striking a tree in front of the residence of William J Canniff at 85 Highland Avenue.
The car was completely demolished and Firefighter O’Donnell was pinned in the wreckage, which was on fire when the police arrived.
Desk Officer John H Boyle had been notified of the accident at headquarters and radioed Officers Robert Baird and David Boyle in a patrol car.
They hastened to the scene of the accident with Officer Mario Buzzotta, in the department’s ranch wagon.
Officers Baird and Boyle radioed for the fire department rescue truck and the police ambulance and both made quick trips to the scene of the crash.
Officers Baird and Boyle extricated Firefighter O’Donnell from the car and he was removed in the ambulance to the Winchester Hospital, where he was treated by Dr.
He sustained severe face lacerations and X-rays disclosed a possible lacerated liver.
Fire Chief James E Callahan hastened to the hospital as soon as news of the accident reached him.
Testing Hydrants The Fire Department is instituting a new static pressure test for all fire hydrants in town.
This is an entirely new test and should not he confused with the old flow test or flushing of hydrants.
The purpose of the test is to get the various hydrant pressures to make sure that the hydrants are delivering sufficient water for the pumping that may be necessary.
A representative of the Water Department will accompany the firefighters on their testing trips so that if any defects are found they can be remedied immediately.
A total of 2700 postmasters from all over this country, Hawaii, and Alaska, were in attendance.
Mr A Robert Tonon of 53 Lawson Road was recently re-elected to the Board of Directors of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts for a three year term.
November 2, Open House «t Winchester Hitfh School will he held at 7:45m.
November 3, Friday, 7 :30m., Family Nifrht Film Program, Rich Room of the Public Library.
Saturday.:15m., Children’s Film Program, Rich Room of the Public Library.
November D, Thursday, Jnycees Meeting, Winchester Red Cross House, 7 :30 m.
November 1ft, Friday, and Saturday November 11, No Library Film Program.
Gr«>esinger of the Animal Rescue League will talk on her experiences placing pets by radio.
November 16, 17 18, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Parish Players present English mystery, “A Murder Has Been Arranged” in Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church.
November 28, Tuesday, the Friendship Guild of the First Congregational Church will meet at 8m. in Chidley Hall.
Members, friends *nd the girls of Troop 9. extend cordial invitations to the mothers of all the girls to attend.
John McHugh to conduct the investigation and he is working on several possible leads.
Back in 1957 the proprietor of the store was a victim of holdup men at his home.
He and members of the family were tied to chairs and the store receipts which he had taken to his home were stolen.
Paul Mahoney are announcing the births respectively of a daughter and a son, last Saturday night at the Winchester Hospital.
They were rushed to the Winchester Hospital and had their babies within ten minutes of each other, occupying the same room and having the same obstetrician, I)r.
Paul Edwin LaJoie Jr. , of West Concord, announce the birth of their first child; a daughter, Pamela Jean on October 11, 1961 at the Winchester Hospital.
C ONION THINS Monday l uesday and Wednesday Speeial, Noveinbe itive Chicken Breasts ilive Chicken Legs PLEASE SEND ME A ONEYEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THE WINCHESTER STAR ADDRESS Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
DAILY eoptH-tf Bonnell's Body Shop Fast Efficient Service Collision Work Our Specialty Auto Painting Insurance Estimates • WE REPAIR ALL MAKES OF CARS Local Civil Defense Directors and Building Inspectors today were invited to join members of Boards of Selectmen, City Councillors and Mayors at an afternoon Civil Defense conference to be held at the John Hancock Hall in Boston on Thursday, November Oth.
Senators Leverett Saltonstall and Ben A Smith in cooperation with Governor John A Volpe and Massachusetts Civil Defense Director John J Maginnis.
Congress appropriated $201) millions, but we have a duty to make certain they are spent wisely.
Sorority Pledge Martha Bond, a sophomore at BaldwinWallace College in Berea, Ohio, has recently been pledged to Zeta Tau Alpha sorority.
Aiblison J Becker of It) Perkins Rond, is congratulated on being coinmfssioned ensign in the Naval Reserve by Capt.
Hedrick d tiring ceremonies held September 29 at the Naval SeTiool of Pre-Flight, Naval Air Station, Pensacola, Fla., the unit commanded by ('apt.
The commissioning ceremonies’ came after Ensign Becker successfully completed the 16-week pre-flight course.
He will next move to another base in the Pensacola complex for training leading to the gold wings of a naval aviator.
To Discuss Shelters Efforts of the Massachusetts Civil Defense Agency to protect the public against uninformed or unscrupulous shelter dealers will be intensified in a series of educational meetings throughout the commonwealth next month.
The meetings will be open to town and city assessors and building inspectors, architects, engineers, builders and others in the shelter business.
The nature of the radiation threat, methods of coping with it and the basic standards for shelters will be outlined by Civil Defense specialists.
John J Maginnis, Director of the Massachusetts Civil Defense Agency, stated in announcing the schedule of meetings that he believed most builders in the shelter business were anxious to give their customers full dollar value in protection.
The nearest locally scheduled meeting is at Newton on November 6 at 9:30m. and 1:30m. at War Memorial Building, Commonwealth Avenue, and Walnut Street.
PA 9-1981 nov3-tf Democratic Town Committee The Committee's first formal meeting of the Fall season will be held during the week of November 5.
It was originally planned for Wednesday, November 8 but, due to the intangibles of the hostess’ business commitments, the week is set and, within a few days Secretary John Hogan will notify the members of a definite date.
It has for some time been planned that the hostess for our November meeting would be Mrs.
In the Dan Gaynors' spacious playroom where we have already enjoyed such warm hospitality, we will first conduct a business meeting.
Then we will hear from the small sub-committees, composed of four members each; the reports of their constructive meetings and the work they have done in all districts of the Town during the vacation months.
The December and January j meetings, will also be house meeti ings, the hostesses who have al| ready offered their homes to be announced later. our Hart Schaffner & Marx • fine liquors • vintage wines • choice beer and ale -At the \ Jlou se Of (food Spirits ” outlook and outlast ordinary coats HS&M outercoats stride in style and ease through seasons of wear.
HS&M plans it that way,' tailoring every model in classic natural lines that stay in style ... in fabrics with stamina under their surface softness.
Hood Country Club in Melrose, scene of last year’s meet, for the 18-school Middlesex Cross Country League Championship.
Favored Beverly came through for the second straight year by winning the varsity race with the low score of 4*1 points.
Bill Norris of Beverly A fra in was individual winner of the race followed closely by teammate Tom Page.
As the race progressed, Winchester moved four men in under twenty, with Steve Dee going all out for the Sachems coming in 18th.
Three other Winchester runners all came within ten seconds of Steve; Frank Johnson 16th; Jack Scherban 18th; and Dean Anderson 19th.
In the JV race Winchester fared as well as their varsity counterparts by coming in 3rd also.
Beverly again showed the individual and team strength by placing two of their men first and second, and having a team total of 22 points.
Neil Kirkpatrick ran in the top 10 throughout the whole race and was able to hold his position by coming in 9th in his best race of the season.
The other scorers for the JV were Richard Amoroso 22nd; Gerry Hills 24th; Don McClellan 29th; and Joey Ruma 34th.
Girls"" Sports At McCall Junior High The girls inter-mural sports pro| gram at the McCall Junior High j School is being conducted by the newly-formed Girls’ Sports Association.
The officers for this year are president, Virginia Williams; vice president, Nancy Petri; secretary, Judy Carucci; and treasurer, Christine Richardson.
The fall sports program features field hockey for grades eight and nine and soccer for grade seven.
The varsity team for grade nine includes Barbra Morton, Irene Lynch, Sally Mullare, Nancy Long, Barbara Bund, Ginny Williams, Gail Bairstow, Sharon McCuddin, Lynn Cochran, Sue Porter, Carla Hutzenlaub, Lynn Keppler, Rita Gramzow, Marcia Horley, Sue Lewis, Debbie Nelson, Jan and Judy Carucci, and Charlotte Dennett.
Already in full swing is a junior high school bowling league consisting of fifteen teams.
Currently holding the highest string averages are Lori Bradlee, Nancy Clark, and Caroline Root.
Leading the cheering section at the football games are Mary Ford, Katie Coakley, Nancy Petri, Debbie Nelson, Linda Colliander, Sally Hoyt, Karen Horley, and Jane Lynch.
The girls are presently working on forming a Pep Squad for the game on November 10th, versus the new Lynch Junior High School.
Jane Lynch, an eighth grader, is currently serving on the Jan Jordan Fashion Council, a junior high school group sponsored by the Jordan Marsh Company in Boston.
Early this fall, seven McCall Junior High School ninth graders attended Merestead Field Hockey and Lacrosse Camp in Camden, Maine.
The girls spent a week being instructed by the top American and British players and coaches.
In the group were Lynn Keppler, Charlotte Dennett, Judy Carucci, Sally Mullare, Barbra Morton, and Sue Porter.
I ferb \\ ood. vice president of tin* Ha he Huih ! .eagiie, presents championship trophy, won l>\ the dubs, to team sponsor.
Tom Ford, Ed Cutting, Mr Walsh, Mr Wood, Mr Gustin, Joe Curran, Ron Frikson, Kevin W iggin.
Picture snapped at graduation and award exercises Tuesday night, October 24, at George Washington School.
Babe Ruth League Mothers’ Committee at refreshment tabl. at league graduation and award exercises October 24 at Washington School.
November 5 — Winchester at Woburn Conches Don MacElwee, Bill Sipp, and Ed Gravalese are work ing hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needham.
The YW is offering a unique ski package program including four ski conditioning exercise classes, two dry skiing lessons and two outdoor lessons.
The two indoor dry skiing lessons will cover the selection, cost and care of equipment, technique, and a study of ski areas and where to ski at home and abroad.
Pleasant Area in Bridgton, Maine and can he taken at any time during the 1961-1962 ski season.
Mr Jenni operates this ski area, and either he or one of his instructors will give these outdoor lessons.
For additional information, call the Boston YWCA at KEnmore 67940, extension 22, before it snows.
Tufts Medical Faculty Wives Dahli Hi is the theme of this year’s gala dinner dance sponsored by the Tufts Medical Faculty Wives.
At 6:30 on November 4 members and their distinguished husbands will gather for this annual affair.
In the past this group has contributed furnishings and equipment for the use of the medi1 students.
Don’t Put Ofl* —Send $1.50 for iTCH-AID Now — PHARMACY GIRL, Inc., Labs Fifth Ave., Brookfield, Conn.
ITCH-AID is COOLING, COLORLESS, STAINLESS, INSTANT DRYING . . . nct 26 -tf Babe Ruth League Awards Night I lie 1 Labe Ruth League held its Annual Awards Night at the George Washington School on Tuesday.
Coach Henry Knowlton showed films of the Lexington and Melrose football games, which the l>oys found most interesting.
Awards were then presented to the Cubs, who were the league champions this year.
Jack Marascia, John Cus sen, Davis Blanchard Steve Ka jander, Eddie Cutting, Kevin Col lins.
Tommy Ford, Dick Rowe, Jeff Peckham, Kevin Wiggin, Joe Cur ran, Charlie Tarbell, and Ron Erik son.
Vice president Herb Wood and player’s agent Charlie Walsh pro seated the awards.
They also pro sented to Lester Gustin, represent ing the Gustin Corporation as team sponsor, the Carl Morton Memorial Trophy which is awarded annual ly to the league champion.
The fifteen-year-old boys who were graduating from the league were then presented with their trophies.
These boys were Tomm Ford, Dick Rowe, Jeff Peckham Joe Curran, Ron Erikson, Joe Mawn, Tommy Johns, Paul Reardon, Neil Doherty, Phil Doherty Andy Page, Bill Zovickian, Phi Sachem Harriers Sweep Haverhill 1-7 43 Winchester Harriers hung up their fourth straight win of the season by defeating Haverhill Friday.
Haverhill had one of their top three runners of last year, George Skafas, returning but, he proved to be no serious threat as the Sachems took the first three places and six out the first eight.
Although Jack Scherban, Steve Dee, and Dean Anderson all ran excellently.
Again Scherban turned in the fastest time in two years by running the course in 17m.s.
Harrington led a string of Winchester runners, McClellan, Keane, and Amoroso over the finish line. and Roger The First Fifteen Finishers; 1.
Sullivan also presented to Mr Ben Wild, treasurer, a substantial check from funds raised hy the mothers of hoys in the leugue.
Pa perm ate, Sheaffer’s, Parker, Esterbrook, and Scripto pens and fillers available at the Sitar office, 3 Church Street.
Winchester Harriers suffered their second set-back of the season as a *fired-up"" Waltham team nipped the Red and Black 27 28.
Winchester went into this meet with four straight victories against one defeat while Waltham was undefeated.
The meet was split up into two heats, varsity first and then junior varsity.
Sixteen runners lined up for what was to prove to he the start of the fastest and most exciting race of the season.
Waltham posed a serious threat when they took over the first three positions early in the race with four Winchester runners following close behind.
Nearing the half-way mark it appeared that Winchester might come through ns Steve Dee took over the first position with the excellent half time of 8m.
The speed of the race started to make itself felt on the local team as two of the Waltham boys forged ahead and went on to win 75 yards ahead of the nearest Winchester man.
Winchester had the next three runners, Frank Johnson, Steve Dee, and Jack Scherban in 3rd, 4th, and 5th.
Ru<;""e*l Belmont Meets Winchester In I league Game Here Saturday Winchester has another busy afternoon in store for its football j forces Saturday when a big and reportedly niggtM Belmont High eleven comes to Manchester Field to keep a Middlesex League en~ j gagement with the Sachems.
Coaches generally rate Belmont as tough this year, despite its I record of three wins and three losses.
The Red and Blue absorbed its worst heating of the season from Melrose, losing to the Raiders.
Winchester’s rugged course proved to be too much for the Waltham JV as the Red and Black won their sixth straight by a score of 23 32.
Kevin Kiley ran his best race of the season as he took the top honors with a time of 18m.s.
Harriers End Season With Win Over Wakefield On Friday, October 20, Winchester wound up its dual-meet season by defeating a strong Wakefield team.
This meet was very important to both clubs as it would decide second place in the Pilgrim Division.
Approximately fifty runners left the starting line in what was to prove the fastest race on the home course in five years.
Steve Dee broke away from the group and was closely followed by Martino of Wakefield and Bucko Johnson of the locals.
Passing the half way mark Winchester had one, two, and it looked as though there were going to be some outstanding times for the 2. mile course.
Steve and Bucko battled for first position all through the second half with Martino holding a close third.
Following these three, Winchester’s Jack Scherban and Dean Anderson held the fourth and fifth positions, with Phil Gallagher and Dave Bird finishing the scoring.
Bucko won out over Steve*, covering the course in the excellent time of 16m.s., 16 seconds off the course record set by Ken Brown in 1956.
Steve was only two seconds behind Bucko, coming in with the time of 16m.s.
This was one of the fastest local times on the course since 1956, the year Winchester won the New England 1.
From this compilation it would seem Winchester is the stronger, both offensively and defensively.
Comparative scores mean little or nothing, hut the fact remains that, with the exception of the Stoneham game when nothing went right for Winchester, the Sachems have been able to move the ball, averaging slightly better than 25 points a game against the teams Winchester and Belmont have met in common, Belmont’s average is 17.
Both teams have shown a good scoring potential, albeit their defense has not been too stout.
Saturday’s game looms as another of those closely contested affairs with the breaks likely to enter largely into the final decision.
Winchester’s chances will be improved if Tom Mooney, first string center, and Jim Menucci, reserve lineman, are able to play.
Mooney and Menucci are strong defensive players, and there were plenty of times against both Melrose and Reading when a stouter defense could have meant victory.
THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1961 With the seventh round of play j under way tonight, four teams are on top on a won-lost basis, with I Alabama, California, Notre Dame j and Navy in that order occupying the first four places in the standing's.
A week ago Alabama was fourth, California second, Notre Dame first and Navy fifth.
Frank Gangi has been replaced by Hob Fiore in the individual high three department.
Tony Saraco has been replaced by Bob Fiore in the individual high singles.
Important matches tonight are Alabama vs California, Notre Dame vs last-place Georgetown, and Navy vs fifth-place Harvard.
Lentine and CorrecLeuguc Standings Won tiOSt Plnfalls Alabama 17 7 10,149 California 17 7 10.059 Notre Dame 17 7 10,017 Navy 17 7 9,906 Harvard 16 8 9,900 Maryland 14 10 9,691 Yale 12 12 9,751 Penn 12 12 9,690 Army 9 15 9,857 Holy Cross 9 15 9,746 Batoa 9 15 9,400 Boston College 7 17 9,799 St.
As a whole, the night was a drop from the pace that has been set in the past weeks.
Vin Balestricr of Reading can't quite reach pass from John Colliander to Rich Rowe , good for 12 yards in the third quarter of Jgst Saturday’* Reading-Winchester football game, Lennis Timpone is the other Sachem.
Gelatin 34 22 9,854 K of C 33 23 9,391 Post Office 30 26 9,683 Bro.-in-Law 1 29 27 9,346 49’ers 24 32 9,695 St.
LADIES’, MEN’S, CHILDREN’S — $5.95 to $35.00 NEW-TYPE STEEL POLES — $12.95 SKIS FOR EVERYONE, 4ft. to 6ft., 9in.
Muriel Crosby, assistant school superintendent in Delaware; Betty Lou Pagel, co-ordinator of elementary grades in Cheyenne, Wyoming and Louise Lackemann, school prin cipal in Denver, Colorado.
Captain Mike Bellino swept over from the six yard line to score the equalizer after a last ditch passes had set up the tally. lie Sachems’ cause looked all hut hopeless when a clipping with only minutes remaining in the final period and forced them on the Photo by Ryerson CHEER LEADER CINDY HOPKINS takes off as she urges her Sachems onward against the Reading Roekets in last Saturday football game on Manchester Field.
Other elieor leaders an lift to right, Pat Sexton, Dobbv Price and Debbv Nichols.
Samuel Reid’s lovely home i Second High on Salisbury Street was the setting j Frank Brennan for the fourth annual banquet of the Roaring Twenties Bowling Club.
Members of the team who attended the dinner were Adele Ack erman, Mary Brennan, Ann Cum mins, Ann Dean, Betty Farley, Maxine Glynn Mary Keith, Betty Kirk, Dorothy MacDonald, Trudy Mainberger, Marion Manoli, Dolly Pasquale, Midge Pazolt, Ann Pearce, Jackie Pheeney, Eleanor Reppucci, Mary Reid and Lolly Smith.
Playing For Bridgewater •i* ;&* DH l*ELl St ) . . . \\ inchr»l<T ho\ plasiug dri m>i\ <* center lor Bridgewater Slate College.
Hob i> a former \\ iucliester High lineman, lie muko Ids home at 2o > Washington Street, and is a up h on lore at Bridgewater. series of penalty set them hack to kick away the ball.
Reading had a 12-6 lead at the time and the Rockets were sniflfing victory as Gerade, a workhorse all afternoon and as good a back as Winchester has faced all year, ran back Bellino’s punt to his 36.
The Sachems, however, refused to be counted out, and a hardcharging line forced a Reading fumble on the first play from scrimmage with the Rockets recovering back on their 24.
On the next play Gerade was brought down for a five yard loss on the Reading 19, and kicked immediately, his hurried boot going outside at the Reading 33.
Colliander took to the air at once, hitting Donlon at the 24, and then Benincasa for a first down at the 17.
A pass completed to Bellino actually lost yardage hack to the 20, and another pretty toss down field was dropped by the receiver.
Facing third down and 13 long yards to go, Colliander again dropped back and this time hit Timpone who was finally downed on the Reading six.
With the Winchester stands in an uproar, Captain Bellino swept right for the score, going over standing up.
A successful conversion would have given Winchester the game, and Bellino on a repetition of his scoring play, might have made it had he elected to keep running for the goal line marker.
Instead he attempted to cut in lost his footing and was stopped a short yard from pay dirt.
The game was in doubt all the way after the first quarter when Reading looked good to knock the Sachems completely off the field.
Gerade busted through for six, and then took a flat pass from Meehan out to the left, driving straight down field to the Win Chester 39.
Meehan again went to the air hitting Ken De Cicco at the 16, the Reading end going into the end zone for the easy touchdown.
Winchester couldn’t go anywhere after the kickoff, and Bellino got off a beautiful kick of 50 yards, the ball going outside at the Reading 12.
The Sachems forced Reading to kick, but once again the local boys couldn’t mount an offense.
Facing fourth and seven situation the Sachems tried a fake kick and a fullback trap up the middle.
Here Reading staged a steady march, sparked by a 12 yard pass from Meehan to De Cicco.
Nowell saved a possible score when he dropped De Cicco at the Winchester 35.
Gerade drove through to the 26 for a first down and Newell reached the 17.
Gerade was stopped by Benincasa at the 13, and a long pass intended for Gerade in the end zone fell incomplete.
Wheeler reached the nine off tackle, but with fourth and two the Sachem front wall stopped Meehan on a quarterback sneak and Winchester took over at its nine.
Rowe picked up good yardage, but Winchester was called for illegal procedure, and the ball went back to the four.
Bellino in two tries reached the 14 and then hoisted another fine boot up the field with Benincasa dropping the Reading receiver on the Reading 20.
Bel lino’s hurried boot traveled only to the 40, and Johnson ran the ball back to the Winchester 22, as the first quarter ended.
Swift picked up seven, but here the Rockets fumbled and big Joe Dattilo came up with the pigskin at the Sachem’s 15.
Winchester picked up four in three tries, and Bellino was forced to punt, Benincasa dropping Gerade at the Reading 45.
Gerade picked up four and then, with a six point lead, the Rockets went to the air, with Bill Branley picking off Meehan’s toss at midfield and getting all the way to the Reading 15.
Colliander sneaked for four yards to the 11, and Bellino on sweep left was knocked outside it the eight.
Here Reading was called for a personal foul and was penalized half the distance to their goal-line, the ball being placed clown at the four for a first down.
Benincasa picked up a yard and then Bellino swept right for the equalizing touchdown.
He tried a sweep again for the extra points, but was stopped short of pay dirt.
Gerade ran the kickoff back to the Reading 41 from the 19, and then swept to a first down at the Winchester 30.
A 15 yard holding penalty stalled the Rockets and on fourth down Gerade was stopped at the 31 and Winchester took over.
Here Bellino got around the corWinchester 0 6 0 6—12 Reading »; o 0 6—12 Touchdowns — Hid lino 2, l Jennie, DiCicco. ner for once to the 45.
Benincasa and Colliander were dropped for losses and Bellino had to kick, his boot traveling 40 yards to the Reading 21.
A clip on the play put the ball hack on the 10, and forced Gerade to kick, Benincasa making a fine twisting driving run back 20 yards to the Reading 46 as the half ended.
Coming out after the half Winchester worked the hall from its 30 to the Reading 26, an 1 1 pass from Colliander to Rowe keeping the drive alive.
Another pass was squarely muffed by the receiver deep in Reading territory, for a had break, and on the next try Colliander was hit and jarred loose from the ball on what looked like a pass attempt, Reading taking over at the 30.
Gerade picked up four and Swift got through for a first down at the 42.
Gerade and Johnson reached midfield and Gerade made another first down at the Winchester 47.
Swift advanced to the Winchester 44, and here the Rockets were fortunate to recover a fumble back on the 47.
A forward lateral reached the Winchester 35, Johnson bucked to the 32 and Gerade to the 29.
Cootey, in two tries reached the 22, and here Winchester was penalized for a personal foul, the ball being placed at the seven yard line.
Here the Sachems piled up a buck for no gain but on the next play Gerade from the quarter back slot rolled out to the right and went over standing up, the Winchester defense again being caught out of position.
Reading elected to have Gerade sweep left for the extra two points, which would have meant the ball game, but the Reading captain was hit hard at the goal line by Erskine, being knocked outside short of the goal line.
Winchester had the better of the going during the remainder of the game, though a 15 yard penalty for clipping on a pretty Bellino runback of a Gerade punt didn’t help.
After the Sachems scored they had one last chance when Bellino intercepted a lofty Meehan pass at the Winchester 30.
Mike had to wait for the ball and was caught from behind at the 36, before he could get going, the final whistle blowing after the next play.
Reading completed five of 11 passes for 64 yards, with 39 of those yards coming on the first touchdown play.
Winchester — Le, Donlon; It, Nowell, Whittaker; lg, McNeill, Chane; c, Nibh>ck.
Eleanor Shaughnessy is one of the assisting teachers in the Team Teaching Group in the 4th, 5th and 6th grades at the Parkhurst School this year.
Before her marriage she taught in Rockland and at the Garfield Junior High School in Revere.
She and her husband, Joseph, who incidentally comes from Point of Pines also, live in Melrose and have two sons, Joel, a senior at Melrose High School; and Dana, an eighth grader in the Lincoln School in Melrose.
Shaughnessy does volunteer work in the coffee shop of the Melrose Hospital.
Photo by Ryerson ROSAMOND WELLS Winchester’s Opponents Belmont, 12; Concord, 6 Wakefield, 6; St.
Rosamond Wells is one of the assisting teachers in the Team Teaching Group in the 4th, 5th and 6th grades at the Parkhurst School this year.
Wells first teaching post, though she practice taught at Parkhurst last year.
Two years ago she returned to college and received her Bachelor of Science in Education from Tufts.
They have two daughters, Judy, in the eighth grade of Lynch Junior High School; and Debbie, in the fifth grade of the Wyman School.
Wells still finds time for her Girl Scout work, hut has had to sacrifice a lot of other activities.
Shop Early for a CHRISTMAS GIFT FOR MOTHER OR DAD ☆ Hand-Made Florentine Leather Desk Appoint men l and Memo Pad.
Mae Serieka, David Saliba and John Hogan must go a large measure of the success of the evening.
Sue Winn, assisted by Betty Hill, Mary Doherty and Lilian Roy, engineered a smoothworking combination of cars and passengers.
Secretary of State Kevin White, young and able official in charge of that important department of our State government.
His talk was non-partisan (not by design, of course) but set up that way because of the nature of the subject which was “Improving the Quality of State Government.
What interested the Secretary’s hearers most was hisreport of the “Committee of Eight” which he appointed soon after he took of fice.
Secretary White, a very successful young lawyer before he assumed his present office, explained in incisive, legal terminology the law on such matters as it now stands and some of the solutions which have been suggested for correcting abuses of the law, and its limitations.
Although his explanation had to be of necessity, couched STOP FOR \ DAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE ON ALL CHRYSLER BUILT CARS ROCKFORD MOTORS, Inc.
The two members of the General Court who were present contributed questions, the answers to which served to further explain the important subject under discussion.
Martin I Small, president of the Lexington Democratic Club, introduced the speaker and Arthur J Brock, chairman, Lexington Democratic Town Committee, invited those in attendance to he present at the next of the four meetings in this series at Muzzey on November 21.
Friendship Guild Monthly Meeting The Friendship Guild of the First Congregational Church, will meet on Tuesday evening, November 28, at 8m. in Chidley Hall.
The girls will have an actual Court of Awards, a fire lighting ceremony, a display table and will serve the refreshments.
Many of us have daughters already in scouting and many have daughters to enter in the very near future.
The Friendship Guild also would like to extend invitations to the mothers of all the girls to attend wih us, as well as members and friends.
On October 24, a tea wan held for teacher and parents of children in the kindergarten class, at Noonan School auditorium.
Baugher, kindergarten teacher; Miss Minnetta Jurgenson, school principal; Mrs.
John F Collins, president of Noonan School Chapter of Community Schools of Winchester and Mrs.
Baugher prepared a delightful program by playing a tape recording of each child’s voice singing his favorite song or reciting his favorite poem.
Bird, adorned an attractive table at which Miss Minnetta Jurgenson and Mrs.
Only a few of the many available pieces are illustrated 40 High Street Medford, Mass. frU«* Include To Visit Parents Ann Davies Nicholson (Mrs.
Tomas G., Ill, will arrive here from her home in Washington, D.C., early next week to visit her parents, Mr and Mrs.
William W Davies III, 11 Sanborn Street, in order to attend the Opening Night performance of the Vassal* Centennial Opera, “Command Performance,” on November 17th at Kresge Auditorium in Cambridge.
Mr Nicholson will join the family in time for the Thanksgiving holiday.
Phychologist Views Teen Ayers “In the whole world there realty know what the own group/* In this are only about a dozen people who is and every one of them is in their wav did Dr.
Palubinskas kept an overflow crowd which included Police Chief Derro and four members of the school guidance department hanging on her words as she described with rare wit, perception and much sound information a remarkably graphic picture of many of the things we deal with when trying to understand and plan for this group.
The meeting was planned by the Mental Health Association to stimulate interest in recreation planning for local teen agers.
What it in fact did was to paint in vivid colors the youngsters with whom we deal when we start to work in this direction and therefore highlight some of the pitfalls to keep in mind where community planning is concerned.
And in the same way “if we step in with a perfect program they will not like it too well because we’re doing the thing hardest to revolt against.
She exhorted parents to try and find the mean between not intruding on the teenagers but being reliably there when needed.
And again she pointed out that Musical Moods Big Success One of the most enthusiastic audiences ever seen in Winchester turned out last Friday evening, October 27, for “Musical Moods,” which was presented in the high school auditorium by the Winchester Junior Circle of Florence Crittenton.
Richard T Preston, Ways tnd Means chairman, welcomed the audience and introduced the opening act, which was the Four Rascals Barbershop Quartet.
The Four Rascals are the top barbershop quartet in New England and showed the audience last Friday that they truly deserve this high honor.
They then demonstrated how harmony is created in barbershop singing by starting with the lead man and adding each additional voice until true harmony is attained.
They then presented several orig i n a 1 numbers, accompanying themselves instrumentally.
Theodore von Rosenvinge, president of the Winchester Junior Circle, drew the lucky number for the door prize.
The delighted winner of an expenses paid “Evening for Two” at the Terrace Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton was Mr Gerald O’Neil of 2 Alden Lane.
Following intermission, the audience of music lovers showed equal enthusiasm for the Show Toppers, a group of six highly talented young singers, who have Won great acclaim at the Statler Terrace Room during the last three years.
They presented Vignettes of Broadway, accompapied by the music of Ruby Newman.
The Show Toppers are a welltrained, talented group under the guidance of Ruby Newman and Lee Daniels, and they presented a highly polished, professional performance of a calibre seldom enjoyed in Winchester.
Tunes from “My Fair Lady,” “Pajama Game,” “Sound of Music” and many other Broadway hit shows were sung with skill and obvious enjoyment.
The Show Toppers have been tabbed “the best in Boston,” and by the audience’s reaction, they certainly lived up to this high praise last Friday evening.
Proceeds will benefit the Florence Crittenton Home. teenager wants adult will reject it from a parent hut accept the same thing from someone less personally involved, such as a teacher, guidance officer, camp counselor.
She suggested that community planners lean heavily for advice on those who handle this age every day — the schools.
Palubinskas answered questions such as what is a normally rebellious child, and what do you do if you do need special help.
In speaking about non-conforming children she asked the group to examine the reasons a child is nonconforming and let many of them stay that way.
On the subject of consulting a psychiatrist on a small problem she quickly dispelled the worry she believes some to have that they’ll be put immediately into five years of analysis.
James B Willing, opened the meeting by reminding the group of the short history of the four-year-old organization and something of its purpose, a part of which is to improve community understanding of mental health.
She spoke of the Children’s Clinic in Lexington, which is co-sponsored by Winchester as a branch of the Mystic Valley Mental Health Association.
She equated mental well being with emotional well being or happiness, something we all would like to have.
Coffee was enjoyed before the speaker by the more than fifty interested people in attendance.
Shih of the Chinese Christian Church of New England will speak Sunday morning at 9:15 at the Chapel Service of the Senior Forum at the First Congregational Church.
Shih’s subject “This Is A Friendly World,” sounds strange in view of world conditions but will reflect his findings on a recently completed round the world trip which took him to such places as East Berlin, Israel, Formosa, Bangkok, Singapore, Manilla, Hongkong and Japan.
Shih had opportunity to see first hand many factors bearing on world tensions but also visited many Chinese congregations, especially those served by former students of his.
Shih adopted an 11-year-old Chinese boy, a refugee from Communist China, who is now a part of the Shih household in Boston’s Chinatown.
Joan McClennan and Natalie Palmer will be the chaplains for the service.
Linda Carter and Jane Hood, cochairmen for the Work Day for Christ, have requested that all Forumites complete their work projects and bring in their earnings by this week end if possible.
The committee of mothers who served the October Forum supper consisted of Mrs.
FAMOUS BRAND SUPPORT STOCKINGS REGULARLY IN STOCK AT $4.95 A PAIR, For 2 Weeks 2 Pairs for $5.95 Colors — Cinnalnrk and White Sd&t'DtnoU 3 WINCHESTER TERRACE PA 9-1191 Hadassali Membership Tea Mrs.
Chapter of Hadassah, recently opened the first meeting of the year, by thanking Mrs.
Herbert Land of Reading for so graciously opening her home for the Membership Tea.
This marks the 50th Anniversary Golden Jubilee Year of service for Hadassah.
Albert Steigmann of Win Chester, membership chairman, greeted members and guests with a warm and inspiring talk on Hadassah’s outstanding humanitarian service in healing, teaching and rescue.
Alfred Haaxma of Wakefield, life membership chairman, honored the many new life members.
Joseph Leavitt of Wakefield, on behalf of all the members, spoke of Mrs.
Robert Friedmann’s many untiring efforts and presented her with a lovely gift.
Mr Leonard Gelfand of Stoneham, kindly showed a film, “Fifty Miracle Minutes,” on the moving of the Hadassahs Hospital’s vari ous units to their new quarters officially opened June 6, 1961.
TO — PHARMACY GIRL INC., LABS Fifth Avenue, Brookfield, Conn. oct2fl-fcf Republican Town Committee On Thursday evening, October 26, the regular monthly meeting of the Republican Town Committee was held in the East Room at the town hall.
Woodward, a former member of the local Republican Town Committee, spoke of the increased interest by the government and public in the field of Civil Defense.
She showed illustrations of typical family fallout shelters which might he built.
She also explained what “fallout” and “radioactivity” actually is and how we can protect ourselves from them.
Among the many items of business discussed was the possibility of having Mr George Lodge, for mer Undersecretary of Labor, speak to the group in the near future.
The banquet program for the organization is scheduled for Friday, November 17, at 6:30m. in the Sheraton-Gibson Hotel, Cincinnati, Ohio.
Elected to the Army’s Advisory Panel on the Reserve Officers Training Corps this year.
Knowles is also on the National Advisory Council of the National Society of Scabbard and Blade.
Knowles has under his supervision a Department of Military Science that directs the training and education of students enrolled in the largest voluntary Army R.O.T.C. unit on a single campus in the. country.
Largest Class At Wentworth Area residents are among students representing fourteen states and five foreign countries enrolled in the largest class in the 50 year history of Wentworth Institute', according to an announcement today by H Russell Beatty, Wentworth president.
Enrollment increased 1 1 per cent to 2000 students in the two year industrial and engineering technology programs, President Beatty said.
Among the eleven Winchester students enrolled at Wentworth, three are preparing for careers in Mechanical Engineering Technology.
Patrolman Roland J Roy, chairman of the committee in charge of arrangements for the annual concert of the Winchester Police Relief Association has announced that a seven-act professional bill this popular day evening, high school commencing H Elliott is has been booked for , party, to be held Tuei I November 7, at the I memorial auditorium | at 8 o’clock.
Ruby Newman’s Orchestra will rday and proceeds from the concert will go to help swell the Pojlico relief fund treasury.
Anden’s Performing Poodles, recently featured with the Liberace Show Pat Theriault, Wizard of the Banjo Paul Winik & Edna Mae, Delightful Dancers General Grant, Modem Deception ist Vicki Taylor ami her boy friend Ronnie, Comedy a la Carte Kirk Stevens, Dynamic Song Stylist The Boginos, Famous European Family in a Whirlwind Novelty.
Girl Scout News A cordial invitation is extended to all adults in Girl Scouting in Winchester to attend a combined Fall Council and open Board Meeting, at the Girl Scout Cabin on Monday evening at 7:30m.
The Program Committee w T ill meet at the Girl Scout Cabin on Tuesday, November 7 at 9:30m.
Know the reputation of your upholsterer. \\ ilsons has been a proud and reputable Winchester firm for over 30 years.
D R A P E R I E S Call Now For Completion Before The Holidays 10 Park Street PArkview 9-1566 oct2fi-2t I THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2.
Westbrook Junior College is the first residential junior college in the country to offer the dental hy giene curriculum.
Avenue, Arlington Mission 3-8770 Open Evenings 7 9 P M. analt-tf FICTION Convonant With Death, by John Harris Dangerfield, hy Barnnby Conrad The K veiling of the Good Samaritan, hy Dorothy Davis Flame of Fire, hy Jane Oliver, pseud.
Today’s need for spiritual discernment will be emphasized Sunday nt Christian Science church services.
Scriptural readings in the Lesson-Sermon entitled ""Adam and Fallen Man"" will include lh«*se words of St.
WIN< HESTER UNITARIAN ( III RCH Mystic Valley I’arkway and Main Street PA rk view 9-0949 Rev.
Metcalf Union meets nt Hv church to go to Federation meeting ii Melrose. ill Sunday, November 5. 11:00m.
The Fall Meeting of the Woburn Association at the First Congregational Church in Malden. 5:00m.
PArkview 9-4363 after 6m. augl2-tf SPECIALS GENUINE BUCK FOX COLLARS S I9.95 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats CASHMERE SWEATERS WITH MINK COLLARS AND LINED s 47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED INTO A CAPE, STOLE or CAPELET at a labor charge of $• 20 SWARTZ FURRIER 24 College Avenue Davis Square Somerville SOmerset 5-3399 oct6-eow EVENTS OF THE WEEK Monday.
Reception of New Members ; extended session Nursery through 5th Grade. 5:15m.
Phone or come in W indicator 36 Church Street PAikview 9-3000 mar2-tf EVENTS OF THE WEEK Monduy, November 6. 7:00m.
Woburn Association of Churches will meet at First Congregational Church in Malden.
The Welcome Wagon Hostess W ill Knock on \ our Door witli Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors and Your Civic and Social Welfare Leaders ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies Charlotte L Dodge HUnter 8-2882 No Cost or Obligation Rev.
Carlton Helgerson, Pastor Baptistic Evangelistic Non Denominational CHURCH OF THE EPIPHANY Rev.
The Senior Youth Fellowship at the home of MIbh Judy Durfee, 48 Cabot Street.
Charming, useful, and quaint e the new 1962 “calendar towels,” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star.
Nites to 9 P.M. aprl8-tf In OWU Play w Susan Stockwell, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Stockwell, a sophomore Spanish major, is a member of Pi Beta Phi sorority.
Moffett Funeral Sertnce augft-tf KIMBALL FUNERAL SERVICE -A. -Allan J<imlJl Kolart C Jlujfay 39 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-0200 Page Fourteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1961 — 1JJU Parkhurst Teaching Team School People Getting Around Candy Stripers Photo by Ryerson PARKHURST SCHOOL’S TEACHING TEAM taken tin* lunch hour to <l«> some of the planning involved in this year’s experiment teaching grades 4, 5 and 6 together.
The teachers are enthusiast ie about the new system despite the extra work it entails.
Graham, not a regular member of the team, gives service to it in her science program.
Mr Sutula, who studied the system in Lexington this summer, keeps close touch with its present development at Parkhurst.
Anderson Advocates Team Teaching In Gingery Parkhurst Talk Professor Robert B Anderson is an educational revolutionary who thoroughly enjoys assailing the status quo in teaching, turning present school conditions upside down and then dealing constructively with the effects of his agitation.
In fact his humorous but gingery talk was heard by a nearly full auditorium with parents from all over town and some school administrators from other towns joining to hear him.
Anderson, who is the di| * — rector of the Teaching Team Project at the Franklin School in Lexington as well as on the faculty of the Harvard Educational School, was introduced by Principal Albert Sutula of Parkhurst as the “god-father” of Team Teaching.
Little League associate. vestryman and a man who chose Winchester to live in because of its fine schools for which he is willing to pay even more taxes.
He quickly dispelled, however, any idea that this link with his audience would qualify the presentation of his views on education.
Anderson brought them into his story early when he told of experiences shared with three of them and Mr Sutula at the first Harvard Summer School Team Teaching program at Lexington this summer.
He described it as a strenuous and at times even sanguine program which only the fittest teachers survived; but he strongly believes in the value of the challenge, change and exchange involved when teachers are collectively planning and carrying out a program for children in this way.
Anderson in reviewing results at the nations first real pilot project in Team Teaching, the fouryear-old Franklin School in Lexington.
This despite the fact that no statistics there yet show a claim of real advantage to the system.
In contrast to this contained classroom concept wherein a teacher may retire and create a separate, insulated regime subject only to occasional observance from a principal or supervisor, a team of teachers is given the responsibility to work jointly for the instruction of a group of students whom they group by ability rather than age. bVtP/o Interest on Your Savings INVESTED IN CATHOLIC CHURCH AND HOSPITAL BONDS In Units of $500 or More KEENAN & CLAREY, Inc.
City \ \ | Numerically the grouping of the 1 children may be done in many ways, and done differently for every subject ar far as scheduling permits.
Whenever pos; sible, however, the teacher among them whose ability is greatest in a | given subject takes the lead in directing the planning for this course and the other teachers support.
This makes for most effective use of both talenu and time for both students and teachers — as well as for a great deal of planning for the latter.
Whereas in the conventional school a poor teacher can conceal an inadequate performance and an excellent teacher cover up or habituate what may be a blind spot, working as a team in a more flexible way they illuminate each other’s performances as well as the material which they are presenting.
The constant curriculum evaluation which is highlighted by this process is one of the best potentials of the system, according to Dr.
Anderson, who believes it is also one of the greatest needs in American education today.
In question period he said he felt social studies, mathematics and language arts all to need a new look — and that in general much more might be done with creative work with the beginning learners.
As a system this kind of reorganization also offers a natural hierarchy of teacher assignment which would take into account ability variation.
In the top or team leader level it certainly demands a higher remuneration and then on the learning or assisting levels it offers the perfect adjunct for the kind of Teaching Assistant Program which exists in Winchester.
Anderson recognizes that it is a live controversy in the educational world and he cautions a very slow and careful approach to it.
He is proud that Winchester has taken this step at Parkhurst (and, as he pointed out, previously in a simplified way at Mystic) and at the same time admits that if adopted on the elementary level it raises further questions on the secondary | levels.
Harry V Ciilson, superintendent, noted that the schools would move into this system only as fast as the various factors allow and direct.
He also invited the public to take note that the new Lynch Junior High School has been designed to be able to accommodate Teum Teaching if desired.
John Reed, president of the Parkhurst Parents, said good eve ning to an audience which buzzed with comment for a considerable time before it was ready to break up.
To Speak At Unitarian Women’s Alliance On Tuesday, November 7th, the Women’s Alliance of the Winchester Unitarian Society will hold its second meeting.
After the business meeting, which is at 10:00m., Mr Geoffrey Harwood will speak.
Geoffrey Harwood has been gathering and analyzing the news on radio and television for some 20 years.
Muchtraveled, he has interviewed the famous people of our time and has written two novels and numerous stories and articles.
Mr Harwood is a fluent and provocative lecturer, who does far more than summarize.
His mind is richly inquiring, and he has vigorous opinions, based on 20 years’ experience in assessing the news, on what today’s current events mean to us, and how they will shape our history.
After the talk, at 12:30m., luncheon will be served in Metcalf Hall by a committee of Mrs.
At Swampscott also Principal W Howard Niblock of the High School took an active part recently at the 144th meeting of the New England Association of School Superintendents as one of two discussants on the subject “Enrichment vs.
Winchester’s program of acceleration is one of the oldest in the state.
Miss Sybil Daniels, president of the Winchester Teachers Club, reported that Winchester's teachers attending the Middlesex County Teachers Convention on Friday at the Metropolitan Theatre, Boston, found it the best program yet to be presented.
Among others they heard Chet Huntley speak on’ the role of the educator in world affairs.
There was a constant background of low African music and the meeting was held in the same building with three of the special exhibits put on for that week around Boston, those of African Sculpture, African Painting, and the Sweitzer exhibit.
School of Fine and Applied Arts Building, and the Winchester group, the largest teachers delegation present, found it one of the very few day long conferences they were sorry to have come to an end it was so good.
Library Film Program The film program at the Library this Friday and Saturday will appeal to animal lovers young I and old.
Beaver Valley, a Walt | Disney production, shows birds, animals and fish in their native I habitat in the region of a beaver j pond.
Those who may have viewed this on TV will appreciate the color photography.
A Night in a Pet Shop tells a story of what happens when the pet shop owner goes home and an enterprising monkey discovers how to unlatch his cage.
T ft ; ; \ -p.m,. * f ys v i S > * Ti 1 It *1 Representative Of Trinity Here Jacob W Edwards, assistant director of Admissions at Trinity College, Hartford, Conn., will be in the Greater Boston area Monday and Tuesday to interview high and preparatory school seniors interested in a liberal arts college.
Trinity College, a men’s college of about.00 undergraduates founded in 1823, offers degrees in liberal arts and science.
Currently attending Trinity College from Winchester is George L Tisdale of 15 Jefferson Road.
Some of the 66 “Candy Striper**’ who were awarded certificates at Friends of Winchester Hospital fall meeting.
George Marks, president of the Friends, presided at the business meeting and particularly welcomed the junior volunteers, to whom this meeting was dedicated.
A series of slides, mostly Don’ts for hospital volunteers, was shown by Mrs.
Harry P Hood, Jr., program chairman, with an amusing commentary by the vice chairman of volunteers, Mrs.
Harold Pyne, chairman of the Children’s Hour, gave a most interesting account of the duties of her volunteers, and mentioned the need for books, games, and toys for all age children.
The highlight of the meeting was the salute to the junior volunteers, or candy stripers as they are called, because of their red and white pinafores.
This past summer 66 teenagers from Reading arid Winchester volunteered for hospital service, attended training courses, and gave almost 1000 hours of service in the coffee shop, as messengers, and caring for patients’ flowers.
Certificates of achievement were awarded to those candy stripers as of June 1961, charter members of the junior volunteer group.
Lynn Anderson, Betty Bowes, Hope Barker, Beverly Bowen, Debby Berger, Charlene Bertolucci, Judy Carr, Victoria Cass, Sarah Clark, Susan Dolben, Leslie Dube, Eleanor DeVaney, Diane Engel, Gwen Eugley, Virginia Ellis, Lydia Ellis, Peggy Edson, Nancy Falzano, Elizabeth Folkers, Ann Grant, Jane Gray, Caroline Griffith, Nancy Hollinshead, Nancy Hinnendael, Margo Harmon, Debbi Harrison, Mary Frances Henry, Susan Haley.
Also Karen James, Elizabeth social hour for these junior volunJnckson, Jill Johnson, Sue John son, Mary Ann Johnson, Marcia Kimball, Beth Kaufmann, Sue Keppler, Roberta Kirkpatrick, Ann LaPointe, Wendy Lewis, Jill Lougee, Gayle LeVan, Elaine Lantz, Sandra McNaney, Paula Murphy, Mae Munima, Barbara Monsen, .lanet Niles, Deborah Nichols, Trudy O’Hare, Suzanne O’Claire, Sylvia Pirotta, Marcia Patterson, Carol Preston, Sharon Putney, Dorothy Mary Richards, Kate Robinson, Susan Steward, Janet Sullivan, Vicky Soucek, Joan Segerstrom, Phyllis Thomson, June Vant, Sue Wallace.
The speaker will be Harold Rogers, First Reader of First Church of Christ, Scientist, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
ARLINGTON MIs»ion 8-060S Christmas Fair GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH 70 Mont vale Ave., Wo burn Saturday, November 4 10m. to 10m.
WElIs 5-0169 augl2-tf CONTRACTORS FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTORS Established 1914 Bulldozing — Excavating Driveways — Roads Landscaping — Trucking Loam, sand, gravel, crushed stone, shrubs Tel.
Medford EX port 6-7300 Edward P Lynch RUBBISH REMOVAL 18 White Street, Winchester Tel.
Powe steering. nnd other Has been used J mental health W0t*k ns second enr and has Only 5.00(1 miles* Woods Dil Excellent condition nnd prieed far be* market value.
Call PA 9-2782. i OR SALE ( rntndfut her clock, mu hottany. ten tub«*s.
Rumbling Ranch. bedrooms, large kitchen, sun poreh, fireplaced living room, attached Karaite, fenceti in yard ; reduced $20,600.
Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, g ravel, brick, all types, flue liners, drain pipe, cesspool covers, fireplace dampers, cleanout doors, ash dumps and heutllators.
WElls 50670. julv 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants.
For $ v the finest, most dependable sj \ TVRADIO • HI FI REPAIR J ’> } | PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMBOS \ v \ TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing.
Includes Deluxe interior. power steering, brakes, windows, C-way power Kent, plus many other extras, including sure-grip differential. and Goodyear captive air tires.
Phone PA 9-4063 FOR SALE Modern 3-bedroom Ranch home; 2Mi baths, living room, dining room, all-electric kitchen, 2-car g a r a g e, completely finished basement.
Priced in the 30,000's. ( all Owner, PA 9-4063 HELP WANTED MALE ICE-SKATING RINK SUPERVISOR WANTED This is a good job for someone who wants only part-time or partial employment during the winter months.
Experience in supervising young people desirable but not absolutely necessary.
Huverty, WElls 3-5389. ueptl2-tf FOR SALE — Ford Station ^ Wagon, new tires, low mileage.
Call WElln 3-2834. sep21-tf FOR RENT — Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedge wood Apartments. $190 up.
Call PA 9-6860. oct5-tf Social Service Guild On Tuesday afternoon, November 7th, the Social Service Guild of the First Gongregational Church is sponsoring a tour of the Metropolitan State Hospital in Waltham, not only for its own members but for anyone interested in Mrs.
Mental Health is one of the major fields of interest of the Socia Service Guild, both in study and service projects.
It is a field of increasing importance as the public becomes more and more aware that mental and emotional illness is not an inadmissible social stig ma.
Instead it is an illness which modern medicine is treating with increasingly beneficial results, re suits which often depend upon greater public education for tolerance and understanding.
This need is very apparent when patients are ready to be dismissed from the hospital but have to remain because their families or friends are not ready to accept them and co operate in helping them adapt to normal life again.
Members of the Social Service Guild have worked at the Metropolitan State Hospital as weekly volunteers for several years.
Members of the Mystic Valley Mental Health Association who missed their tour last year or others interested in a closer view of mental health work are cordially invited to go along on this hospital tour.
The group plans to assemble on the Vine Street side of the First Congregational Church at 12:45 m. on Tuesday, November 7.
Cars may be parked here if not needed for transportation to the hospital in Waltham.
Each driver will be given written directions for the best routes to the hospital and for use if any group needs to leave before the tour is concluded.
First floor has 3 large rooms with modern kitchen and pantry.nd floor has 3 nice bedroomH, den, und modern hath.
Hlllcrest 65521. octl9-tf WANTED WANTED — Tutoring in English und History, available most afternoons and evenings.
If you have no further use for your large dining room set and are realistic about its present value, please send description and price to Star Office.
WANTED— Have client who has just sold a 2-family house and must find another single immediately.
It is not necessary for a girl to evidence financial need to qualify for this award.
Three laboratory schools on the Lesley campus accommodate the teaching of these specialties.
HELP WANTED — Gal Friday for Electron ica Sales Firm in Winchester, one girl office, excellent working conditions, Hillary commensurate with experience. duy w»x*k.
DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home und Industrial use.
WElls 8-0062. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS WINCHESTER EMPLOYMENT -Domeatic help available and wanted Cull PA 0-3132 after 7m.
It can be seen at 26 Muple Street, Chelsea. nov2-8t WANTED WANTED Antique* — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc.
All plane, ship, train aud hotel arrangements through the United States and all I Over^ The World can be made at tariff rates by culling your Authorised Travel j SEWING MACHINE SERVICE — Electric A * unt know your travel plans and | Sewing Machine Repair Service.
System for Public* Employees have long boon the subject of dobnto not only by ordinary taxpayers, but by experts in personnel administration as well.
The League of Women Voters of Winchester have been studying the Massachusetts’ (’ivil Service System for two years in an effort to find out how it works, and whether or not it can he improved.
So that the voter can form a constructive opinion, the League is offering a series of units beginning next Tuesday on an evaluation of the Merit System for Massachusetts.
Since consensus will he taken on 12 items dealing with both broad reform and pieceiYieal improvements, it is imperative that League members come to these meetings so that the League can take action.
Because it is a subject which is being widely discussed and affects every individual in the State, nonLeague people should take advantage of this chance to learn more about Civil Service.
The best preparation for this meeting would be a reading of the League’s new publication, “The Merit System in Massachusetts” which is available from Mrs.
Winn Supper Meeting On Tuesday evening, October 24, the management employees of J H Winn Inc. enjoyed a supper meeting at the Bellevue Golf Club in Melrose.
After the supper of roast beef and chicken, Mr Ralph Jury, plant superintendent, acting as master of ceremonies, introduced Mr Ernest B Dade, chairman of the Board.
Mr Dade introduced his guest, Mr Vincent Ambrose, president of the Winchester Trust Company, who introduced the speaker of the evening, Dr.
Baker spoke clearly and interestingly concerning his work with astronomical telescopes and the precise calculations which must be made concerning the location and distance of heavenly bodies.
Baker’s talk was illustrated by the use of several photographic slides.
Chefalo Named Director DADE CHAIRMAN OF BOARD OF NEW HAMPSHIRE FIRM Ernest B Dade, chairman of the board of directors of PotterChamberlain, Inc. of Gilford, N.ll. announced at a special stockholders meeting held October 21, the election of Harry E Chefalo of North ConWay as a director of Potter-Chamberlain, Inc.
Mr Chefalo, formerly of Winchester, was a .member of the Winchester finance committee and board of selectmen.
He is still active in business in Winchester and the owner of several business blocks.
Mr Dade also reported to the stockholders that the 100,000 pounds of steel had arrived for the new boat storage building and that the contractor was obligated to a fully completed date, under a penalty clause, by November 15.
This new building will have a clear span without posts, having a total of 10,000 square feet.
Mr Dade also stated that a new lease is being negotiated with Pembroke Marine, Inc., which will include the new building facilities and the marina packaged into one lease.
To h 11 persons interested in the estate of RICHARD M BINSW ANGER late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The e-xecutors of the will of said RICHARD M BINSWANGER have presented to said Court for allowance their first account.
Witness, John C Loggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this sixteenth day of October.61.
John V Harvey, Register. oct26-3t The Water & Sewer Board will receive bids for cleaning 11,974 feet of 12-inch C I. pipe and 4,1 15 feet of 10-inch C I. pipe.
Specifications and plans of pipe lines may be inspected at the Office of the Superintendent, Lake St., Winchester, Mass.
To all persons intercstiM in the estate of LORENCE M WOODSIDK, also known as LORENCK MONSON WOODSIDE late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
Witness, John C Loggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-seventh dny of October 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. nov2-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of CARMELA MO LEA, sometimes called CARMELA MU LEA. nnd CARMELA MO LAIR late of Winchester in Baid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of certain instruments purporting to be the last will and codicil of said deceased by MARY LORRAINE FORGIONE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this tenth day of October 1961.
To all persons interested in the trust estate under Article Ten of the will of WILLIAM A KNEE LAND late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of FLORENCE L KNEELAND and others.
The trustees of said estate have presented to said Court for allowance their fourth nnd fifth accounts.
That the zoning by-laws be hereby amended by changing or altering the man incorporated therein and made a part thereof and a portion of that certain district indicated and identified therein as a general residence district so that the following described area will be changed from a general residence district to an industrial district.
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of an amendment to the Zoning By-Laws adopted by the Town of Winchester, Massachusetts, at the Special Representative Town Meeting of June 19, 1961, nnd approved by the Attorney General of Massachusetts on October 10, 1961.
Elsie M Nelson Town Clerk uctl9-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
To all persona interested in the estate of JOHN W THORNTON late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition hua been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the laat will of said deceased by WINIFRED AMELIA THORNTON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that Hhe be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should Ale a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the tenth dny of November 1961, the return day of thia citation.
Enquire, Find Judge of said Court, thia twenty -third duy of October 1961.
To all persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M ALICE MASON Into of Winchester in anid County, dtceasod, for the benefit of JOHN S MASON nnd others.
The trustee of fluid estate has presented to Haid Court for allowunce its first and second accounts.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should lilu a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in tho forenoon on the seventeenth day of November 1961, the return day of this citation.
THEN DIAL PA 9-0029 Page Sixteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1961 HOW BANKS HELP m I We can give you the best demonstration of how banks help car buyers if you’ll come in and discuss car financing through our bank, \ ou 11 learn exactly what we mean when we say that, with a bank auto loan, credit requirements are simple; borrowing cost is low; terms are con* venient.
You’ll learn, too, how you may finance the initial car insurance premium in your loan.
And if we decide to do business together, you 11 quickly learn that arranging a loan here is a quick process.
A cooking demonstration and discussion on diabetic diets will be presented by Mrs.
Elizabeth Caso, nutritionist of the Cambridge Health Department, Miss Mary ElI len Collins of the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital and Mr Ernest Hinkley, chef and production supervisor, the First National Bank of Boston.
Many members of the Massachusetts Dietetic Association will also participate in the program by answering* questions about diabetic diets.
The Institute, which held its first Boston sessions from October 30 to November 2, inclusive, offered 23 evening courses during that time.
Later in the year seminars will be held at different points in New England.
Internationally Speaking Simple justice demands that the next issue of our series of “Champions of Liberty” stamps display the likeness of Dag Hammarskjold.
One wishes that among the instructions to th»' Peace Corps candidates had been one concerning the usefulness, and sanctity, of sealed envelopes.
Shelter companies should acknowledge that their devices will not protect residents against blasts within a radius of as much as fifty miles.
We are glad to know his dream came true, and that he was able to come, hobnob with great and near-great, and gather material for a thousand and one nights of story-telling in the tea houses of Pakistan.
Meanwhile, back home, his wife is wondering if their humble hut will be good enough for him on his return.
Pleasant Outlook A sonic boom is not, as often thought, a one-time phenomenon transmitted just at the moment the sound barrier is broken.
A plane flying faster than sound raises thunderclaps continually over a wide path of ground along its course.
Photo by JRyerson NEW PLANT OF ATLEE CORP., now in operation a 2 Lowell Avenue, Winchester.
This $150,000 plant is the first building to he erected in the new Parkview Electronics Park in the North End of town.
Containing 15,000 eq. ft., it is two stories in height in the front witli a single high manufacturing story at the rear.
The applied dynamics division and its product lines have been integrated with the Atlas Division and its product lines in the new plant, and the corporate offices of the company are also located there.
Yet this — and other — restraints against compul sion are being broken by the revolutionary concept of mass medication, and many towns, including our own, are telling us just that in a less personal but more totali tarian way, the more dangerous in that it constitutes an unprecedented invasion of our individual rights and liberties.
Drinking unfluoridated water harms no one and denies no other person fluoridated treatment if he wants it.
Indeed, more precise dosages are available in liquid and pill form, and are not expensive.
Now that the flood gates are down, other projects for doctoring our water are crowding into the breach.
It won’t be long before someone will propose a serious amendment to add aspirin, a sleeping drug, and an old-age tonic to the fluorides.
Coventry, England Students at Woodlands School staged a sitdown demonstration recently because they do not have sufficient homework.
Solemn Thought During the thirty minutes you spent at breakfast, 2700 members were added to the human race.
Enlightened Winchester No considerate person would dream of taking fluoride tablets in to a neighbor’s house and saying, “Your children must take these.
PA.90654 INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENY LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER'S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son insurance agency S THOMPSON STREET Rea.
PArkview 9-1062 FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
One shelter manufacturer recently amused others in the industry by advertising a “life-time guarantee” with his shelter.
Waiting for a man to get mar ried is like waiting for an egg to fry itself. odor, failed to find it, and dashed out the door.
Saul Kronenberg of Brooklyn *once had a patient come into his office and sit down gingerly while being questioned.
ERASMUS Republican Club Board Meeting On Wednesday, October 25, members of the board met at the Winchester Country Club.
Reports from the various committees were given and several plans for the regular meetings were discussed.
Health and food preparation classes designed to improve the inadequate unbalanced diets on which more than half of all Americans are living, will begin on Sunday evening, November 5, at 7 to 9m., through Thursday, November 9.
This five-day course is being sponsored by the New England Sanitarium and Hospital as a part of the health education program.
Vollmer, of Glendale, California, instructor for the course, will give practical demonstrations in food preparation.
Free recipes will be distributed at each lecture, and special gifts and door prized will be awarded.
Thanks go to all who contributed their time and expense to make this Beatnik Hop the success it was.
You will find many attractive items from which to make your selections at the Marycliflf Bazaar Tuesday, November 7, from 10m. to 10m.
Stay as long as you wish, since the tea room will be open for coffee or n snack.
Dinner will also he available 5 to 7, both meals modestly priced. qiialily Footwear for men, women and children since 1866 Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m.
As a gag, his friends painted his upper lip with ripe limburger cheese.
But you who need VITAMINS and WHO doesn’t? — send to — PHARMACY GIRL, Inc., Labs.
V CY Q 1117 WINCHESTER tA D-iJl / O'BRIEN'S LIQUOR MART 2153 Mystic Valley Parkway Medford, Mass.
Yes, pick up the one that's just right for you and yours • . gorgeous Impalas, Bel \irs.
Expert Service and Repairs Mirak's enmplete -bop facilities (one id* tinlargest service and body shops in N ft.
NO “HIDDEN COSTS” 1 No costly service policies, no annual furnace cleaning bills, no expensive storage equipment, no motor operating cost necessary.
And the CLEANLINESS of Gas keeps household cleaning and redecorating bills low, too.
As a Gas heating customer you may use our convenient Easy Budget Plan to spread the season’s estimated fuel cost over 10 months.
Photo by Ryerson HENRY T KNOWLTON This is the third year in which the award has been made.
The award will be presented to Coach Knowlton at the annual award banquet of the Football Officials Association to be held Monday evening, November 20, at the Hotel New Brunswick at the corner of Massachusetts Avenue and Norway Street in Boston.
The banquet is open to the public and all Winchester fans are cordially invited to see this “coach of the year” honored.
The affair is stag and the honorarium is $5, tickets being available from Frank Finigan at the high school, PA 94.300, or MI 3-4464.
Governor Volpe is among the invited guests with All-American football immortal, Joe Bellino.
It is also expected that Superintendent of Schools Harry Gilson and High School Principal Howard Niblock will attend.
Police Aided In Stolen Car Chase Officers Robert Baird and David Boyle in a Police cruiser figured in the ninety-mile-an-hour chase of a stolen automobile through town last Thursday forenoon.
Headquarters was notified by the Arlington Police that a youth who had stolen an automobile in Arlington was headed toward Winchester.
Officers Baird and Boyle went to the Ridge Street section of town, where the car had been seen, and Officer Tony Pronski, al so on patrol duty in the area, was also alerted to be on the lookout for the wanted car.
Officers Baird and Boyle spotted the car on Cambridge Street, head ed toward Woburn and gave chase.
The wanted operator turned right into Everett Avenue and the Police followed him into Bacon Street and along Main Street toward Medford.
Officer Boyle kept Headquarters informed of their patrol car’s posi tion and Officer Cogan informed Medford of the chase.
As the fleeing car turned into Playstead Road it narrowly avoided a collision with another vehicle and nearly turned turtle.
The operator ran through land ar Oak Grove Cemetery with Officers Baird and Boyle in pursuit.
The Medford police joined the local officers at Playstead Road and searched the neighborhood, the youth, a 16-year-old, being picked up on Wood Road off Playstead Road by the Medford Police.
He was booked at Medford Headquarters and turned over to the Arlington Police who say the car he was driving was stolen in that town earlier in the morning.
Veterans Day In observance of Veterans Day, Saturday, November 11, Commanders Walter Appelton of the American Legion and Robert Swymer of the Veterans of Foreign Wars invite all veterans to participate in the ceremonies at the War Memorial, at the corner of Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street.
Veterans will meet at the American Legion Home on Vine Street at 10:30m. and march to the War Memorial monument on the McCall Junior High School lot at 10:45.
Brief exercises will be held at the Memorial at the traditional hour of 11.
This progress picture is tangible evidence that the long-awaited expansion to the hospital is making rapid progress.
It is hoped that the good weather will continue so that the exterior of the hospital may he completed before the winter period.
The latest estimate is that the new wing will be ready for occupancy about October 1 of next year.
Plans Still Uncertain Board Reaches No Decision In School Bills Impasse ‘ For the first time since the Legislature granted permission to the town to pay outstanding bills in connection with the construction of the Vinson-Owen School all parties interested met on Wednesday, November 1, at the offices of Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke in Boston.
The meeting was called in an attempt to arrive at an agreement as how best to resolve the difference of opinion with regard to the town’s liability for certain bills in excess of the original appropriation by the town meeting to build the school.
Norman E Weeks’ Tube Test Design Wins Recognition In ‘‘Electronics” On the cover of “Electronics” Magazine for October is a picture of an Automatic Tube Tester designed by a Winchester engineer, Mr Norman K Weeks, Manager of Test Equipment and Standards Department of the Industral Components Division of Raytheon Company in Newton.
One operator loads the seven-ton machine with tubes and another worker packs tested tubes.
The machine performs twenty static and dynamic electrical tests, at a rate of 1,800 tubes per hour.
Field rejects have greatly decreased since the machine was placed in operation and a higher quality assurance factor and repeatability of performance have been obtained.
The ability of the machine to subject. all tubes to exactly the same test conditions has upped acceptance.
The human fatigue factor, with its consequent lowering of quality assurance, is not a problem.
After preheat cycles, the tubes are indexed for each of the twenty parameters tests.
If a tube is within preset limits, it proceeds to the next test position; if it is outside limits, it is ejected into bins, as shown in pictures illustrating the Automatic Tube Tester.
Counters indicate the number of rejects for each position, and also count total input and total output, Testing speed is such that process engineering can be alerted if tubes coming through production are not up to standard.
The automatic test set is calibrated daily, as well as prior to changeover to a different tube type.
A sample of 25 tubes considered acceptable is checked five times each day.
Quality control x and r graphs arc plotted hourly for up to 20 reject items and for acceptable tubes, to ensure product quality.
A feature soon to he added is an adapter for testing flying lead and other type tubes.
This machine is one of many pieces of Automatic Equipment developed by Mr Weeks and members of his department for the Automation Program at Raytheon.
Items amounting to $13,268.10, which the contractor claims is due him on change orders, are still in dispute with $1,061.45 in architect’s fees.
The architect's fees will depend upon what decision is reached in connection with the change orders.
Represented at the November 1 meeting were the School Building Committee, the contractor, the architect, the Board of Selectmen, Town Counsel, Town Accountant and Town Engineer.
The Selectmen are charged with the payment of the outstanding bills and in passing the enabling legislation the General Court provided that no bill be paid until it has the approval of the Town Accountant and the State Department of Accounts.
No agreement was reached among those at the November 1 meeting as to a reconciliation of liability, and the Board of Selectman at their meeting last Monday evening came to no definite decision.
Chairman Sherman W Saltmarsh told the Star that the Selectmen will consider the matter further at their coming Monday meeting, and he was hopeful that a more definite announcement can be' made after this session.
Local Boy Boston Herpetologist Herbert Clement, formerly *>► Winchester, lias come more and more into the news of late because of his one-time hobby while lie was still a resident here.
Town Comptroller Post Is Urged By Consultant Coordination Of Office Administration Recommended In Study Of Town Hall An official Comptroller to coordinate office administration of several departments of Town government was recommended this week by special systems consultant John M Sinclair of Bentley College in a report submitted to the Methods and Procedures Committee.
The Methods and Procedures Committee has the matter under advisement, and has made no commitment regarding the proposed Comptroller one way or the other, the Star learned.
In towns that have adopted the f Northeastern’s Levy Scholarship To Winchester’s Brenda McGowan Democratic Town Committee The Winchester Democratic Town Committee and its associate members will be the guests of Mr and Mrs.
At the business meeting there will be committee reports and some * observations from those members who attended the meeting at the Muzzey Junior High School in Lexington.
Following this, plans will be made for the November meeting at Lexington when Attorney General Edward McCormack will be the speaker.
The social hour which will take place after full attention has been paid to Democratic affairs, local, state, and national, is sure to please all who attend, as have our meetings in the past.
Reptiles and amphibians occupied much of his spare time while he was going through Winchester High School.
Later, while studying in Boston, Herb’s casual interest deepened into a full-fledged study, with emphasis on reptiles, and particularly onturtles and tortoises.
He soon became known as something of an expert in the field, and has been consulted more than once by museum staff members in the Boston area.
In addition to being the co-founder of the New England Herpetological Group, and its president for the first year, he is co-owner of The Ark, one of Boston’s really unique animal shops.
With his partner, Herb has fashioned a shop that is the mecca for animal lovers throughout the Greater Boston area, and especially for those whose interests arc reptiles.
It is remarkably non-commercial, no posters on the walls, and no “hard sell” involved.
It is called Boston’s Street LOCAL BOY, continued page 7 Comptroller plan, the position has been filled by the Town Accountant, because of his intimate familiarity with the budgetary procedures of all departments.
It appeared that, insofar as office administration work is concerned, the Town would operate more efficiently, if there were a co-ordinator of such work.
As mentioned above, the various departments operate more or less as autonomous units.
Mr Sinclair recommended the title Town Comptroller as an appropriate one for such a co-ordinator.
COMBINING DEPARTMENTS The possibility of combining departments of Town Government was raised during the survey, Mr Sinclair reported.
The $100 Levy Scholarship is presented annually to students majoring in psychology who have showed high academic achievement and excellent character.
She has been a member of the Husky Key, undergraduate society that works for the promotion of college spirit; the Silver Masque, student dramatic organization; and the Modern Dance Society, since her freshman year.
A 1957 graduate of Winchester High School, she is also vice-president of Chi Pi Epsilon Sorority and a member of Gamma Delta, women’s undergraduate society.
Miss McGowan is employed at the Massachusetts Eye and EarRetina Foundation, as a laboratory assistant, during co-operative work periods.
Kaufmann Named Chief Of Medicine as a group to study procedures at Town Hall by the Town Meeting of March, 1960.
The consultant’s basic objective has been to consider means toward a more effective use of existing personnel and equipment, to provide new equipment made essential by an increased volume of Town business, and to eliminate the hiring of part-time employees during peak periods of Town government work.
Pupils At Saint Mary's 13 Local Girls Win Marian Medal Sunday, November 5, saw the fulfillment of the earnest efforts of thirteen girls from grade eight at St.
After laboring for over a year and a half to complete the requirements for the reception of the Marian Medal, the highest award that can be received by a Catholic Girl Scout, these merry representative girls saw the reward of their untiring efforts in the joy they experienced while receiving the awards.
Evelyn Brennan, Carol Crimmins, Donna DeAngelis, Diana Donald, Marianne Karnes, Mary Hannon, Rosemary Harrington, Carol Johnson, Cathy Kenny, Maureen McKenna, Joyce Moynihan, Diane Penta, and Margaret Sampson.
The awards were presented by Most Reverend Bishop Jeremiah Minihan at the Cathedral of the Holy Cross at 2:00m. on Sunday afternoon.
The girls were a part of an outstanding group from many parishes in the Archdiocese.
Mary’s is very proud of the work that these members of the parish have done and hope that they will prove by their example and lives that they are truly Marjian girls.
The Dirigos, a newly organized group of female songsters, made their debut in October, 1960.
Their repertoire stems from rehearsing numbers for four part harmonizing.
Under the talented direction of Mr George Blouin, the group has offered to a choice few the opportunity of participating in singing which is both challenging and enjoyable.
Their time is divided between building up a repertoire and fulfilling engagements.
Since the date of organization, the Dirigos have made many appearances including singing under the hot TV lights at WABI in Bangor.
Sunday, November 5, from 12 to 1m. was their first Television appearance this fall, at which time each girl was also interviewed.
A love of singing and a navy blue suit with white accessories are their trademark.
Norman E Weeks of Fells Road, and is a graduate of Winchester High School, Class of 1960.
GUSTAV KAUFMANN The Board of Directors of the Winchester Hospital announce the appointment of Dr.
Gustav G Kaufmann, a well known specialist in internal medicine, to the position of Chief of Medicine at the hospital.
He has been certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine, is a member of the Massachusetts Medical Society, the American Board of Internal Medicine, is a member of the Massachusetts Medical Society, the American Medical Association and the New England Diabetes Association.
Mr William J Speers, Jr., president of the board, in announcing the appointment, stated, “We are indeed fortunate that once again a physician of Dr.
After an internship at the Presbyterian Hospital in Chicago he was appointed resident in medicine at the Massachusetts General Hospital, following which he became assistant physician at Phillips Andover Academy.
From 1952 to 1956 Dr, Kaufmann was associate physician in the adolescent unit of the Children’s Medical Center in Boston.
Mary’s Girl Scout* pressive ceremonies at tin* Cathedral of the Hedy Cross.
Marianne* mary guret bump&on. by-laws were read and accepted by a unanimous vote.
Then Mr Howard Niblock, Principal, extended his appreciation for the strong parental support the school receives and helei a very brief “orientation period” for the activities of the evening.
Following their son’s or daughter’s program on a special bell schedule of ten minutes for each period, the parents attended classes in which teachers gave information concerning the scope, aims, methods and general expectations of the individual courses.
James Hollinshead, Social Chairman, directed the serving of refreshments throughout the evening in the school cafeteria where fall flowers donated by the Winchester Conservatories served as colorful centerpieces.
Page Two THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1961 ^ on ran always have your money when you need il in a savings aeominl here.
The company candidate will compete with some 30,000 other checker-cashiers working in more than 3,000 retail food stores throughout the United States, and Canada.
All First National Store checkers will be rated for customer courtesy, accuracy, care in handling of food, and speed and efficiency at the trash register.
The First National Stores campaign will be directed by Mr John J Caulfield.
The competition is sponsored by the Institute and the National Cash Register Company.
Me Neeley will attempt to wrest the heavyweight crown from Champion Floyd Patterson in a 15-round bout in.
M e Neeley said he chose Colonial as his training site because of the ideal conditions for training which exist there and because he wants as many as possible of his hometown devotees to visit his site and follow his preparations in the quest for the title.
Leasing Corporation of Boston, it was announced today by David J Seder, president of the firm.
Mr Browne comes to G.D.C. with an extensive background in sales and administration.
He is a member of the Society for the Advancement of Management and the Sales Executives Club.
A veteran of World War II, Mr Browne resides at Strawberry Hill Street in Dover.
Leasing Corporation is an affiliate of the General Discount Corporation, one of New England’s oldest and largest commercial financing companies.
It leases capital goods of all kinds, with particular emphasis on machinery and equipment.
Fenway Concerts The ‘Boston Conservatory of Music has announced the programs for this year’s Fenway Series.
These events, given by both faculty and guest artists at the Conservatory, are held on Tuesday and Friday evenings at 8:30m. throughout the school year.
The series opens November 14 with the first Boston appearance of Katja Andy, pianist-in-residence at the Conservatory.
Miss Andy served for many years as principal assistant to Edwin Fischer in Berlin and Zurich.
On November 28, Richard Conrad, tenor; and Robert Pettitt, pianis^, will give a recital which includes unusual English songs for Christmas.
On December 8, comes the debut of the Gabrieli Trio, which is in-residence at the Conservatory.
The artists, all members of the Boston Symphony, are Alfred Schneider, violin; Earl Hedberg, viola; and Richard Kaepuseinski, ’cello.
Other concerts will follow on January 9, February 0, March 13, and April 13.
DIAMONDS and COLLECTORS’ ITEMS Expert Appraiser MAKER and DESIGNER of EXQUISITE JEWELRY Repairing 47 Bromfield St., Boston, Mass.
DEvonshire 8-8639 nov2-4t SIX ACRES NURSERY SCHOOL Classes for 3, 4 years olds Limited Enrollment • Non-Sectarian SCHOOL BUILDING OF MEDFORD JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER 47.
ELEANOR B HALL, Director PArkview 9-3492 HU 3-8556 EX 5-4117 CALL OR WRITE Massachusetts Cancer Detection Center 1095 Beacon Street.
A New England unit meeting held last Monday evening at the Shoreside Club, Everett, Forester’s Flower Shop won two of the awards.
Bob Glover and Charlie Forester made door sprays for Christmas decorations.
All pieces submitted were marked at retail prices— workmanship, design, etc., being Bob and Charlie were chosen first and second for this type design.
The meeting was attended by florists of the F.T.D.A. from ail over New England, and all types of floral arrangements were submitted by them.
Newcomers Coffee The Women of Epiphany will hold a Newcomer’s Coffee on Thursday, November lt>, at the home of Mrs.
All women who are new to the parish this fall are cordially invited to attend to meet members of different church organizations and learn about the many activities open to them.
According to the lost and found report at the police station, he* keeping’ them on hand for the skipper who lost them, presumably through someone else’s efforts.
Anna M Crowley of 12 Garfield Avenue told police she left in an envelope on a nail in her kitchen last Friday.
Crowley said the money was taken from her j kitchen while she was out between j 1:15 and 3:30m.
Rose M archant of 5 Mystic Avenue discovered that some rather un pleas ant person had smashed the rear window of her Chevrolet station wagon, presumably deliberately, and apparently with an instrument that makes a hole like a rifle shot.
Lincoln School Dads* Club The Lincoln School Dads’ Club j board of directors met Tuesday evening at tjie home of Edmund A Williams, last year’s president, i and elected a new slate of officers.
President-William Maggio Vice President — William Tobey Secretary — Frank Rallo Treasurer — Lawrence Kelbley Many new ideas were discussed for the coming year and after the j smoke cleared away and all th«* coffee and cake were gone, the plans wore made for the future and it was resolved by the committee that the annual Lincoln School Dads’ Club Costume Dance would be hold the evening of November 18th.
As usual a live orchestra will play for enjoyable dancing and the dad’s made arrangements for coffee, cider, doughnuts etc., to be served while all Lincoln School parents make new and renew friendships.
Crittenton Sale A pre-sale for the annual Floj rente Crittenton Bazaar will be held on Wednesday, November 15.
I Coffee will be served from 10:00 m. to 12:30m. and punch from to 1 1 :30ni.
Chief Titilah is married to the former Mary Louise Murray, daughter of Mrs.
Only That’s right -alt the prescribed medicine the average American buys in a year costs him only $15 — a small price indeed to pay for so much health benefit.
Ad.erl IMITATION PINE <f SPRAYS ■ BEG. 5c — SI .20 Value CANDY o O BARS OO e 50c Value BABY PANTS 33 ' S2.25 Value FOOTBALLS $1.
SJendi erne 5 5 un d Succulent Sic uvor ... *fbe tenJerest, juiciest pork roast* you ever tastedi Fine pink meat . . . from young porkers and a well — trimmed roast , free of excess fat.
SMALL ENOUGH TO KNOW YOU AND LARGE ENOUGH TO SERVE YOU Moody Motor Sales, Inc.
John Volpc ol \\ inrhcsU r was the key not <' speaker Monday evening, November (i. at the ‘Xitli annual ladies night dinner ol the llaptist Soeial l llion in Boston.
Foster, and Lewis M Foster ol LJovtl Street, president ol t he Baptist Social Union, who presided at the after-dinner program.
Lewis G Curtis Is Promoted To Rank of Captain The Fortnightly Guild Presents Mrs.
Cusack, Mrs. ^ ,fc "" f D th ‘‘. forn i cr Ambassador to Howard and Mrs.
Graustuck are Grcat Br ’ t,a ""\ Unowned for her members of The Fortnightly, and * rac f *n handling sem.-offictal duMrs.
Downes is daughter-in-law of ti « at u ° wh«ch she was often ass.gnMrs.
Eva Henderson, a j Voted Boston’s prettiest high well-known lecturer and traveler, school senior, she graduated from En Ka Ingathering mJoncn Bruno KJLj 3) c C onetf Miss Frances Ann Bruno, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
James M BruI no of 7 Upland Road, became the 1 bride of James Joseph Maloney, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs.
James J Maloney of Watertown, at a nuptial mass celebrated on Saturday I morning, Sept.. ,‘10, at the Immaculate Conception Church.
Driscoll, performed the marriage ceremony at 11 o’clock and was also celebrant of the nuptial mass.
He is presently serving as an Armament Electronics maintenance officer with the 305th Bomb Wing, Bunker Hill AFB, Peru, Indiana.
The 305th Bomb Wing is the first tactical medium bomb wing to fly the new B-58 “Hustler” supersonic bomber.
Captain Curtis’ wife, Wendy, and their three children live with him at the Strategic Air Command Base.
Antique Study Croup The Winchester Antique Study Group will hold the November meeting on Tuesday, November 21 at 7:30m., in the Rich Room of the library.
Those who did not attend the opening meeting in October missed an interesting informative and amusing lecture on fans by Mr Holbrook Dodge.
Next Sunday, November 12, there will he a general discussion on the problem of Alcoholism, the person and the decision.
See Don McClellan for further information. as the speaker at the home of Mrs.
The first meeting of the Literature Committee was held at the Library on Wednesday, November 1, with the chairman, Mrs.
The social hour will be at 1:00m. at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church Hall.
Nites to 9 P.M. aprlB-tf Friends Of Don Orione On Monday November 6, a second meeting of the Winchester Friends of Don Orione was held at Barbo’s Auditorium.
The Fiesta will take place on Tuesday, November 28, at the Sons of Italy Hall on Swanton Street.
A spaghetti supper with chicken, salad, ice cream and coffee will be served from sixm. through nine m.
It is hoped that all Winchester friends will help this charitable and noteworthy cause because its success will insure the expansion of the Don Orione home for the Aged and the development of a National Shrine to be viewed by millions of sightseers each year.
Dorchester High School with ho nors at fifteen, the youngest in her class.
She went on from High School to become a brilliant stu dent at Sacred Heart Academy in Manhattanville and at Blumenthal Academy in Vails, Holland.
In ad dition to German, she learned to excel in French and also became an accomplished musician.
Ken nedy not only toured Europe, but accompanied her famous father on an extensive trip to Latin Ameri ca.
As a traveler, she became trail blazer in 193b when she tour ed Russia with only a child as companion.
Rose Kennedy is far more than the wife of Joseph P Kennedy a Washington veteran of many top-level appointments, or the mother of the youngest elected President of the United States She is a renowned beauty, intrepid traveler, accomplished pianist honor student, devotee of both political and fine arts, and the mother of nine.
The Guild of the Infant Saviour will be honored to welcome Mrs Kennedy and most grateful to her for her charity in lecturing to benefit its great cause, unfortunate girls and their babies.
Kindergarten Tea For Miss Cullen A tea for Miss Mary Cullen, kindergarten teacher at Parkhurst School will be held in the kindergarten room Tuesday, November 14, at 3:30m.
Perry McCarty, room mothers for the morning and afternoon sessions, respectively.
Mothers of these kindergarten children who are attending public school for the first time are looking forward to Miss Cullen’s discussion of her program and objectives for the current school year.
Winchester Historical Society On November 2 (Thursday evening) there was a meeting of the Winchester Historical Society in the Rich Room.
After the reports, and several re commendations had been consider ed, he turned the meeting over to Mrs.
Guy Livingstone, program chairman, who introduced the wellknown Mr Richard F Lufkin, president of the Bostonian Society, as well as curator of the Medford Historical Society.
The president of the Medford Historical Society was introduced, and spoke briefly on the suggestion that various societies visit each other.
He invited the Winchester Historical to the next meeting in Medford on November 20, when the speaker will he Professor Robert Nichols, of Tufts College.
The lecture by Mr Lufkin was “Boston, 1630 1880,” and was well illustrated with slides of the city in its various phases, saying that it had been changed many times; a great fire in the 1870’s destroyed many land-marks.
The Old North Church , the Old State House, King’s Chapel, the Union Oyster House, and Paul Revere’s House, as well as the Old South Meeting house are the oldest Photo by Ryert+on EN K A INGA I HERING. left to right.
Harry Mueller, Miss Phi miner of the Visiting Nurse Association, and Mrs.
En Ka Holds Fall Meeting Tuesday afternoon, October 31, the En Ka Society met for its fall meeting at the interesting and attractive home of Mrs.
Stephen Nichols, president, opened the meeting with a word of welcome to all and with special greeting to Mrs.
Dunn read a letter from Mr Shinney, in charge of the Red Cross swimming program, thanking En Ka for the gift that made possible the first Annual Swimming Award dinner.
Bradford Bentley gave a detailed account of the work accomplished by En Ka’s various Civic services.
She announced that three new workshops were being organized, two to make gifts for Christmas for the* Home, for the Aged and for distribution by the Visiting Nurse Association and the Welfare Board chairmaned by Mrs.
George Blair, the third a morning workshop for folding sponges for the Hospital under the guidance of Mrs.
Winchester Hospital toward the purchase of a portable X-ray mahine $2000.00 Membership, Mrs.
William Beal, chairman, had the new membership books which she and her committee had compiled.
These were distributed before the meeting and the members were asked to take note of the changes.
Harry Mueller, Chairman, expressed her thanks to all who contributed gifts for the Ingathering.
The “Ingathering” or harvesting was a timely feature of this fall meeting as En In for the third year has taken ver the former activities of the Winchester Branch of the Needlework Guild of America, Inc.
The distribution through the Board of Public Welfare, the Visiting Nurses’ Association, and local church groups.
En Ka will carry on this “charity” that helps other charities in Winchester.
The fall meeting was concluded with a unique and amusing professionally planned fashion show, glamorized by our own En Ka members modeling the latest in fashions as found on Church Street in the En Ka Shop.
Winthrop Knox, En Ka Shop chairman, was thanked for planning and presenting this wonderful show.
Senior Forum M iss Margaret R Blemker will l>e the guest speaker at the Senior Forum at the First Congregational Church Sunday morning at 9:15 m.
In the United Church Board for World Ministries Miss Blemker is secretary for work in Europe and the Near East.
He work also takes her occasionally to Bulgaria, Albania, Serbia, Turkey, Greece, Syria Lebanon and Iraq, where the whole range of church activity from education through social service to medical work and evangelism is carried on in various centers.
Her trips to Europe and the Near East have given her opportunity to talk not only with church leaders but with political and other national figures.
Deacons will be* Charles Irwin and Joe Kingston, and the ushers will be Bruce Hamilton and Jeffrey Russell.
Hole-in-One A hole-in-ont) scored this season by Elliott Bluisdell of 14 Herrick Street may earn him a trip to Scotland for two and $1,000.
By getting his ace at the Winchester Country Club course, the Winchester man was entered in the Old places still standing.
It was most members bring gifts of New clothSmuggler Hole-In-One Sweepinteresting and was greatly enjoyed ing, or if preferred gifts of money stakes.
The winner will be by members and guests. with which to buy clothing for announced early in January.
Stewardship Sunday This has been designated as Stewardship Sunday at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church.
In the afternoon, starting at two o’clock, fifty men of the church will canvass the entire parish for pledges of financial support of the church in 1962.
Mr Kenneth Lamprey and Mr William Leighton, chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the finance committee, will have charge of arrangements and assignments in the campaign.
While there are some changes in the Budget for 1962 the total amount needed will be almost exactly the same as the budget for the current year.
The major new items in the budget are necessary to carry out plans for major organ repairs, a new driveway approaching the front door of the church, and parking are and landscaping of the church grounds.
Sebers of Everett, Washington, announce the engagament of their daughter Sharon to Mr Danforth Scott, son of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Sebers is a graduate of the Everett High School in Washington and is now stationed in Washington, D C., at the Pentagon.
Treasurer Bi liman also stated that the Bank has paid $300,000 during the month of October for Real Estate taxes on behalf of its shareholders who are buying their homes through the services of the Winchester Co-operative Bank.
In addition to an ever increasing demand for mortgage funds, there is also an increase in demand noted for money to modernize and improve presently owned properties.
Given in marriage by her father, the bride wore a gown of white peau de soie with a beaded portrait neckline of Alencon lace and a bouffant skirt with a chapel length train adorned with matching lace, pearls and sequins.
Her tiered veil fell from a square crown of sequins and pearls and she carried a cascade bouquet of white orchids and stephanotis.
She wore an aqua taffeta dress with a deep turquoise cummerbund and a bustle back.
She wore a matching turquoise crown embroidered with pearls and a small circular veil.
Miss Dona Fuearile of Woburn, small cousin of the bride, was flower girl.
She wore a floorlength frock of blue with a cummerbund and large bow at the back.
Her head piece was a halo of blue flowers and she carried pink and white nosegay.
Anna Barbara Bruno of Somerville, sister-in-law of the bride; Miss Dona Nutile and Miss Sandra Proia both of Woburn and cousins of the bride; and Mrs.
Ellen Santoro The bridesmaids wore dresses similar in style to that of the matron of honor, two wearing pink with deep rose cummerbunds and two wearing orchid with purple cummerbunds.
All wore matching headpieces w r ith short veils and carried cascade bouquets of carnations.
Bruno, mother of the bride, wore a dress of gold and white brocade with a gold satin cummerbund, matching accessories and a white orchid pinned to her mink cape stole.
Maloney, wore a white rose on her mink cape-stole and a turquoise brocade sheath with matching accessories.
Donald E White of Brighton was Mr Maloney’s best man, and ushering were two brothers of the bride, Robert A Bruno of Somerville and Carl V Bruno of Winchester; Carl J Proia of Woburn, cousin of the bride; and Dominic Santoro.
After their wedding trip by motor through Washington, Virginia and Florida Mr and Mrs.
William V Kelley of 1 Wildwood Terrace, who was married at a nuptial mass on September 9 at St.
James Church, Boston, a family friend of the bride, officiated at the 11 o’clock ceremony, and a reception followed at the Middleton Arms in Middleton.
Howard E Clark of Carmel, California, announce the engagement of their daughter, Priscilla Louise, to Mr John P Becker, son of Mr and Mrs.
Isabel Bcggs Scott of 2 Lagrange Street announces the marriage of her daughter, Sally Louise, to William Nelson Bursey, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs.
Following three years of military duty, he was appointed this fall to the Foreign Service of the Department of State.
Vice President, Marjorie Ralston, is Chairlady of this social and hopes that, all members and friends will attend.
Phis will be the one and only time this year the Department Finance Chairman, Mary Clark, will ask us for money for her project.
Please mark the date on your calendar, Monday, November 13; come and bring a friend Refreshments will be served after tlu* social.
Robert B Stewart, right, of Winchester, dean of the Tufts Fletcher School, commends Edward I Cohen.
New \ ork industrialist, for his effective leadership in behalf of the nationwide Tufts l Diversity program for $7,550,000.
Mr Cohen, a Tufts alumnus, is a member of the national planning committee.
Medical Auxiliary To Meet The Woman’s Auxiliary to the Middlesex East Medical Society will hold an important and interesting meeting on November 16 at 1:00m. in Hadley Hall of the Church of the Epiphany in Winchester.
This subject can prove fascinating*, not only to the antique enthusiast, but also to anyone interested in furnishing a home.
Members of the Auxiliary are urged to attend and to bring guests; Hadley Hall is a lovely place to meet and many people can be accommodated.
There will be refreshments served, followed by a brief, but very important business meeting, at which a topic of vital interest will be brought to the attention of the members.
It cannot be stressed too strongly that a great many women of the Medical Auxiliary should make every effort to be present.
Epiphany Women General Meeting Mr Kenneth Watson, supervisor * of case work for the Church Home Society, Boston will be' guest speaker at the first general meeting of the Women of Epiphany to be held in Hadley Hall, Tuesday, November 14.
He will discuss the work of the society placing children in foster homes and providing care and guidance for them.
Tickets must be reserved in advance and may be obtained from or at the church office.
The success of this fall’s Greater Boston United Fund drive is first a story of volunteers and second money.
While dollars are the prime target of any community campaign, and the United Fund needs some $14 million, the money will never be collected, counted or distributed to its agencies unless there are enough volunteer solicitors to call on every family in Metropolitan Boston.
This is one of the problems that key United Fund volunteers have been working on for weeks in preparation for the residential canvass that began on November 3.
Teams of volunteers, working long hours after their regular jobs are over, have been attempting to recruit solicitors to call on a few of their neighbors in behalf of the United Fund.
One of their biggest difficulties is tho old curse of public apathy, and the refusal of some who have volunteered before and found the role of the solicitor a hard one.
Campaign volunteers readily admit that part of the “missing million” that has eluded the United Fund every year for the last four years is undoubtedly resting in the hands of willing givers whose doorbells have never been pushed.
Mail a jigsaw puzzle postcard of Winchester to your friends, 25 cents each at the Winchester Star Free booklet on opportunities 24 fact-filled pages pin-point securities transactions that can mean improved investment position and substantial tax savings for you.
I I 1 i 1 s 1 1 f 1 Includes practical work sheets that will bring your holdings into sharp focus for inventory and tax purposes.
City -Zone» ON RADIO WBZ • 10:15 PM Every Week Might STOCK MARKET A BUSINESS NEWS Anothor Allyn Service for Investors Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club At the November 1st game.
The results were; North-South Audrey Glaven and Rachel Sexton, 97 Mr and Mrs.
A Kleinbecker, 8414 Section B, which often inherits the intricacies of half-table scoring, once again had to be computed on a percentage basis.
Lloyd Butterfield, .611 Richard Smith and Blair Hawley, .579 Herbert Wood and < P Woodward, .558 Mr and Mrs.
Pasquale, .616 John Nikula and Robert Arthur, .490 Board 16 in Section D was one of those interesting hands which confronts us with both a bidding dilemma and a delicate problem in play.
Although there is some merit to a call of 2 no trump or a raise in clubs, we approve of South’s rehid of 3 diamonds.
MOMENT OF TRUTH South A ¥ K 9 7 A 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 A K 4 3 East West A Q j 10 6 3 A 9 6 4 2 ¥ A Q 8 0 ¥ J 10 3 2 ♦ J ♦ K Q 3 A 6 5 2 A 8 7 North A A K 8 7 ¥ 5 4 ♦ A 2 A A Q J 10 9 One pair played this in 5 dia1 monds and was destined to go down one.
Bob Haskell, who had been unable to locate a partner at the last minute, decided to spend the evening looking over our shoulder.
True to the kibitzer’s code, however, he pointed out afterwards that there was only one way to make this contract against any defense.
Y’ou must now avoid the almost irresistible temptation to discard two hearts on your AS and KS, because defensive trump leads will reduce dummy’s rutting power too soon.
Nor can diamonds he brought in if West holds back his king and lets East ruff the second lead.
This creates an extra entry to dummy and allows plenty of time to set up diamonds. , Next Wednesday, the 16th, is master point night, and the Club’s Open Pairs Championship for 1961 is scheduled for Wednesday, November 29th.
The fair will he held from November 12 through November 18 at New England Life Hall, and during each of these days speciul programs will be held for the many children from Boston and its surrounding towns who plan to attend.
Adventure In Store; Chocolate Soda; First Semester; and Second Semester; just published.
She will describe to her youthful audience how a book develops from a simple idea into a reality.
Finast Wattles Dole ABC Breakfast Juice Pineapple-Grapefruit Juice Pineapple-Orange Juice StarujAs, Toot famous Brands at.
STAMPS With a FINAST Date and Ni Crosby's — Pure Barbados Molasses iqtsozcont 43 c Dupont Sponges Med.
Subseof Agriculture, Orville L b reeman, j q Uen t distribution will he made in Washington, D.C a week prior through feed manufacturers and to the Chicago meeting.
In its in troduetion, AFMA President W K Glennon notes, “Agricultural productive efficiency has soared to such heights that only one person in twenty-six is now engaged in tilling soil and tending livestock By contrast, Russia is forced to enslave nearly half its total population in collective farms.
Glennon continued, “Our food Bupply is u most prized possession Offered a wide choice of highly appealing foods, Americans have selected greater amounts of nutri tious meat, milk and eggs, available at reasonable prices, due in part to more efficient feeding.
The manufactured feed industry has played an important role in utilizing new animal nutrition know ledge, and has become a source of new wealth and employment for other segments of our economy.
According to Glennon, in less than half a century, the feed manufacturing industry has grown from a handful of grain and byproduct mixers to the 13th largest manufacturing industry in the United States, and the largest in the world devoted exclusively to providing goods and service to agriculture.
Consisting of six thousand plants and twenty-five thousand dealers, it. has a total investment of nearly two billion dollars, and annual gross sales of nearly four billion.
Over a billion dollars worth of grain and high protein meals; four hundred million dollars worth of transportation; three hundred millions of food industry by-products; two hundred millions of vitamins, antibiotics, minerals and chemicals; and hundreds of millions of fuel, utilities, credit, machinery, advertising, autos and trucks, and a host of other items needed in the production and sale of feed.
Glennon concluded, “The story of feed manufacture is the story of American industry and agriculture more potent than our mightiest missiles.
From Winchester were Naomi Fleischman, Judy Harmon, Gay Hoaglund, Robert Kessler, May Milliken and George Watson of Winchester High School; Linda Giragosian, Dare Paige and Barbara Tomlinson of Lynch Junior High School; and Anne Farwell and Arlene Waehsberg of McCall Junior High.
Another from Winchester attending the conference was Harris B Siegel, who teaches at Arl ington High School.
The major objectives of the Col lege Student Conference were “to broaden and deepen American un derstanding of the achievements and aspirations of Africa’s people and to develop ideas which may be useful in improving intercut tural programs and relations be tween African and American stu dents.
November 11, the Winchester Lodge of Elks will serve a spaghetti dinner at 12 o’clock noon.
The first floor of the quarters have been renovated since the fire, so that all social activities of the club are again available.
BLOOD URGENTLY NEEDED The local organization is appealing to all members to replenish the blood bank in the name of their lodge.
In the latter instance the member was refused and thrown upon his own resources.
It is the duty of the members to take care of their own; and it reflects poorly on the lodge when a member’s plea for blood must go unheeded.
The bloodmobile will be at the Church of the Epiphany Monday, November 27.
Gertrude Groesinger of the Animal Rescue League will tell of her experiences with finding homes for strays.
Her job ranges from the pathetic to the heart-warming, to the highly amusing, to the ulti mately satisfactory.
Groesin ger has never spoken in Winchester before and her story of her radio program on pet placement should be most interesting and entertain ing.
A brief social hour (a “brief hour” is defined as one that passes quickly) featuring refreshments and chit chat will close the afternoon.
Pick-Up and Delivery Service PArkview 9-2350 nov2-4t FAMOUS BRAND SUPPORT STOCKINGS REGULARLY IN STOCK AT $4.95 A PAIR, For 2 Weeks 2 Pairs for $5.95 Colors — Cinnalark and White 3lBtDwaU 3 WINCHESTER TERRACE PA 9-1191 Girl Scout News Conservation Project Troop 61 did a conservation at Cedar which consisted of clearing away brush and wood of cut, diseased trees so that the wild flowers of the area would not be damaged.
The girls who went were Winifred Kelbley, Regina Harwood, Betsy Moore, Nancy Millican, Marilyn Bradley, Hannah Nowell, Ellen Buchanan, Valerie Kelbley, Jane Curtis, Janice Doherty, Barbara Ehrgott, Sally Haley, Patricia Jennings, Susan Mead, Marie Lavalle, Christine Stavros, Linda Corby.
This was a worth-while project as well as one enjoyed by the girls in spite of the hard work involved.
Investiture Ceremony On November 1 an investiture ceremony was held for the girls of Troop 31 at the Mystic School.
Carol Anderson, Sydney Atkinson Betsy Andrews, Sarah Bates, Patricia Belinowiz, Debra DeCicco Susan Douglas, Deborah Duffy Gail Evans, Jean Fay, Nancy Han sen, Susan Hillman, Jennifer Knight, Louise Mears, Deborah Murphy, Paula Paglia, Carol Per rotti, Theresa Roche, Carol Scan dura, Jennifer Sibley, Christine Ulwick, Rosemary Wolf.
Before the ceremony, the Girl Scouts of Troop 38, under the leadership of Mrs.
Following the investiture refreshments were served to those mothers attending.
Herberich, the Winchester j League of Women Voters, partied1 paled in the Annual Conference of | the Adult Education Association in j Massachusetts on Saturday, November 4 at Swampscott.
The AEA in Massachusetts is an organization composed <>f representatives of civic, community, labor and industrial groups as well as those from the fields of education, religion, health and social service who are involved in any form of Adult Education in the Commonwealth.
Its purpose is to coordinate activities involving any form of Adult Education in the Commonwealth.
The theme of the November 4 meeting was “Effective Techniques of Public Affairs Programming,” selected participating organizations describing successful methods they have used in launching and carrying out programs.
The purpose of the discussion was to exchange ideas and experiences which the conference participants can apply to their own organizational work.
The LWV has long used the discussion method as a means of disseminating information to its own members, and a way of stimulating thought, study and active participation in League affairs.
When the Adult Education Institute of New England arranged a series of courses on program presentation last winter, it invited the League to participate.
Herberich attended these as one of the representatives of the LWV, then continued with a more advanced seminar in Boston this Fall.
The League's Candidate’s Questionnaire was discussed as an example of “Using Mass Media”; and Mrs.
He was horn November 12, 1878. in Barton, N.S., but came at the age of 16 to Bosj ton.
He worked and studied at thi then Mullane Engineering School j her 6, at his home.
Later he held a similar position with the Diamond Power Specialty Company in Boston.
From the latter company he came to the Winchester plant of New England Laundries as a stationary engineer, serving fn that capacity for more than 20 years, until bis retirement in 1043.
On July 3, 1030, Mr Smith married Beatrice L Bowditch of Somerville, and they had lived in Winchester 31 years, the lust 10 years at their Washington Street addross.
Funeral services were held Saturday afternoon at the BennettNorris Chapel with Rev.
Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., pastor of the First Baptist Church officiating.
English “Who Dun It” Take a deserted stage, a legacy of two million pounds a young wife and an aging husband and Maurice Mullins, a smooth scoundrel, and you have excellent ingredients for a terrific mystery drama, “A Murder Has Been Aranged,” by England’s master writer, Emlyn Williams.
This is the fall paly of the Parish Players, to be given Thursday, Friday and Saturday evenings, November 16, 17 and 18 on the stage of Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church.
The cast includes Gene Pollard, .enore Gamage, George Connor, Nancy Dorsey, Phyllis Hollinshead, George Hebb, Elizabeth Shepard, Otis Jason, Rhoda Feuer.
Virginia Rideout, prompter; with Granville Gilpatrick in charge of the stage crew; Margaret Hodgson, setting; Mrs.
Girl Scou t News Troop 33 composed of girls in the 6th grade at Mystic School went on an overnight on October 27 and 28 to the Winchester Girl Scout Cabin.
Friday evening meal was a onepot dish and Saturday breakfast was cooked on buddy burners which the girls made the night before.
All fires were prepared by the girls and all meals were cooked by tho girls.
When the girls awakened Saturday morning, they found their dunk bags containing their eating utensils frozen solid on the line outside.
Audrey Puffer, Mary Fay, Lynn Jones, Dorriann Perrotti Betsy French, Susan Kajander, and Candace Grass.
Kary Laban, Wendy Nelson, Susan Beckley, Alma Fontaine, Janice O’Con nell, Marilyn England, and Cornelia Taggart.
This exhortation was given at the end of his talk in a list of things we can do to help sell the world on choosing the right but longer and harder way to a higher standard of living.
Mr Kennedy included with active citizenship and understanding what our own free society really is the need to develop the study habit and the habit of keeping up in world affairs; the knowledge of how important what happens in such far away places as Lima, Peru, and Lagos is to us; and the need of keeping physically fit.
He began his talk about his recent two-month trip to South and Latin America (Mr Kennedy toured Africa in 1960 and was a International News Service reporter there in 1956) by drawing a picture of the minimal living standards held by so large a proportion of the populations there and how desperate they are for a change.
He then pointed out how susceptible these people are to the illu’sorv words of communism as it promises the quick, easy answer and change and how much harder is the job of the democracies to sell their longer, more difficult but better way to the same end.
This reporter followed up the assembly by attending a Modern Problems class and found the talk and its questions carried over to some blackboard discussions made much more alive by the morning assembly.
Each was asked what he would like in return from the President John wanted an appointment to West Point.
Maurice T Freeman of this town are listed among the patrons of the Christian Cul ture Lecture series sponsored by the Paulist Fathers and held at the Paulist Information Center at Park Street, Boston.
The next in the series of lectares on November 15 at 8:15 will be given by Hon.
Frederick H Bo land, permanent representative of Ireland to the United Nations.
Joseph's Mothers' Club Donation $1.00 Realtor Councils Met Here Members of Realtors Councils “L” and “P” gathered last month for a Legislative Liaison night at the Winchester Country Club sponsored by these two council areas of the Brokers Institute.
Featuring the dinner meeting was a panel of real estate professionals, among whom was Attorney Clarence A Roberts of Winchester, legislative counsel for the Boston Board and the Massachusetts Association of Real Estate Boards.
The purpose of the meeting was to acquaint the individual realtors with the men and women who represent them at the State House and to lay before the legislators the increasing need for tax relief for the real estate industry.
Among topics discussed formally and informally were zoning, metropolitan planning and urban renewal.
Eugene A Boyle Eugene A Boyle of 15 Nelson Street, a lifelong resident of Winchester, died Thursday night, November 2.
He was born in 1898 in Winchester and grew up in the town, attend ing the Winchester schools.
For a time he was associated with his brother at the Winchester Provision Co. but in recent years he had been a guard at the I.G.A. in Burlington.
Marian Penfold of Clearwater, Florida; three sons, Eugene J of Clearwater; James V of Lunenberg, and Paul E Boyle of, Winchester; three sisters, Sister M Reinette. stationed at Sacred Heart Convent in Bradford, Mrs.
The funeral was held Monday morning from the Costello-Moffett Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass at St.
Joseph’s Church, Belmont, a nephew of the deceased, was celebrant, Rev.
Reginald Hall Wentworth of if* Allen Rond, a retired Edison Company lighting engineer, died suddenly Monday afternoon, Novemhad been in poor health foi* four years, hut his was wholly unI expected.
He was born August f>, 1905, in Somerville, and grew up in that city, attending the Somerville schools and graduating from Somerville High School.
A Massachusetts registered professional engineer, Mr Wentworth spent 33 years with the Boston Edison Company, retiring in 1958 because of poor health.
He was a member of the Illuminating Engineering Society and a Mason, a former member of Soley Lodge of Somerville.
In his more active years he was a member of a Masonic degree team composed of Edison employees.
Mr Wentworth’s hobby was photography and he devoted many hours of his free time to that field.
For 11 years he took motion pictures of Winchester High School football games for the school and took many stills of teams and other school groups.
In taking the football movies Mr Wentworth was assisted for seven years by his son, Jack, and after Jack’s death February 27, 1956, by his daughter, Jeanne.
On August 18, 1928, Mr Wentworth married Victoria Atley of Somerville, and they came to Winchester from that city in 1939.
Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at 2 o’clock at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister, Dr.
Wynn C Fairfield, a distinguished Protestant church leader who died at Claremont, Calif., on I October 14, was the father of Mrs.
Conlon FUEL SERVICE Oil Burner Installations All Work Guaranteed Time Payment* WE 3-1720 27 Lake Avenue, Woburn J*nl2-tf Mrs.
Bridget M Callahan of 20 Kendall Street, wife of the late Timothy Callahan, died Monday afternoon, November 6, at Her home after an illness of three months at the age of 81.
She was born June 16, 1880 in County Kerry, Ireland, but for more than 65 years she resided in Winchester and was one of the older members of St.
She leaves a daughter, Sister M Eusebia, C.S.J., stationed at Sacred Heart Convent in Roslindale; a son Officer William J Callahan of the Police Department and three grandchildren, William J Callahan, Ir., now studying in Madrid, Spain; Robert T a senior at Boston College, and Mary Jean, a sophomore at Matignon High School in Cambridge.
The funeral was held this Thursday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass at St.
She spent her early life in Burlington, later living in Montreal, Canada, and in Putnam.
She and Mr Symmes, a native of Winchester, were married June 24, 1936, and first lived after their marriage on Kenwin Road, later residing a 4 Ridgefield Road until they moved to Melrose in December of 1948.
Symmes was a former member of Winchester Chapter, Order of the Eastern Star, but her interests were always primarily centered in her home and family.
Maryland Estes of East Providence R I.; and two brothers, John Payne of Pawtucket and Milton A Payne of Detroit, Mich.
Funeral services were held Monday afternoon at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with the Rev.
Lewis Mills, assistant rector of Trinity Episcopal Church in Melrose, officiating.
Mr Stepper is a Fulbright Scholar I studying at Massachusetts Institute j of Technology, a temporary resilient of Winchester and member of the Unitarian Church Choir.
As | well as discussing the problems | facing Berlin, Mr Stepper will ^how colored slides of East and West Berlin us it is today.
All interested High School students are I invited to attend this very timely meeting, 6:30 Sunday at the Unitarian Church.
Marguerite L Norwood, a former long time resident of Win Chester, died Sunday, November 5, at the Boston City Hospital, after a long illness.
She spent her early life in Bynum and later lived in West Virginia before coming to Winchester in 1927.
She was a maid in the families of several Winchester residents, including the Clarence Millers, the William Wymans, and the Rev.
John E Page at 22 Everett Avenue, accompanying the family to Maine during the summers and being held in esteem by the Pages and their friends.
Norwood retired from the Page home and took up residence in Boston at 52 Atherton Street.
She leaves a niece, Mary Norwood of Chapel Hill, N C.; and two nephews, Frank Norwood of Chapel Hill and Jeff Norwood of Philadelphia, Pa.
Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at the Kimball Chapel with Dr.
He received his A.B. degree from Oberlin College in 1907 and his Bachelor of Divinity from the Oberlin Graduate School of Divinity in 1910.
Fairfield commenced his long career of service in 1909 when he was appointed a career missionary to China by the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions.
He sailed in 1910, and on July 19, 1910, he was married in Karuizawa, Japan, to Miss Daisie Gehman of Norristown, Pa., who had been serving in China since 1903.
After their marriage they went on together to Taiku in North China, where they were stationed for the next 19 years.
They served in church and educational work, being associated for their last 10 years there with the Oberlin-Shansi Memorial Schools, of which Dr.
Fairfield was called to the headquarters of the American Board in Boston in 1929, and served for the next 10 years as the board’s administrative secretary for China and Japan.
He became secretary for general administration of the Foreign Missions Conference of North America in 1945, his position involving liaison with the International Missionary Council, the Federal Council of Churches, World Council of Churches and other interdenominational bodies.
Fairfield served in 1950 as administrative secretary of the planning committee that established the National Council of Churches of Christ in the United States, a merger of the Foreign Missions Conference with other agencies.
He was called up in 1951 to lend his extraordinary organizational and executive ability to Church World Service which at that time became a department of the National Council of Churches.
He served as executive director of this organization until his retirement in 1954.
Fairfield was honored by the Turkish Red Crescent Society, being made a life member and receiving the society’s medal in recognition of assistance given the Bulgarian Moslem refugees.
Queen Juliana of the Netherlands presented him with the Order of Cranje Nassau in appreciation of aid given to the Dutch people during floods in 1953.
Fairfield went to Japan on behalf of the OberlinChansi Memorial Association and at the time of his death was writing a history of the association.
Fairfield gave heavily of his time and efforts to the strengthening of the American Council of Voluntary Agencies and in the years that followed before his retirement contributed greatly to its continuing success.
Fairfield leaves two sons, Frederic W Fairfield of Farmington, Mich, and John F Fairfield, a missionary of the United Church Board for World Ministries in Tokyo, Japan; seven grandchildren and one greatgranddaughter.
Harold S Matthews, a former missionary, now in Claremont represented the United Church Board for World Ministries at the service.
In Appreciation During the past several months of his illness, Larry received hundreds of cards and notes of good wishes which were a great comfort to him.
Now our sons, Robert and Ri•hard, and I Would like to express our appreciation to all our friends in Winchester for their thoughtfulness at this time.
F Meredith Cooper) Margaret Cooper 4 Wedge Pond Road l Page Six THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1961 The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr.
Those closely acquainted with Coach Knowlton \s work at W inchester High will feel that in selecting him “coach of the year” the football officials have chosen wisely.
His standards have always been above reproach and any boy who has played for him will tell you he will tolerate no breach of the sportsman’s code.
Football coaches and officials who have competed against him or officiated in Winchester games will agree.
Since coming to Winchester in 1940 Coach Knowlton has built a lot of real character on Manchester Field.
Such college stars as the West brothers, Rill and John ; Charlie Lovejoy, Quicker Roche, Bill Whittemore.
Paul Amico, Jocko Serieka, Mike and John Murphy, Don Armstrong and others, including the All America Joe Bellino, will testify to the ethics as well as the football they learned from him.
Though he has never believed winning is the beginning and end of coaching and has never compromised in the slightest the welfare of his boys.
Coach Knowlton has an enviable record of success in his 21 years of coaching here.
Winchester won the Class C State title in 1942 and 1946, and the B title in 1951.
His ’55 team went undefeated and untied, but the polio scare that year cancelled several of its games and made it impossible to pick up enough points for a championship.
Only those showing no interest are dropped to permit more concentration on those who want to learn.
Last year he served on the Kennedy Committee for Physical Fitness and he has been highly complimented for his work in this field by Ralph Colson, director of Physical Education in the State Department of Education.
He has worked with and for his fellow coaches in their various organizations.
He has never been too busy to talk Winchester sports to local groups who are interested.
His grasp of public relations has meant much to Winchester and to football hereabouts.
His place in the affection of local sports followers is best shown by the gift to him a few years ago of an automobile by a group of citizens of all walks in life for his work with Winchester boys.
And if you want an affidavit of his place in the hearts of his former players, ask any one in Plymouth.
Let’s Face The Facts Let’s face the facts about fallout shelters in Winchester: They just won’t save us.
But anything less than the truth at this moment of history is a cruel deception.
The primary fact for us to face is that Winchester is eight miles from the prime target area of Boston, and that even if it were thirty miles away, it would still be destroyed.
In World War II the British could rush down to their underground “tubes” and escape the bomb.
And it may serve as a funnel through which nuclear fire storms may suck the oxygen out of your shelter, guaranteeing the entombment of all within.
One sees cozy pictures of families seated in their basement shelters playing dominoes and drinking canned water.
It will take us a goof] while to find out what our bombs did to the Russians.
We will be too busy guarding our shelter doors against entry by the neighbors we were once asked to love.
Lest this fact seem incredible, just recall the recent news of that Chicago suburbanite who installed a machine gun at his shelter door to fend off his former bridge partners.
Recall too that Nevada has announced plans for a 5,000 man militia to fend off not Communists, but California refugees seeking shelter when the bombs hit the coast.
This is nuclear war wc are facing, and to understand what it means we must entirely re-shape our thinking.
We must fight our way through the obscurity and delusion and outright deception that now paralyze our nation’s will to peace and face facts.
This assertion, entirely inaccurate. directly contradicts the statement of President Kennedy that in nuclear war 70 million Americans would die.
The President’s statement, in turn, contradicts Defense Secretary McNamara’s assurance that only one-quarter of the American people could be saved in shelters.
Nonpolitical scientists, on the other hand, state flatly that in an all-out 20,000 megaton mutual attack.
HO per cent of the American people and 75 per cent of the Russian people would be killed.
Let us suppose, Hagan say's, that the Soviets, not quite on target Boston, hit Cambridge City Hall with a 20-megaton bomb (twofifths the size of the bomb Russia tested last week.
Within ten miles of this blast — meaning Winchester — deep blast shelters might help, but basement fallout shelters would be of no use.
As far out as 15 miles from the blast Mr Hagan says, flying objects, including human objects, would endanger life.
Yet within two minutes of the nuclear blast anyone in a 25-niiIe radius of the blast will receive a fatal dose.
Within 10 miles of the blast, merely looking at the nuclear tireball far awav would permanently blind you.
Let’s stop deluding ourselves that we in W inchester can survive nuclear war.
Maybe if enough of us act on these facts and demand rational negotiation by the world’s statesmen, perhaps man can he spared the certain death that awaits him if the bombs ever fall.
In the name of mtr children and future generations to come, in the name of human reason and sanity, let us act now.
Unspectacular as these hearings might be to the public at large, to the individual concerned they are often of the most vital importance.
There is no need to bore with statistics or details of these hearings of which literally hundreds take place each year.
Let it suffice to say that in each and everyone of them your Selectmen, however hackneyed the expression might seem, do their level best to he sympathetic, non-partisan, impartial, and conscientious.
In the town manager system, the administrative detail described by the Greenfield selectmen is placed in the hands of the town manager thereby freeing the selectmen for thorough study of the broad policy matters facing the town.
Over and above the consideration of policy, however, is the responsibility the selectmen have for appraising the effectiveness of the manager’s administration since he serves at their pleasure.
Furthermore, they must maintain political leadership when issues relating to the town’s administration threaten to entrap the manager in local politics.
They still remain the town’s “selected men” and can furnish invaluable assistance to a town manager by interpreting public opinion on issues, while at the same time knowledge of a town’s traditions and aspirations to the attention of the manager.
Since Saugus accepted the manager plan in 1948, 22 towns have introduced enabling legislation in the General Court and the citizens of 12 of these towns have accepted it (cf.
The various acts parellel the duties and responsibilities established under the Saugus plan although there are certain modifications reflecting local situations and circumstances.
The manager’s power to appoint varies somewhat from town to town for the positions that he might fill in theory may he the responsibility of the electorate, selectmen, or moderator rather than his.
Thus, in Shrewsbury the town clerk and town treasurer-collector arc elected, the town accountant and town counsel are appointed by the selectmen, and the finance committee and the personnel board are appointed by the moderator.
Because the Town of Ipswich has two enabling acts dealing with professional town management, the latter act calling for the establishment of a “town manager to be designated as executive secretary,” a few words of explanation are in order.
The 1949 statute called for the office of a town manager with complete authority for supervising and directing the administration of all departments, commissions, and boards, except the board of selectmen, the school committee, trust fund commissioners, election officers, and the registrars of voters.
His authority to reorganize, consolidate or abolish departments, boards, commissions, and offices under his direction and supervision and to create new departments and offices was singular.
Further, the power to appoint the planning hoard, the hoard of public welfare, hoard of health, hoard of playground commissioners, hoard of cemetery commissioners, board of cemetery commissipners, hoard of fire engineers, board of assessors, the town clerk, town treasurer, superintendent of public works, and the town counsel was vested entirely in the person of the town manager.
However, in the course of these four years dissatisfaction with the aforementioned provisions of the enabling act brought about the submission of “remedial” legislation to the General Court in 1954.
This act was quickly approved by the state legislature and subsequently by the citizens of Ipswich.
Besides stipulating that the town manager be called an “executive secretary,” the legislation broadened the authority of the hoard of selectmen by charging them with the responsibility for “formulating a general policy for administering the affairs of the town” and permitting them to “direct and advise the executive secretary in any matters pertaining to the duties of his office,” as defined in the legislation.
Of the 13 towns with “strong manager” charters, Ipswich has been the only one to weaken the position of town manager.
In summary, the manager is responsible for the efficient administration of all departments, boards, and commissions under his jurisdiction and to help him implement this charge he is given power to appoint, supervise and remove department board, and commission heads.
He should make recommendations to the selectmen on such matters as he thinks desirable.
He may reorganize, abolish, or consolidate departments, boards, and commissions under his direction.
He must purchase all supplies, materials, and equipment with the usual statutory exception of hooks for schools.
He is required to keep the selectmen advised of the financial condition of the town and its future needs.
He must prepare and submit to the selectmen and finance committee his annual budget.
Finally, he should keep the selectmen and indirectly the public informed concerning the operations of all aspects of the town’s government.
Ten of the seventeen Massachusetts towns had been managers in other communities before they were hired for their present posts.
The remaining seven had previously served as assistants to managers, had held other positions in local government, or had come from governmental research work.
Five managers arc products of the unique public management program conducted by the Univcr sity of Maine while the others arc from various schools with degrees in business, public amdinistration, or engineering.
The average period of time they have served their present community is 3 and one-half years and six of the seventeen have been in the same community for five or more years.
Massachusetts town managers are presently being paid in the salary range of between $7,000 per year and $16,500 per year depending on the number of years with the town and the community’s size and ability to pay.
Although it is relatively easy to explain the town manager method of administration and to trace the historical development of the plan in Massachusetts, it is much more difficult but apparently necessary to explore the psychological impact of the town manager concept on the New Fnglander.
However, for a variety of reasons the Maine development is unique in New England.
No other New England state has had as many factors creating the milieu necessary for the establishment of the manager plan as has Maine.
In any event, that there seems to be practically a natural antipathy toward the town manager concept in Massachusetts is usually acknowledged by every' committee established to study the plan.
However, upon closer analysis the reasons” why people object to the manager plan seem to involve misconceptions about it rather than anything else.
After 31 years and numerous reprintings, her book discourages peers as a survey of man’s supreme culture.
It is at once scholarly and exciting, a hook to treasure and know hy heart.
She is content to describe what DID happen in the first culture in which the spirit of the East and the reason of the West were joined, the first culture in which man ceased planning his life in terms of death, accepted life’s challenge and lived it with joy.
For the Greeks there were no limits to thought, no forbidden areas beyond the light of inquiring reason.
Man was great, Sophocles said, not only because he tamed the seas and wild animals, but because he could think, talk, wonder, doubt, and decide.
Throughout Asia Minor, Miss Hamilton writes, the missionary Saint Paul was mocked and beaten.
But in Athens the same crowds that thrilled to Aeschylus’ tragedies and delighted in Aristophanes’ limitless spoofs, listened politely to word of the Christ.
They had a burning compulsion to know and suffered no censor but the internal censor of reason.
On these two commandments, engraved at the Delphic shrine, hung all the Greek law and the prophets.
Unashamed by the beauty and joy of the body, they celebrated life in sculpture and in fact, free of inhibiting fears.
In this celebration they founded an art, a literature, a science, a philosophy, a society in which the requirements of mind and body were related in balance.
The dramatist Aeschylus was an army general, while the erudite Xenophon, who immortalized Socrates in his “Memorabilia,” led 10,000 Athenians to freedom from the tyrants of Persia.
The Greeks, writes Miss Hamilton, were the first people who knew how to play.
For them the athletic event itself embodied the human genius in a splendid concert of mind and body.
For them a gold trophy would have been superfluous; a simple crown of olives for the victor did nicely.
And facts in turn were important only so far as they brightened the passage from wrong to right.
In the later Greek religion, as opposed to the Homeric myths, ethics preceded magic and no idea that could not stand up under critical inquiry was considered worth holding.
In poetry and prose they loved facts, for the purpose of their literature was not to obscure or embroider, hut to clarify and teach.
The result was the clean prose of Plato telling the tale of Socrates in language more alive than our own; the historian Herodotus scouring the world for data on strange cultures, telling the glorious .story of Thermopylae; Thucydides recording the story of Athens’ decline and defeat hy Sparta, writing “for eternity” of the greed that makes wars; Aristophanes poking fun at Athens’ most cherished institutions with no holds barred.
The result, too was the Greek tragic playwrights, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, who invoked pity, awe, and exaltation to show' man that suffering was not private pathos hut part of the cosmos itself, rooted in past evil, to he born nobly, without selfpity or complaint.
They sought, writes Miss Hamilton, to show “mankind in a man” the general truth in the particular fact.
Now Greece is dead, its wondrous balance of mind and spirit never quite found again, its joy of life almost fantastic in the age of the Hydrogen bomb.
But if this age of science and hidden persuasion cannot recover the rational Greek spirit, Miss Hamilton writes, it can perhaps learn something from reflecting on why Greece was great.
We can perhaps realize how much we have permitted private greed to obscure community need, how little balance exists in our society between the things of Caesar and God.
Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 1954 The Winchester Star, left at your Residence for one year, $4.00 in Advance Single Copies, Ten Cents The Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements but will publish without «■ li a r k e a correction in the next issue, or republish that portion ot the advertisement which is incorrect.
Buckley, chairman William G Andrew Thomas B Brennan i THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1961 Page Seven Town Comptroller lown Manager Remember When thorn.
We are noi was important that we heard Mr Kennedy, and will hear in the future* other persons of public prominence.
You published a letter last week, signed, “Disturbed Mother,” which bothers me deeply. could not agree less than I do with the I authorities for sponsoring this writer. speech by Mr Kennedy.
We feel If she had attended the Parent that the student body is adult Advisory Meeting, that same 1 enough to jydge anti criticize such week, and later, the High School a speech for its real merit.
Whether Mr Kennedy’s intentions were political or otherwise, we should be exposed to such a talk as part of our educational experience.
Winchester High School Student Council meerned with I together and find a way to odu his success or failure in presenting cate our Town in what to do and j ommendations the subject.
Our school system is doing fine job, and is constantly on the alert for new methods and techniques.
No matter what tomorrow is like, we should be teaching our children to make the new family next door welcome; to help the injured robin that they find in the yard; to include even the clumsy player in a ball game.
And the best way to teach it is by doing it ourselves, not spending all or even part of our time criticizing, avoid ing, and pretending not to see situations that are right near us.
Teachers can get a very good idea of what makes Susy the way she is, after a chatty and informal session with Susy’s mother.
And if the mother cares to, she can see for herself why the child enjoys the teacher.
As long as there is a world, as we now define it, there will be people.
I think the best preparation for living in it, no matter what talents we possess in science, math, art, you name them, is to learn to live with people in warmth and thoughtfulness.
Feeling superior u fine but in an emergency lots of people in high places have to come dowi) to earth. < lair, in addition to the proposal duce an apathy or lethargy among w * th * cornerstone laying ceremony iT towns that a Town Comptroller be namL» ‘ . ‘ on August 25 of that year.
Under jin explaining the Walpole Town j $22,000. such a system bills now mailed out I engineer plan (cf.
We stood in the background while our children rang the doorbells for their treat.
As we took out their treats to sort them for the children we were disgusted to find wrapped in a napkin ground eggshells, the whites of eggs and dirty candy, mixed together and coated with black pepper.
Two of the children received napkins of candy that was full of lack pepper.
It is hard to believe a nerson would stoop so low as to do such a thing to a child.
On Thursday morning Mr Edward “Ted” Kennedy addressed the Winchester High School student body.
His speech concerned his trip j bills with no money for extras, through Latin America; he touched The trouble is, also, people do upon the problems of our neighbors I not think of these things until and the ways we can help to solve they are upon them.
Why can’t Winchester have a large community Fallout shelter, with arrange ments for aged and children.
Lots of people live from day to day hoping they can pay their 3 Churcli Street, Winchester — PA 9-5300 JOHN 1.
The play is fast-paced; the outcome always excitingly uncertain to the very end.
King’s letter recommending compulsory building of atomic shelters, is based on the same fallacy that is the undoing of most other “compulsory” programs.
It assumes that one or more all-wise and all-powerful people happen to have the “right” an swers, and that less fortunate individuals must somehow he forced to see the light.
The tragedy comes when such a master plan is followed, only to find out later that the planner purposely or accidentally left out some small detail which completely alters the value of the plan.
If the problem is protection from fallout, an ordinary raincoat, boots and hat, plus a handkerchief tied around the face will do very nicely.
Simply close all windows, doors, air conditioners, wall fans and chimney dampers.
Obviously then, the fallout shelters described are not intended for fallout, but for blast, heat, or radiation protection.
For radiation shielding, an ordinary home cellar is probably as safe a place as can readily be devised, and it doesn’t cost a penny.
If the danger is supposed to be blast or heat, then the outdoor shelter built underground is certainly best.
The cellar shelter, even if built with cement blocks, could very well become a death trap.
If a shock wave or blast rocks the house enough to bring it tumbling down upon the cellar strong-room, there is an excellent chance that the water pipe or gas pipe inlet will be broken loose either in the basement or on the first floor.
The ultimate safety of the American public will come from greater knowledge of the terrors confronting us.
Safety will not come from madly rushing to build artificial and inadequate shelters, but from learning slowly and painfully the characteristics of various forms of mass aggression, and the best means of evading, decontaminating or counteracting assaults.
Then, and not till then, it will be proper to start building your own particular shelter for your own particular needs.
The voters get duplicating and supply functions, j the id’*a that at last they can lay hi his report Mr Sinclair said that i (IoVvn the reins and let the town the General Services Department mn Itself.
YVo think there is overburdened with work or it is , -strength in the town-meeting form not busy at all.” °** government up to a point where 3.
Mechanization of procedures | the^ size of the town prevents it, in the Treasurer and Collector’s of lice to increase efficiency, including an adding machine equipped for possible future electronic papertape punching devices, an electric letter opener, and an automatic time stamp.
R bookkeeping machine now used in the Accounting Department to the General Services Department and acquisition of a bookkeeping machine equipped to accommodate possible future electronic devices.
Under the present system three precincts are billed every three months.
Mr Sinclair proposes that one precinct be billed every month to assure a more steady How of money into the Town Treasury and to avoid unnecessarily busy periods every three months.
Establishment of h forms control program whereby greater standardization of forms and Town stationery at reduced costs might be effected.
In this connection, purchase of a photocopy machine and the use of a multilith offset printand it has been our purpose to retain it in its essential features.
Hie facts, however, seem to indicate that particular issues determine the interest shown in town meeting for any one year.
The primary strength of the manager plan is the unification of powers in the town meeting and the selectmen rather than their piecemeal distribution among several boards, departments, and commissions.
There is no real danger to democratic government from the town manager system, as the elected selectmen alone make the final decisions, and must stand or fall on these decisions.
As for the town manager, he continuing machine to produce forms now . . , , ^ . ... . i i es to occupy the uneasy role ot printed or purchased from stocki , . , ; ... , , ... serving solely at the pleasure of form supplies are recommended by 1 ., , , rr , . . r .. , ,, %/r i •' the selectmen.
This is as it should Mr Sinclair. , .. , , . , u . , ... , . be; for as long as elected men fi7.
Massachusetts town government is lown government cannot reach another without calling through j at ( ^ a 1 secU10 ‘ the telephone office.
Similarly a call from an outside party cannot be transferred from one department to another, meaning that anyone calling must hang up and dial another number.
Locally sponsored by Metcalf Union of the Unitarian Church and several Girl Scout troops, the greatest effort of all times by children to help children was marked by careful planning, smooth organizing and the wholehearted enthusiasm of all involved.
Local residents who were away from home Hallowe’en night, or were not reached by the young Trick or Treaters for some other reason can still make their contribution.
Donations will be accepted at the Winchester Trust Co. and the W Allan Wilde & Son Insurance Agency from today until November 10.
Cub Scouts Cub Scout registration will be held at the Noonan School Auditorium on Wednesday, November 15, at 7:30m.
Boys between the ages of 8 and 10 Mi, and accompanied by both parents, are eligible.
S Use of a tape recorder at meetings of various boards while) testimony is being given.
FOLEY Realtors Real Estate — Mortgages Insurance PArkview 9-1492 au«12-tf immediately being made for the erection of the present stone building at the corner of Main Street and the Parkway.
This church, costing $40,000, was completed and dedicated April 27, 1899.
The Gifford school, prior to 18(55 was a primary school building located at the corner of Washington and Myrtle streets.
When it became necessary to have better accommodations for the high and grammar school pupils, it was moved from this location and a new grammar school built there, named in 188b for Edward A Wadleigh.
The old Gifford school was moved to Main Street beside the then Unitarian Church and used as a primary school for children from the center and much of the East Side.
Children from Symmes Corner attended the school for their 4th and 5th grade work.
At its peak the school housed five grades and a kindergarten, ft was torn down in the four-school building campaign of the early twenties, its pupils being accommodated at the new Mystic School on Main Street.
ANNE R WILD 45 Church Street PA 9-3268 WINCHESTER Immaculate 10-vear-old CAPE, lovely location, 3 large bedrooms and family room.
Members of The Ark staff, (Herb included), are kept busy after hours with a heavy schedule of lectures and discussion groups concerning the animal kingdom.
They work closely with the Children’s Museum of Boston, and with the Museum of Science.
Herb has conducted courses in Herpetology at the Children’s Museum, and serves as an advisor to its live animal collection staff.
In addition to his work involving the usual run of pet shop animals, such as cats, dogs, parakeets, and tropical fish, Herb has filled The Ark with a horde that would be the envy of Noah.
More than fifty species of turtles, many snakes, monkeys, kinkajous, ocelots, marmosets, parrots, niudpuppys, frogs, toads, macaws, jaguarondis, owls, coati-mundis and even tarantulas, all have paraded their way through The Ark to eager buyers.
Both common and scientific names adorn the cages, together with descriptive educational legends which make a visit to the shop a Natural History course in itself.
Whoever wrote that inscription knew Herb Clement better than ho knew himself back in those days, for Herb was still an ardent student of the violin, (which he still plays), and plotting to assault the world of classical music with an Assortment of talents displayed in many u high school music program and in the concerts given by his orchestra at the First Congrega tionui Church here.
Many unusual features UNDER $40,000 C^ijt lurid t^eijno a PA 9-3334 NEW TO MARKET Seven-room CAPE, Washington School area.
Three bedrooms, den, fireplaced living room, dining room, modern kitchen.
Each apartment bus a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full buseiucnt for hobbies or play area.
REAL ESTATE WINCHESTER NFAV LISTING — CAPE in excellent condition with three bedrooms plus nursery, or sewing room.
F'i replaced living room, dining room, modern kitchen with dishwasher and eating area; finished play room.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors .13 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Gertrude H Murphy, PA 9-2310 Richard H Murphy, PA 9-6213 Marion It.
PA 9-1966 C harles T McCarthy, PA 9-5972 ATTRACTIVE CAPES Four-bedroom Cape in Parkhurst School area.
K Four-bedroom (’ape in Wyman School district Deluxe kitchen with laundry facilities.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis BR 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp PA 9-0373 Jean Gibb PA 9-3808 HORACE FORD PA 9-5887 Realtor WINCHESTER Attractive pre-war Cape in quiet, convenient surroundings.
Dining room, modern electric kitchen and lavatory complete the first floor.
RANCH — Three chambers, 2M> ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage.
Realtor 38 Church Street PA 9-3320, 0047, 5612, 2672, 1164, 5046, and EX 5-1784 WINCHESTER Good older home.
Features a beautiful yard, secluded porch, panelled game room with fireplace, large living room with fireplace, three bedrooms, unfinished fourth bedroom.
PA 9-3268, PA 9-2790, PA 9-5550 RENTALS Large modern Split Level with five bedrooms, two baths.
Available December 1, 1961, to September 1, 1962. $250 per month Duplex, five bedrooms, two baths, unfurnished. per month North Shore — Four-bedroom, three-bath newly converted carriage house.
NORTHRUP 24 Thompson Street REALTORS PArkview 9-4240 WANTED URGENTLY We have a sincere buyer who has sold his present home and wishes to buy a good-sized familytype home with four to six bedrooms, in Winchester.
JOSEPHSON ■ Real Estate 6 Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3667 WINCHESTER West Side Hill brick and frame Colonial with excellent first-floor family room, library, two-car garage, lurge fencedin lot, and many other plus features.
Alfred D Elliott Morris B Kerr Frederick W McCormack Charles A Murphy Curtis W Nash Stanley E Neill STAFF Elizabeth A Kehoe Martha C Ellis Anne G Shaw John G Perry SECURITY COMMITTEE George L Billman Charles A Murphy Alfred D Elliott CLERK OF THE BOARD Morris B Kerr ATTORNEY Curtis W Nash Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street Newsy Paragraphs Ralph R Macaulay, Vacuum Cleaner Sales and Service.
Lindsay H Caldwell, Brooks Street, Winchester, is a member of the backstage committee for the annual fushion show of the Retailing Club of Westbrook Junior College, November 9.
Everett P Stone, formerly of 10 Warren Street, have left for Florida where they will stay for several months, after which they will go on to California.
Mr Richard C Ashenden, Jr., of 99 Pond Street has been elected commodore of the Manchester Harbor Boat Club.
Margaret Corrigan, proprietress of the Mar-Cel Beauty Shop on Washington Street and her assistant, attended the Fall demonstration of the latest hair styles given at the John Hancock Hall by Breck Hair Products on Monday, October 30.
They returned to Winchester most enthusiastic to put these latest methods and styles into practice.
Newsy Paragraphs Kodak color prints and Christmas cards should be ordered now at the Winchester Camera Shop. nov2-tf Dr.
George E Kimball of 20 Everett Avenue is attending the meetings of the Operations Research Society in San Francisco this week.
Kimball will visit in Appleton, Wisconsin, for Parents’ Day at Lawrence College where h i s daughter Susanna is a member of the freshman class.
The event marks the launching of new programs of education and of campus development.
John F Hogan, Jr., of 38 Salem Street and Emily H Marks of 32 Foxcroft Road have been drawn by the selectmen to serve as traverse jurors, commencing December 4.
Lewis M Foster of 34 Lloyd Street, is serving aboard the escort destroyer USS Carpenter, a unit of an amphibious task force which was scheduled to take part in Operation “Silver Sword” on October 30, assaulting beaches on the Island of Maui in the largest meneuver of its kind to take place in the.
Receives AF Wings Receivinghe wings of an Air I Force navigator on October 23, at Harlingen AFB, Texas, was Lt.
RICHARD BINGHAM Now ready to take his place with the nation’s Aerospace Force following 38 weeks of intensive training, he is the son of Mr and Mrs.
While in training at this South Texas Air Training Command Air Force base, he was taught the fundamentals of electronics, dead reckoning and radar navigation as pertains to today’s rapidly advancing Aerospace Force.
Bingham has been assigned to Keesler AFB, Miss., for advanced training.
Edward Bowler of the Police Department last week attended a week-long refresher course for instructors in first aid at the Red Cross chapter house in Salem.
Bowler was for ten years chairman of Red Cross First Aid in Winchester, during which time he conducted many first aid classes.
Alumni Club of Arlington, Lexington and Winchester, members of which will take an active part in the homecoming festivities.
When you pian to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car Dlease call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, VHssion 3-8000. decl5-tf Mrs.
Mary R DiCenzo of 23 Bromfield Street, Lawrence, reported to police on Monday that she had crashed into the pedestrian cross light at the intersection of Mt.
Emergency Committee For WCBH The Winchester Emergency Committee for WGBH is mailing a town-wide appeal for funds to rebuild the educational station this week.
Many parents in the community enjoy watching this TV window on education with their children.
The lecture, music, art, and theatrical programs offer all of us a seat at some of the outstanding educational and cultural events of Boston.
Please give so that we can keep informative WGBH radio and television, one of New England’s valuable assets, in existence.
Glacken, past president, North Council; Robert Mulhall, acting manager, Winchester telephone office.
The Boston Edison Company is sponsoring the attendance of 10 science students and eight science teachers at the three-day conclave November 9 through November 11.
The purpose of the Conference to present to a group of the nation’s most able high school science students and teachers a first hand, authoritative picture of the promise of the peaceful atom in its various applications, and to help advance interest in the study of science in the United States.
In the manufacture of paper, the fibrous stock is subject to treatment which reduces it to uniformly fine particles and forms it into a wet sheet or web that is processed into the finished paper.
However, it often happens that the wet sheet contains fibrous masses or aggregates of random sizes and shapes.
These masses are undesirable for paper making and many devices and processes have been proposed to avoid their formation.
Fibrous masses, if of controlled sizes and high density, have numerous filler for plastic molded articles, and as a carrier for chemicals such as medicines and insecticides.
Thus it is desirable to have an efficient and inexpensive meth od and apparatus for producing them.
In accordance with their invention, the raw material is formed into a continuous wet* web or sheet which is directed onto the conventional endless wire screen used in the manufacture of paper.
As the web is advanced on the screen, it is cut into eontinuour ribbons by water jets impinging against it.
The ribbons are then subjected to the action of a scuffing belt and associated devices, with the result that they are cut into predetermined lengths which are rolled tightly and dried to form fibrous nodules or masses that are of desired weight and size and may be handled and processed without any appreciable break-up.
Raphael and Lindstrom, the fibrous aggregates or masses of their invention may be made from the usual cellulose paper-making materials, from synthetic resins such as rayon and nylon, and from mineral fibers such as asbestos and glass fibers.
Among their important uses, they may be employed to advantage as a plastic molding material and as an inert and safe carrier for various chemical compositions, such as insecticides, fertilizers, soil conditioners and the like, which are released or leached out gradually during use of the material.
This patent has been assigned to Arthur D Little, Inc., Cambridge, Mass.
Prizewinning Artist 1 Telephone Pioneers Honor Farrar Last week on Tuesday afternoon, the Pioneer Lounge and Work Shop of the Telephone Pioneers of America was the scene of an open house and dedication tq the late Charles A Farrar of Winchester.
Spmicon, Inc. of Bedford, manufacturers of semiconductor devices, announces the appointment of Rolland V Robison of Winchester as President of the electronic semiconductor manufacturing firm.
ROLLAND ROBISON Mr Robison was formerly associated with Sylvania Electric Products, Inc. as sales engineer, product planning manager and product sales manager in the Semiconductor Division.
He received his B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from South Dakota School of Mine and Technology and his M S. degree in Bu siness Administration from Harvard Business School.
Davies, Sr. from Providence, R I., to the world premiere of the Vassar Centennial Opera, “Command Performance, at Kresge Auditorium in Cambridge on November 17.
T Faculty Club, and the cast party following he performance, at the -home of Mrs.
Davies, class of ’96 at Vassar, has been a frequent visitor in Winchester.
Swanson, un artist in the Laboratories’ technical illustration section, was one of many employees and members of their families who entered works in the categories of oil painting, sculpture, photography, crafts, and drawing, water color, and graphic art.
The Work Shop has also been set up to provide an additional service of repairing the talking ma chines used by the blind.
Both of these programs are operated by active and retired members of the North Council Pioneers on a volunteer and spare-time basis.
During the open house, two of the first fifteen machines in need of repair were actually restored to operating condition in the process of showing visitors how this work can be done.
John J Sullivan of Winchester, sisterin-law of Charles A Farrar, and his sister, Mrs.
This is indeed a touching tribute to the loyalty and activity of our dad and we know he would be exceedingly proud of such an honor.
The program of repairing these machines began in earnest last Monday night when a group of the Pioneers under the direction of Milton Dickey of Woburn, chairman of the Community Activities Committee, tackled the first batch of machines in need of repair.
This marks the beginning of a plan de signed to provide faster repair service permitting a more nearly con stant operation of this equipment so vital to these people.
Mr White is president of the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company and also senior vice president of the National Associa tion of the Telephone Pioneers of America.
Others are Mr Thomas M Hennessey, vice-president of the company; Mr Sherman W Saltmarsh, Jr., chairman of the Board of Selectmen; Rev.
Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., of the First Baptist Church; and Mr John M Dick, association vice-president for New England.
Mr Dick is returning to Winchester, having recently purchased a new homo on Ginn Road.
Miss Katherine M Doyle of Winchester was one of seven of the ten former presidents of the North Council who attended, as did numerous presidents from other councils in Massachusetts, coming from New Bedford, Fall River, Framingham, Gloucester, and other points in and around Boston.
Assisting Mr Dickey in the Work Shop was Mr Kevin Smith of the State Division of the Blind.
Mr A1 Korn of the Winchester Appliance Co. provided a stereophonic radio-record console for the occasion.
November 9, Thursday, Jnyccen MMr ing, Winchester Red Crons House, 7 :30 m.
History Group of the Winchester College Club will meet at tho home of Mrs.
Grooslnger of the Animal Rescue League will talk on her experiences placing peta by radio.
November lfi, 17 18, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Parish Players present English mystery, ""A Murder Has Been Arranged"" in Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church.
November 17, FHday, College Club Art Group will meet at the entrance of the Addison Gallery, Andover, just before ten o’clockm.
Dave Maynard, well-known disc jockey, one of ""The Live Five"" on Station WBZ, Boston, will entertain.
Members, friends and the girls of Troop 9. extend cordial invitations to the mothers of all the girls to attend.
John J Merieantante, 26 Loekeland Road, announce the birth of their fourth child, third daughter, Lillian Rose, born October 26 at Beth Israel Hospital, Brookline.
Carl Magnus Pi hi, II, of Moores town, New Jersey, announce the arrival of a son, Stephen William Pihl, Ocotber 21.
Grandparent honors are shared by Marshall R Pihl of Winchester and Dr. and Mrs.
William G Hook of Big Spring, Texas, formerly of Danvers. y i i Mr and Mrs.
John H Atkinson of 21 Mark Street, Burlington, announce the birth of their second child, John Malcolm, at the Winchester Hospital on Sunday, October 29.
Donald G Martin of Winchester are proud to announce the birth of their third child, second son, Gary Philip, on November 4th at the Winchester Hospital.
James G Frailey, of Timonium, Maryland, a second child, first daughter, Lisa Pendleton Frailey, November 6.
C WAFFLE CREAMES NEW EDUCATOR NUT CRACKERS EDUCATOR HOLIDAY ASSORTED COOKIES SUNSHINE KRISPY CRACKERS SUNSHINE CHOCOLATE NUGGET KIES 2 pkgs. 29c each 19c p k g19c -oz. pk g . 53c p k g45c -oz.
P k S45c P k 29c P k g31c P k ?25c P k S29c P k g39c P k £29c P k g* 29c Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday Special, November 13, 14, 15 Pork Chops 69c lb.
REJOICING WITH UNITED FUND'S ""TESSIES” over Wincheater's 101.5% volunteer enrollment are Sherman W Saltmarsh.
Jr., chairman of Winchester’s Board of Selectmen, left, and William D Sullivan, town chairman for the United Fund drive.
They attended the “Mayors’ Day” first joint report luncheon held recently at United Fund headquarters in Boston.
The atmosphere was friendly, informal, slightly smelly and very heart-warming.
These lost or deserted pets are given a brief new “lease on life"" and chance to find a home and owner.
In their turn they will reward some child or lonely adult with over-flowing gaiety and affection.
If you’re a decided individualist America's most famous tailors HART SCHAFFNER A MARX are at your service.
Come in, choose the fabric you like from hundreds of samples and select the style you prefer.
Our tailor takes your measurements then HS&M master craftsmen tailor your suit to perfection.
To Speak At She Fortnightly The November thirteenth meeting of The Fortnightly will be held in the Social Hall of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church.
The Business Meeting will he at two o’clock with the Club’s 1 ’resident, Mrs.
Herbert Thomspon, will present the speaker, Mr Don S Greer, recently elected President of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts, llis subject “The Individual in the Space Age.” of the Board of Selectmen, vicechairman of the Finance Committee and a committee member of many more civic interests in Winchester.
Greer Co., Wilmington, as its president as well as vice president of the Wire Belt Co., of Winchester.
He is vice president and director of the Winchester Trust Company and the Boston Filter Company of Charlestown.
The Fortnightly members with their guests are cordially invited I to come and hear Mr Greer on his Greer is known so well servj subject that will convey elements his community as chairman ; of sound and basic substance.
PLEASE SEND ME A ONEYEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THE WINCHESTER STAR NAME ADDRESS TOWN , Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR ] 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
Follower l>or hack to the early nineteen hundreds will Dover, one of the stars of the high school team Son of the late Mr and Mrs.
Md. urely recall . from 1907 tn Dover, fortm lit 10. >f ‘ Alfred, or “Al” ns he is still known, is 71 years old and living in Brookline.
A young friend of his with a flair for writing has gotten together a story about the former Winchester High hoop star which should interest any sports follower and especially “AIV old friends who are Star readers. f Winchester High School basketball who rememTwo Winchester boys.
As we remember the game was played in 1009 and “everybody” went in to see it.
Those were the days of basketball when the whistle wasn’t blowing every 30 seconds and it wasn’t a two-shot foul if you ran into a player who got in your way.
A group of youngsters, including Al. were taught the fundamentals of basketball by members of the Winchester Town Team, who gave “When Al. entered Winchester High in 1900 he tried out for the basketball team and made second string.
By his third year he was a first stringer and in his senior year he not only played but coached as well.
Al. set a schoolboy record in the 1D01/1 0 season when he scored 19 baskets from the floor against a Dorchester High team.
This record has since been surpassed but at that time it was an extraordinary feat.
Richard Cain’s Badminton and Health Club which operated on Oliver Street, Boston, from 1925 to 1949.
At first the club was exclusively for men, but after a short m inton instructor Al devoted more than four years to the learninf of the sport.
Al was responsible for the start of badminton in numerous Massachusetts communities which included Hingham, Swampscott and Woburn.
Al’s job is selling the products and re-stringing tennis and badminton racquets.
Al is married to Edina (Campbell) Dover, director of the Hickox Secretarial School for Girls and noted for her work among prison inmates throughout the state.
Maxwell R McCreery, Treasurer 4 Curtis Street, PA 9-203(5 Miss Nellie M Sullivan, Secretary 44 Spruce Street, PA 9-0095 novD-tf DAVID BERC.QUIST Upon completion of recruit training, new leathernecks report to Camp Lejeune, N.C., for combat infantry training prior to attending a service school for specialized instruction or being assigned to a unit of the Fleet Marine force.
Mail servicemen’s names and addresses to WINCHESTER HOMEFRONTERS PUBLIC LIBRARY NOW Name of Serviceman Rank Serial Number Military Address Home Address Tel Mrs.
Alvaji G Smith, Executive Chairman Winchester Homefronters navU-8t JOHN FENTROSS Local Boys Join Regular Army Five Winchester boys have enlisted in the Regular Army recently and are presently undergoing preliminary processing at Fort Dix, New Jersey.
Laura Parkin of 27 Elmwood Avenue, who re-enlisted as a Sergeant for his second hitch The other four men are Bruce M Govostes of 16 Swanton Street John H Bond of 47 Clark Street Richard R Riccioli of 22 Albamont Road and Charles L Petri of Manchester Road.
Govostes, son of Mr and Mrs George Govostes, attended Winchester High School and enlisted for an assignment to Europe following his basic training at Fort Dix.
Anthony Riccioli enlisted under the Army “guaranteed” assignment program for assignment to the Army Ballistic Guided Missile School Charles Petri, the son of Mrs.
Edith Petri, chose the communications field for his three year tour of Army duty and will receive advanced training in communications as soon as he completes basic training.
Bond, whose brother William is also a regular Army man, is the son of Mr and Mrs.
Charles Bond and also joined the Army for training in the communications field.
Don’t Put Off —Send $1.50 fur ITCH-AID Now — PHARMACY GIRL, Inc., Labs Fifth Ave., Brooklleld, Conn.
School radio station, WHSR, which was seen nationally last Thursday afternoon from 4:50 to 6:00,p.m.
The show’s director, William Lord, was in Massachusetts for one week only and chose Winchester’s fine station to present as an example of up and coming student endeavor.
Mr Lord had contacted Thomas A Morse, WHRS faculty advisor and assistant principal, and asked to do the program after having heard the station on the air during a previous visit to the state.
There was also a pantomime view of members of the Modern Problems class in a discussion, something which the station often broadcasts.
Mr Lord did a short tape interview at the same time the Parent-Faculty Association sponsored Gisela von Klueke from Berlin, also seen nationally last week.
It is in its sixth year of operation and has been picked up as far away as Plymouth, Mass.
It serves you with music, discussions and radio-drama programs; high school sports broadcasts; and civic events including the all important town meeting live as it happens.
Just this week it put Ted Kennedy’s High School talk on Latin America on the air direct.
WHSR owes its existence to the Rotary Club, donors of its original equipment, still in good repair.
It owes its continued operation to civic-minded groups, such as En Ka and Parent-Faculty Association.
Student work ip this field is entirely extra-curricular and does not earn course credit; however, the station is a valuable adjunct to both Speech and Modern Problems courses.
News Announcers Alice Dyson of 9 Ridgefield Road and Wendy Everett of 14 Mt.
The Science Club For those citizens of Winchester who think their children do nothing constructive in after school extra curricular programs, I would like to point out one organization which is doing its best to keep the students of W.H.S. up to date and informed in all matters.
The Science Club boasts, at this time, of over 60 members with equal representation from each class.
Edmund Grotty, president; William Eddy, vice president; Ruth Anne Hutchinson, secretary, and Pamela Smith, treasurer; and ably directed by Mrs.
Lenna M Travis, head of the Science department, the Science | Club promises to have an exciting year.
Already this year, we have had a field trip to the Harvard Observatory at Harvard, Massachusetts, sponsored by Mr Robert Grenzeback of Winchester.
This was held on Sunday, October twenty -second and the turnout was excellent.
The second of our meetings, held Wednesday, November 1, was a discussion by Dr.
By giving us examples of the progress of radio tubes from Thomas Edison up to the modern day Transistor invented by three noted scientists and showing us various tubes to illustrate his talk, the meeting proved to be very interesting.
Seniors, Kristina Wilhelm and Lloyd Stillman; Juniors, Jan Thomas and Scott Erskine, and Sophomores, Fred Cardin and Lance Grenzebaek.
Students don’t have to be enrolled in a Science course or even in the club itself to attend the meetings.
Attention Jaycees The Winchester Jaycees will hold a most important meeting tonight at 8:00 o’clock at the Red Cross building.
The Jaycee Charter night dance will be held on December 9, just one month away.
At a meeting of the Jaycee Board of Directors last Sunday evening, the resignation of our president, Jim Quine, was regretfully accepted, and Bill Bird was unanimously elected the new president.
The Jaycees hope that every effort will be made by mem hers to attend tonight’s meeting.
SNOW PROBLEM' YOU NEED A M0T0-M0WER 20 "" DELUXE POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3V4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and heavily packed snow.
Remote control chute handle directs the stream of snow 25 feet in the direction you want.
An adjustable slip clutch protects against chain breakage or impeller damage.
FONTAINE Upon completion of recruit training, new leathernecks report to Camp Lejeune, N.C., for combat infantry training before being assigned to a unit of the Fleet Marine Force or attending a service school for specialized instruction.
Deadline Date For NROTC Exam High school seniors and graduates have ndy until November 17 to apply for the Navy’s Reserve Officer Training Corps.
Designed to supplement the officer output of the Naval Acudemy, the NROTC program makes it possible for a young man to earn a regular commission while studying at a civilian college of his choice which has an NROTC unit.
All tuition, fees and hooks are furnished by the Navy, and the student receives an annual retainer of $600 for not more than four years.
After completing the usual four year college course, he is commissioned in the Regular Navy or Marine Corps and goes on active duty as a prospective career officer in the Naval service.
He receives the same promotional opportunities, duty assignments and benefits as his Naval Academy contemporary.
High school seniors and graduates who have reached the 17th anniversary of birth and have not reached the 21st anniversary of birth on July 1, 19(52 may apply for the NROTC aptitude test.
A real economy item for the student who likes all his notes in one neat volume.
Patriots* Proxy Hoads TB Soals William H Sullivan, Jr., president of the Boston Patriots Football Club, has agreed to serve I ns the 1961 Honorary Christmas Seal Chairman for Massachusetts, announces Frederick Y Briscoe, president of the Middlesex TB Christinas Seal Association.
Sullivan will lead the 1961 state Campaign which opens on Monday, November 1"". in cooperation with Charles O Finley, owner of the Kansas City Athletics, and a recovered tuberculosis patient, whose appointment as National Honorary Chairman was announced by the National Tuberculosis Association.
Bowling League Anchorman Frank DiMambro helped his California team overcome Alabama's challenge by a 4-0 score and enabled the team to regain the top spot in the standings.
Important matches tonight at Strike Lanes are California vs Holy Cross, Notre Dame vs Yale, Maryland vs Harvard, and Navy vs Boston College.
Two attendance prizes were awarded, the first going to Emile Doucette, and the second to Angie Amico.
League Standings Won Lost Pinfallfl California 21 7 11,659 Notre Dame 20 8 1 1 ,636 Harvard 19 9 11,567 Navy 18 10 1 1 ,548 Alabama 17 11 11,116 Maryland 17 1 l 1 1 ,340 Yale 16 12 11,411 Penn 16 12 1 1 ,368 Holy Cross 13 15 11,394 Army 9 19 11,431 Bates 9 19 10,857 Boston College 8 20 1 1 ,368 St.
This is her first teaching position although she practice taught kindergarten, third and sixth grades in both Belmont and Watertown before coming to Winchester.
A Oo-yard punt return for a touchdown by Captain Mike Bellino got the Sachems back into a ball game that looked in the early stages as if it was going to be all Belmont.
Continuous Sun. from 2:00m. starlit JOHN RICHARD LAURENCE WAYNE • WIBMARK HARVEY Mon.
Levine was born in Fall River, graduated from Durfee High School (remember that basketball game at the Garden) and got a Bachelor of Science degree in Education from Lesley College in 1961.
As hobbies she lists playing the piano and sports, especially basketball and bowling.
She and her husband were married 15 months ago and make their home in Woburn.
Mr Levine, also a Fall River native, graduated from Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute and is now a graduate student in geophysics at Boston College.
Hob Benincasa sprints goalward in last Saturday's W inchcster-Bclmont game on Manchester Field.
Miss Joan E Banning is one of the new teachers at the George Washington School where she is teaching third grade. charge of the same classroom in which she did her student teaching.
She did other practice teaching in the Franklin School in Lexington in the Team Teaching program.
She graduated from Harvard Graduate School of Education in 1959 with a Master of Education degree.
Prior to entering Harvard Graduate School Miss Banning was a social worker with the Family Service Bureau of Greater Boston.
She has traveled extensively through Europe and the United States, spending some time in Moscow in 1960.
She has done some writing and plans to work in the near future on children’s story books.
Sophs Tip Tanners Winchester High School sophomore football team blanked the Woburn High sophomore eleven last week Thursday afternoon on Manchester Field, 22-0, giving the Tanner cubs their first defeat of & ' the season.
Sachems at Wakefield Saturday Winchester High faces wliat looms as the toughest football game of its 1961 schedule Saturday afternoon when the Sachems leave their wigwams above the turgid Aberjona and trek across country to Wakefield for their final Middlesex League engagement of t he season with the scarlet clad Warriors of Wakefield High.
Ruth Graham in grade 3 of the Washington School while studying at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
PArkview 9-1931 Quality .3s Our HJosl / \gcious ^4sset Three minutes later a poor Woburn punt was downed on the Woburn 22, and the Sachems again went over, Ed Cutting going the last seven yards for the touchdown.
Winchester’s third touchdown came following a pass interception at the Woburn 20 by Cutting.
Two plays later Barry Johnson grabbed a pass in the end zone for the score.
Woburn spent most of its time on its own side of midfield, and it wasn’t until the final minutes of play that an air attack carried the Tanners to the Winchester 25 as time ran out.
Wakefield is undefeated in league competition while Winchester has been beaten twice and tied once.
Up until last Saturday the Sachems had shown little to make their supporters feel they had much chance against the Warriors, who have the biggest line in the league and several good backs.
Against Belmont last week end Winchester looked like it is beginning to jell, and at times played some good football against one of the best Belmont teams to play in Winchester in some time.
The Sachems definitely showed promise against Belmont and if they can play as well against Wakefield, or better as they well may, the Warriors will have an interesting afternoon.
Wakefield and Winchester have played five teams in common Stoneham, Lexington, Belmont, Concord and Reading.
By the dangerous yardstick of comparative es the Sachems are 14 points stronger offensively and 38 points weaker defensively.
Winchester has had its troubles defensively all fall and repetition of its play against Reading and Stoneham will prove fatal Saturday.
On the other hand, with the exception of Stoneham, the Sachems have been able to move the ball well against everyone.
Wakefield has hardly outclassed its last three Middlesex League opponents, Belmont, Lexington and Stoneham.
Recovering a loose ball in the end zone helped plenty in the Lexington game, and against Stoneham the Warriors had to score three times in the last quarter to pull off its twopoint win.
The Warriors run from a winged T, at times loosening an end and halfback in a slot formation.
They have a good back in Bacon and an effective passer in their quarterback, Shevlin.
Birch, another back, is the target for many of Shevlin’s passes and is a good receiver.
At times, also, the Warriors drop off an end, leaving their giant tackle, Hupprich free to receive a pass.
Winchester is going to need rather more imagination in its attack than it has yet shown if it is to cope with the bulky Scarlet line.
The Sachems have no real heavyduty bucking back and continual belting away inside the tackles has been of little avail all season.
On the record Winchester has little more than an outside chance against Wakefield on Saturday.
However, there is that outside chance, and if for a change the Sachems should live up to their potential for once, who knows.
Playing For Princeton Freshmen CHRIS LAWRENCE Winchester boy, former Sachem end, playing a similar position on the long side of the undefeated Princeton freshman football team.
They played Penn last Saturday and meet the Harvard Frosh at Cambridge, November 11.
Fifteen yard penalties stalled both teams as the game got under way, hut midway through the first quarter Bellino kicked to Gardiner who took the leather deep in his own territory and got past every one on the Winchester team but Bellino, who knocked the flying Belmont boy outside at the Winchester 34.
Wood immediately hit Gardiner with a pass at the Winchester 27, but on the next play Donlon spilled Gardiner for a yard loss.
Twice on trap plays the speedy hard-driving Cronin bolted through huge holes in the left side of the Winchester line, reaching the 15 for a first down and then, the five.
On two straight dive tackle plays Cronin carried over, going a yard on his second carry.
Cronin busted through for the extra two points, but Belmont was offside on the play and from seven yards out Erskine stopped Emerson two yards short of pay dirt.
Winchester couldn’t go after the kickoff and some good defensive work by Mooney and Menucci stalled Belmont at the Winchester 44.
A pass was batted down at the line and Belmont had to kick, Wood getting off a lofty spiral deep into Winchester territory.
Bellino caught the ball over his shoulder at the seven, and cutting back to the five yard line, reversed his field and legged it for the far side line.
Mikey simply outran most of the defenders with only one man having a shot at him at the Belmont 35.
Here Bob Donlon threw an effective brush block that got Bellino by and that was all that was needed.
Mikey fled the remainder of the way into the end zone for a big touchdown that put the Sachems right back in the ball game.
On a sweep-right play, Bellino started for the right corner, but cut back between two running Belmont boys to stumble into the end zone for two more points that put Winchester ahead to stay.
After the kickoff Belmont advanced the ball from its 33 to the Winchester 27 where on fourth down Wood on a rollout was stopped a yard short of first down with the Sachems taking over.
The Sachems looked like a different team with eight points under their belts and on first down Benincasa cut through the line to get away for a first down at the Belmont 39.
An indication of Cronin’s speed was the fact that he hauled down the Winchester boy from behind to save a score.
At the Belmont 39 two plays stuttered hut on third down Colliander hit Timpone at the Belmont 24 and another first down.
Bellino on a sweep-left was knocked outside at the 12, just lacking running room to go all the way.
Benincasa was piled up at the line for a two yard loss and a pass to Donlon in the end zone was batted down.
Interference might well have been called on this play, but it wasn’t, and Colliander on a sneak was short of first down yardage with Belmont taking over at the half.
Winchester started well after the half, advancing the ball from its 42 to the Belmont 31.
Here Bellino was held at the line and Colliander, on an intended pass play tripped and fell as he ran back to throw', being pinned at the Bel mont 46.
Gambling on fourth down, Bellino got off a pretty quick kick that rolled dead at the Belmont three yard line.
Belmont had to kick and Wood was badly rushed on his attempt, the ball reaching only the Belmont 30.
Rowe was dumped for a yard loss, but Bellino broke through the line for a first down at the Belmont 15.
Here Bellino went t/ver on a sweep, but Winchester was called for back-in-motion and the ball went back to the 13.
Belmont’s drive after the kickoff was stopped short when Rowe made a corking diving interception of a Wood pass at the Belmont 42 as the third quarter ended.
Benincasa got a yard and Bellino in two tries made first down at the Belmont 26.
Benincasa drove to the 15 for another first down and then bucked to the nine.
Winchester was called for offside on the play and the ball went back to the Belmont 20.
Here Bellino took a pitchout and simply outran the Belmont secondary into the end zone.
Winchester sent in a flock of substitutes ami the Sachems were called for taking too much time, the ball going out from the two to the seven yard line for the try for the extra points, f’asalinuovo was stopped well short of the goal line on a sweep play and the score was 22-6.
Captain Mike Hrlliuo drives tor extra yardage as Bolinoiiis Jim gives chare in last Saturday's WinchesterBelmont game on Manchester Field.
Winchester won 30*22. that did not go ten yards and resulted in Belmont getting the ball at the Winchester 44.
Casalinuovo knocked down a long scoring pass, but on second down the fleet Cronin circled Winchester’s left flank and ripping awny from three would-be-tacklers, got into the clear, legging it all the way into the end zone for a great bit of running.
On the try for points-after Cronin was piled up short of the goal line, but Winchester was called for a personal foul and the hall went ahead to the one.
It looked bad for Winchester when Timpone was hit hard after taking the kickoff and had the ball jarred from his grasp, Belmont recovering at the Winchester 49.
Cronin whirled away for a first down at the Winchester 28, again around the Sachems’ left flank, a last ditch tackle by Benincasa saving a score.
Here, however, Wood on what looked to he an intended pass play was spilled in the pocket and lost the ball, Graham recovering for Winchester at the Sachem 41.
Immediately Benincasa, on a quick opener, broke through, and aided by a timely block got into the clear, outrunning a Belmont defender all the way into th zone.
With the ball at the 25 Winchester was assessed a 15 yard penalty for communicating, putting the ball back on the 40.
Two pass plays went bad, on the first the receiver dropping the ball when tackled and the second falling incomplete.
On fourth down Colliander tried another pass and when his receivers were all covered had to eat the hall on the Winchester 45.
Gardiner and Cronin made it first down at the 34, but a long pass to Burton was caught outside the field and a subsequent pass attempt was broken up for a ten yard loss.
Winchester was called for a personal foul on the play and the 15 yard assessment put the ball on the Sachem 19.
Cronin ripped his way to the eight, Wood reached the six and Cronin, the three.
From the three Cronin hit off his own right tackle for the score and a pass from Wood to Burton in the end zone added the two points.
The Sachems lost 81 yards in penalties and fumbled twice, recovering once.
The visitors lost 35 yards to the white pants and fumbled three times, recovering twice.
Starkweather ; rt, Kimball, Mullen; re, Timpone, Graham ; qb, Colliander, Macdonald ; Ihb, Benincasa, Flaherty, Erskine, Rowe, Cut»alinuovo ; fb, Bellino, Branley.
Winchester Belmont 8 14 — 30 0 16 — 22 TD’s — Bellino 2, Rowe, Benincasa, Cronin 3.
Wakefield Fops Middlesex As a result of the games in the Middlesex League last Saturday Wakefield remains at the top of the circuit with a perfect record, five wins and no losses.
Lexington and Winchester each have won three and lost two, with Winchester having played one more league game than the Minuteboys, a tie with Reading.
Concord has had most points scored against it, 120, with Belmont yielding 108.
Joseph P Lynch Jr., of 32 Grove Street opened her lovely home for the first of the year’s luncheons for the Mystic School teachers.
There were fifteen teachers present and two practice teachers; also Mrs.
Edward Dreano, Mystic School secretary, and Mr Raymond Dickman, Mystic School principal.
Replaces Maribel As Skating Coach It will be of interest to Winchester skating devotees that Nancy Luddington of Stoneham, former Olmypic skating star, will replace the veteran instructor and Olympic immortal, Maribel Vinson Owen, as Metropolitan District Commission skating instructor at the Medford rink.
Owen was killed last year with her skating daughters, Maribel and Laurance, in a plane crash in Belgium.
Many will be pleased to have a girl from a neighboring town succeed Mrs.
One of her pupils, Joan Christensen of Milton, will serve as instructor at Ulin Rink in that town.
As in real life, success depends on right proportion of fame, happiness, and money.
There is excitement and fun galore as each player tries to be first to reach the goals which he hos set for himself.
PARKVIEW 9-0029 i Page Twelve THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1961 Navy ’s Joe Bellino “Navy’s Jog Bellino,” the Barone^’ new book about Winchester’s Rift to Naval Academy football, is off the presses and is finding its way into homes everywhere of admirers of this sterling young man who grew up in a modest home on the Plains and won every conceivable football honor as a schoolboy at Winchester High School and as a midshipman at Annapolis.
The book was written by Cynthia Barone in collaboration with her husband, Dr.
These pictures really add much to the book, and they would be great sport shots, even without their Bellino angle.
There are also inside pictures of life at Annapolis that are out of the ordinary for a book of this sort.
A tremendous amount of time and effort must have gone into amassing these shots and getting permission to use them.
It is well covered in the Barones’ book, skill being shown in tne selection of material and especially in the deleting of much that could have been told about Bellino, but was withheld for the sake of brevity.
After all the book is not intended to be a complete biography of this remarkable young man who has been held up to the world as a top example of American youth and sportsmanship.
The book is cleanly printed and attractively bound, with large photos of Joe in midshipman’s uniform and football togs on the jacket, the football picture being the familiar action shot seen so many times during Joe’s Annapolis days Within its covers is an interesting story of Bellino’s life written by two true admirers and friend of this refreshing young man; his life from the time he was delivered by Dr.
Barone, his athletic tri umphs as a schoolboy, his unprecedented football achievements while a midshipman, his marriage to his boyhood sweetheart, Ann Tansey, and his decision to remain in the Navy in the face of tempting offers to turn professional.
Recounted in the pages of the book is Joe’s winning of the Heisman Trophy, the Maxwell Memorial Award, the Chic Harley “College Football Player of the Year” Trophy, the Touchdown Club’s Memorial Trophies and the Naval Academy Thompson Trophy Cup and Athletic Association Sword.
Joe was the first midshipman in 42 years to win both these coveted Navy awards, just as he was the only Navy back ever to score three touchdowns against Army.
As a matter of fact the pictures of the various trophies and awards amassed by Joe during his schoolboy and academy days are among the most interesting in the book.
There is a heartwarming picture of Bellino with his proud parents, another thriller of him marching at the head of a Middie parade, yet another of his dejection after the Missouri defeat and still another of his miraculous catch of the forward pass for a touchdown against Missouri, a catch to stand beside any made at any time on any gridiron.
Starting his life’s story is an unfamiliar snap of Joe at the age of three.
Among other unusual shots is one of the muscular Bellino legs, the legs that carried him to gridiron fame and kept him there.
The Barones spent countless hours collecting the material from which they drew for their book, a book not intended to gild the lily of Joe Bellino’s football prowess, but rather to hold up this youthful fellow townsman as a true example of what the real All American boy should be.
Club staged a variety show for the entertainment of the Club and their friends.
Fred McCormack, master of ceremonies par excellence, made many witty comments as he introluced the various acts.
This was ung by A1 Fay, Ray Sylvester, Bill Sullivan, Chris Brown, John Bulger, and Pat Cosgrove.
Then followed the male chorus aptly named “The Show Stoppers” who sang a medley of George M Cohan songs.
Under the direction of George Dillon were Jim Grower, Tom Arnold, John Campbell, George Kean, Leo Roche, Jack Waite, Joe Maloney, John McDonald, Fred Fiumara, Fred Zappala.
A snappy song and dance number, Ballin’ the Jack, was perform'd by Julie Covino, Ann Dean, Hedy Fiumara, Mary Mears, Midge Pazolt, Mary Keith, Lillian Newton.
Winchester’s own Phil O’Rourke shillelagh in hand, entertained with songs and stories.
The Nantasket Nifties, Rose Mnrchant, Chris McDonald, Rita McCormack, Marie Campbell, Sally Cause, Trudy Mainberger, took us back in time to a day at the beach in the 1920s.
Then the smartly attired Highland Lassies performed an intricate drill routine.
Under the direction of Rosemary Dolan the group included Eleanor Arnold, Mary Reid, Virginia O’Grady, Pat Waite, Mary Roche, Yolande Finneran, Dorothy Cullen, Pat Sanford, Helen McLaughlin, Madeline Sullivan, Mary Falla, Pat O’Rourke, Betty Saulnier, Rita Debitetto, Jo Zappala.
At the finale, Mae and George Kean, directors of the show, expressed their thanks to all who participated.
They were especially grateful to Martha Daschbach and Herb Cleary who were the piano accompanists.
Makes Plans For Show Photo by Ryornon MAKING PLANS for the distribution and sale of tickets for the production to be sponsored by the Community Seliool Association at the Winchester High School Auditorium on December i are, seated, left to right, Mrs.
Clarence Gay, president of the Community School Association of W inchester; Mrs.
The big surprise of the night was Atlantic Gelatin, which took six points from St.
This is a feat which is almost impossible, for a team using only dummy score is usually lucky if it takes two points.
Knights of Columbus will hold their annual Mass for their deceased members and the deceased of all Wars.
The Mass is at the Immaculate Conception Church at 8:00 o’clock and the celebrant will be the chaplain, Rev.
All members and their families are invited and coffee and doughnuts will be served in the school hall after Mass.
Gelatin 40 24 11,169 Post Office 38 26 11,116 49’ers 32 32 1 1 ,188 Bros.-in-Law 1 29 35 10,660 St.
Charles Raflfi, Jr., of 2 Everett Avenue, to plan the sale of tickets for the Community School Association production which will be presented in the Winchester High School Auditorium on Friday afternoon, December 1, at 3:45 m.
The Community School Association of Winchester is sponsoring this presentation in the belief that “live” theatre for children fills a need both educationally and culturally in the lives of today’s children.
Samoiloff Spoke to the meeting concerning the background of the Children’s Theatre Groups in the metropolitan area and throughout the country.
The Winchester Children’s Theatre School was one of the pioneers in this movement and is well known for its versatility.
Each performance combines the talents of each child and unites the arts since the props and scenery are painted by the performers.
The children who will act in the current play have made lovely, colorful posters depicting scenes from each story and these will be distributed to the schools and business establishments.
Noonan — Rebecca Brackett Vinson-Owen — Judy Morrill Mystic — Mitre Fiore Lincoln — Ronnie Marcy Wyman — Karen Kimball Washington — Cara McCarty Parkhurst — Kathleen Dale Plans were discussed for the distribution and sale of the tickets to the children in the schools.
In addition to a display of 3,000 children’s books, many authors, illustrators and storytellers will entertain at various times during the week.
Winchester’s author of teen-age novels, Helen Miller Swift, is one of the guest speakers.
In the Children’s Room of our own Winchester library there will be a display of the new fall hooks which we have purchased.
We hope many parents as well as children will enjoy the thrill of looking through them.
Now you can enjoy more than 50 different kinds of solitaire card games to intrigue you.
S Friday evening, November 17, at 7:30, each of the three high school classes will present a one act play.
Each will be trying to win the trophy which is awarded for the best presentation.
If not, refresh your memory with this hilarious comedy starring Sally Leighton, Jim Reid, Sue Bennett, Sandra Simpson, and Bill Sandburg.
The stage is lively with action when a stuffy banker finds that his son has a date with a Hollywood beauty.
She turns out to be a beauty who knew him when he was less of a stuffed shirt.
The cast is Jeff Peckham, Diane Kelley, Betsy Woodward, Larry Archibald, Jan Thomas, and Candee Callaham.
Of course “Nobody Sleeps,” and this is the sophomore play directed by Linnie Butts and John Giger.
Starring in this production are Jim Bonney, Diane Clifton, Sue Knight, Betsy McCreery, and Jean Weiner.
Robert Andree, Illinois school su perintendent; Sarah Caldwell, teacher in Ohio; and host William Carr.
Wee Sachems On Sunday, November 5, the Winchester Wee Sachems defeated the Woburn Pop Warner football team by the score of 22-6.
Winchester didn’t want to waste any time with their chief rivals and on the very first play of the game, Winchester’s Choo Choo Collins ran off tackle for a 55 yard touchdown play.
Shortly afterward with Woburn in possession of the ball on their own seven yard line, both Peter Mawn and Marty O’Donnell charged and nailed the Woburn quarterback for safety and gained two more points for Winchester.
In the third period with the finest display of blocking that we have seen all year, Choo Choo ran for another touchdown with the entire Winchester team leading the way.
It looked as though Winchester was going to hold Woburn scoreless but in the final minutes of play a Woburn hoy intercepted a pass and ran 75 yards to score.
This win was the third straight for Winchester and the Sachems hope to make Wellesley their fourth when they play this coming Sunduy at Wellesley to wind up their very successful season.
G' to 14.6'x30', including a selection of new. used, antique and semi-antique in all qualities and colors.
Wvman Dance Complete Success Eye-catching decorations and the sparkling rhythm of Roger Carpenter’s Mel tones sot the mood for a delightful evening of dancing at the Wyman Parents’ Association annual party on Friday evening, November 3.
Colorful travel posters loaned by Mark Kirsten of the Kirsten Travel Agency in Winchester, giant tubs of philodendron used through the courtesy of Winchester Conservatories, a flower cart loaned by Chitel’s, and a delightful red and white scalloped canopy over the fireplace, all contributed to the gay atmosphere.
Two attractive flower girls, Nancy Carter and Joyce Pettingoll, sold corsages during the evening, under the direction of Mrs.
Robert Westwater and her flower committee, who were also responsible for the many attractive floral arrangements.
Cider and popcorn served at red and white covered tables furnished refreshing pauses during the eve ning.
The cider was generously con tributed by Converse Market, and refreshments were served by Mrs.
Lewis Wadsworth, president of the Parents’ Association, drew the names of the winners, and her husband, Lewis Wadsworth, read them.
Charles Gill, an attractive tea tile; Mr Robert Johnson, a Parker pen; and the Boston office of the TWA, two travel bags.
An especially hearty thank you is due the Wyman parents for their enthusiastic support of the Association’s only fund-raising event of the year.
Miss Bbcler Chosen Agnel Bixler, daughter of Mr and Mi S Herbert E Bixler, Winchester, has been selected to be a member of the first team for the Northeast Field Hockey 'tournament to be held on the Smith College playing Fields Saturday and Sunday, November 11 and 12.
Sixteen teams from Boston, Westchester, Albany, Ontario, Vermont, Rhode Island, and the Connecticut Valley will compete.
Players include nine who are or have been members of the United* States Team or its reserve.
Teachers’ Tea At Noonan A tea for the teachers of Grades 1, 2, and 3, was held in the Noonan Auditorium on Tuesday October 31.
Thomas Cheatham and were presented to Miss Minnetta Jurgenson, the school principal, to Mrs.
John F Collins, the president of the Noonan School Chapter of Community Schools of Winchester, and to the teachers of the lower grades, Mrs.
Mary Mead, Miss Elaine Corcoran, Miss Zella Giggie, and Miss Sarah McGowan.
In keeping with the Halloween motif refreshments of delicious cider and doughnuts were served, and the centerpiece of the table held a large jack-o-lantern holding a beautiful bouquet of mums.
Andrew M Sinclair, the chairman of the tea was ably assisted by the room mothers from the various rooms.
These teas are prepared by the room mothers as their special tribute to the fine services of our children’s teachers.
Infant Saviour Guild The semi-monthly meeting of the Guild of the Infant Saviour will be held on Tuesday, November 14, at 2m., in K of C Home.
Edward F Conners, will present a workshop dealing with the art of decorating for Christmas under the capable craftsmanship of Mrs.
Mon. through Frl., 8 A.M. 5 P.M. — Sat., 8 noon \ WHOLESALE PRICES ALCOA ALUMINUM 3-CHANNEL COMBINATION WINDOW $ 11 95 1 1 Screen Is self-storing.
FORESTER’S A FLOWER SHOP ■k CUT FLOWERS ★ WEDDING FLOWERS ★ FLORAL DESIGNS PA 9-1077 Eves.
The program, directed by SherwinWilliams executives and *researeh personnel, includes a two day visit to the paint company’s Chicago factory and research laboratories demonstrations of new paint products and sessions covering the latest trends in color.
PArkview 9-4363 after 6m. augl2-tf PHOTOGRAPHY by RYERSON PArkview 9-3311 AVERY’S For T V Radio Sales and Service 1203 Mass.
This delightful comedy hit is currently in rehearsal under the direction of Jacqueline Langdon Sibley with an all-star cast of new and seasoned performers.
Playing with great relish the role of the renegade father, Biddeford Poole, is newcomer Tony Carrigan.
Another new Player, Billy Ann Maley, plays his ex-wife Katherine, while two new members from the high school ranks, Norma Wood ind Gary Callahan appear as their daughter and her fiance.
Come and see for yourself whether or not a long lost father can suddenly appear on the eve of his daughter's wedding and call the whole thing off.
WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Strict PArkview 9-0949 Rev.
Lower School classes, kindergarten through grades J; Crib Room facilities. 11:00m.
South Middlesex Conference meeting at Wellesley Hills Unitarian Church. 5:20m.
Dw ight L Cart, D.D., Minister PArkview 9-0.328 Rev Wesley A Mallfery, B D., Associate Minister, PA 9-377*3.
SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH Washington Street at Ken win Road “The Church in the Highlands” Ralph H Earle, Minister Residence, 47,3 Washington Street Church Study, Tel.
The title °f his sermon will be ""Proving the Plan of (1ml."" •' lft «.m.
Blemker of the 1 nitud Church Board for World Ministries, Secretary, Europe and the Near Hast.
Parish Players Rehearsal in Chldley Hall. ? :4ftm. -Study Group in the Palmer Room.
Senior High P.F. will study the importance of Christian Missions. 8:00m.
Mr Raymond B Stillman, Super__ intendent of the Church School. which annuls the claims of matter, that j Tel.
Phone or come in 36 Church Street W inches ter PArkview 9-3000 marS-ti Mrs.
The Canvassers will meet in the church parlor for instructions und assignments.
Every junior high young person in our church should he in this fellowship.
The Welcome Wagon Hostess Will Knock on Your Door with Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors and Your Civic and Social Welfare Leaders ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies Mr Raymond Shannon, Organist and Choir Director.
Glendale Christian Training Institute, at First Baptist Church, Medford. 8:00m.
High Fellowship of the First Congregational Church elected its officers Sunday.
President — Judy Wells Vice President — Susie Faga Secretary — David Smith Treasurer — Carol Bower Worship Chairman — Beth Dutting Program Chairman — Debbie Ericson Refreshment Chairmen — Joyce Kell and Paul Robison The next activity that the group will participate in will be held on November 10 at the Junior High School and will be a dance for Fellowship members only.
The next regular meeting of the young people will be on November 19, at which time food collected through the Sunday School will be packed and delivered to City Missionary.
Charlotte L Dodge HLnter 8-2882 No Cost or Obligation Charming, useful, and quaint are the new 1962 “calendar towels,” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colprs to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star.
JJadfey 39 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-0200 i Page Fourteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9.
ROBERT L DRISCOLL Citing the role of the pharmaceutical industry in these achievements, Mr Driscoll pointed to the sulfa drugs, penicillin, terramycin and tranquilizers as signs of medical progress during the past 20 years.
The compound used in that tranquilizer, chlorpromazine, was discovered in France and initially used in surgery, he said.
SK&F purchased the rights to the compound and supported an intensive two-year research program before introducing it to physicians in America.
Before the tranquilizers, half the hospital beds in America were occupied by mental patients.
In 11)56, for the first time in history, the number of hospitalized mental patients was reduced.
Such advances are made possible through research, and last year the pharmaceutical industry spent $200,000,000 to make such advances possible, Mr Driscoll said.
In 1960, Smith Kline & French is spending $18,500,000 in its search for new health products.
Because of rapid research advances, “the life of a new drug today has been estimated to be only from two to five years,” he said.
Nine of every 10 prescriptions written today are for drugs that simply did not exist 20 years ago.
To assure the patient gets “just what the doctor ordered,” exhaustive testing and quality control during manufacturing processes are required on each compound.
A single anti-ulcer medication is checked at SK&F 1170 times to assure its purity.
According to Department o Commerce studies, the average American spent a total of $11. for prescriptions in 1959.
Department studies show that drug prices have gone up about half as much as the increase of other items, Mr Driscoll said.
A survey by “American Druggist” magazine indicates the average prescription cost is now $3.14, he said.
Calling all children — to “ NeverNever-land' next Wednesday, November 15, at 3:45m.
You will find it at the Storyland Bazaar, held at the Unitarian Church.
Bob Munstedt (Mr Bob), comedian, ventriloquist and ouppeteer, will present a one-man ‘fun show” with a variety of acts Including Alex, the funniest wooden boy in town.
At that time ho lived in Switzerland, where he toured the neighborhoods with his puppet show.
During World War II he served in the Air Corps, Special Service, as staff sergeant.
Attached to the 312th Bomb Group, he carried not only his barracks bag and carbine, but also his accordion and his wooden pal, Alex Smallwood.
In spare moments from his duties Bob entertained the soldiers (and sailors) wherever they were ... in hospitals, on shipboard, in Red Cross centers, or just in open-air jungle theaters.
Bob, with or without his various puppets, has appeared many times on WBZ-TV television, and he and Alex have the distinction of having appeared on the very first telecast of that station.
On Thursday afternoon the hildren’s entertainment will be cartoon films, also at 3:45m.
Standing, Constance Sasso, Medford; Catherine Gould, Malden; Mary Fielding, Wakefield; Helen Rideout, District 18 membership hairman; Margaret Eikrem, department president; Mary Thorne, district president; Ruth Gorman, department chief of staff; Vivien Spinney, Woburn; Carolyn Kirby, Malden.
To Speak At Mission Union Guild The season's first mooting of Mission Guild of the First Congregational Church will bo hold in Chidloy Hall on Tuesday, November 14.
Sinclair is a member of the Second Congregational Church there and has been active in church work.
She is a former president of United Church Women of Massachusetts and treasurer of National United Church Women from which she went as a delegate* to the recent Assembly in Miami.
There, she wa* honored by being elected one of the Vice-Presidents of United Church Women.
Take rout** 93, turn right onto route 125, proceeding to route 1 28; follow 28 into Andover.
And he’s glad to have a backlog of Savings Bonds to help meet the expenses of setting up housekeeping.
He sends his youngsters to college, and Savings Bonds help out He retires — and Savings Bonds again have an important part In his life.
And in a business where few things are certain, it’s good to have one crop that never fails Personal experience, 20 years of it, has made America’s farmer one of the strongest boosters of U S Savings Bonds.
Bonds offer everything a farmer likes in an investment, dependability, good return immediate availability.
They in turn have served the Bond Pro gram, giving it their fullest endorsement and recommendation.
As the program observes its 20th year, the Treasury Department is proud to acknowledge this sup port.
After the opening ceremonies were conducted membership chairman, Helen Rideout of Malden Auxiliary presented 10 candidates for membership into the Ladies Auxiliary of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.
Department President Margaret Eikrem acted as chaplain and gave the obligation to the members.
After the new members were welcomed into their respective auxiliaries the department president was called upon for a few words.
She stated she was pleased to be present on this occasion and spoke briefly on the various programs scheduled for the balance of the year.
Membership, Hospital Work, Community Service, Publicity, Americanism, and the Dept.
Finance Chairman’s Project were a few of the many subjects she spoke on.
The Department Chief of Staff Ruth Gorman was introduced and recognized.
Louise Barentine, department publicity chairman, was asked to speak briefly on Publicity, which she did.
All three comrades expressed to the sisters present that it was a pleasure for them to be present on this occasion and hoped the Auxiliary would obtain many more new members in their membership drive.
Auxiliary President Mary Thorne with a substantial check which represented one-half the proceeds of the First Banquet held on September 23 in Melrose.
Chairman Bolivar stated he knew the Auxiliary would appreciate the check to carry on the wonderful work they are doing.
After the meeting closed an open house social was held and several ladies interested in the work of the Veterans of Foreign Wars Auxiliary enjoyed meeting the members of the various auxiliaries.
Membership Chairman Helen Rideout hopes that many of these ladies will be asking for applications to join the Auxiliary in the near future.
Delicious refreshments were served by Chairlady Gertrude Horn and her committee.
Adult Discussion Group At Second Church An adult Bible Study and Discussion group will begin a five week series of studies this Sunday night at 8:00m. at the Second Congregational Church.
I During these five weeks, the group i will center its attention upon the i message of the Old Testament and its relevance for the present day.
Specific attention will be given to the thesis that the Bible does speak to the world about national, social and individual tensions which exist in our time.
Irish-American Benefit Concert The Irish American Associates of Middlesex County have completed plans for their benefit concert and dance to climax the current fund drive for the African Foreign Mission Society.
The musical entertainment featuring Irish step dancing medalists and many of New England’s favorite radio and TV entertainers will be held Friday evening, November 17 at the Hotel Commander, Cambridge, beginning at 7:30.
Tickets for the concert and i dance are now on sale and may be | reserved by telephoning PR 6-0860 j or KI 7-6305.
Sinclair was sent by the national organization of United Church Women to India as a delegate to the International Prayer Fellowship meeting.
She spent several weeks travelling all over India, visiting colleges and missions.
While on this trip she also took the opportunity to visit missions in the Near East.
She will speak about her trip to India, and the Guild cordially invites all women interested in the mission work of the Church to hear a most informative and stiVnulating talk. hold its second monthly meeting on the campus of Phillips Andover Academy in Andover.
On Friday morring, November 17, the group will meet in the entrance hall of the Addison Art Gallery, before ten o’clock.
Recently he gave this lecture abroad, and it is a rare privilege to have the opportunity to hear it and to see the slides.
After the lecture there will be ample opportunity to see the display of paintings in the Museum.
This particular exhibition is a survey of thirty years of collecting, with special emphasis on acquisitions during the past five years.
If by chance anyone arrives later than ten o’clock, please do not try to find the group (which will be listening to Mr Hayes), but wait in the Gallery and study the paintings until the lecture is over.
There are two excellent and wellknown places for luncheon nearby, the Andover Inn and Fieldstones.
Turkey Winners The turkey whist held last week at K of C Hall by the Malden Hospital Alumnae Association for the benefit of needy nurses and student nurses was well attended and most successful.
Among the whist winners to receive turkeys were Bert Stevens, 27 Eaton Street, A1 Barnard, 52 Middlesex Street, Mrs.
Mather, 57 Ashland Street, Medford; and Mary Sullivan, 10 Hancock Street.
Anthony Pronski of Winchester, who headed the committee in charge of arrangements for the whist, wishes to extend her group’s sincere thanks to all who aided in any way in the success of the party.
Give your cherished pictures nc^v lije and beauty . . . oil paintings _ __ reframed . . . restored llolnnlm P Of aha it 4 * 78 Summer St.
TO— PHARMACY GIRL INC., LABS Fifth Avenue, Brookfield, Conn. oct 26 -tf Listen, Girls . »thcr day said there are s becoming clothes con’ l is personality with I, for one, think And don’t forget blunderers and drv it is a good tiling, that Wakefield Laundry’s expert cleaners ean he a great help in giving the men in your life that smart professionally groomed look.
Tel.5-0H6 If anyone had told him, a short while ago, that his 1961 Cadillac could be improved on — he would have regarded them with disbelief.
And yet, after only half an hour in the newest ,f car of cars”, he knows that a year of Cadillac progress has made a world of difference.
In fact, the list of Cadillac advancements for 1962 embraces each of the great motoring virtues.
For added beauty , there is a lower, longer silhouette . . . greater simplicity and dignity of line . . . and new interior elegance and luxury.
For improved comfort , there is increased spaciousness . . . new convenience of appointments . . . and a ride that is unbelievably quiet and smooth.
For increased safety , there is a new dual braking system ... a new three-phase rear warning light system . . . and new cornering lights that illuminate your way around turns.
And we would like to say that even Cadillac quality has been enhanced for 1962.
But the truth is simply that the car continues to be built to the highest standards that can be brought to the production of an automobile.
He’ll be happy to demonstrate to you what a difference a year can make — when the year is this one and the car is Cadillac.
FOR SIXTY YEARS THE STANDARD OF THE WORLD THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9.
Medford Laundromat and Appliance Service SI High St., Medford, EX 9-9775 nov9-2t BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES PAINT STORES Expanding National Paint Manufacturer HAS Dealer Franchise Available in Area. 12 to 36 Months Financing Merchandising Demonstrations Promotions National and Local Advertising Arranged.
WElls 5-0169 augl2-tf CONTRACTORS FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTORS Established 1914 Bulldozing — Excavating Driveways — Roads Landscaping-^-Trucking Loam, sana, gravel, crushed stone, shrubs Tel.
Just 10 min. from your town For alterations on that dress You will tind mu the best.
WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 nov2-4t ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 JUNK DEALERS Winchester and Woburn JUNK DEALER HIGHEST PRICES PAID For Rags.
PArkview 9-1346 augl2-tf WALTER J JOHNSON PAINTING Interior ami Exterior PAPER I NO PA 9-6014 nov9-tf FOR SAM 'omt running I — Hitlmn condition.
Fm Interior Painting, Ceilings Carpenter Work Reasonable, (rood References Immediate Service MO 6-8455 PIANOS PIANO CARE Tuning — Reconditioning Organs and Players Complete Rebuilding Clinton Jonas PArkview 9-0785 augl2-tf $150. ( ""all PA 9-2922.
FOR SALE Wringer type wn*l iet*. end tables, ski*, po lei, worn ianV toppe rn.
HIGHEST CASH PRICES Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Rons, alBo Rubbish Removal.
PA 9-2835 &pr6-tf Edward P Lynch RUBBISH REMOVAL 48 White Street, Winchester Tel.
PArkview 9-3516 Weekly Pick-Up If Desired janl2-t t In jrood condition.
CHRISTMAS TREKS < wholesale), selected fancy trees, that sell on sight.
Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, travel, brick all types, flue liners, drnin pipe, cesspool covers, fireplace dampers, cleanout doors, ash dumps and heatilators.
WElls 0670. july 6-tf RKUPHOLSTEKING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants.
Haverty, VVElli 3-5389. septl2-tf FOR SALK — 4-bedroom, 2 1 j bath home large cabinet kitchen, fl replaced livingroom, dining room and 2 dens.
FOR SALE — 1 drum table and coMY table with leather tops, 2 table lamps and 2 living room chairs.
For the finest, most dependable TVRADIOHI-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMBOS TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing.
Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. apr27-tf HELP WANTED WANTED Experienced Carpenters and Carpenters' Helpers Steady Work Please call after 5m.
FRED CAUSE, Contractor PA 9-0621 FOR SALE — Woburn, Central Square section, 6-room house, 3 bedrooms, tile bath.
FOR SALE — Estey organ, old fashioned manual operated, good condition, $12.
FOR RENT — Furnished combination living. bedroom, bath, kitchenette, all utilities, parking.
FOR RENT — In Winchester, G room upper apartment, fireplace, oil heat, porch, guruge.
FOR RENT — 2nd floor apartment, rooms, gas heater, gas stove*, hot water.
FOR RENT — Plennnnt five room apartment, comlpetely redecorated, quiet section near center.
FOR RENT — Professional office space with parking on grounds, cuntrai location.
Call PA 9-68G0. oct5-tf WANTED WANTF2D — Good home for fine German Shepherd dog. for nine months.
Cull PA 9-1253. nov9-2t * WANTED Ride from Everett to Winchester, 4-5 in the ufternoon.
POSITION WANTED — Woman deeii coking and serving dinner throe nights a week.
WANTED Home from Trip Mavis McGrath of the wollknown McGrath Travel Service of Woburn, has returned from a month’s trip to Rurope, including a visit to Russia.
She left Boston in the evening on a Pan American arriving in London the followuuc morning.
All arrangements in Russia were undor the direction of Intourist, the Russian State Tourist office and Miss McGrath’s eight days in Russia included four days in Moscow, where she stayed at the Metropolis Hotel.
It is interesting to note that when Miss McGrath visited the Mausoleum on October 3rd, Stalin held just as prominent a spot as Lenin.
From Moscow, a one hour flight on a Russian Jet took Miss McGrath for a four day stay at the Astoria Hotel in Leningrad.
Her English speaking Intourist guide accompanying her while sightseeing in the former St.
Petersburg, including the Winter Palace, the Hermitage, Peter and Paul Fortress.
From Leningrad, Miss McGrath returned to Moscow with her guide and then flew via Russian Jet to Prague, the capital of Czechoslovakia.
Nicholas Church, Strahov 11th Century Monastery, now a museum, former palaces, which are now embassy residences and many fine restaurants such as the Praha which was displayed at the World’s Fair in Brussels and then returned to Prague.
From Nice she went on to Cannes to attend the 31st World Travel Congress of the American Society of Travel Agents as the secretary of the New England Chapter of American Society of Travel Agents.
After a week at Cannes, on the French Riviera, Miss McGrath flew on a Sabena Jet to Brussels, where she spent three days visiting Brussels, Ghent and Bruges.
Sgt Jack Bateson Army recruit er in Winchester points out that many of the young women from this area have enlisted for the WACs under the exclusive two year enlistment program.
As a member of the Women’s Army Corps, traveling is made extra appealing by the exclusive tours at low rates scheduled by Special Services representatives.
Assignments overseas put the travel-minded WAC within easy reach of places she has always dreamed about.
SEWING MACHINE SERVICE SEWING MACHINE SERVICE— Elootric Sewing Machine Repair Service.
WElls t-0052. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS ANTIQUES— One horse sleigh with Swiss bells in beautiful condition, all TXJrner 4-3307.
It can be seen at G Maple Street, Chelsea. nov2-3t PLUMBING — Heating, Oil-burner sales and service.
WElls 81947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There is a way out.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling yoyr Authorised Travel Agent.
Largest Cymbal At Science Museum A resounding crash from the world’s largest cymbal is the earsplitting opener to the “World of Sound,’’ an unusual program at Boston’s Museum of Science which is being seen, and heard, by sonic 50.000 flth-to-lOth grade Greater Boston students this school year.
Its purpose is to explain the science of sound, with the help of some ingenious visual aids and sound effects.
Altogether, according to the educators who have seen it, they make this ninth annual School Visit Program the most effective yet in generating enthusiasm for science among local public, parochial and private school students.
The program is sponsored by the Metropolitan District Commission, and planned and conducted by the Museum’s Education Department.
During the lecture-demonstration, seen Tuesdays through Fridays in the Museum’s Morse Auditorium, sounds are created by many different methods.
They range from heating a grid in an eight-foot Pyrex gl^ss tube to catching a whisper from the back of the auditorium in an eight-foot parabolic reflector.
Students giggle delightedly as the lecturer changes his voice by breathing in a mouthful of helium before speaking, or sings a musical scale by snipping off the end of a drinking straw, bit by bit.
With a giant ear model, as big as himself, he reveals some of the wonders of the human ear that, next tothe eye, brings humans more information about the world than any other sense.
Other visual aids that help to clarify his explanation include a wave simulator, a 10-foot line of tiny lighted bulbs that forms giant mechanical waves to explain amplitude and frequency of sound waves; and an ear analog, an electronic device that shows how the nerves in the cochlea respond to various frequencies.
Among school groups attending the School Visit Program this past week at the Museum was the Immaculate Conception School of Winchester.
Treoa. nov2-Ht NOTICE OF LOST PASS BOOK In connection with the requirement * of Chapter 107.
To all persons interested in the «*state of MAHKI.I.K H LORD late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The executors of the will of Said MABRLLE H LORD have presented to said Court for allowance their first account.
Tho executors of the will of said RICHARD M BINSWANGER have presented to aaid Court for allowance their first account.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this sixteenth day of October, 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. ect26-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the trust estute under the will of MABELLE H LORD late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of LOUISE FRANCES EBERLE and others.
The trustees of aaid estate have presented to said Court for allowance their first to third accounts, inclusive.
To all persons interested in the estate of I.ORENCE M WOODSIDE, also known hh LORENCE MONSON WOODSIDE Late of Winchester In said County, deceased.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-seventh day of October 1961.
To all persons interested in the estate of CARMELA MO LEA, sometimes called CARMELA MU LEA, and CARMELA MOLAIR late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this tenth day of October 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. oct26-3t TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS November 3, 1961 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add to an existing garage attached to the premises numbered 61 Emerson Road, locating the same less than twenty feet from the lot line.
To all persons interested in the estate of DANIEL C DENNETT late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain Instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by Boston Safe Deposit and Trust Company of Boston in the County of Suffolk praying that it be appointed executor thereof without giving u surety on its bond.
John V Harvey, Register. nov9-3t TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS November 3, 1961 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add a garage with less than half the side wall in contact with the house, numbered 1 Salisbury Street, locating the same less than fifteen feet from the lot line.
By the Board of Appeal Oilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V French Daniel T Chane nov9-2t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To nil persona interested in the trust estnte under Article Ten of the will of WILLIAM A KNEELAND late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of FLORENCE L KNEELAND and others.
The trustees of said estate have presented to said Court for allowance their fourth und fifth accounts.
John V Harvey, Register oct26-S1 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all parsons interested in the estate of JOHN W THORNTON late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the lost will of said deceased by WINIFRED AMELIA THORNTON of Winchester in the County of MiddU«ex praying that ahe be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on Iu*r bond.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty -third day of October 1961.
To ull persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M ALICE MASON late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of JOHN S MASON and others.
The trustee of wiid estate has presented to said Court for allowance its first and second accounts.
Esquire, First Judge of aaid Court, tide twentythird day of October 1961.
THEN DIAL PA 9-0029 Fflge Sixteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1961 HOW BANKS HELP YOU TO A guiding principle of banking is that trust is inviolable.
This holds not only for money and property, but also for confidential information that depositors and customers entrust to a bank.
You can confide in members of our staff with every assurance that your desire for privacy will be respected.
Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Attended Conference Mrs.
Dana M Greeley of Boston president of the Unitarian Universalist Association, addressed the conference which was sponsored by several departments of the Association and also by some of the associated agencies.
Kimball is currently serving as treas urer of the continental Alliance of Unitarian Women, one of the sponsoring organizations.
Lee Ann Healey won the top vote of the customers for first prize in the salesgirls’ costume con| test.
JOHN B MERCURIO ‘INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED ” HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage at Less Cost l Ml.
Thousands of Communist East German border guards who pace the breastworks of their own prison now have the grim job of shooting down their fellow Germans who are struggling for freedom.
Now it seems the last echoes of the bomb will he punctuated by the staccato blast of machine guns driving our neighbors from our shelters.
Small Talk Our little talk today concerns the reprehensible manner in which too many parents tend to shunt their youngsters aside.
We must recognize that a child has needs which call out for satisfaction, and the very least we, as adults, can do is to give him or her the courtesy of interest in his ovej-tures.
Spiel Appeal It was, I thought, a wondrous speech, They ought to print and save it; I liked its tone, I liked its pace I liked it all.
PA.9-06S4 INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY PIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET Res.
EX 5-1317 High fidelity music in 1970 may emanate from living room wqlls, painted with a special chemical paint that conducts sound waves.
The walls will tune into the music’s frequency and one will be surrounded by true stereo sound.
For a change in mood music, the wall colors will change, too, it is added.
Tidbits That restful six percent of the people who have no political opinions must be somewhere, but they never show up any place I go.
A Maine logger, fresh from the big woods, was watching a store clerk open a package of gaily colored men’s pajamas.
A lady in heavy mourning entrusted a photographer with the task of enlarging the only snapshot she had preserved of her late husband.
A lady best described as a perpetual talker was asked by one of her long-suffering neighbors if she ever thought about what she was Toing to say before saying it.
Singing With Wellesley Choir Three students from Winchester, the Misses Marilyn Beckley, Martha Maloney and Susan Wallace are members of the 150voice Wellesley College Choir, which opened its 1961-62 season on Sunday, November 5, with the traditional Fall Vesper Concert at the college.
Later this season the choir will present concerts with the glee club of Williams and Hamilton Colleges, and will give their traditional Christmas and baccalaureate vesper concerts.
In addition, choir members sing at daily and Sunday chapel service on the campus.
Another first-year student, Miss Maloney is the daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Wallace is a sophomore at Wellesley and her parents arc Mr and Mrs.
Miss Beckley and Miss Maloney are Winchester High School graduates, while Miss Wallace prepared for college at Abbot Academy in Andover.
Public Affairs Award to Weaver Mr Miles R Weaver of 29 Winslow' Road, director of Publication Relations for Sylvania Electric Products Inc., has received an award for outstanding leadership during the year 1961 in the “Public Affairs Program for Massachusetts Businessmen” sponsored by the Associated Industries of Massachusetts.
The Board of Directors regards the new emphasis of Industry in Public Affairs as pre-eminent among its various programs.
Mr Weaver was given this award in recognition of his valuable contribution toward progress in advancing the economic growth of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Three models, plus duplicate bridge boards and an advanced course ir contract bridge.
Those who saw Mr Sheehan’s program presented by the club last vear will remember with pleasure his beautiful color slides of Epiphany.
Some of these slides are included in his newest lecture, “Steeple Chasing,” which is a pictorial review of travels from north to louth told in the beauty of places of worship.
Mr Sheehan, a well-known radio announcer with WHDH, describes the historical significance of such points of interest as stained .rlass windows, altars and carvings, itatues and architecture.
His in’ormative commentary is enhanced by music from world-great choirs and orchestras.
He takes his audience from the famous Boston churches to the outdoor splendor of the Cathedral of the Pines, from quaint Quebec City to the majestic beauty of the shrine of Ste.
Anne de Beaupre and then to great cathedrals and shrines in Washington, D.C. before returning to the familiar local churches.
See this fascinating' game at the Winchester Star, also the official aluminum duplicate bridge hoards and the advanced course in contract bridge.
Quality Footwear for men, Women and children since lillHi CoWct rd Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m.
S4VE*50“on this Caloric Ccckinq Heating Gasl&nge This Gold Star Award 40"" Gas Range has a built-in room heatei in one end.
Thermostat-controlled . . . wonderful for taking the chill off on Fall mornings.
You’ll love its cooking features, too . . . including the Burnerwith-a-Brain* that automatically prevents scorching . . . and the popular new Gas exclusive, a Keep-Warm oven with special low setting that lets you hold meals ""table-ready” for hours without overcooking.
Members of Winchester Post, 97, The American Legion, and Aberjona Post, 3719, Veterans of Foreign Wars, gathered at the Winchester War Memorial to pay tribute to the service dead of all wars.
Flanked by the colors are, left to right, Walter Appleton, commander of Winchester Post, and Robert Swyiner, commander of Aberjona Post.
Acting as escort to the veterans are regular and auxiliary police and members of the fire department.
Trumpeters from tin* Winchester High School Baud, who played taps during the exercises, were Peter Moulton and Terry Cron burg.
Town Meeting November 27 Lynch JHS Committee Asks $ 31,992 Members of the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee met with the Selectmen at their regular meeting Monday night to discuss additional expenses for which they will seek an appropriation at the November 27 Town Meeting.
Selectmen Express Approval f Paying Excess School Bills Town Accountant Continues Inquiry Into Validity Of School Expenses I he Board of Selectmen voted unanimously Monday night to express approval of Winchester’s paying “the balance of the unpaid obligations of the Johnson Road-Ridge Street School Building Committee that are now due and arc not under any legal restrictions.” d'he unpaid obligations total $21,502.11, including retainage.
Mr Clarke attended the meeting of the Selectmen at which the motion was discussed and voted.
Mr Clarke advised the Selectmen that while under the terms of the special act of the Legislature their action was not legally necessary, passage of the motion would indicate clearly how the Selectmen felt about the matter.
Under the terms of that special act, the signature of the Town Accountant and the State Director of Accounts on warrants to pay the excess expenditures is required before the Selectmen can finally approve the bills and authtrize the Town Treasurer to pay them.
Chairman of the Board Sherman W Saltmarsh at first expressed his opinion at the meeting that passage of the motion would be unnecessary, but concurred in the consensus of the Board.
Additional expenditures found desirable by the committee because they can now be purchased with Federal school aid at 30 cents on the dollar, total $17,623.
They include $9,000 for additiona 1 construction items, $666 for architect’s fee, and $7,957 for school furniture and equipment.
Revision of hoys’ basket trucks in locker room, $410. , Metal ceilings in boys’ toilet rooms to replace composition tiles already destroyed by boys in acts of vandalism, $500.
Wall fan in foods room, $600 to | on the March 5th ballot, correct situatibn of obnoxious odors filtering through school.
Cut into bank in football field to correct situation in which goal posts are too close to brook, $400.
John M Harrington, chairman of the By-Law Revision Committee and State Representative Harrison Chadwick, who will introduce the bill in the House of Representatives.
It is hoped that the Legislature will act on the measure quickly enough to permit the referendum question to appear The referendum reforms, four in number, were approved by the Town Meeting in April, 1961 and in a referendum by the Town at large on May 15.
Requiring the signatures of 3% of the Town’s registered voters on petitions for referenda; Clarifying and simplifying the language of referenBloodmobile Here On November 27th The Red Cross Bloodmobile will be at the Church of the Epiphany on Monday, November 27 from 12:45 to 6:45m.
For those of you who have yet to donate that first pint of blood, here is an opportunity to assure yourself and your immediate family of blood coverage for the next 12 months.
It’s easy, it’s not time-consuming — approximately 45 minutes — and you will have the wonderful feeling of giving that precious lifesaving fluid.
No personal injuries, however, were reported to police at the scene of the accident.
Starr of 58 Bright Road, Belmont, was in collision with his front door.
Mr Starr told police that he had thereafter pulled over to the westesly side of Washington Street when his car and one operated by Mrs.
Poliee estimated damage to Mr Starr’s car at $150, Mr Guaranccia’s at $50, and Mrs.
Town Pays $25,000 For Play Site The South Border Road Corporation has received a payment of $25,000 from the Town for a 1. acre lot of land on Dennett Road, which the Town will use as a playground.
The Town’s purchase of the property was authorized by the Town Meeting of March, 1961.
The negotiations for the sale of the land to the Town were conducted with the South Border Road Corporation by Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke and the Board of Park Commissioners.
The corporation received a rebate of $31.97 for the full year’s taxes it has already paid to the Town.
The rebate covered the period from* October 9 when the Board of Park Commissioners decided to take the land until December 31 of this year, when the tax year expires.
Editorial A Good Word For Youth Winchester special Juvenile Officer James Cogan asked the Star to convey his congratulations to Winchester youth on Hallowe’en night.
Officer Jim said there were only four minor complaints about Hallowe’en pranksters.
WHEREAS, the Town has authorized the construction of an elementary school in the Johnson Road-Ridge Street area and given full authority in relation thereto to the Johnson RoadRidge Street School Building Comm.
NOW THEREFORE IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, that the Board of Selectmen hereby approve for payment the balance of the unpaid obligations of the Johnson Road-Ridge Street School Building Committee that are now due and are not under any legal restrictions amounting to and totalling $21,502.11.
Forty typewriters for typing rooms, $7,400. for in simple majority vote in referenda to approve a given Town Meeting action; and Requiring the signature of 20 ' r of the Town’s registered voters to reverse an action of Town Meeting.
League Open Meeting November 28 To Discuss Greater Boston Planning Although the League of Women Voters of Winchester has taken no official stand in favor of a specific plan for regional cooperation, it has studied planning needs for the Boston area for one full year and is continuing that study as a State League item this year.
Because* of critical transportation problems, increasing urban renewal projects, population shifts, and pressures for changes in the tax structure, public interest in mores comprehensive planning in some form is increasing.
For this reason, the League will hold an open meeting at the Lynch Junior High School Tuesday, November 28th, at 8:00m.
The panel of experts who will discuss “Planning for Greater Bostuii” are Reverend W Seavey Joyce, dean of the College of Business Admin* istratjon of Boston College and moderator of the Channel 2 “Metropolis” program; Mr Ralph Kaminsky, director of the Greater Boston Economic Study Committee; and Mr Howard Whitmore, Jr., ex-Mayor of Newton.
Written parental consent for those 18 through 20 is required EXCEPT those who are in the Armed Forces or married.
Yes, after your first donation you will be mailed a card showing your blood type.
Beyond this period blood is specially processed into useful medicine or derivatives which arc always in great demand.
For donor and recipient safety each donor relates facts about his medical history, such as past illnesses.
Blood pressure, temperature, pulse, weight and hemoglobin are determined.
BLOODMOBILE, cont. page 5 1962 Warrant To Close On January 8th At their regular meeting Monday night the Selectmen set aside Monday, January 8th as the deadline for submitting articles to be included in the Warrant for the regular 1962 Town Meeting.
There will be two vacancies on the Board of Selectmen, among other posts, to be filled at this election. •fudge Seeks Hettev Fueilities Henchey Asks Full-Time Court Justice W illiam H Uenchey of the Fourth District Court in W oburn was the guest speaker at last week's luncheon meeting of the W inchester Rotary Club in the Masonic Apartments.
Introduced by Charlie Murphy, the judge made a humorous approach to his subject by saying that, busy as he was with court duties, it was easier to prepare a speech and come to Winchester to make it than it was to say “no” to the ebullient Mr Murphy.
I he judge had an address prepared, hut had to “go it blind”, as he said, due to the fact that when he got to the speaker’s rostrum he found that Mr Murphy had “snitched” his notes and would not return them.
If Judge Henchey was non-plusscd at the theft, he showed it not at all.
He first stressed the importance of the Fourth District Court which serves the police of seven communities, three state police barracks, Registry of Motor Vehicles inspectors and the Metropolitan District Police.
Judge Henchey, in his remarks, emphasized two facts, first, that Woburn needs a full-time court and second, that the present court quarters are not large enough.
He told the Rotarians that there is now a hill before the General Court to make the court at Woburn a full time court.
Presently it is in session mornings and one evening a week for the benefit of probationers, to enable them to report to the court without losing a day’s work.
Judge Henchey is commencing his 25th year at Woburn and in his years on the bench has won the reputation of a wise and humane disciplinarian.
On July 25, 1961, the executive secretary of the Supreme Judicial Court wrote the clerk of the court in Woburn, “Your quarters continue to be one of the problem children of the court system.
Harry Ciarcia Lodge, 1592, Sons of Italy, receives the lodge’s Mother of the Year award troui Mrs.
William HENCHEY, continued on page 6 -Vlaggiu, uoat. venerable of the lodge, at a uiceling held November 7 at Sum of Italy llali.
Emergency Committee For WGBH The Winchester Emergency Committee to help WGBH and Channel 2 has mailed to Winchester residents appeal brochures describing WGBH plans for rebuilding after the disastrous fire of October 14.
Listeners and viewers who are grateful for the excellence of the WGBH and Channel 2 programs are being asked to contribute toward a goal of over $1,500,000 needed for a permanent building and new equipment.
To date $285,000 of the needed $1,500,000 has been mailed to the station from the listening area.
Brochures and information about the townwide appeal for funds to help rebuild WGBH and Channel 2 are available at the Star Office.
Morse Plans Visit Here On November 28 Congressman Bradford Morse will confer with constituents in Winchester Town Hall during an informal lunch hour from 12:30 to 1:30m. (sandwiches and coffee will be on sale) and continue until 4:30m.
He will welcome one and all who have problems in which he may be helpful.
Lon^-Fstablislied Realty Company Blend of Old and New The Ruth (V Porter Company is a blend of the old and the new.
J In continuous operation since its inception in 1981, this outstanding I local real seute firm has grown steadily with the Town of Winchester; it is now in its 81st year I of real estate service.
The firm j has already transacted over $12,j 000, in Winchester sales in 1901.
The building in which the Ruth C Porter Company maintains its offices was Constructed back in 1812.
Owned by Mrs. (iretrude H j Murphy, the building, too, has seen many changes and now consists of four stores and three offices, all occupied by thriving business concerns.
The sales staff consists of Richard H Murphy, Marian R Ferriman, Charles T McCarthy, Flor cnee M Salyer, James F Quine, all of whom are residents of Winchester.
Gertrude H Murphy, is a longtime resident of the town, and after 25 years with the company, is still very active in local real estate.
In addition to the office at 88 Thompson Street, the Ruth O Porter Co. maintains another rapidly growing office in Sudbury, where business is conducted in the same friendly, competent and honest manner that has been the foundation of the company's continued growth and success in Winchester. porting a house fire.
It was only a pile of leaves burning, no onr knows why i or how, on the streot >in front of j the house.
CLASSIFIED AD IN THE STAR BRINGS RESULTS A Tribute To Larry Cooper At the last meeting of the school committee the committee voted a tribute to F Meredith Cooper which will be incorporated in its minutes and in the town report.
As a teacher he possessed those qualities of competence, dedication and sympathetic understanding which epitomize the best in his profession.
His leadership as head of the department of social studies was responsible for the substantial developments in that department in the past few years.
A gentleman in every sense of the word, he quietly, effectively and unselfishly gave of his time and efforts to his pupils, his town’s government, his church and his family.
C Holy Name Society on Sunday, November 12, was highlighted by the honor of having one of its own members elected to the treasurer’s position on the archdiocesan level of officers for a term of two years.
Franklin G Flahive of 49 Russell Road was duly elected to take the office December 3.
Mr Flahive addressed the group following Mass, stressing the importance of being an active Holy Name man on the parish level and emphasized the indulgences to be gained by following the principles of the society.
Coming events are the convention at the Bradford Hotel, Boston, December 8, and the second annual dinner at Blinstrub’s January 28, 19(12.
Guild of The Infant Saviour Daughters of Guild members who will usher at the illustrated lecture by Mrs.
Mary Ann Johnson Patricia McDonald Christine Brigham Peggy Hoffman Frances Winterson Jean Marchant Mary Armstrong After the lecture, Mrs.
John McDonald The Guild extends a cordial invitation to all to hear this lecture, and tickets may be obtained by calling Mrs.
The award will he presented at the association’s annual Awards Banquet, this year being held at the Hotel New Brunswick at the corner of Massachusetts Avenue and Norway Street in Boston.
The banquet is open to the public, and tickets at $5 may be secured from Frank Finigan at the high school, PA 9-4800, or Ml 34404.
AND ) NONE IN 1 SELECTIONS Big Selection ZZ TOYS 66c| Plenty of V S Z TOYS $1.34 GIGANTIC PENNY SALE Selected List 1 Buy 1 at Reg.
Woburn buzzed in on that really bad fire that destroyed a private dwelling on Porter Street, and we sent two engines, one to fill in at the station at one to actually cover the fire, which started in the backyard of the house.
Captain Connolly and firefighters Paul Haggerty and John Nash covered in at Woburn, on Engine 3, while on Engine 2, Lt.
Joe Connolly and firefighters Bob Haggerty and Joe Riga went to the fire.
While covering in at the Woburn station Winchester’s Engine 2 responded to another fire in Woburn, this time at 15 Mount Pleasant Street.
This one apparently started in a bedroom on the first floor of the house, and was brought swiftly under control.
No sooner had the Winchester engines returned home at 4:35m. when there was another call from 93 Grove Street of this town reThe delightful, easy way to LEARN BRIDGE or Improve your game AUTOBRIDGE the play yourself Bridge Gamr r I r ■U G iiiiliisii lUiildin"" IV rni its The following building permits were issued for week ending Friday, November 10.
Cra ak A tS 4 29 j, 5 ""’-*) JUl'cy CSS ■ I THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY NOVEMBER 16, 1961 Page Three Winchester Toastmistress Club Denton W Randal] Don Orione Fiesta ©bttitams — try A Captain •ath, Jr.
Philip F Hauck Denton William Randall of 10 Everell Road, former proprietor of Randall's ice cream, candy and catering establishment on Mt.
Vernon Street, died suddenly Saturday evNovember 11, at the WinThe Common Room, Church of the Epiphany, was the meeting place for the Winchester Toastmistress Club last Monday night, November 13, at 8:00m.
Pamela Papadinis told us about her study of stained glass, and showed us how stained glass is cut into the various shapes.
Dorothy Staffer talked about “Indians’ Rights and Rituals,” covering all phases of Indians’ lives from baptism, courtship to marriage.
The Winchester Toastmistress Club is composed of women from Winchester, Medford, Arlington, Woburn, Malden and Melrose.
The club invites all women interested in self-improvement to come and see the club at work.
Charles Hunter 60 Lorena Road, the birth of their first Charles, on TuesMr and Kerrigan announce child, David day, November 7 at the Richardson House.
Joseph H Kerrigan of Stoneham and Manchester-by-the-Sea. ening, Chester Hospital following a heart attack.
He was born September 2, 1892, in Prince Edward Island, Canada, but spent his boyhood on Peak’s Island in Casco Bay, Me., later living in Boston and Somerville.
He attended Portland High School, Roxbury High School and graduated from Somerville Harry A McGrath, Jr., of Winchester and Winthrop died* Tuesday morning, November 14, at the Baker Memorial Hospital after a brief illness.
Captain Philip Frederick Hauck, USN, of 41 Canterbury Road, died Monday, November 6, in Washington, D.C., where he was attached to the office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as head of the Atlantic and Caribbean Division.
Roswell M Bout well, 3rd, of Sheffield Road is a hostess and member of the Ladies’ Committee in charge of the New Members’ Tea this afternoon at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
In 1914 Mr Randall came to Winchester and joined his father in the ice cream, candy and catering business on Mt.
The business prospered and built an enviable reputation for the quality of its products and the cleanliness of its quarters.
After his father’s death in 1921 Mr Randall took over the business, and continued to run it successfully until he retired in 1948.
He first lived on Lloyd Street and later for many years at his Everell Road address.
He was also a member of William Parkman Lodge of Masons, the First Congregational Church and its Men’s Club, and of the Evergreen Improvement Association at Peak’s Island.
On September 15, 1921, Mr Randall married Lucy Hardy of Winwho survives, with two HARRY A McGRATH, JR the last tea in November a year ago, a number that has helped increase the Museum membership to more than 10,000.
He was born December 9, 1920, in Boston but grew up in Winchester and was graduated from Winchester High School in the class of 1938.
From high school he went to New Hampton Preparatory School and was attending Boston College when World War II broke out.
He enlisted on the day following Pearl Harbor in the Naval Air Corps, later serving in the Army Air Force.
While in the Army he was in charge of athletics for Air Force personnel in North Africa and designed a golf course for their use in that theatre.
An ardent golfer, Mr McGrath commenced playing with his father in father-and-son matches at the Winchester Country Club at the age of six, the pair continuing in this yearly competition until the younger Harry entered the service.
The senior Harry was one of those influential in instituting the father-and-son tourneys at the Photo by Ityer^on aiullari, Eunice MaiPLANNING DON ORIONE FIESTA etta and Geri Buzzotta.
Flower or Fruit arrangements for his Office? Smith Club Candle Sale, tomorrow at 6 Everett Avenue.
A Fruit grouping by The weekly meeting of the Winchester Friends of Don Orione was held on Monday night, November 13, at the Barbo Auditorium.
Plans for the Don Orione Home for the Aged Fiesta were developed further.
This fiesta will take place on Tuesday, November 28, at the Sons of Italy Hall on Swanton Street, and the dinner will be served from 6m. to 9m.
On hand will be the Don Orione Flying Kitchen and its corps of fine chefs.
There will also be a display of religious articles on the second floor with priests of the home in attendance.
Persons interested in attending this fiesta are invited to contact committee members.
Angelo Maictta, chairman Chief Joseph Derro Mr Leonard Barbo Dr. and Mrs.
Aldo Minotti Miss Eunice Maietta Mr Robert Maietta Mr Andrew Biggio -Mrs.
Geri Buzzotta Mr Robert Caggiano The donation will he $5.00 per person.
The proceeds will be used to continue the work and expand facilities of the Home for the Aged and to help build the national shrine to the Madonna.
With your help we can have a very pleasant evening and at the same time assist this charitable and noteworthy cause.
Francis E, Final Report on UNICEF Halloween CAPTAIN PHILIP F HAUCK Captain Hauck was the son of Mrs.
He was horn August 23, 1913, in Brooklyn, N.Y.; and spent his boyhood there, graduating from James Madison High School in Brooklyn and from the United States Naval Academy in the class of 1935.
In 1941 Captain Hauck was attached to the Battleship Utah when she was sunk by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor.
He received a letter of commendation from the Secretary of the Navy for his rescue of shipmates at that time.
He then was assigned to the USS Duncan, a destroyer, as gunnery officer and participated Francis E Rogers of 29 Elm Street, a lifetime resident of Winchester and prominent in local Knights of Columbus circles for finy years, died Monday evening, 13, at the Winchester in clevcl ma November 13 t Hospital, after a short illness.
He was born February 11, 1880, in Winchester town Chester schools, retirement 16 oping countries may be protected from tuberculosis, thanks to the generosity shown on Halloween by citizens of Winchester, Metcalf Union announced yesterday.
At the Winchester Star. some UNICEF Trick or Treat program of the Unitarian Church School.
In . terms of the aid given to 56 million needy children and mothers by the United Nations Children’s Fund in grew up in the being educated in the WinHe was until his years ago for 45 years in the employ of the Boston and Maine Railroad as a freight cashier.
The oldest living member of Winchester Council, 210, Knights of Columbus, Mr Rogers had served the council as Grand Knight as trustee and as inquisitor, during his 52 years membership.
A regular attendant at meetings until his health failed, he was especially active in promoting the Council’s welfare and particularly interested in the degree work of the Council.
He was a member of Pope Pius X Assembly, Fourth Degree, Knights of Columbus, and of St.
He and the late Luke P Glendon were co-workers in the Knights of Columbus and the railroad as well as close friends.
He is survived by a niece, Miss Helena M Rogers, with whom he made j Chester, daughters, Mrs.
Thomas H Hoover of North Canton, Ohio; eight grandchildren; a sister, Margaret, living on Peak’s Island; and a brother, Roy, of Newton.
Earle MacNeill Randall, lost his life in a plane crash while serving with the Marines at Quantico, Va., after Wbrld War I Funeral services were held Tuesday afternoon at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister, Dr.
A daily glass of milk for 5,900 children for a month. Penicillin to cure 7,000 children of yaws, a crippling tropical difor their “very own” perfect gifts for everyone gagement and during the war received two Silver Stars, a Bronze Star and a Commendation Ribbon.
After the Duncan Captain Hauck commanded another destroyer, the USS Bennett, built at the Charlestown Navy Yard, in which he participated in seven Pacific campaigns.
From December 1944, to January of 1947, he was an instructor at the Naval Academy in Annapolis, and then attended the Armed Forces Staff College at Norfolk, Va.
Following two years of duty in the Bureau of Personnel at the Navy Department in Washington, Captain Hauck was next assigned in 1952 to the USS Worcester, a heavy Cruiser based in Boston, and it was at this time that he came to make his home in Winchester.
In 1953 he commanded a destroyer division based at Newport, R.I., then for a ALL GIFT BOXED KEY CHAIN • » • Handsome gold-fone accessory for pocket or purse.
Initialed ' $4 50 personal loud Shiverick An unusual and inexpensive gift.
Navy veteran of the Spanish-Amcrican War, died Tuesday morning, November 14, at the Winchester Hospital after a year of poor health.
Makepeace, Inc., Later he was until his morning at 8 o clock from the Lane Funeral Home with Requiem High Mass celebrated at St.
Captain Hauck was commanding officer of the USS Rockbridge, an amphibious assault ship which took part in the Marine landings in Lebanon during July of 1958.
He commanded Destroyer Squadron 10 and participated with units of his squadron in the opening of the St.
In November of 1959 he was assigned as chief of staff to the Commander of the Cruiser Force of the United States Atlantic Fleet, and it was from this assignment that he returned to Washington last July to the office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, his final duty post.
On June 8, 1937, Captain Hauck married Virginia Hustvedt, daughter of Vice Admiral and Mrs.
Hauck survives, with Card of Thanks FUR BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL PEOPU We wish to thank most sincerely our neighbors and friends for the beautiful flowers, spiritual bouquets and other expressions of kindly sympathy extended us in our recent bereavement.
Mr Hopkins was born in Concord, graduated from Boston College with the class of 1915, and from the Bentley School of Accounting and Finance.
He was associated as a payroll auditor with the American Mutual Liability Insurance Company.
A resident of Winchester for the past 20 years, Mr Hopkins was a Let us answer your phone in our office while you arc out. ford Railroad.
He was a member of the First Congregational Church and held the 50-year medal of Massachusetts Lodge of Masons of Boston.
He leaves his wife, Clara; a son, Frank T Shiverick of Winchester; a daughter, Mrs.
Ruth Van Landingham of Pomona, Calif.; two grandchildren, two sisters, Mrs.
Family services will-'be conducted Thursday forenoon at the Bennctt-Norris Chapel by Dr.
Paul Ward of 28 Stone Avenue, died Sunday morning, November 12, at her daughter’s home after an illness of three months.
She spent her girlhood in Nova Scotia, hut later lived for many years on Middlesex Street in Lowell and was employed at Pollard’s department store in that city.
Besides Funeral services Were held on Thursday, November 9, at the Chapel at Fort Myer, Va.
Joseph E O’Donnell t\, pastor of the First Baptist ’hwrrh, officiating.
Satin finish gold tone top make* this a most attractive motch book cover, for pocket, purse gm OO or home use.
Funeral services will be held riday afternoon at 2 o’clock at le McLaughlin Funeral Home in foburn.
Burial will be in Calvary The Winchester Star 3 Church St, Personalized stationery for every one.
Benedict F Massed, chairman of the Massachusetts Heart Association’s rheumatic fever committee, Massachusetts parents should be alert for signs of streptococcal infection, forerunner of rheumatic fever.
Massell offered the following Civil Defense chaplains and social welfare workers.
I or her agency volthe child of it as quickly as pos . unteers should an emergency arise.
Waldo Pisco, acting director gible wil , RO f ar toward cutting the of the Civil Defense Agency for Boston, administered the oath. | rheumatic fever toll.
A common sign of streptococcal infection is a sore throat, hut not every sore throat is a “strep” infection.
By following these directions on when to call the doctor, parents Christian Science Thanksgiving Service A special service on Thanksgiving Day has been announced by First Church of Christ Scientist Winchester.
Local members have invited the public to attend this Thanksgiving service which will be held in the church edifice on Thursday, November 23, at 11:00m.
If your child gets a sore throat Grove Street branches off, and is the home of Mrs.
Some say it is the oldest home “ 1 .. . . , . * u f rvu toms listed below, phone your docin Winchester.
Did the sore throat come on around the roof mukes identification more difficult.
The house was built by Deacon John Symmes and later occupied suddenly by his sons, Luther Richardson 2.
Cut in the stone are his initials, L.R.S DA 2-8785 DA 2-8785 ""fVEESS^ Sp#n> FRED ASTAIRE Will Give You A *25 Course / of Private DANCING LESSONS FREE FREE Somewhero in W* ad are three vnistptUd words.
Preient Students and Previous Contestant* Are Not Eligible Fred m A m DANC starve DANCE STUDIO* Haldtn Stodloi 17 Pimant St.
These signs and symptoms help your doctor decide if he should examine your child for strep infection.
Your youngster isn’t likely to have all these symptoms and only your doctor can tell if your child has a strep infection.
Your job is to report any of these signs and symptoms as soon as you notice them so that your doctor can start treatment right away.
This is how you help the doctor protect your child against rheumatic fever.
He said that those selected under the program will attend a special course of training in basic military fundamentals at one of the combat arms schools, and will then attend a basic course in the branch on which he has been appointed.
Robert Grady Show At Library The Winchester Art Association is currently sponsoring an exhihi tion of watercolors and woodcuts by Robert Grady in the Winchester Library.
When asked by some of his Winchester students why he has departed from the strictly representational art demanded of beginning students, he attempted to explain the attitude of those who paint more creatively.
Nature is used as a point of departure, and the artist progresses to more creative expression, perhaps to more abstract forms.
Some of the pictures in the library start to depart into more abstract forms, but the symbols of nature are still recognizable.
His woodcuts, especially, are strong, simple, and may appeal to some more than the watercolors.
The woodcut “Bob” attempts to show the strength of his father’s face and hands, and it succeeds in both expression and design.
The areas of design are first indicated in color, and, while still wet, the outlines of boats, figures, etc., are drawn in ink, which runs some what into the watercolor.
The “Pond” has been purchased by the De Cordova Museum for its permanent collection.
All of these pictures are worthy of much study by the aspiring painter, and by those who wish to understand more about different types of art.
These pictures will hang in the North Reading room until the end of November. gram Chairman.
Registry Opens Woburn Office The Registry of Motor Vehicles announces the opening on November 2 in the Woburn Armory a temporary office for the purpose of processing 1962 registration applications only.
Inspector Anthony J Melaragni of Winchester, who is in charge of the Woburn office, announces that no operators’ licenses will be handled there.
The Woburn office will function under the Malden office, of which John W Avjian is supervising hearings officer.
Established ten years ago as a convenience to local registrants, the Woburn office is open Monday through Friday from 8:45m. to 5m.
The anuual concert and entertainment of the Winchester Police Department for the benefit of the department’s relief fund was held on Tuesday evening, November 7 in the memorial auditorium of the high school.
Seven acts of professional enter tainment wore presented with mu sic furnished by Ruby Newman’s Orchestra under the baton of Fred die Guerra.
Anden’s Performing Poodles, re cently featured with the Liberace Show Pat Theriault, wizard of the banjo Paul Winik and Edna Mae, de lightful dancers General Grant, modern decep tionist Vicki Taylor and her boy friend “Ronnie,” comedy a la carte Kirk Stevens, dynamic song stylist The Boginos, famous European family in a whirlwind novelty Members of the annual concert committee were Roland J Roy, chairman; John H Elliott, treasurer; Joseph Quigley, secretary.
John J Dolan Secretary — Joseph L Quigley Trustees — James E Flaherty Daniel Pearson, Edward F Bowler Pacific Panorama Planned The Tandem Club of the Church of the Epiphany announces a night of Polynesian feasting and viewing.
John W Ellison, renowned chef of Chinese cookery, will prepare the following menu for your gastronomical pleasure.
Appetizer Don Far Dow-Foo Gai Tong Entree Liches Boo-Lo Gai Pan Shu Pe-Good Har Kew Chow Fan Kar-Toy Chow Gee Yoke including Kai-Toy Sam Shoon Don-Koo Bok-Toy Sheet-Dow Dessert will be a dark Oriental secret that will come to light in Mrs.
Donald Van Roosen is ProThe appetizer, Don Far Dow-Foo Gai Tong, will be served instead of juice from 7 to 7:30 in the Suter Room.
Mr Russell is particularly well versed in this subject, as he has made several trips to our fiftieth state and has recorded the sights, scenes, people and personalities of the land of the hula, the grass skirt, the beautiful beaches and the waving palms.
Members and friends of Epiphany are cordially invited to participate in this memorable and unusual occasion.
Please make reservations by Saturday, November 25, by calling the Thayers, PA 9-1126 or the Bensons, PA 9-4461.
Luncheon For Noonan Teachers The teaching staff of the Noonan School were entertained at a luncheon Tuesday, November 7th, by the executive board in the Noonan School auditorium.
Colorful decorations and table settings of candles and pine were arranged by Mrs.
The food, which was most delectable, was prepared and served by these mothers to the executive board of the Parents’ Association and to the teachers at Noonan School, including Miss Minnetta Jurgenaon, principal, and Mrs.
Ralph R Meigs, secretary of The Fortnightly, tin hoar about tho Middle East by Mrs.
The speaker was most attractive in a red ceremonial costume, trimmed with gold thread and braid.
She said one of the most amazing facts was the way people, and especially women, follow the same customs of more than 3,000 years ago.
She spoke of the women visiting the wells at 4m. each day, and carrying a water-jug home on their shoulders.
For all that, she felt that the women knew of the world’s progress and were hoping for a chance to be more like other countries.
Henderson visited friends in Beirut, Lebanon, which was not quite as bare and sandy as some other Arab countries.
However, she said it was hot there in July, but the climate in the hills above the city was cool and delightful, although they could see the arid Dead Sea 1,500 feet below sea level.
These Arab countries have very religious backgrounds in each of their particular religions, but are very different politically.
Visitors are not allowed to return to one of their countries one they pass over the boundaries into another state.
Bethlehem has many Christian churches, and only one minaret, but that is unique.
She had a lovely water-jug with a delicate pattern in color, a testament with an olive wood cover, and some cutlery with carved wooden, bone or horn handles.
Savings Bond Program has been lucky in having the dedicated support of thousands af American women.
Their wonderful cooperation has from the War Bond tours of Hollywood’s brightest stars to helping to operate the Savings Stamp Program for the Nation’s small fry.
The special talents of American women Many a boy and girl wouldn’t have a full Savings Stamp book, but for Mom.
And many a Bond would not be sold, but for the army ot women volunteers who put their strength be* hind the Savings Bond Program.
Why iVe worth listening to the ladies Every United States Savings Bond yon buy is guaranteed to grow by Uncle Sam.
Savings Bond Program we salute the volunteer spirit of the Women of America.
By buying bonds and encouraging others to do eo, we help build a more secure future for ourselves and for our country.
J «*%C yC Honorary Chairman, National Women’s Advisory Commit too for Saving** Bonds Yon save more than money with U.S.Savings Bonds Buy them where you work or bank ft For 20 America's newspapers have published Savings Bonds ode at no cost to the Government.
A I which turned out for last Monday’s meeting at h*r very attractive C abot Street home.
Lyle j Longworth, she divulged the tremendous success of “Morning, j Noon and Night in Suburbia,” the j to realize that their donkeys and recent M.S.P.C.A. benefit fashion dogs actually have feelings.
In addition to organization flying the American the fine humane work being done flag in a foreign land.
Gibson then described the shocking situation at the “Duck Feeding Station” across from Norumbegu Park.
C nor anyone else does anything about their feeding in the winter — except one Mr Walter Koe of Wayland, the “Buck for a Duck” man, whose hobby and life work it has been.
Gertrude Groesinger of the Animal Rescue League, who has worked for years in the pet placement department.
She conducts a weekly program, describing her pets-for-ndoption at the moment.
Long before she goes off the air. tlu* phones aie . ringing with calls from eager people who have fallen in love (by radio) with some animal she has inentioned.
Make additional payments at any time prior to Christmas, and when the full amount is paid, you will receive the toy reserved for you.
BEAUTY PARLOR ONLY Florida — Full of Juice Yellow Variety — Adds Extra Zest Unbreakable 25"" Doll — Hair Dryer — Swivel Chair — Hair Styling and Beauty Accessories.
Yellow — Firm and Flavorful ONLY Works Like a Real Car — Ignition Key, Windshield Wiper, Signals, Horn, Shitt, Brake, Antenna, Gauges, Etc.
Why Retire Among other matters with which Winchester must come to grips some time is the general feeling that selectmen should not serve beyond the three-year term for which they art* elected.
The Star was discussing this single three-year term thinking with a particularly capable former town officer recently and found he was not at all sold on it.
As we have on several occasions questioned its value, we were interested and pleased to get his concurrence.
The three-year term for selectmen was not primarily enacted here to prevent continuity in office.
Rather, it was adopted to relieve a candidate for the hoard of the stress and expense of standing for re-election for a second term or more.
Desirable candidates were becoming increasingly reluctant to wage the campaign necessary for election more than once, and it was felt that if a candidate could be elected for three years, instead of yearly, more and better candidates would be attracted.
Most selectmen in the days preceding the voting of the three-year term ran for no more than three years, though this was not always the case.
As the years rolled by and the duties of selectmen became more and more complex and time-consuming, incumbents seldom served for more than three years, though there were exceptions, notably that of Walter H Dottcn, who served for seven years.
Holding office as a selectman today however, is entirely different from such service in the days of Messrs.
Administering the government of a town of some Is The Truth Every once in a while we get to feeling that Winchester has become accustomed to getting news al>out Town Hall.
We suppose that everyone realizes that the people have a legal right to know what their elected, or appointed, officials are doing and that they expect their local newspaper to report these doings.
Now, when you get to calling reporting the truth “in bad taste,” it seems to the Star that in the majority of cases you’re far out on a slim limb.
It also seems to the Star that anyone who doesn’t want to see the truth published is probably concerned with something other than taste. i i i There arc at least two things that have to be said on this subject of reporting Town Hall news.
By and large most Town departments are not only cooperative with the Star in reporting news but happy to be.
Most especially, the Star has enjoyed increasingly productive news-gathering relations with the Board of Selectmen and the Town Accountant, among others.
The expression “Red or Dead” has a fair measure of rhyme but precious little reason.
It reveals a shocking lack of faith in the competitive power of American society, a naive belief in Soviet omnipotence, and a rather casual attitude toward death.
To suggest that the only alternatives open to adult Americans are mass death in nuclear war or capitulation to Soviet domination is to confess a belief that under conditions ot peace one doesn’t believe that we can win the ideological and economic battle with the Communist system.
To the Star thi.s is the sheerest nonsense. ( liven the productive capacity, the revolutionary economy, and the intellectual flexibility of the American system, it seems to us that in any competition with the Soviet Union, time, wealth, and a big head start put us far out in advance.
To concede, therefore, that unless we and the Russians blow each other to smithereens we’re going to he bossed by the Kremlin, contradicts all known facts and shows a willingness on the part of American defeatists to take Soviet claims of omnijK>tencc at face value.
The ""red or dead” people will he surprised to hear it, but more than any of the anti-war people, they themselves are playing the Kremlin game more effectively than Mr Khrushchev. 1 i i As wc suggested, this “red or dead” slogan, also shows a pathological attitude toward death.
Perhaps the most shocking aspect of the “shelter"" fiasco is the case with which a minority of escapists have acquiesced in the idea of death, without so much as a quiver of protest against the nuclear policies that are leading both Moscow and Washington to mutual suicide.
For many selectmen three years’ service is enough, hut there have been in recent years several who were deterred from seeking re-election simply by the prevailing dogma that, “No one runs for a second term.
Precedent or tradition, if you will, is only good so long as it serves those in whose interests it ris invoked.
The electorate can safely be trusted to decide whether a candidate for re-election should remain in office.
If he can persuade enough voters he should he reelected, that his re-election will serve the Town well, it is the Star’s feeling that a belief in the sanctity of precedent should not prevent his giving further service to the community.
School committeemen jrretty generally seek re-election for a second three-year term with no criticism.
In fact most seem to feci that they are equipped by previous experience to render more valuable service to their committee and the town after their re-election.
Town officers like the collector of taxes, treasurer, assessor and park commissioner, to name only a few, extend their service in many instances way beyond the three years served by selectmen.
Indeed the selectmen do not feel that their appointive officers like the accountant, town counsel, and town engineer should end their service after three or six years.
And yet a selectman, in the most important office of our town government, can not, or does not extend his service beyond three years because of an unwritten law that has no rational justification.
It seems to us that in performing their legal duty to make records of their meetings and decisions available to the public these Town officials and others are doing a real service to the Town.
The only way the Town can make wise decisions, after all, is if these decisions are based on facts.
And the only way W inchester can get the facts is if your Star goes after them and makes them known.
But there are a few good citizens who still believe printing the news al>out Town Hall is unpatriotic, sort of an invasion of official privacy as it were.
Its the Town’s business, and anyone who doesn’t think so shouldn’t be running it. i i 1 Now, as to this matter of press responsibility.
Winchester officials are in a good position to know that the Star is frequently in possession of information, which if published prematurely or handled sensationally could damage the interests of the Town and unnecessarily hurt a lot of people.
But news of this potentially harmful kind is the exception rather than the rule.
Most of the. news coming out of Town Hall should he published, and will be.
And we should not make the mistake of confusing “controversial” news with sensational.
Let us look to our strength, both material and spiritual, with confidence and maturity.
I veil if one side managed to gel in a surprise attack, it would destroy itself with the radioactive fallout from its own bombs.
Let’s also get off the defensive, and concentrate on living rather than planning for death.
Thanks to enlightened people in our society we’re still free. \qd in mutters of revolution, we’re still way out ahead.
Photo by Ryerson PIANO INSTRUCTOR ALBERT HORN AT WORK WITH STUDENTS Mr Albert Horn, teacher of piano for 20 years both in Winchester and Boston, has moved into handsome new studio quarters at the recently renovated Center railroad depot.
The new studio is spacious and nicely decorated, equipped with a Sohmer grand piano.
Thus, Mr Horn begins a new chapter in a lifetime of piano instruction, following the fire in the old Waterfield Building on May 4 in which his studio was reduced to ashes.
Mr Cohen’s pupils have played with Pops and have themselves taught future concert pianists.
At one time Mr Cohen turned out most of the professional musicians in Boston, Mr Horn tells the Star, Mr Horn is hopeful that more adults can be persuaded to take piano lessons, not merely to increase his patronage but to provide for themselves a sound outlet for creative energy.
Mr Horn has the best wishes of his many friends and associates as he begins teaching piano in his new quarters.
Photo by Ryereon “FRIENDS” MANNING THE “CHUCK WAGON” at Manchester Field.
Be advised that this very popular gastronomic rendezvous is the famous “Chuck Wagon,” operated during the football season by the Friends of the Winchester High School Band and Orchestra to raise money for the benefit of these popular teen-age musical organizations.
The “C ; huck Wagon” was built by Rotarian “Al” Elliott, the “Homespun Boy,” and presented to the Friends of the Band and Orchestra by the Winchester Rotary Club.
It is not exclusively the property of the “Friends” and can be used by any other responsible local organization.
The “Chuck Wagon” has been a great help to the “Friends,” for before it was available workers had to dispense food and drink from hit or miss tables and counters on the ground.
Working under such conditions was hard enough, and besides, toward the end of the season it got good and cold standing on the ground throughout a football game.
The “Friends” were finding it harder and harder to get workers under the old conditions, but the “Chuck Wagon” has changed all that.
Its dollars to doughnuts they are wending their way to the “Chuck Wagon” for hot dogs, coffee, or what have you.
The Wagon is the Mecca for the hungry and thirsty at football games and the money that goes into the till benefits the high school band and orchestra.
Suzuki, Zen is “the art of seeing into the nature of one’s own being,” permitting us passage from bondage to freedom.
Fundamentally, by helping us to transcend the illusion of self, of our individual separateness from the rest of existence.
And true wisdom is the realization of this unity, first in theory, ultimately in our lives.
Wc try to contain within static dogmas and concepts a life whose supreme fact is change.
Our knowledge of “reality” is a knowledge of mere words, which are to the Zen adept, at best “fingers pointing at the moon,” not the moon itself.
Imprisoned by man-made fictions, we are crippled by the pain and sorrow that arise from craving attachment, and, once again, the illusion of self.
First, Zen tells us, we must realize that no one can help us but ourselves, no master, no intermediary.
This was Buddha’s recognition, as it was Jesus,’ that the kingdom of God is fully as much within you as without.
Next, says the Zen patriarch Seng Ts’an, we must abandon “completed” systems and dogmas.
To know reality we must pass beyond the limiting illusions of intellect and emotion into a state of direct awareness.
This is a word problem whose aim is not to reveal a completed truth but to jar the mind into supra-rational awareness of reality.
The point, among others, is the transcendence of questions themselves, for once questioned, Zen believes, life’s unity is shattered.
The Lankavatara Sutra adds that the wise lose wisdom when their knowledge does not become love and sympathy, and their zeal is not changed into self-control.
This is a condition of one’s whole being in which life’s apparent opposite’s are “seen” as its real ONE; in which, having passed beyond ego, wc not merely realize our oneness with ALL conceptually, hut ARE one with all.
The archer, as Maurice Herrigel put it, is the target, free of effort and will, at once the instrument and the object of his arrow.
I like very much the fine stories of the Zen abbots and patriarchs intended to point a moral.
It is said that one of the greatest Zen “teachers” got up cold one morning and having no fuel, threw his wooden Buddha into the fire, upon which he warmed his hands ostentatiously before his disciples.
Similarly, Huen Sha was about to start a Zen sermon when a bird sang nearby.
Suzuki, again, “abhors anything coming between the fact and ourselves,” most especially words.
To try to explain with words, the great scholar writes, is like chasing your shadow.
It points the way to that condition of wisdom taught by the Buddha, in which a man is unmoved by either sorrow or joy, foils hate with love, and lives rather than teaches truth.
Richard A Ifakanson, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 1954 The Winchester Star, left at your Residence for one year.
Telephone PA rk view 9-0029 OLDEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN WINCHESTER Serving the Community Hi Years Largest Sworn Circulation REPRESENTING WINCHESTER Senators in Congress Leveret* Saltonstall Benjamin Smith Congressman 5th District F Bradford Morse Senator fith Middlesex District C Eugene Farnam Representative in General Court Harrison Chadwick County Commissioners Edward L Buckley, chairman William G Andrew Thomas B Brennan ( THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1961 Page Five See Other Letters On Page Seven Waterways (iomm.
The New Waterways Committee Would very much appreciate the publication of this letter in order that the residents of Winchester may be kept apprised of the latest developments concerning the Committee's work.
At the Adjourned Annual Town Meeting of March 24, 1958, the Town voted a sum of $12,500.00 to be used in dredging and improving the Aherjona River from Swanton Street to a point near the Winchester Post Office.
All work so done would be with the assistance of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, under Chapter 91 of the General Laws.
At the Adjourned Town Meeting of April 4, I960. the Committee informed the Town that under Chapter 91, the Commonwealth was interested in projects involving Hood control only.
On October 20, 1961, the Town was informed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Waterways Division that bids for the project had been received.
They advised that the low bid was for $29,200.00, and that engineering and contingency fees of $7,900.00 would bring the total cost of the project to $20,500.00.
They further advised that upon the receipt of the Town’s check for 6(K» of this amount, or $18,250.00, the contract would he awarded and the undertaking would he under way.
Inasmuch as the appropriation for the work fell $5,750.00 short of the needed amount, the Committee was in a dilemma.
After due deliberation with the Board of Park Commissioners, the New Waterways Committee decided that., time-wise, it had only had two choices.
The first, and not acceptable, Was to inform the Commonwealth that the hid requiring payment of $18,250.00 exceeded the authorized expenditure, and that the undertaking must be postponed pending a subsequent Town Meeting when the additional funds might he allocated.
This seemed unwise, in that there would be a great possibility of the Commonwealth putting Winchester far down the list of proposed projects, and the opportunity to obtain State aid might be lost in the foreseeable future.
The second choice of our Committee was to try to make emergency funds available in order that contracts might be signed immediately.
On November 12, 1961, the Town of Winchester Finance Committee approved the transfer of $5,750.00 from the Town Reserve Account to our budget.
We can now negotiate a contract with the Commonwealth, and work, we hope, will commence soon.
Regarding the letter of Mr David Kush to your paper criticizing the speech of Ted Kennedy at Winchester Senior High: Under only one circumstance should a confirmed political candidate (one who has filed candidacy papers with the secretary of state) be allowed to speak at a public school assembly, and that is “political time,” whereby the opposition I must also be given that opportunity of appearing.
We feel that the administrators were concerned with our “Mental fitness,” our open-mindedness and refused to knuckle under to public sentiment about political opportunists.
John Maybury, Robert B Hamilton, Richard Amoroso, John Marascia, Joey Sehmader, Thomas LaPointo, Robert Murray, Tony Shields, Mike Hammel, Walter Aldorissio, John Lee, Jeff Lyman, John Perrault, Harold Mugford, Helen MoUolo, Walter Armstrong, Arthur Nerold, James Kerrigan, Robert Branley, Bernard Gigliotti, Edward Tonello, Susan Knight.
Sorokin’s theories on creative altruism, Vivekananda’s “Karma ^ «>ga,” Fromm’s “The Art of Loving’ as offering better foundations for our continued existence than fallout shelters, automaton thinking, and fear and hate complexes.
I am, too, in my Kate Greenaway Keepsake with white bouquets hordering the pretty pouf sleeves and wide whirling skirt.
Thank you again for laying in on the line for us so clearly, no matter how distasteful it may be to have to think about war and its consequences.
I hope I may have some reprints, to follow those of your famous editorial of last summer.
If you are pointing out the shortcomings of shelters as a means of saying that a federal program of public shelters is an admission of bankruptcy in foreign policy and statesmanship, there are many who will agree with you.
It is a bitter disappointment to pay all those billions in taxes for “defense” only to be told to take cover, that international politics is now likely to be continued by that other means called war.
At the same time, it does not do to say that no shelter can possibly help.
If that bomb you describe as falling on City Hall in Cambridge were to fall as many miles east of Boston, by the same error, then you have a situation of neutron moderation and sodium activation which could allow a well-designed home shelter to make all the difference between survival and no survival.
I believe that the choice has to be an individual and personal thing, and that the prudent man will do the prudent thing even though it cannot guarantee him complete protection.
Thank you for your impressive editorial on fallout shelters in the issue of the Star preceding the 44th day of Armistice since World War I What you said was to the point and timely.
I loDked in Vain for news or editorials in the Boston papers on the one subject suitable for the day and for our times.
The chief issue discussed was the problem of finding a place to buy meat or to shop for Christmas on the holiday of peace.
The economic considerations seemed to take precedence over the eternal and spiritual values.
It was disappointing to me to read the church page on Saturday and to discover that not one sermon topic made use of the word “peace,” or vaguely referred to the problems of peace.
I feel that many voices should he raised today in this whole business of keeping our world a safe and sane world.
V Father Joyce will outline a broad statement of the need for planning and tell how individual civic groups gradually united for more effective action.
Mr Whitmore will dis cuss the relationship between local governments and metropolitan problems from the point of view, of local city governments.
Winchester will ultimately be faced with the decision as to whether or not it should join with other communities in solving mutual problems.
In order to help the voters of Winchester make an educated choice from among many alternatives, the League will present this program to the public.
It was with keen interest that 1 read the editorial in your paper on fallout shelters.
Certainly anyone who has read the articles by Norman Cousins in the Saturday Review on the same subject will heartily concur.
It might be pointed out that “The Reporter” magazine of August 17, 19(51, in speaking about the use of computers in Air Force New Nursery School Recognizing the need for additional nursery school facilities in Winchester, Dr.
John W Ellison, rector of the Church of the Epiphany, has appointed a committee to investigate the possibilities of operating a week-day nursery school for three and four year olds at the church.
Tentative plans call for the school to operate five mornings per week, under professional supervision, and with the assistance of mother helpers on a cooperative basis.
The committee would also like to hear from women who might be interested in employment as parttime helpers.
A perfect rendezvous for rulaxation wit h friendsor business associates.
FOR SPECIAL PARTIES FUNCTIONS OF ALL KINDS UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM Beautifully appointed fur banquets, wedding receptions, business meetings. dances or luncheons.
It is a time when it is not easy to stand by not knowing what will come, or when it will come, or if it will come.
In the larger affairs of mankind, many of us have u feeling of helplessness.
We desperately hope to hear the magic news that will keep our world intact However, it is not possible to remove oneself from the seriousness of the human predicament, not even in one’s summer retreat.
This is not to say that I have not appreciated the summer weeks for recreating.
One is fortunate to have a hideaway, not underground, but far removed from the feverish activity of town and city life.
For my part, it was most refreshing to be living for several weeks at the end of a seldom travelled road, far from traffic lights and sounds, from city illumination, and especially from the aggravating intrusion of a telephone bell, living in an extremely simple way.
I can understand why many people today permanently retire to the country fairly early in life to get away from it all.
It was glorious for a time, but the other world, the actual world, is there waiting, and all the time becoming more and more complicated.
Shortly after the commencement of the summer, the crisis in Europe came to a head in Beilin.
Several times I wondered seriously whether there would be a Winchester to come back to.
Another cartoon depicted a young couple looking for a home in a housing development.
Shelter Manor, it was called, looking very much like one of the cemeteries without headstones.
On the cover was a picture of a man building his underground hideout of brick and mortar.
This booklet was illustrated throughout with specific plans for building a shelter of modest cost.
But we know that forces hostile to us possess weapons that could destroy us if we are unready, That is why we must prepare.
Then came the story of the experiment conducted by the news men underground on an island in Boston Harbor — Operation Survival.
I can believe they discovered Some important things about themselves and human nature in such close quarters.
In the year of our Lord 1961, the major threat of mankind is a nuclear explosion, a bomb that can destroy acres and acres of living earth.
Man’s primary concern seems to be to find a safe hiding place from his fellow man.
Certainly we must be convinced that the threat of nuclear power is the most serious menace to civilization thus far in human history.
Already the possibility of an accidental border incident leading to something more disastrous faces us.
We deem it imperative that immediate action be taken to effect an international agreement to stop all testing of nuclear weapons” — this from our scientists.
Currently there is a tremendous amount of talk about the reasonableness of non-atmospherie testing, the necessity of keeping ahead of the Russians.
Surely we can follow the advice of our government and the example of our governor.
We shall be able to live in them, we are told, for days, weeks, or even months.
The question is raised as to what kind of world will be waiting for us.
The fact remains that no one of us really knows anything about the alternative to peace, war.
To be sure, we have been through two world wars, some of our families have experienced precious loss, but no one of us, in our land, knows what it is to see our home and towns ripped apart, to live in constant dread of death from the skies.
We do not know except from photographs and word pictures, and, of course, no one anywhere in the world can appreciate what a nuclear war would be like.
Hundreds of square miles would be covered with contamination and the deadly effects would last not for hours or weeks, but for months and even years.
We must devote our efforts toward Missing Admiral Byrd Couch Found By Morgan Memorial in Studio An old ami valuable Victorian couch owned by the family of the late Admiral and famed Explorer Richard K Bvrd of Beacon i I ill has been returned to the family by Goodwill Industries after being' missing several weeks as a result of a combination of errors.
Industries to pick up clothing and other household articles to be repaired hv handicapped workers and later Lt. ( onidr.
Richard F Byrd, son of the famous admiral, discovered the tragic disappearance of the family heirloom. at the facts of life honestly in this place.
It is the time now for us not to be depressed, but to be serious; not to be frightened, but to be calm and reasonable; not to feel the situation is hopeless, but to go to work; not to devise ways and means of hiding, but to concentrate our efforts on building a world where it will not be necessary for all nations to spend billions and billions of dollars for armaments and defenses.
Too many people today are reading a quick headline and saying, “I guess it will be war.
I have no right to tell you how you should feel, what you should think, or what you should do about the. present situation.
We must make some evaluations of our prejudices, some better evaluations of what we read and hear.
We must insist that all lines of communication with all people of the world be kept open.
In addition, we must realize the way to safety is not as simple as booklets on how to make an air-raid shelter tell us.
We must know what it truly means, certainly not peace without oppostion or differences; not peace without verbal conflict; not peace without extremes of ideas; but peace on earth as it operates in our houses, in our towns, in our nation; living with people with whom we do not always agree, people who may be difficult to understand, people who may even have hostility against us, bad people, evil people even, but whom we do not exterminate.
This kind of peace can operate on a large scale if we agree it is high time, and if we work at it as hard as we work at our gardens, summer homes, golf, bridge and organizations.
Now is the time to be at the constant business of promoting and supporting all forms of world interchange, parliaments, governments, congresses, conferences; to keep on creating avenues of face to face meetings that can lead to better understanding.
What a wonderful opportunity we have in our land of opportunity and democracy to take a lead, not in pride or arrogance, not to be the best in this or that material aspect of living, but to lead in sympathy, love, service, understanding, humility and trust.
We can blaze new trails, new wide open roads rather than narrow, dark underground enclosures; and along these new highways I would hope and trust, please God, finding a peaceful solution to the j other nations would go along with world's problems.
Sitting spot of the late admiral, of a prophet of doom; but I do Causing additional difficulty in believe we cannot expect religion ^ u ‘ search was the fact that two today to be merely a comforter.
We 1 in about the same time, must not merely look for the rock Hot On Trail of ages; we must be willing to look Hot on the trail, Goodwill Industries men believed they had found the much wanted couch only to learn it had fallen off one of the trucks enroute to a customer and smashed into several pieces.
Painstakingly, the handicapped people put the couch together until it looked like new but Comdr.
Miss Cenci had been looking for such a Victorian couch for more than ten years, she said.
Occupying the studio with her were birds, dogs, snakes, bears and other pets totalling thirty-three in number.
Wanted To Keep Couch Miss Cenci was not disposed to part with her new possession at any cost until she learned it had been the property of the late Admiral Byrd.
She would agree to the couch being moved out if she could select another item at one of the Goodwill Stores, “something unusual,” she insisted.
Miss Cenci selected an elephants leg, two-feet high and about fifteen inches in diameter, holding a kettle container, an odd decoration which might have been used as an umbrella stand.
The couch is back in the Byrd Homestead at 9 Brimmer Street, Beacon Hill, and Miss Cenci is happy with her stuffed elephant’s leg, and Goodwill Industries folk are relieved and happy again.
Bloodmohile MAY I EAT BEFORE DONATING Yes, you may eat a regular meal; but refrain from fatty foods such as butter, eggs, cream, mayonnaise, etc.
Your family should notify your local blood program chairman or call your Red Cross Chapter, PA 9-2300.
On Sunday afternoon Mr Ralph Marchesi of the Winchester Bowladrome told police that some time Saturday night presumably someone painted a three by four foot square of blue paint on the bowladrome wall.
On Tuesday evening Mr Nutter of the Winchester Theatre reported four sections of a chain link fence near the theatre destroyed.
Upon investigation police found two links of chain fence damaged behind both the Theatre Mobil Station and Reardon’s Texaco Station near the theatre.
THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1961 Page Six Some cars have new names... this name has a new car, Just right for just about everybody... right size... right price... right between Galaxie and Falcoi MOTORS Winchester.
Parents with teenage sons and daughters are invited to come in for information about several attractive thrift plans.
Current Dividend Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street Coming events November 16, 10m. to 5m.
November 17, Friday, Collejre Club Art Croup will meet at the entrance of the Addison Gallery, Andover, just before ten o’clockm.
Library will be open Friday from 10m. to 9m. and Saturday from 10 m. to 6m. as usual.
The Fortnightly Woman’s Club at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall, American Home Day.
Members, friends and the girls of Troop 9. extend cordial invitations to the mothers of nil the girls to attend.
December 1 and 2, Friday and Saturday, Unitarian Players present “The Pleasure of His Company,” 8:30m. in Metcalf Hall.
Nites to 9 P.M. aprl3-tf Newsy Paragraphs Something new for the men has come to town. lie Jean gives great pleasure in the opening of her Scalp Clinic for Men specializing in hair and scalp treatments.
William J Pearce is serving on the annual Family Night Program sponsored by Wentworth Institute Alumni Association, Friday evening, November 17 at 8m. in Wentworth Hall auditorium.
Harvey of Lloyd Street, who has been quite ill with a heart ailment at the Massachusetts General Hospital, was reported improved this week.
Joseph S Donnell Jr. of 13 Cabot Street is serving aboard the guided missile destroyer USS Sellers, commissioned, October 28, at the Boston Naval Shipyard.
For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. tf When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf Mrs.
Lewis Foster of Lloyd Street entered the New England Baptist Hospital on Tuesday to undergo surgery.
William H Daley, Jr., Malden district manager for the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company, has retired under the Company’s pension plan.
A resident of 46 Salisbury Street, Mr Daley will be succeeded by Lynn district manager James F Penza.
Marriage Intentions Salvatore Paul Caraviello of 44 Warren Street and Camille Grace Gravallese of 20 Ledyard Road.
Leonard David Kaplan of 16 Alton Place, Brookline and Judith Smith of 6 Oakland Circle.
Roger Kenneth Worthen of 15 Seaview Avenue, Swansea and Bonnie Louise MacLellan of 7 Parker Road.
Antonio Gironda of 5 Columbus Road observed their Golden Wedding anniversary Sunday November 5, at the Christopher Columbus Club.
Two hundred guests assembled to extend congratulations and enjoy the Girondas’ hospitality.
A feature of the buffet table was a handsomely decorated anniversary cake, which Mr and Mrs.
They were married November 5, 1911, in Sacred Heart Church, Boston, and have lived all fifty years of their mar ried life in Winchester.
Mary’s Church on their anniversary day at 4:30, after which their reception and anniversary party was held in Columbus Hall.
Cyril Spearing Hart of Winchester announce the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Ann, to Mr Edmund Colinan Beebe, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Hart is a graduate of Winchester High School and was graduated from Penn Hall Junior College last June.
Mr Beebe, Jr., prepared at Governor Dummer Academy and was graduated from Hobart College in June, 1961.
He is a member of Sigma Phi fraternity and is a Second Lieutenant in the Air Force Reserve.
Something new for the men has come to town. lie Jean gives great pleasure in the opening of her Scalp Clinic for Men specializing in hair and scalp treatments.
Peter Lonigro of 10 Loring Avenue told police on Monday that someone had removed a snow tire from his garage sometime between November 6 and 11.
On Tuesday Mr Needham Brown of 26 Mystic Valley Parkway reported that a rim, four lugs, and one hub cap had been removed from his Chevrolet sedan, presumably sometime Monday.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Wednesday morning at 10:30 firefighters attended to a smoking washing machine at Jake Horn’s house at 26 Hemingway Street.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Daniel F Blanchard of 4 Dix Street, has been elected to the Board of Directors of the Tufts Teachers’ Association.
Henchey Though no additional clerical provision has been made the recent “no fix” law requires a quarterly audit of all tickets issued by the police, whether or not they result in court appearance.
It is expected that the Woburn Court will have to audit thousands of such tickets quarterly.
Even prior to the adoption of the “no fix” law the court had outgrown its facilities.
Other proceedings that come before the court, which do not appear in statistics of the court but which are time consuming to the court and add appreciably to the work load of the office force include commitment of insane persons, petitions for allowance of marriage of male under 18 and female under 16, waiver of three days notice of intention to marry petition for attachment of motor vehicles, permission for attach ment of wages for personal labor or services and permission to install keepers.
Judge Henchey surprised his listeners when he told them that statistics released by the Administrative Committee of District Courts indicate that, based on 1960 census figures the jurisdiction of the Woburn Court is ranked 14th of the 72 district courts.
The area population served by the court has increased from 77,000 in 1950 to 125,000 in 1961.
In eluded in the thirteen larger courts are four with two full time judges and 27 with smaller area populations than the Fourth District that are designated full time courts.
In 1950 a comparable report of the Administrative committee of District Courts ranked the Fourth District Court of Eastern Middlesex 26th.
Newsy Paragraphs If you need light bums, call Winchester Lions, PA 9-6584 or PA 93548.
The Star’s editorial “Fallout Shelters: Let’s P'aee the Facts” is, j in my judgment, a great public serEditor of the Star: Last week our schools held open 1 vice.
This is quite in contrast to the I had occasion to visit the Park ; impression which I received at the hurst Elementary School and the | recent meeting at the Vinson-Owen school devoted to Civil Defense.
The dedication of the teachers and their Pennine interest in our children deeply impressed me.
The whole atmosphere was permeated with the philosophy of giving our children equality of opportunity and the best possible education.
It was apparent that the education of our children has received considerable thought and is well planned.
As I observed the devotion and graciousness of our teachers, I could not help but admire their professional stature.
We in Winchester have much for which to be thankful — a decent and friendly community, excellent school plants, dedicated teachers, and above all, our wonderful children in whom we place our hopes forhe future.
Here’s hoping that we will eventually realize the great injustice done last March and make some effort to correct it before it is too late.
Quoting from Mr Norman Cousin’s editorial in the Saturday Review of October 21 “In home, after home throughout the country the question of fallout shelters has become a profoundly important and perplexing issue.
No one can quarrel against a decision by a citizen to prepare today against possible danger tomorrow.
But at least he is entitled to full and factual information before making up his mind.
The facts given us by Mr Sullivan should certainly incite much discussion in this community.
My own awareness has been quickened by editorials written by Mr Norman Cousins in the Saturday Review.
I recommend his articles on “Shelters, Survival, and Common Sense” found in the issues of October 21, 28, and November 4.
I hope that well authenticated information concerning the feasibility of fallout shelters will be offered by the Star not once hut many times' so that even he who runs may read.
Grace T Wills 5 Agawam Road was appalled at the lack of realism demonstrated in that public appeal to us to build fallout shelters in this area.
May I suggest that, as important as it is, your emphasis upon the futility of fallout shelters is only the beginning.
If we really want to protect not only our own children, as precious as they are to us, hut the children of the world (who are also precious to their parents), we as Americans have got to do some real soulsearching and intelligent thinking about world affairs.
We have got to rededicate ourselves to our American Dream, which includes concern for all humanity, and find out how to make it effective in political practicalities.
If and when the American people rise to that crucial challenge, the politicians will respond, and mankind will really bless us now and for years to come.
No woman really loves housework, but in order for a home to be a home it has to be clean.
Others do it as a real necessity like a girl coming on the bus from Boston, another from Billerica.
It would be nice at Thanksgiving time to do something*nice for these girls, such as presenting them with a bag of fruit or a small turkey.
If some of those who hire these women knew the stories behind their going out in bad weather to earn -a few dollars, they would be more thoughtful.
I wish everyone could read it — and certainly trust that no Winchester person has skipped it over ightly.
I strongly advise people to buy extra copies and pass them around to their friends.
In the first place no shelter will save you if you are under the bomb’s destructive area.
The area de pends upon the size of the bomb— the larger the bomb the greater the damago.
But a bomb twice ns large does not have double the coverage, roughtly only one and a half.
It is known that no means — at present — are available for transporting a 50-megaton bomb; further, that 20-megaton takes r plane to carry it.
With our welldeveloped and successfully proven anti-aircraft missiles very few planes would get through our outer lines of defense — which are of a scale far beyond the average person’s conception.
Our antagonist wants to destroy our large military air bases, missile installations which are mostly west of the Mississippi, and submarine yards.
He will derive no benefit from destroying large cities merely be cause they may be a source of future planning, of electronic or sci entific development.
These latter are the things he wants for himself and they would be of no use to him buried under rubble.
He unquestionably will get through with many smaller megaton bombs via missiles and some planes.
These will be destructive enough to cause serious disruptions in our accepted manner of living.
They will cause dangerously distributed fallout conditions and serious loss of life.
The normal well-constructed fallout shelter will withstand 10 pounds per square inch pressure.
Adding 15% to the cost will strengthen it to resist 35 pounds per square inch, which in turn will save many more lives.
The estimated loss of life in a nuclear attack depends upon who does the estimating.
With the benefit of fallout shelters this is reduced to 10% or say 20 million people — quite a sizable amount, but still better than 60 to 80 million.
Suppose you do listen to the fringe group of “peace at any price” — then you may find yourself without means of protection when you need it most.
As our strength, and the enemy’s strength, grew greater, certain groups came to the conclusion that civilization is doomed and that civil defense is a futile gesture and that there is no place to hide.
Indoor shelters don’t require them because the house walls and floors have absorbed and filtered so much of the particles that only the radiation remains.
Hence no doors arc needed in a basement shelter for radiation protection.
Absorbtion of radiation if you are in direct sight of the bomb is one thing.
If you are behind something substantial or in your fallout shelter where you should be, in anything but an un detected surprise hurst, you will be protected to tho degree that your shelter is safe from blast.
Hence with the 5 megaton bombs, which we are informed are the largest that can br carried by missiles, you’ve got a good chance of survival in any thing but a direct hit, or a near miss.
If you are not exposed to di rect radiation you have nearly an hour before fallout hits you.
All the statesmen in the world cannot assure us that agreements will be kept.
Theodore J Boecker 49 Wildwood Street Director, Civil Defense, Winchester on Government Operations of Au1 leaders will he encouraged to settle t Such an impression would create 1 their differences short of mutual panic and cruelty of the most slaughter.
Then there is the group who says stop testing — stop building bombs, in short stop war.
But we are not going to throw away everything we have to fight with and so be like sitting ducks for Mr K to bag.
Another group says, in effect, not to build any shelters — it aggravates the enemy and makes him want to fight.
Recruiting is compulsory — you take the courses, you make trial runs, you follow instructions in detail or else.
We were told that after two or three days, short trips can he made outside a shelter and that in ten to fourteen days it is safe outside.
Plans are well advanced to ship food out of central warehouses within two weeks.
Any food in metal containers or under good cover will not become radioactive.
In fact it is urged in nulear reactors to shield humans working around them.
Charged particles may fall into either one, but in a reasonably short The Star welcomes Mr Boeckcr’s letter on fallout shelters printed above and is glad that Winchester will have the debate which the subject of human survival deserves.
First, let us agree that despite confusion in the press, fallout shelters are not a matter of opinion.
Scientists not committed to defending political strategy of the present or past Administrations have testified candidly and courageously on this matter.
Their consensus is that given limited warning time, swift radiation dosage, and super-megaton bombs, 92 per cent to 94 per cent of the American and Russian people would perish in a 30,000 megaton ull-out mutual attack.
Because it is eight miles from Boston, Winchester is within Boston’s destructive area.
If a 20-megaton bomb were dropped near Boston, the Star pointed out last week, everything in a four-mile radius would be totally destroyed, all frame houses in Winchester would be levelled, and basement shelters or comparatively shallow outdoor shelters would he useless.
Even if one succeeded in obtaining shelter in less than one minute, he would emerge to a radioactive wasteland in which, all food was contaminated and all homes, hospitals, and buildings were levelled.
It would be a lawless world of epidemics, hunger, marauders and disease.
Next, Mr Boecker says that there is at present no intercontinental missile that can carry a 50 or 20 megaton bomb, and that there are no present means for carrying a 50-megaton bomb.
It is true that there is at present no missile that can carry a 20 or 50 megaton bomb from Russia to America or vice versa.
But the United States and U.S.S.R. hoth have bombers designed to carry two 25-megaton bombs each.
Mr Boecker says that United States and Soviet intercontinental missiles are capable of delivering only 5 megaton bombs.
The only obstacle to mounting larger warheads on missiles, scientists say, is a purely engineering one — that is, devising missiles made of light enough material to permit projection.
The consensus is that such a development is either accomplished or imminent.
The civil defense head next assures us that the enemy “will derive no benefit from destroying large cities,” because after victory is achieved he will need the facilities of these cities.
Rut it is surely undebatable that in an all-out war neither side will dare risk sending anything less than all the bombs it has, lest the other side gain a partial advantage like, say, two million survivors.
Indeed, the strategic separation of the city and defense bases will not hold true in nuclear war.
A map in “Air Force” magazine of September, 1961 shows that there are missile bases in every state of the Union and that most of them are near heavily populated urban and suburban areas.
But as the Star pointed out in its editorial last week, basement shelters, with or without “baffle,” simply won’t save anyone because all Winhester frame houses will be levelled even in the “modest” hypothetical 20-megaton attack on Boston.
Again, even supposing that you could build such a foolproof shelter the crucial question is whether you will he able to reach it in time.
Within a radius of 25 miles from the Boston blast, you would be exposed to a fatal dose of radiation in a fraction more than one minute.
Should you take two minutes to get to your shelter, therefore, even if you should bolt the door quickly after you, you would face death through radiation sickness.
Mr Boecker says that without shelters there would be a toll of 80 per cent of American lives.
But according to scientific testimony, again presented to Congress by the Rand Corporation, 94 per cent of Americans, even with shelters, would perish in a 10,000 megaton attack.
United States Chief of Naval Operations Arleigh Burke says flatly that it is “improbable” that the majority of Americans could attain* shelter in time.
And even if shelters could be made foolproof against existing weapons, there is no reason to suppose that enemy technology could not devise more devastating weapons to make bigger holes in the ground and make even these shelters obsolete.
Mr Boecker is optimistic regarding our chances of survival in a world without food, homes, hospitals or means of production.
Similarly, he suggests that we could Like trips outside of our shelter within three to four days of the nuclear attack.
Clearly he is assuming a very small attack, and a single one, while neither possibility is likely.
He is also assuming a rapid decay of radioactive materials, whereas a number of books on the subject, including Professor John Fowler’s book “Fallout,” reviewed in the Star on May 6, 1960, show that such radioactive agents as Strontium 90, Cesium, and Carbon 14 retain their killing power over several months and their disease inducing power over several generations.
Mr Boecker fails to indicate the probability that the H-bomb attack will be accompanied by bacteriological warfare.
There arc bombs now available to the great powers capable of chemically inducing mass disease and even fear over vast territories.
Again we must remember that the fallout now in the atmosphere as a result of tests has reached critical levels in several areas of the country, and that from the tests suspended in 1958 alone 3,600 cases of leukemia are estimated.
The radiation threat to the human bone structure and genetic system increased by the Soviet Union’s recent terroristic bomb tests need not be labored.
Finally, Mr Boecker refers in bis letter to a “peace at any price ‘fringe group”* cringing and moaning and weeping before the Soviet Union.
Such arguments aside, surely Mr Boecker doesn’t view the probability of human suicide with equanimity.
If war was still a tactical possibility open to the minutemon of Lexington, it, would be sheer genocidal madness for modern man.
Again, it seems to the Star that there is a middle ground between “moaning” on the one hand and Still Disturbed manage a sneak attack, it would he destroyed byhe fallout from its own bombs.
Mr Khrushchev, as Mr Boecker reminds us, may have threatened to “bury us,” but he knows at this point that he will sleep in the same grave.
All evidence and testimony presented by objective nonpolitical experts indicate that they will not save us, and for this reason are a cruel deception.
Moreover, by inducing a false sense of security they encourage us to pursue policies, which, if carried to their logical conclusion, will produce nuclear war.
There is, indeed no place to hide, and anyone who suggests to informed adults that there is, is already hiding from the facts.
Your Editorial, “Fallout shelters: Lets Face the Facts,” presents one of the most misleading, harmful, irresponsible and near treasonable arguments for not having self protection that I have ever had the misfortune to find in print.
If a single family, who might have otherwise done so, is dissuaded from building a shelter afteF reading your editorial, you have done your community a tremendous disservice.
There may indeed be valid reasons for not building shelters based on individual beliefs and circumstances, hut none of them are mentioned in your editorial.
First you let us know that all will be somewhat less than rosy in this community if thermo-nuclear devices start to drop.
However not all the people will he killed and property can be replaced.
Certainly not everyone will have access to a shelter at the right time but it is an undeniable fact that with more shelters, more people will live.
You tell us that the air intake pipe will very definitely pipe radioactive air into the shelter.
However in my experience as a consultant to various A.E.C. agencies over the past ten years I have never observed any concern over the activity level of air, with its short half life.
What the concern is about is the radioctivity of airborne particulate matter which would be sucked into an improperly designed intake system.
Entrance of the heavier particles can be prevented by the use of a downward pointing air inlet, two or three feet above grade level.
Civilian Defense opinion seems to be divided on the need for a filter to remove residual fine matter.
You say that a fire storm might suck all of the oxygen out through the ventilating system.
In that case I would rather die of anoxia than of the third degree burns that would be my lot if I were outside.
As far as failure of anyones builtin oxygen supply is concerned, one does not need electricity to induce high pressure oxygen to flow out of a bottle.
There are plenty of us who can remember, with no great affection, the old one holer of country fame.
True, this device is not as chic or as free from oli factory stimulus as the tiled and chromed counterpart we enjoy today, hut it is functional.
And as long as we are on the subject, don’t forget that a spade served the same purpose for many a combat soldier.
This means that water with induced radioactivity would be safe to drink in a few days.
As with air, the major problem with water is that it may contain other materials of fairly long half lives.
Filtration and simple distillation will render sufficient potable water for survival.
Not for luxurious living, but for raw survival which is the immediate issue.
Grant at least that not ill stockpiles in the entire country will be destroyed.
Also grant that there is at least a chance that the government of these United States will eventually distribute food to the disaster areas.
If the foregoing possibilities exist, the least 1 can do as a responsible citizen is to provide my family with sufficient niation.
You deride the fact that there are differences of opinion regarding the number of people that would be killed in an all-out attack, as though not knowing the exact figures were a valid reason for doing nothing.
Unless you have inside knowledge to the contrary, Cambridge City Hall may not he ground zero.
An error of a few miles one way or another would make a great difference to Winchester residents having adequate fire and fallout shelters.
In the closing paragraph an appeal is made for rational negotiation by the world’s statesmen to avoid war.
Fine, Im all for that, but I happen to remember that the attack on Pearl Harbor took place during “peace” negotiations, and if I, as a father, can initiate action that will increase the chances for survival of my children by one per cent, then I shall do it.
Yes, let us act now in the name of reason and sanity for our children and future generations to come, in the event that others, not as wise as we, act without reason and sanity.
Certainly all of us want to do anything we can to insure the safety of our children, ourselves, and others.
As one authority stated, the only realistic alternative for persons living in heavily populated and defense areas is to migrate.
I realize this is a very personal matter that each must resolve in his own heart.
For myself, I feel I will be doing a greater service for my children, and inseparably, for people in general, if I spend what time and energy I have in working to prevent a war that would necessitate the use of bombs.
There arc positive things that individuals can do if we will study and think through the issues, and be willing to express ourselves.
One channel for action is a new* national effort, Turn Toward Peace, which has New England headquarters in Cambridge, and which is made up of many unrelated national organizations which share a deep concern for the need of peace.
No pat solutions are offered, but the central thesis is that there arc national policy alternatives other than surrender to Communism or the threat of war, and that there are actions that count which people can personally undertake.
Certainly it is not wrong to be concerned with the question of survival.
You are to he commended for your forthright editorial on fallout shelters November 9.
Such realistic appraisals of nuclear destruction are needed to stir people to speak and work for peace rather than preparing for war.
I believe this same individual energy can be dirceted toward convincing the government that public opinion supports serious negotiations and statesmanlike acts for peace.
For example, a national group ffort called “Turn Toward Peace” I did not make clear my principal objections to the present parents' association set up in the Winchester elementary schools.
By way of background I should like to explain that I have actively participated in parent-teacher organizations in five different schools in four different communities, first as a teacher and now as a parent.
I have never been accused of being anti-social, although I do admit to being tremendously concerned about my children’s preparation for adulthood; their physical, emotional, mental, social, educational, moral and spiritual development.
After having served as a committee chairman last year I have asked to remain on the sidelines as a helper this year only because of pressure of church work.
I feel that this explanation is necessary lest it appear that I am merely a carping onlooker.
Having seen first-hand other home-school organizations performing a real service for mutual understanding to the ultimate benefit of the children, it has been a disappointment to me to find that in the elementary school my children attend the accent appears to be on merely socializing and fund-raising for equipment which should be provided by our tax money.
I do not object to enjoying a cup of tea with my children’s teachers, but if I am to take the time from my busy day for such an occasion, I would like to hear a few words from the teachers about their programs and objectives and have the opportunity to ask questions.
I note in the Star that some of these teas do include such a discussion.
This, I think, is worthwhile because it can help the homes and schools do a more effective -job of educating.
A closer reading of my original letter would show* that my objection was to the fact that socializing was the sole purpose of the gathering.
I questioned whether we can afford this luxury in today’s terrifying world.
It does not make sense to me to hire a baby sitter in order to go to the school for light refreshments and superficial talk, with instructions to avoid discussing school work.
If this means that I have a distorted sense of values, then I plead guilty.
Socializing indeed has its place in the home-school relationship hut it should be an incidental outcome of the parent and teacher working together in concern for the child.
To place the social element foremost is a case of the tail wagging the dog.
Several of these groups present dynamic, stimulating programs (this year especially I note an improvement in their quality) but teacher participation is usually indirect, and from my previous experience I do not believe that this arrangement is more nearly ideal than a genuine parent-teacher plan.
Joining a nationwide organization would make us more aware of the opportunities for home and school cooperation.
Far from eliminating the social angle, it would place it in its proper relationship to the total program.
It would surely “broaden our horizons” and just possibly disturb any complacency that might exist about our Winchester schools.
The people of the world recently voiced righteous indignation concerning Soviet testing in the atmosphere.
And now wq in the United States are considering similar tests, emulating Russia to a certain degree, because of what is described as possible military necessity.
It might be well to keep in mind that there are effective forces other than military superiority.
It needs to be more j bring an end to further pollution alistic confrontation of the nuclear j them tea, aspirin and a place to lie widely known and supported. . . • , ol the earth's atmosphere, facts of life and immediate action down if I can.
You refer to them as Cynthia F Cooley Irene J Hoglund to create through candid debate a | if they were lepers and dangerous | | Nashoba Road climate of reason in which world | to others.
Another highlight of the* cere1 — ■ mony was the presentation of the Pioneers of Underwater Sound Award to Dr.
Beranek heads is comprised of a group of scientists and engineers engaged in research, consultation, and product development in acoustics and many other areas of pure and applied sciences.
The citation for the Sabine Award stated “For twenty years he has brilliantly served his fieid as scientist, teacher and supervisor of student research, author of outstanding books and consultant to architects.
His published works include major contributions on acoustical measurements, anechoie chambers, acoustic materials, building structures, noise control, psychoacoustic criteria, sound systems, broadcast studies, assembly rooms and the world's great concert halls.
A fifth volume, “Acoustics of Halls for Music,” will be published in 19(52.
In 1944, he became the second recipient of the Biennial Award for his contributions to the advancement of theoretical and applied acoustics by the publication of scientific papers while under the age of 35.
He also served as president of A.S.A., helped organize and edit its magazine called “Noise Control” and served on the editorial board of its journal.
A fellow of A.S.A., he contributed widely to the society's program on standardization and technical development.
He also formed the Systems Research Laboratory at Harvard during the war to combat the threat from Japanese Kamikaze planes.
He was technical director of the Acoustics Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1947 to 1954.
Beranek helped form the Professional Group on Audio of the Institute of Radio Engineers and became its first chairman.
He received the Presidential Certificate of Merit for his World War II contributions, the honorary D.Sc. degree and a special alumni citation from Cornell College of Iowa, and is a member of Sigma Xi and Eta Kappa Nu, honorary fraternities.
He has served on committees of the National Academy of SciencesNational Research Council, and the Department of Defense.
Visiting Day for the Lynch Junior High School is announced today to be set for Saturday, November 25 from 10m. to 2:30m.
Barbara Bailey, speaking for the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee of which she is ’ the Chairman.
Visiting Days, which are times set aside for the general public to look over the new buildings in which they have invested, have become a custom in Winchester; and the Building Committee, in whose hands the responsibility for the school still remains, and the School Department both hope that many citizens will take advantage of this opportunity to become acquainted with the fine new schoolhouse up on the Well Field site.
The public is reminded that the new School Administration offices are also at the Lynch School.
That interest in the School runs especially high was attested to by the fact that between seven and eight hundred parents attended the regular Open House held there a week ago Wednesday evening.
Among observations heard that night were emarks on the building's great expanse; its functional versatility; the effective use of color to relieve its economically basic construction; the language labs (which McCall also has) and the just plain modernity of the new School.
Northeastern I diversity's 40-aere campus in the Baek Bay of Boston will look like this when the development program is completed in 1970.
New facilities include an addition to the present Science Building, a chemistry building, a elassroom building, general renovations and remodeling of existing buddings, extension of the stuck areas in the Dodge Library, new dormitories, two multi-level buildings for oil-street parking, outdoor athletic areas, a music drama and fine arts center, a chapel, a laboratory school for the College of Education a faculty club, an ice-skating and hockey rink, swimming pool, and additional indoor athletic facilities.
Nikita Khrushchev has had from time to time, and especially in recent weeks, occasion to extol the wonderful living conditions in Russia under the communist regime and to belittle life in the United States, that leading bastion of capitalistic ideology and imperialism.
Other communists have followed the Khrushchev line which recently prompted Nikita to two six-hour speeches that painted the rosiest sort of picture of the communist future.
Junior Red Cross The first council meeting of the Wyman School Junior Red Cross was held on Tuesday morning, November 7.
President, Paul Martini; Vice President, Peter Rozett; Secretary, Barbara Devaney; and Treasurer, Peter Ellison.
Peter Ellison spoke about doing a kind service for others to earn membership.
The president gave a short talk on courtesy, kindliness and thoughtfulness to others.
ARLINGTON Mission 8-060J People of the United States, of course, do not know whether Mr Khrushchev is to he believed when he goes into ecstasies over the economic and social situations in Russia, but they have no reason to doubt an appraisal of conditions in the United States given by an official of the United States Census Bureau and published in the United States News and World Report.
Looking at the future of America, the appraisal of the Census Bureau representative isn't based on propaganda, disseminated for the soothing of people in this country and the confounding of peoples within the Iron Curtain.
Official and incontrovertible census figures form the basis of 'the appraisal.
These figures show a younger typically American who is settling in cities and suburbs and is having it better than ever before financially.
In fact 31 per cent of all families in America are now in the $7,000 to $15,000 a year income bracket whereas only eight per cent were in it 10 years ago.
Seventy per cent of all Americans are now living in cities or the suburbs of them.
Premier Khrushchev, in a recent statement placed the Soviet Union’s population at 220,000,000.
Census figures indicate the population of the United States will reach 214,000,000 in 1970 and 400,000,00 by 2010.
Mere numbers of population, however, are not so important as the fact that Americans are tending to become more and more alike.
Whereas in the past population tended to regimentation along ethnic lines, now with inter-marrying racial and and national origins are becoming less apparent.
For instance in 1900 about 90 per cent of all Negroes in America lived in the South.
Last year only (50 per cent still lived there with many of the other forty per cent coming to Northern cities.
American people generally are becoming more mobile, one out of five moving each year, often out of state.
Census authorities discount the claim that the retired in great numbers are flocking to Florida and California.
The last named has a lower percentage of retired persons than the national average.
Several states, including New Hampshire and Vermont have about as many people over 05 as Florida.
In the face of Russia’s growing agricultural problem, American farm acreage is maintaining its size and productivity.
Our problem, the experts say, is in the decline in the number of farms and farmers, with small farms being consolidated into fewer big farms.
More Americans are being born than ever before and they are living longer, resulting in higher percentages of both young and aged people.
Over a 10 year span births have brought the median American age down from just over 30 years to just under thirty, and this in the face of increased longevity.
The average American family is smaller, 3. persons, with relatives having a greater tendency to live in separate homes.
In real income, what money would buy in 19(50, the increase was from $4,000 to $5,600, making for a markedly better standard of living.
Still talking about constant dollars, families in the $7,000 to $15,000 bracket has risen percentagewise from 15 tu 31 per cent.
Now factory workers are middle class by income, standards, their children go to college where years ago they were fortunate to go to high school.
Owning a car, radio, TV and many appliances, the typical American family lives in a house they own, usually of five rooms and in the suburbs or city fringe.
They may have a mortgage on their home and owe for their car and some appliances.
Census figures show that the average American family’s income, even in terms of purchasing power is up appreciably in the past 10 years.
The income of the Negro family has risen faster than that of the white, though it still is not near the white level.
The census report shows that America has its problems, it is true, but it is also a fact that the good old United States A is still a pretty fair place in which to live and prosper.
OLD FARMERS ALMANAC Now on Sale at the Winchester Star 35c Also PHILLIPS BROOKS CALENDARS $1.00 The Winchester Star 3 Church Street PArkview 9-0029 WHOLESALE PRICES ALCOA ALUMINUM 3-CHANNEL COMBINATION WINDOW 51195 1 1 Screen Is self-storing.
Jennie Palmieri, Rat Trap 103, National Order of Alley Cats, of Medford, to be held Saturday evening, November 18, at the Hotel Lenox in Boston.
The National Order of Trench Rats and the National Order of Alley Cats are auxiliaries of the Disabled American Veterans, organized to further child welfare work.
Past Golden Rodent Morgan will serve as toastmaster at the banquet and responding to toasts will he representatives of the State of Massachusetts and prominent figures in the State Department of Disabled American Veterans.
Messer tell the Star they haven’t heard yet whether Priscilla will be appearing in my of the Charles Playhouse productions this year, as she did last year.
Christian Science Lecture In Stoneham The need for spiritually active expression of peace will he brought out in a free public lecture on Christian Science in Stoneham, November 19.
The lecture will be given under the auspices of The Mother Church, The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Massachusetts.
Arrangements for the lecture are being made by local members of First Church of Christ, Scientist, Winchester, and First Church of Christ, Scientist, Melrose.
An authorized teacher and practitioner of Christian Science, Miss Aultman was first named to The Christian Science Board of Lectureship in 1952.
Since that time she has lectured throughout the United States, Canada, and countries overseas.
More than 1,000 student body presidents, student newspaper editors and honor students in international relations attended the two day session representing nearly every state in the union.
United States Senator Joseph Clark , chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on International Organization Affairs gave the closing address.
The student participants also met with delegates from the Nigerian, Philippine, Irish, United States and Soviet Missions to the United Nations.
Mrs. j 1 Wills had decorated the tea table I with a beautiful arrangement of I ivy, clusters of nuts and fruit, j lighted by green candles.
Everett W Goss, the treasurer, thanked the club for the money made at the luncheon to benefit the veterans.
She said that they would be grateful for good used playing cards for the hospitals.
Warren Whitman spoke in favor of freeway, for which there would be Federal aid, and asked members to sign the petitions.
Miss Corrine Mead of the Gardens and Conservation Committee asked those interested in some form of garden group to meet after the auction at the next meeting.
Michael Hintlian of the art committee had arranged a table of most interesting costume dolls of the Ozark Mountain region, bought at a fair in Noel, Mo.
Harold E Bergquist gave an excellent and comprehensive report of the Federation meeting held at the New Ocean House, Swampscott, last May.
Hatch said that the next meeting will be on Monday, November 27, beginning with an auction at 10:30m., _ followed by a snack bar in charge of Mrs.
Greer of Wilmington, vice president of Wire Belt Co. of Winchester and newly elected president of Associated Industries of Massachusetts.
Mr Greer had returned from Europe only a few hours before, and he told of flying over a large city, one half of which was brightly lighted and full of people, and the other in darkness.
It was Herj lin with a 27-mile, five-story high j wall topped by barbed wire, and ; of course the lighted side was | West Berlin.
They are trying to penetrate the ultra-violet rays surrounding the earth’s atmosphere in hopes of findinghe answers to the moon’s mountainous surface and to make bearings within as a clue to the solar system and search for the origin of life.
In 1044 Chinese scientists discovered “super nova” — crablike nuclear — moving 6000 miles per second, and still far away.
Mr Greer felt that each one would have to arrive at their own values, and he felt that the Bible was the best guide, because there mankind had found many answers.
LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE OF EVERY DESCRIPTION •lt-m ^Diamonds wene meant to be seen © <§> <jk new setting tuifiC make you p/toucf % to wea/i you/ts £ W e take precious diamonds from outmoded, often unsafe mountings, and put them in new, fashionable settings that restore their brilliance.
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1961 l*Z*u)fradc /fyac<z//££J , 0 uLcj,u£& Page Nine FORESTER’S FLOWER SHOP * CUT FLOWERS * WEDDING FLOWERS ir FLORAL DESIGNS PA 9-1077 Eves.
Within a few days information showing the place and time for the examination in your area will he posted on the bulletin board of the local post office, including stations and branches.
If you are interested in taking the test, be sure and watch for complete information at -your post office.
Brown Ride To War, by Henry R Pyne Theatre World 1900-61 Triumph, by Hy Steirman You actually make a mosaic with Tile Craft by number.
This In The Sunday J Churches THE CHURCH OF THE OPEN BIBLE Winn Street, Burlington Tel.
A CHANCE TO HELP Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those ’vvith small children and limited incomes, need help at Thanksgiving and Christmas if these holidays are to be happy occasions in accordance with the American tradition.
To help our less fortunate Winchester friends during the holiday season, gifts of money, food and cdothing are earnestly solicited.
Phone or come in 36 Cbtiroh Street Winchester PArkview 9-3000 tu&rS-tf WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev.
Roswell Harding, Executive Hostess. § | % f $ FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH Comer Mt.
Grades L through 3 will be dismissed before the sermon for a story time in the Michelaen Room, Crib Room facilities.
The availability here and now of the healing power of the Christ, Truth, will he stressed at Christian Science church services this Sunday.
Luke’s uccount of the healing by Christ Jesus of the “woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, und was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself’’ is included in the Scriptural readings.
Baldwin W Callahan, ""Minister of Mi«sions und Stewardship"" of the Mush.
The Senior High P.F. will visit the North Street Church in Medford. 8:00m.
The Union Thanksgiving Service will be held ut the First Congregational Church.
Donations for the Thanksgiving Baskets for the less fortunate should be brought to this service. 10:45m.
Nursery, Kindergarten and Primary Departments of the Church will also present their donations. 5:30m.
Attend this service and make this Thanksgiving one of sincere gratitude to God for HLs blessings.
Moffett Funeral Service Charming, useful, and quaint are the new 1962 “calendar towels,"" size 17 x 18, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star.
I 5 u ■ ■l i n n ; A _ s _ w Some Of The Homes Sold By Ruth C Porter Co.
In 1961 «iva»i Pictured on these pages are some of the homes sold by the Ruth C Porter, Co. through October of 1961.
We felt this would be of interest to you who are contemplating the purchase or sale of a home.
NOVEMBER 16, 1961 Page Eleven More Of The Homes Sold By I Ruth C Porter Co.
In 1961 * RUTH C PORTER, CO., Realtors The Sign Of Leadership Richard H Murphy James F Quine 33 Thompson Street Since 1931 Gertrude H Murphy Charles T McCarthy Marian R Ferriman Winchester, Mass.
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1961 Terzaghi and Ferris Voted Moles Outstanding Achievement Awards Dr.
The announcement was made at a dinner meeting of The Moles, an association of leading figures in the tunneling, dambuilding and heavy construction industry, at the Biltmore Hotel.
Formal presentation of the honors will be at the annual Moles' Awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel next January 31.
Terzaghi and Mr Ferris | — — — make' up the 22nd pair of honorees elected president in 1953 and hoard in a series that started in 1941 and chairman in 1960.
He played prinnumbers among its winners former President Herbert Hoover, Robert Moses, Adm, Ben Moreell, Peter Kiewit, Harvey Slocum, John Bruce Bonny and Lou Perini.
KARL TERZAGHI The award is considered the highest recognition that can be accorded for service to the American construction industry.
Announcement of the selections was made by Eugene G Rau, Award Committee chairman.
Terzaghi, who was born in 1883 in Prague, then Bohemia, has nad wide experience both in teaching and in the execution of significant engineering projects in Europe and in this country.
Reclamation Service, and worked as a driller on construction of the Celilo locks on the Columbia river.
In 1916 he returned to Europe and taught at the Imperial School of Engineers in Istanbul, and it was while there that he developed most of the basic principles of modern soil mechanics.
For the next five years he was engaged in a massive program of air base construction for the Navy in the Pacific Area.
He marshaled the forces of American contractors and directed a program covering more than $360 million worth of procurement, shipping and construction.
Mr Ferris joined the Raymond company, then known as Raymond Concrete Pile, in 1946; he was cipal roles in organizing and managing the $350-million Spanish bases program, the huge Hyperion outfall project off Los Angeles, and the spectacular bridge-and-tunnel crossing of Lower Chesapeake Bay, now under construction.
Women’s Republican Club On Wednesday evening, November 8, members and guests were welcomed at the home of Mr and Mrs.
After several announcements the speaker of the evening, Mr Vincent F DeCain, was intdoduced by Mrs.
Mr DeCain’s subject was the much-discussed Connally Amendment, which will certainly come up for Senate action again this year.
This amendment may well be the bulwark between the integrity of the United States’ judicial system and the invasion of foreign power under the guise of the International Court.
An amendment to this charter is what we are fighting for now and have been for a long time.
Six words of the amendment mean freedom of our country and our way of doing things., “Disputes with regard to matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of the United States of America as determined by the United States.
This is all-important, otherwise judges of any member country in the World Court would rule.
Yet when the “one worlders” advocate repeal in the name of. “rule by law” they would hand over our country’s sovereignty.
Write your congressman, state your demands so they will learn that you are standing for the United States of America and our way of life.
Unitarian Choir The Winchester Unitarian Choir under the direction of Mary Ran ton Witham will present a twenty minute pre-service program on Sunday mornings for the next six weeks.
The choir will sing from the works of the great masters and the programs will include many un usual carols as well as the traditional ones.
This Sunday, Novem her 19, at 10:40, the Unitarian Choir will sing the following selections from Mendelssohn’s oratorio, St.
Lord, Thou Alone Art God To God On High How Lovely Are The Messengers Contralto, Baritone and Choir But The Lord Is Mindful Contralto The soloists are Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffrey, tenor; Sidney Blanchard, Jr., baritone.
Mail servicemen’s names and addresses to WINCHESTER HOM EFRONTERS PUBLIC LIBRARY NOW Name of Serviceman Rank Serial Number Military Address Home Address Tel.
A Ivan G Smith, Executive Chairman Winchester Homef renters novfl -3t Raymie Still Stirs *Em Ray “V-for-Victory” Hayward, retired English teacher and faculty manager of athletics at Winchester High School, now living on Chebeague Island in Casco Bay, Me., used to like to stir folks up during his years in Winchester.
We recall the time he nearly succeeded in getting a four-inch advertisement for tickets to the Woburn game, placed squarely in the middle of the hack page of the Star with type all around.
The late “T.P.” went upstairs to the press room three steps at a time, instead of the usual two, when he saw that page of the press proofs.
Another time he invited the editor, then more or less of a cub reporter, to give a few tips to reporters for the high school newspaper.
We visualized five or six more or less uninterested hoys and girls waiting for us to get through, with our helpful hints, and were shocked as we opened the door of the high school room designated to find the entire class in journalism, complete with teachers, smilingly awaiting our remarks.
Any large number of youthful listeners can be terrifying to the uninitiated, and when you add a sprinkling of English teachers to watch your split infinitives you have the makings of an oratorical blue funk.
Suffice it to say that had we known in advance what the odds would be, we would have done much better.
These two examples should indicate the Hayward rating as a stirrer-upper, and we might also add his feuds with the late “Squire” Franklin, a bosom buddie, but not beyond the Hayward humorous touch.
There was no malice in his approach to his victim, nor did he harbor a grudge when the joke was on him.
Wodehouse heroes, when the girls at the Star sewed together all the button-holes of a suit that “Raymie” kept at the Star office for dress-up emergencies.
If we paid through the nose for our transient success, , we were sure that “Raymie” was still our friend.
All this notwithstanding to the contrary, “Raymie” was a stirrerupper in the old days and he is still at it in his new home environment on Chebeague.
In connection with the battle to get the bridge Mr Hayward pen ned a small brochure telling of the supposed visit of a newspaperman to Chebeague and his attending a baked bean supper there.
At the supper he met Chebeague advocates of the proposed bridge and recounted their arguments in a very clever bit of propaganda.
Winchester friends who remember the Hayward flair for writing can imagine the excellence of the booklet.
Mr Hayward is presently on the Chebeague Island Bridge Referen dum Committee, the members of which will once again attempt to get the 42,000 signatures necessary to have the building of the bridge put on the State ballot.
A referendum petition presented earlier in the year failed bacuuse too many names were thrown out for legal technicalities.
The Portland Press Herald for November 4, sent us by another former Winchester teacher, Otis Leary, ‘now retired to Pine Point, Me., shows a picture of the Refer endum Committee with old Ray “V-for-Victory” in the middle with his jaw set.
Conn., wields the trowel at the placing of the cornerstone at Dewey Hall, first of four buildings in the Vermont College Second Century Building and Development Program.
Watching closely are, left to right, Virginia Brooks of Wei leslcy and Cynthia Knox of Winchester.
Birds, Witches, Sandman A t Lincoln Assembly Miss Elizabeth Bonnaffon’s fourth grade presented to parents, friends, and members of four other classes a delightful program on Friday, November 3 in the school hall.
Mary Tonello, as a little German girl, continued with the narration of “Hansel and Gretel” in which the entire class participated.
The play was done almost completely in music, with Miss Jeanne Loudon, music supervisor, as accompanist.
Hansel, Paul Donahue; Gretel, Dorcas Joslin; Mother, Ann Dieterich; Father, Kenneth Titilah; Sand Man, Walter Johnian; Birds, Ronald Cavallo, Sally Hayden; and Witch, Kathy Marini.
Joseph Campo, Chris O’Dair, Jon Tobey, Paul Shanley, Ruth Edmands, Susan Ewing, Theresa Gigliotti, Ruth Ann Nault, Bernadette Neary, Kathv Noel, Linda Salera and Jean O’Neil.
F.’ers split up into buzz groups and discussed the problem of alcoholism.
At the end of the evening, ideas were pooled and many interesting facts were brought to the attention of the whole group.
Next Sunday at 8m., there will he a corporate Communion followed by breakfast in Hadley Hall.
Saint Mary's Sodality Saint Mary’s Sodality held their regular meeting on November 7th at 8m.
Father Turke announced there would he a cartoon show on November 26 at St.
The reception for the new members of the Sodality wlil be held on December 5.
Father Turke gave a very interesting talk on the life of Saint Theresa and how she accepted her trials in life with complete humility and simplicity.
He reminded the Sodalists that they should apply this virtue to their own lives.
Junior Guild Santa Sale Paulist Fathers Sponsor Debate United States Senator Eugene J McCarthy . -Minn.) and Russell Kirk, political scientist and educator, will discuss “The Liberal vs the Conservative” on Friday.
November 24, at 8:15m., at the Paulist Information Center, 5 Park Street, Boston.
The Junior Guild of the Infant Saviour will hold its annual Christmas “Santa Sale” on Tuesday, December 5, from 7 to 11m. in the Oval Room of the Sheraton Plaza Hotel in Boston.
Hand-knit gifts, holiday decorations, toys, and gifts for all the family are a few of the features that will he offered.
Santa Claus will be on hand with his bag full of goodies to greet the guests.
Bernard’s Church, West Newton, under the direction of Mr Daniel Mazeika, will entertain the shoppers w’ith Christmas carols.
The directory lists all unions internationals, intermediate bodies and locals in 16 Northeastern states that filed organization re ports required under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act.
Massachusetts leads New Eng land in the total number of reporting union organizations with 1814.
Connecticut has 801, Rhode Island 329, Maine 303, New Hampshire 235, and Vermont 186.
The Carpenters Union leads Massachusetts with 96 union organizations, closely followed by the Textile Workers with 95.
However, some 14 different railway unions in the Bay State have a combined total of 141, and the three electrical unions (IBEW, IUE and UE) have 117.
In Connecticut, the Machinists Union is first with 49, but the combined total of electrical unions is 74, and the combined figure for eight railroad unions is 54.
Rhode Island is led by the Steelworkers with 43, but the combined total of the two textile unions is 48.
In New Hampshire, the Shoe Workers lead with 2, followed by the Textile Workers with 20.
Predominant in Vermont are the Stone and Allied Products Workers union with 16 organizations, although seven railroad unions have a combined total of 39.
McLean Globe Worker Under Newspaper Fund Program David C\ McLean, son of Dr. and Mrs.
A student at Bowdoin College, McLean received a $500 grant, and worked at the Boston ( ilobc.
The project, in its second year, was designed to appeal to students in colleges where relatively little recruiting for newspaper careers lias been done.
Promising young men who thought they were interested in newspaper work, hut who lacked contacts in the field, were asked to apply for summer jobs.
The Newspaper Fund served as a clearing house and screened the applications.
Some students were directed to newspapers which were willing to employ one or more of the trainees for the summer months.
Other applicants were encouraged to seek summer news jobs on their initiative.
The individual newspaper made the final choice of the student and offered him a summer job.
All arrangements for salary, hours and duties were made between the trainee and the newspaper employing him.
Paul Swensson, executive Director of The Newspaper Fund, said that the summer’s efforts with the program are measuring up to expectations.
Many of the students, benefittng from their experience, are making plans to pursue careers in journalism.
Many editors have arranged for the students to continue their work on a part time basis during the school year.
Others have invited the students to apply for jobs next summer after graduation.
Letters which The Newspaper Fund has received, both from the college students and the editors, summarize the progress of the program.
I had turned down a chance to go to Europe, preferring to try for a newspaper job under The Newspaper Fund program.
The experience was my baptism in covering something about which I was utterly ignorant, dealing with a story on the spot and having to finish it quickly, and working side by side with the regular reporters.
I am determined to learn all I can in every area.” trainees will become newspapermen after completing their formal educations.
Craik W ark. director; Larry Smith, director: W illiam Rird. president; Theodore von Rosenvinge, treasurer; James I Cusack, District I state vice president; Franklin Lane, internal vice president.
Winchester Junior Chamber Of Commerce The second general meeting of I the Winchester Junior Chamber of Commerce was held Wednesday, November 8, at the Red Cross House under the direction of newly elected President William | Bird.
President Bird announced that I at a Board of Directors meeting on November 5, James Ferriman was elected secretary and Theodore von Rosenvinge as treasurer.
The main topic of the meeting I was the report by chairman James Ferriman regarding the Charter Night Buffet Dance to be held at the Town Hall December 9, from 8 to 12m.
Re presen tatixes from the State Jaycees will present the Winchester Jaycees with its charter and officially swear in the new officers.
PA 9*1981 nov3-tf A bufTet and dancing to an exciting jazz orchestra will spice the evening’s activities.
Tickets may be obtained from Lindy Lane at PA 9-1252 and Jim Ferriman at PA 9-4136.
President Bird next introduced District I State vice president, James Cusack.
Mr Cusack commended the excellent progress made by the Jaycees here in Winchester, and encouraged its members to visit other chapters to exchange ideas and projects and urged the members to interest others in joining the Jaycees.
The next meeting of the Winchester Jaycees will be held Thursday, November 30, at 8m. at the Red Cross House.
Anyone interested in joining the Jaycees is cordially invited to attend.
Upon graduation from college and the successful completion of the four-year military science course the Cadet is eligible for commissioning as a Second Lieut, the United States Army Reserve.
Cadet Shea is studying for the degree of B.S. in Business Administration.
Postmaster Thomas J Gilgun said today as he launched his 1961 “Mail Early For Christmas” Campaign.
Looking ahead to what may he the biggest Christmas season ever, the Postmaster said further, “Here are the things to watch to help in getting every Christmas card and package delivered before December 25 th.
Be sure each address is complete with full name, street and number, city, zone and state.
Remember, also, that you can include your Christmas card or letter inside your gift packages if you will add the appropriate First Class mail stamps to the postage for the package itself.
By doing this soon, you’ll save lots of time that might. be spent standing in line later on.
All cards sent by 4 cents postage may include a personal handwritten message, and they’ll be forwarded or returned, if that becomes necessary.
It’s socially correct to do this, and enables both you and your friends to keep your mailing lists up-to-date.
Predicting that this year’s Christmas mail will set an all time record, even exceeding the 850,000 pieces that w£re handled here in the pre-holiday season of 1960, the Postmaster pointed out the importance of planning your Christmas mailings now to avoid a lot of headaches when the Christmas rush comes in earnest.
He said further, that through the excellent cooperation of the public during recent Christmas seasons, he has been able to get all of the Christmas cards and packages dispatched and delivered before Christmas Eve.
Available in a wide choice of exclusive plaids and handsome solids. s-m-l-xl, all $17.95.
ALWAYS VIRGIN WOOL Rc^ii tors an ft Longs Pendleton Shirts 13.95 Lady Pendleton Skirts Jackets Slacks Sweaters in our Ladies’ Shop Mens, Boys ’ and Ladies' Shops 6 Mt.
PA 9-307 Matignon Turkey Bridge Smith College Club Open House Lovely weather aided in making the Smith College Open House at the home of Mrs.
Refreshments in hand, Townspeople and fellow suburbanites wandered about enjoying the lovely candle, and flower arrangements from the workshop of master arrangers Mines.
Tomorrow, November 17, Open House will be held at 6 Everett Avenue, the home of Mrs.
Those who missed the first Open House are cordially invited to drop in at 6 Everett Avenue between 10:00m. and 4:00 m.
Those who did come to the first Open House should conic again to see the new Creations.
The annual turkey bridge and whist party sponsored by the Matignon Guild, Cambridge, will be held on Friday, November 17, at 8:00m., in the Matignon High School cafeteria.
Several turkeys will be awarded and there will be a selection of choice prizes.
PA 9-2696 1 I > WI { Name } Address City WWW PLEASE SEND ME A ONEYEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THE WINCHESTER STAR NAME ADDRESS TOWN Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
The quick first touchdown that followed the recovery of the opening kickoff, and a recovered fumble by Wakefield of a nifiy Winchester punt return aft»*r the Sachems had stopped the Warriors wcdl on their own side of midfield, gave Wakefield a lift that they never relinquished.
You’ll have to go back u long way to find a game in w r hich Winchester was so completely outseored.
The Warriors’ .‘28-12 victory over the Sachems last year was the worst a Knowlton-eoached team had absorbed in 20 years until last Saturday.
You’ll find few instances through the years when Winchester teams have yielded 40 points.
Wakefield, with a flat ball, kicked a skimmer that hit Ned Niblock, big Winchester center and bounced from his chest well back into a converging nest of Wakefield boys.
One of them came up with the ball as the stands sat stunned by the quick | turn of events.
The Warriors then scored in se\ ven plays, one of them a five yard penalty for offside against the Sachems.
This gave Wakefield a first and five at the Winchester 21 and big Simensen went all the way in two tries, the first a sweep to the 11 and the second a drive right up the middle.
Shevlin dropped back to pass for the extra points, but was smeared by the center of the Winchester line before he could get the ball away.
Rowe and Bellino made a first down after the kickoff, but a fumble stalled the Sachem drive and when a long pass, that might have meant something was dropped, Bellino had to kick.
Bellino took the ball deep in his own territory and made a nice runback to the Winchester 48 where he drove hard into a gang of Wakefield tacklers and had the ball jarred loose, Wakefield recovering.
Simensen in two rushes reached the 36, Bacon broke through to the 29 and Simensen made first down at the 18.
Bucon picked up seven and Simensen was a foot short of first down at the eight.
Winchester was giving ground grudgingly, but Simensen made first down at the four, as the first quarter ended and Bacon added two.
On the next try Simensen got over off tackle, but a pass try for the extra points proved no good.
Wakefield was offside on the kickoff, and Benincasa ran the second boot buck well to the Winchester 46.
Benincasa made four I ed and arched a pretty pass down reached the two and Winchester the middle to Lennie Timpone, who I was penalized half the distance was all alone.
Timpone made a nice jumping clutch at about the 20 and really legged it into the end zone, dragging a desperate Wakefield pursuer in with them.
A 15 yard holding penalty stalled Wakefield after the kickoff, amd the Warriors kicked from their 32.
Two rushes were stopped with only three yards and a pass was grounded at the 24.
Wakefield was really rushing Colliander on his throws and when he tried another he barely got it away.
It bounced through a Winchester boy’s hands and was grabbed by a Wakefield defender, who aided by some pretty blocking streaked all the way into the end zone.
Here Winchester got a break, for Wakefield was called for illegal use of hands, and assessed half the distance to its goal line, Winchester getting the ball at the Scarlet 12 yard line for a first down.
Colliander again hit Timpone with a pass and the tall end was dropped at the two.
A back-inmotion penalty set the Warriors back to their thirty, but Bacon got through for f^ur and from the 26 Shevlin hit Dennis at the five and he ambled over with no one near him.
Colliander was smeared on a jumper, and on the next play Wakefield’s Boyd intercepted a wobbly pass at the Winchester 33.
Shevlin hit Bacon with a pass at the 20 and he was knocked outside at the 14.
Simensen picked up four off tackle and then busted straight up the middle for 10 yards and a touchdown.
Shevlin passed to Bacon for the extra points with the latter making a great diving catch of the ball.
After the kickoff a Colliander pass was grounded and Bellino got only four on a sweep.
Colliander then tried a lateral out to the left to Benincasa, which seemed to catch the speedy halfback by surprise.
He lost the ball which was recovered by Nardone at the Winchester 37 and the Warriors scored again.
With less than a minute to play, and in spite of a 15 yard penalty for illegal receivers down field, Simensen picked up seven to the Winchester 37, and Shevlin hit Bacon with a pass at the 10.
Shevlin again passed this time to Dennis in the end zone, the big end waiting for the ball all by himself.
An attempted pass for the extra points was no good, and the ensuing kickoff was the last play of the half.
Wakefield lost no time in adding to its score with the resumption of play.
Running the kickoff back to at center, and on the next play l its 41 Wakefield drove steadily Bellino added a yard on a sweep, j ahead to a first down at the WinHere from the 36 Colliander fadChester nine.
On the next play Encarnacao drilled through the right side for the score but a double reverse hokus pokus followed hv a pass for the extra points was no good.
Midway through the final quarter Wakefield with a sprinkling of subs in the lineup got the ball as a fake kick on fourth down failed the Sachems at their 44.
Once again the Warriors marched goalward, a 24 yard rollout by Shevlin putting the ball at the Winchester 15 for a first down.
In two bucks Pietrafitta reached the nine and Purcell drove in to the one.
Lapery, reserve back, bucked the necessary yard for the touchdown, but an attempted sweep for the extra points was stopped short of the line.
Nothing went right for the embattled Sachems, who crossed midfield only twice, once getting to the Warriors’ 48 and again late in the game, to the 46.
Both times they were forced back across the fifty before having to kick.
The Sachems did stop one Wakefield rush at their 10 yard line, in the second half but aside from this accomplished nothing; and if All America Joe Bellino, who was on the sidelines, was heard muttering in his sleep Saturday night, there can be little wonder.
Winchester Sachems atul tin* Woburn Tanners, ml hot athletic rivals since 1891 sume oik* of the oldest schoolboy football rivalries in ( ireater Boston on Thanksgiving Manchester Field, commencing at 10:15.
The Orange has had a great season and richly deserves the favorite role.
ALSO ON SAME PROGRAM ‘ ALL KINDS OF SKI JUNK” WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
Warren Berg, actually lives over the line in Arlington, but his sports activities have been Winchester and both he and his parents are well known here.
Both the Exeter and Andover JVs went into their game undefeated and Andover had not been scored upon.
The game was played at Exeter and because of the teams’ unbeaten status and as an omen for the big varsity game on the following Saturday attracted a lot of interest.
Wild scored a touchdown for Exeter on a nine-yard buck, with Berg passing for the other.
Pete also scored Exeter’s two-points after touchdown on a roll-out option play.
An adjustable slip clutch protocts against chain breakage or impeller damage.
The Sachems have beaten Concord, Cambridge Latin, Lexington and Belmont, have tied Reading and lost to Stoneham, Melrose and Wakefield.
There certainly is nothing in this record to warrant naming the Sachems anything but underdogs.
At times the local boys have moved the ball well, even against strong opposition.
Only once, against Stoneham, has Winchester failed to score more than a single touchdown.
Woburn swonked the Sachems 41-0 back in 1921, but vve can recall no other team tallying over 40 points against Winchester.
The Sachems have good offensive potential, but their defense has generally left a lot to be desired.
In Woburn, Winchester will be facing very probably as strong a team as any it has met this season; perhaps the strongest.
Up in the once Tanning City they will tell you this year’s Orange is better defensively than the great 1957 club that beat Winchester, 2713.
Recent changes by Coach White have, however, bolstered the offense appreciably and against Marblehead last Saturday the Tanners were very impressive.
In Eddie Foley, Woburn has one of the great schoolboy passers of the year.
Foley is also a good runner, and able to gain effectively on roll-out and option plays.
Early in the season Woburn was hurting for a heavy duty back like Castiglione and Sal Carbone.
Along the frontier Winchester averages 187, but for all its size the Sachem linemen have generally been outplayed.
This is, of course, if the weights are accurate, and if those in the starting lineup are able to start.
It was reported early this week that Winchester will be without a couple of regulars on Turkey Duy because of poor scholastic grades.
Winchester and Woburn have played no team in common, so the prophets are spared the dangerous practice of trying to judge the outcome on the basis of comparative scores.
On the average both teams have met about the same ^.ort of opposition, and Woburn is undefeated and once tied.
And yet we have so often seen the heavy favorite “go boom’’ in these climactic games, that we just have to throw in a little word of caution.
The Sachems looked like a pretty fair ball club at times against Belmont, and Winchester has nothing to lose.
A win over Woburn would salve a lot of skun snozzles that have been rubbed in the dirt three times this season.
We don’t believe they will, but, — there is always that outside chance.
If Winchester will give Bellino some blocking for a change and the line will give Colliander some protection on his passes, it could be an interesting game Thanksgiving.
Since 1940 Winchester has won 13, Woburn, 7; and there has been one tie.
Take a look at the season’s records and you will see why we have to pick Woburn.
Edwin Fenton, teacher at Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pennsylvania.
Hockey Clinic The second Annual Olympic Hockey Clinic will be conducted by Bill Cleary, Bob Cleary, and Bill Riley.
For further information call Bill Cleary at MI 81391 or Bill Riley HU 8-1092.
Mambro and Mario Bnzzotta, dt* j f rated Holy Cross by a, 3-1 score | to stay in top position.
Harvard held third place at this time last week but as a result of taking Maryland 4-0, it is now holding next to first place as Maryland has dropped to seventh spot from sixth.
Notre Dame was fortunate in splitting with Yale but it now holds third place in the ranking while the two points moved Yale up one step from seventh to sixth.
In the “top ten” Richie Tofuri and Johnny Mangano have replaced Roundy Fiore and Rudy Fiore.
Important matches being lolled off at the Strike Lanes as you are reading this column are California vs Bates, Harvard against Alabama and Penn challenging Notre Dame.
Being Thanksgiving next Thursday there will be no bowling and we of the Sons of Italy Bowling League wish all the readers of this column a very Happy Thanksgiving.
League Standings Won Lost California 29 8 Harvard 23 9 Notre Dame 22 10 Alabama 21 11 Navy 18 14 Yale 18 14 Maryland 17 15 Penn 17 15 Holy Cross 14 18 Boston College 12 20 Bates 12 20 Army 10 22 Georgetown 9 23 St.
Rug-braiding, bridge, music and the legitimate stage are her principal interests aside from teaching.
KIMBO TRADEMARK a brand new, lively board game in which the play controlled by the movement of fences.
Open House Student monitors were stationed throughout tho corridors at Lynch Jr.
High the evening of November 8 to facilitate passage from room to room by parents interested in theii teenagers school program.
Many and varied were the comments heard, but most parents felt that here in this excellent building was housed every conceivable mechanical aid to education and a staff of completely dedicated teachers.
Parents were especially impressed by the enthusiasm of tho teachers for the subjects they taught, and their desire* to instil in the youngsters a love for learning not as a means to an end, but as a joy in itself.
Shailer Avery and her committee served refreshments in the cufetorium throughout the evening.
Then talk to HAGGERTY RAMBLER Find out how you can save with a ’62 RAMBLER Charles L Haggerty, Inc.
Ralph H Earle, Minister of the Second Congregational Church in Winchester will speak at 9:15 m.
Senior Forum Service this Sunday in Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church.
This will he Mr Earle’s first visit to Forum and Forumites are very happy to have him come because they have enjoyed his leadership in inter-church activities and feel that in him they have a true friend.
Mr Earle is a native of Kansas City, Missouri, and a graduate of Pasadena College in California.
The . deacons will be Dan Brink and John Deans and the ushers will be Richard Starkweather and Bruce Carpenter.
These meetings^provide opportunity for young people to discuss Forum matters and topics of special interest under the leadership of their class leaders.
The annual Thanksgiving sharing project in which Forum cooperates is providing food for the Boston City Missionary’s use.
Forum members have been invited to the Men’s Club dinner on Tuesday, November 21 when Ken Maynard from radio station WBZ will be the speaker.
School Bus Law General Laws Chapter 90, Section 14 permitted a motorist to pass a stopped “school bus” after bringing his vehicle to a full stop immediately before passing, and then passing the “school bus” at a speed not in excess of ten miles per hour.
Woburn Daily Timba WOBURN AWAITS THANKSGIVING WHISTLE, left to right, Richey Sweeney, Co-Capt.
It was a beautiful fall day and Winchester by holding a great team to a six point win played its best game this year.
Wellesley has been beaten only once in the past two years and that was by Dedham, this year’s champions.
It may also interest the readers to know that Wellesley had Waltham to a 34-0 defeat, at halftime rn their game.
Choo Choo Collins, who has yet to be caught from behind, ran 65 yards into pay dirt.
Team elected captains John Newton and Danny McGee kept the team tired up during the entire game and expert punting by Brian Collins kept Wellesley from invading Winchester’s territory even more thun they did.
Outstanding performances of the day were put in by Scott Baerenwald, Bob Di Pietro, Jetf Hughes, Mike Murray.
Winchester’s coaches Dun MacElwee, Ed Gravalese and Bill Sipp who have put in many hours working with the boys this season, are very satisfied with the results.
Much credit is due also to the team representatives George Rowe, John Martin, Joe Collins, Dave Choate, and Joe Cussen for the fine work that they did in organizing the program.
Tom Haley also did an excellent job as manager this year and wore several pairs of shoes out running around.
With many of this year’s boys returning next year we will all look forward to another successful year.
Thanks For Your Support Of UNICEF The children and young people of the First Buptist Church wish to thank the people of Winchester for their quiet efforts and ever-increasing interest in the health and happiness of millions of children all over the world.
In most of the families of mankind, childhood is not a time of play and preparation but a time of premature suffering and dying.
Jim Menucci Richie Rowe, Captain Mike Bellino, John Chane, John Colliander.
Kneeling, Boh Donlon, George Nowell, Dan Mahoney, Toni Mooney, Ned Nib lock.
November 29th 6:30 Dessert and Coffee 7:00 Official Opening of the Booths Thursday, November 30th All day and evening.
Thanksgiving And Loyalty Sunday Thanksgiving and Loyalty Sunday will be observed this Sunday, November 10 at the First Congregational Church.
Through the years this occasion has developed into a significant and memorable day in the life of the Church.
Following the tradition of the first Thanksgiving observed by the Plymouth Colony many years ago, members and friends of the Church will join in expression of gratitude and dedication unto God.
Four choirs will participate in the two services held at nine fifteen and eleven o’clock.
Among early reservation holders for the social hour and dinner are Mr and Mrs.
The play is set in a small town in Mississippi a few years prior to the first World War.
It involves two young people, Alma, a minister’s daughter and John, a doctor.
During the course of the play we see the circumstances that bring them together and eventually separate them.
Alma is played by Kathe Finnis and John by Randall Noreross, the rest of the sizeable cast is made up of Conservatory Drama students.
ELEANOR B HALL, Director PArkview 9-3492 HU 3-8556 EX 5-4117 nov#-2t Boston Vassar Club Mrs.
William W Davies III, 11 Sanborn Street, opera chairman for the Boston Vassar Club, has announced that only a limited number of the less expensive seats are still available for the two Kresge Auditorium performances of the Vassar Centennial Opera-concerto “Command Performance,” starring Metropolitan Opera singers Blanche Thebom and Ezio Flagello, on November 17 and 18.
Library Film Program For those who are beginning to feel the pressure of the approaching holidays, we recommend viewing QUETICO, the feature film in the Library program this weekend.
This million acre area on the boundary of Ontario and Minnesota is being preserved as a natural wilderness.
The photographer Christopher Chapman has captured in color and with very little narration the essence of one of the most beautiful natural wildernesses in the world.
The story of twin fawns, Fleet and Shy, from the age of two days to nearly a yefir is told in Mother Deer and her Twins.
First the mother deer cares for and protects her babies and gradually they learn to care for themselves.
Programs are presented at 7:30 Friday night and at 10:15 Saturday morning.
At Meeting Of Math Teachers Miss Irene Thromoulus and Mr John Waite of the High School faculty attended the first meeting of the Association of Advanced Placement Mathematics Teachers Friday evening, November 3, at Milton Academy.
The principal speaker at the meeting was Mr Richard Pieters of Phillips Academy in Andover.
He is chairman of the Advanced Placement Committee in Mathematics of the College Entrance Ex amination Board, and explained to the group the qualifications neees sary for a student who wishes to take the Advanced Placement test given in May.
Miss Thromoulus, who is teach ing the Advanced Placement course at Winchester High School this year was a member of a discussion group dealing with the subject matter taught in this course.
Mr Waite participated in a discussion of the curriculum leading up to the Advanced Placement Course in Calculus.
The program followed in the Winchester Schools is considered one of the best in New England according to those in attendance.
K of C Thanksgiving Dance On Saturday evening November 18 the Winchester K of C will hold their monthly ladies’ night in the effect of a Thanksgiving dance.
The highlight of the evening will be the drawing for twenty 15 lb. turkeys to be picked up for Thanksgiving at Romeo’s neighborhood store.
One more turkey will be awarded for a door prize to someone in attendance.
The alterations now in progress will have no effect on the dance floor.
A collation of coffee and sandwiches will be served during intermission.
The “Deac” Goes Overseas Major Robert S Hamilton, USAF, was visiting in town early this week prior to leaving for an overseas assignment in Germany.
Bowling League rfi I own Bowling League Last Tuesday produced only one change in the team standings.
This was between Atlantic Gelatin who took over 4th spot and K of C who dropped into 5th.
We also saw the season’s high single broken by H O’Neil with a 145, but this outstanding score was not quite good enough, us five minutes later B Kelley came up with a 147.
Gelatin 44 28 12,614 K of C 43 29 12,159 Post Office 38 34 12,503 49er’s 36 36 12,587 Broth-in-laws 33 39 12,086 St.
W r inn 8 64 11,391 Long Shots 6 66 10,284 Top Ten Bowlers B Kelley 110.
With nine weeks of bowling completed and the end of [ the first, half near, the .fades are 1 the first team to take a definite lead and strong hold for first place honors.
Captain Ann Caggiano has every reason to be proud of her team record and team members.
This is the first captaincy for Ann, and capably supporting her are sisters Vi Bruno and Gloria Monterisi, Mae Rolundi, and a newcomer to the league this year, Bette Cam ma rata.
In tin* second place position are the Rubies, captained by Rose De Teso, and supported by Virginia Mucinanti, Jennie Amico, Anita Dollotf and Mary Fiorelli. in the spotlight this week is Emma Blanda, who bowled a three-string total of 267.
Emma is a newcomer to the league this year and has been on the top ten list each week.
By all indications this is the week to pay tribute to three lovely sisters, Vi Bruno, Gloria Monterisi, and Emma Blanda.
One way to improve one’s bowling is to enjploy the method used by Rose and Bill Fiore.
Holyoke On a perfect autumn day in October eight juniors from the High School journeyed to South Hadley, Mass, where they were entertained for the day at Mount Holyoke College.
Christine Trump, a sophomore, made all the plans with the help of the Winchester students there as hostesses.
They were Carlie Clark, Stephie Hersey, Janet Monro, Phyllis Rutter, Marcia Smith, Alice Dunn, Joyce Pepi, Anne Dyson.
A busy day, attending classes, swim in the pool, luncheon in the dormitories as guests of the College, a tour of the campus, ended most profitably with a conference with Miss Alice Jeghelian, assistant director of the Board of Admissions.
This annual trip to Mount Holyoke is part of the program of the 1 Winchester Mount Holyoke Club.
Piano Soloist In the first student recital of the year at the Wellesley Branch of the New England Conservatory, Friday evening, November 17, Angela Burkhardt, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Martin Burkhardt of 9 Albamont Road, played “The Jolly Acrobats,” by Rebe, as a piano solo.
Guest artist on the program was Miss Paula Kelch of the Conservatory faculty, flutist, who performed “Suite Modale” by Bloch.
Miss Kelch has come to New England Conservatory from the Oberlin Conservatory where she was graduated with a major in flute. > eel el le j “ONE of u KIND” WE BUY AND SELL ESTATES, DIAMONDS and COLLECTORS’ ITEMS Expert Appraiser MAKER and DESIGNER of EXQUISITE JEWELRY Repairing 47 Bromfield St., Boston, Mass.
DEvonshire 8-8639 nov2-4t Reserve Now for THANKSGIVING • COCKTAILS • LUNCHEON • DINNER Have your Thanksgiving Dinner at Fantasia— where fifte food and an atmosphere of gracious living has been a tradition for over 25 years.
Mystic School fifth grader** board the bus for the Children’s Rook Fair in Boston escorted by teachers and parents and given a send-off by Principal Raymond Hickman.
Julia H Pomeroy, teacher, and Miss Cynthia Hoar, teaching interne; parents, Mrs.
The fifth grade went on Monday, the sixth Tuesday and the fourth will go in tomorrow.
Travelling in to New England Mutual Hall and out again by special bus, the groups spent about two hours each browsing among the exhibits and listening to speakers and storytellers.
The children were alert to and critical of what they had seen and heard.
Monday’s group — average age about 10 — heard a professional TV storyteller tell them a tale and a children’s author speak.
They were very impressed with the expressive talents of the former and clearly felt that the author had talked down to them.
At the extensive book exhibits they had been encouraged to write down their own list of books they’d like to read.
Some had remembered to include the publisher’s name and a practical few had the prices clearly noted.
They had noted with interest books for teenagers, an “Information Please” book exhibit and a special table for Braille publications.
After having had a complete tour of the buildings and a briefing of its functions and duties to all nations, they were privileged to attend the session of the General Assembly.
The honored speaker at that session was Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru of India.
Baldwin W Callahan, Minister of Missions and Stewardship of the Massachusetts Congregational Christian Conference, will speak at> the Second Congregational Church.
From 1929 to 1949 he was pastor of the First Congregational Church in Gardner, Massachusetts, and during that time served the denomination in a variety of ways, such as Dean of the Pilgrim Fellowship Summer Conference, and member of the Executive Committee of the General Council.
In October 1949, he became Minister of Missions and Stewardship for the Massachusetts Conference, and in that capacity is now serving the six hundred churches of the Congregational Church in the state.
His present work includes both missionary and stewardship promotion among our churches.
He is preaching somewhere practically every Sunday and speaks to many groups during the week on some phase of current Missionary or Stewardship interests.
During the Spring of 1953, Mr Callahan was a participant in a six weeks’ study tour of the Congregational work in Hawaii, Japan, the Philippines, and Hong Kong.
Union Thanksgiving Service The Union Thanksgiving Service will he held in the First Congregational Church this year and will be on Wednesday evening, November 22 at 7:45 o’clock.
A massed choir composed of choir members from the six participating Churches will sing under the direction of Mr Robert White, Choir Master of the Congregational Church.
The Reverend Ralph B Putney of the Church of the Epiphany will give the sermon and the Ministers of all the Churches will take part in the service.
Colorado, Member of the Heard of Lectureship of J % The Mother Church, The Pint Church of Christ, ScietUiit, ^ ^ ^ ** Boston, Massachusetts — ** Sunday, 3:30 November 19 ^ Town Hall Central Street, Stoneham All are welcome Reserved seats arc available for those attending their first Christian Science lecture — The Mother Church brings you this lecture.
The quiet list of Winchester school events listed two weeks ago in the Star gave no hint of the excitement, preparation on the part of students and teachers, and anticipation on the part of the parents.
The Mystic School Open House was held on Tuesday, November 7, and at 7:30, the doors glinted with a lighted welcome.
The rooms were completely decorated with students’ spelling papers, numberwork, essays, book reports, and frosted with various kinds of exciting art work.
Parents meeting friends and neighbors in the halls rushed by in order to be “on time” for the first bell.
There, the harvest table centerpiece spilled over with fruits, flowers, and the refreshments of cider and donuts added the perfect touch to a windy fall evening gathering.
Mr Dickman, the principal, was on hand to greet parents early in the evening, and to help guide a few “lost” parents.
Later he joined the teachers and parents having refreshments in the auditorium.
The past month of October saw the polishing of silver and the rattling of tea cups at Mystic School.
Each teacher was invited to the home of her room mother to meet socially all the mothers of her pupils.
The guest-of-honor was usually asked to say a few words about her aims for her class and to answer questions from puzzled mothers.
The following is the starting lineup for the fall teas at Mystic School.
A last note of appreciation to all of Mystic teachers who worked so hard to make this year’s Open House such a successful, interesting, and stimulating evening.
Pomeroy, teachers of the combined fifth grades, was held at the home of Mrs.
A combined tea for Miss Milliean and Miss Wood, teachers of the combined sixth grades, was held at the home of Mrs.
At the same time, Gerry Barrett and Ted Atkinson extended their string to three victories in a row.
Long recognized as one of the best looking youngsters at the WDBC, Ed Sullivan has certainly “come of age” with a brand of play to match his profile.
As guest editor this week, Ed describes his favorite bridge situation, as dummy opposite a pretty girl.
Duplicate bridge differs from contract play, as each N-S team competes against all other N-S teams, as is also the case with the East-West teams.
Top scores are obtained in one of two ways; either in obtaining the best contract for your team, or preventing your opponents from obtaining theirs.
A perfect illustration of this occurred on Board 2, Section B, of last week’s duplicate session.
North A J 8 4 V K 8 6 3 ♦ 9 8 5 A 10 8 5 West East A A Q 3 V Q 7 4 V A J 10 9 5 ♦ A K 10 7 3 2 ♦ Q 6 * Q J 9 7 * K 6 1 3 South A A K 10 9 7 6 5 2 V 2 ♦ J 4 A A 2 Your correspondent was playing West on this hand, with the lovely Mrs.
East South West North 1H IS 2D 2S 3H 4S 5H Double Pass Pass Pass The AS was led, trumped in dummy, HQ played and finessed, a small heart continued and taken with the H9, Mrs.
Atkinson played the DQ, continued a small diamond to dummy’s DK, AD was played on which declarer parked her losing spade, diamonds were continued and eventually ruffed by North, over ruffed by declarer, the last trump was taken by declarer, clearing North of trumps, she then conceded the AC, and made six hearts.
The contract as played can be held to five if North refuses to trump any of dummy’s diamonds in which case declarer must lose hand, making North’s HK good.
The East-West teams allowed to play this contract in either 4H or 51 1 were able to arrive at the contract because they were permitted communication at the lower bidding levels.
West knew he had heart support for his partner, a void in spades (which would probably he the opening lead), diamond control and club support.
East knew from the bidding that her tcyim had heart and diamond control, in other words a fit in two suits.
Let us sec how the results would have been if after East opens III, South bids four spades.
Miss Massachusetts, and Tom Killeen of the National Shawinut Bank at the recent New England Fish and Seafood Parade “kick-off** huffrt held at the Parker House in Boston.
Mr Sacra has served as the area chairman lor the New England fishing industry. values, as this is a shut out bid.
An analysis of South’s hand shows a minimum of eight sure tricks, and if there is even distribution in spades he has nine sure tricks.
The MOST he can go down is 3 tricks, probably only one, and if his partner has one ace, or a King on the right side, 10 tricks are assured.
Even more important however, if North has no tricks, East-West may have a slam in any suit except spades.
Ironically, a small slam in diamonds is unbeatable against any defense as can be seen.
Ctjlhnia I'^cijnolils l*\ 9-3334 For Rent WEDGEWOOD APARTMENTS On tin' shore of \\ edge Pond in Winchester Center are the newly completed Wedgewood Apartments, where you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living.
Each apartment has a li\ing room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area.
Ws, Make an appointment today to set* apartments about which the whole town is talking. $190 up.
Call PA 9-5800 Monday through Friday. oet5-t/ COII we thesi Rate Id you ask for in have that, loo.
THIS IS A BLUE-CHIP A custom-built three-bedroom, two-bath RANCH, with a hay-windowed living room, large dining room, fully equipped kitchen, paneled study in a top location.
SEE PAGES 10 AND 11 FOR SOME OF THE HOMES SOLI) BY THIS OFFICE IN 1961.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors S3 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers Gertrude H Murphy.
PA 9-1310 Richard H Murphy, IV\ 9-6213 Marion R Ferriman, PA 9-1136 Charles T McCarthy, PA 9-5972 Florence M Salyer, PA 9-1966 James F Quine, PA 9-3355 WINCHESTER Center-entrance Colonial in attractive setting.
FOR RENT Four-bedroom duplex in convenient location. $175 a month Six-room apartment available January 1.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis BR 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp PA 9-0373 Jean Gibb PA 9-3808 HORACE FORD PA 9-5887 Realtor WINCHESTER Distinctive custom-built Garrison Colonial in quiet, desirable, executive location.
On the second floor are three spacious chambers, and two attractive baths.
Light, airy basement including lavatory and recreation room with fireplace.
Features of this perfectly kept home include pine-panelled living room and kitchen, four twin-sized bedrooms, two baths, two-car garage.
Caldwell PA 9-2790 PA 9-0795 Mr Duff v PA 9-5550 RENTALS Large modern Split Level with five bedrooms, two baths.
BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 21 Thompson Street PArkview 9-4240 WANTED URGENTLY We have a sincere buyer who has sold his present home and wishes to buy a good-sized family-type home with four to six bedrooms, in Winchester.
JOSEPHSON Real Estate f Church Street PArkview 9-242$ ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 WINCHESTER Big, beautiful new Garrison on 15,000-foot level lot.
Oversized living room and dining room, all-built-in kitchen, den. four bedrooms and 2Va ti led baths.
For appointment to see this home call IV\ 9-6100, or Moses —PA 9-2815 Mrs.
Medford Laundromat and Appliance Service 81 Hi^h St., Medford, EX 9-9775 nov9-2 BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES PAINT STORES Expanding National Paint M ami f no tu rer HAS Dealer Franchise Available in Area. 12 to 36 Months Financing Merchandising Demonstrations (Promotions National and Local Advertising Arranged.
Bulldozer — Shoveldozer Cellar Exoavating — Grading PArkview 9-5067 — 9-1531 ausl2-tf DRESSMAKING ALTERATIONS See this number Jot it down.
Just 10 min. from vour town For alterations on that dress You will find me the best.
WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 nov2-4t ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AMICO Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
HIGHEST CASH PRICES Metal Furnncea Removed, Iron, Rags, also Rubbish Removal.
MI 6-7067. novl6-2i FOR SALK — Chrome kitchen table ami ""T— — — ■ — — 4 chair* Excellent condition, $26.
MeJmuc set, two end tables, two kitch. chair*, oil heater, mine. item*, bric-a-brac.
Hnverty, WElls 3-6889. sept 12tf FOR SALE — Reactivated *58 Impalu Sport Coupe.
FOR SALE — Two English setter*, 1 nuil*. 1 female, registered with the American Field Publishing Co.
FOR SALK — New brick ranch home, 3 bedrooms, dining room, living room, electric kitchen.-car garage.
All makca including Japanese manufacture. years of prompt, courteous service.
NOrmandy 6-4620. jun22-ti DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use.
TeL WElls 3-0062. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS YOUR CAR delivered anywhere in Florida.
ANTIQUES— -One horse sleigh with Swis* bell* in beautiful condition, ('all TUrner 4-3807.
It can be seen at 26 Maple Street, Chelsea. nov2-3t PLUMBING — Heating, Oil-burner sales and service.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrange>ments through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling your Authorised Travel Agent Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out with you.
Call WElls 3-2334. sep21-tf FOR RENT — Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartment*. $190 up.
Call PA 9-6860. oct6-tf WANTED WANTED — Widow would like housekeeper to live in for two mos.
Call PA 9-1258. nov9-2t * HELP WANTED FALL WARD ROBES are in the shop* now.
Knowledge of signal generator* and use of *imple electrical test equipment.
Far 'J the finest, most dependable | TVRADIO • HI-FI REPAIR | PArkview 9-3491 J A GALAMB0S K £ TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing.
Call PA 9-5758. or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. apr27-tf WANTED WANTED Antiques — Bric-a-Brae China, Glass, Furniture, etc.
Please call PA 9-5946. POSITION WANTED — Medical aecretary available either full or part-time. years’ experience.
POSITION WANTED— Two high school senior* will do general outside work including snow shoveling ; and for Chrlutmas we will set up your Christmas decorations.
Business A unique one-mun operation, ideul for man with woodworking experience, suitable for part or full time.
Price reasonable, which includes machinery, stock and instruction by owner.
MISCELLANEOUS Superior Construction Company PREVENT CHIMNEY FIRES We are now working in your area.
Thomson Back Of the Week Dougie Thomson, who used to carry the mail for the Winchester Sachems football team a couple of years back, was named Virginia’s “Back of the Week” recently by the Richmond “Times-Dispatch” in recognition of his fine play against South Carolina.
He was the game’s leading ground gainer with 81 yards in 18 carries, and he carried four consecutive times inside the 10 yard line to get over on his touchdown buck from a yard out.
Late in the game he made two important consecutive first downs that helped Virginia to run out the clock with South Carolina threatening.
A sophomore, he started the season at halfback, hut three weeks ago was shifted to fullback in an attempt to get more speed in that position.
Winchester fans will agree they will get speed with Mr Thomson at the fullback slot.
Girl Scout News Troop 37 enjoyed a very interesting trip to the Blue Hills Museum.
One of the most interesting things was the fact that nearly everything displayed were natural things found in the Blue Hills, animals, birds, rocks, flowers etc.
Kristine Uhlig, Gay Aubrey, Nancy Curtis, Judith Snow, Kathy Williams, Betsy Shaw, Joyce Lavalle, Betty Cirur90, Anna Buzzotta, Catherine Gullotti, Theresa Paonessa, Alice Watts, Melissa Colbert, Beverly Erickson, Linda Ciarcia, Betsy Hingston and Jane Grey.
Girl Scout Cabin The office will be closed at noon on Wed. before Thanksgiving and also Friday November 4 due to the Skating party.
Lecture On Art ( Center A lecture on the origin and development of a museum might be a very dull subject, but not when delivered by Jane Miller, nor when the museum, the De Cordova, is not a museum, but a lively Art Center with all sorts of goings-on Some of the wishful thinkers at the November Winchester Art Association meeting, who feel Winchester might he a good place for an art center, were particularly interested in her statement that any community can have an art center.
The location, like that of the DeCordova Museum, should he in such a beautiful spot that people will go out of their way to go there, or it should be in a central location, easily reached by all.
When Julian De Cordova bequeathed his property on a hilltop, overlooking Sandy Pond to the town of Lincoln, he also bequeathed a considerable sum of money for its perpetual maintenance.
He made no narrow specifications hampering its use other than the requirement that it be used as a public museum and park.
Under the direction of a board of directors, with Fred P Walkey as executive director, one of the finest art centers in the United States has taken form.
The building, completely modernized, not only holds hanging exhibitions, but sponsors all forms of art, drama, music, poetry, the dance.
Classes are held in all types of creative art for both children and adults.
M iss Miller showed many slides of museum activities, including exhibits, painting classes, festivals.
She described enthusiastically the unique outdoor summer program of creative arts for children.
She told of the services to the surrounding communities, the talks and exhibits arranged for schools civic groups, and industries.
A new wing is planned to acco| midate more classes and provide more space for exhibitions and administrative offices.
Membership includes priority on class lists, as well as discounts on the purchases of books and reproductions, access to the very fine lending library, notices exhibits, and other privileges.
Many Winchester residents are already members and also take an active part in the museum’s activities.
The current exhibition in the museum at Lincoln consists of paintings by Robert Hamilton and Jack Wolfe.
In December there will be the National Watercolor Show, and the New' England Watercolor Show.
After the talk at the library, all present at the meeting were invited to the home of Mr and Mrs.
The splash party is open to both boys and girls of all uges in Winchester.
But before the plates are heaped full with the traditional turkey and all the fixings, there will be five kernels of corn placed on each plate.
The custom dates back to Pilgrim days when each one is expected to think of at least five things for which to be thankful at this season of the year.
The dinners will begin at the Goodwill Day Nursery for the nursery age children of working mothers and continue through the Youth and Children’s Center, Hayden Goodwill Inn for Homeless Boys, the senior citizens at the Eliza Henry Home, and the Seavey Settlement House; Goodwill Industries and ""'the Noyes Training Center.
ANNUAL APPEAL Henry E Helms, Executive Sec retary, issued the traditional ap peal for canned goods and other foods which come regularly from churches, schools, colleges und other sources for distribution to the underprivileged.
George Denham and Al Salvey will disc-jockey the affair with everyone’s favorite records.
Everyone is welcome to utleud and udd to their record collection if they are lucky.
John V Harvey, Register. nov2-3t TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS November 3, 1961 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add to an existing garage attached to the premises numbered 51 Emerson Road, locating the same less than twenty feet from the lot line.
By the Board of Appeal Gilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V French Daniel T Chane fiATERnaix ■1638 ■ TO THE BOARD OF APPEAL WINCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS November 3, 1961 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add a garage with less than half the side wall in contact with the house, numbered 1 Salisbury Street, locating the same less than fifteen feet from the lot line.
A petition ha* been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purport intr to be the last will of said deceased by MARGARET LOUISE COOP ER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she he appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
If you dertire to object thereto you or your attorney should flle a written appearatico in auid Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on tho fifth day of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
Probate Court, To oil persona lntere*ted in the estate of MAHELLK H LORI) late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The executor* of the will of said MAHELLE H LORD have presented to said Court for allowance their tirst account.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock In the forenoon on the twentyfourth day of November, 1961, the return day of this citation.
To al) persons interested in the estate of MARION C MILWARI) lute of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition ha* been presented to Raid Court for probate a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of *aid deceased by PERCY BUGBEE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying tlrnt he be appointed admini*trutor with the will annexed of said estate, without giving u surety on bin bond.
To &U persons interested in the estate uf DANIEL C DEN N Err late or W Incheater in said County, deceased.
A petition has boon presented to aaid Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by Boston Safe Depoait and Trust Company of Boston in the County of Suffolk praying that it be appointed executor thereof without giving a surety on it* bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney ahould hie a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before u*. 1 o'clock in the forenoou on the fifth •lay of DoeemJber 1961, the return day of this citation.
To all persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M A BELLE H LORD Lite of Winchester in aaid County, deceased, for the benefit of LOUISE FRANCES EBERLE and others.
The trustees uf said estate Itave presented to aaid Court for nllowanca their first to third accounts, inclusive.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in aaJd Court a Cambridge before ten o’clock In the forenoon on the twentyfourth day of November 1961, the return day of this citation.
THEN DUL PA 9-0029 Page Eighteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1961 HOW BANKS HELP ft One important way in which America’s 14,000 banks help our Country is by serving as “retailers” for the United States Savings Bonds program.
Banks sell Bonds as a free service, distribute information about them, and furnish voluntary leadership— some 70% of state Savings Bonds chairmen, 56% of county chairmen, are bankers.
Because Bond dollars help to keep America strong; and because the program has helped to. revitalize the American tradition of thrift— the key to individual progress.
Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Finger In The Pie Internationally Speaking Two alternatives confront useither to put an end to the arm race, or to the human race.
Man has turned Nature’s cool, refreshing rain into some thing sinister.
West Berlin construction experts have estimated that fifteen thousand families could have been housed with the materials used in the “Ulbricht Wall.” (as the hated structure is called on the Western side) Now they can’t tear it down even if they want to.
Half an hour after the wall came down a hun dred thousand people would be off to West Berlin.
To accept the so-called necessity for shelter and protection is to acknowledge nuclear war as a valid instrument of national policy.
We must, of course, retain our military potential as a deterrent, but the billions of dollars that will be spent building public and private fallout shelters could be put to far better use promoting peace.
Named Zoo Drive Chairman Theodore vonRosenvinge, 3rd, of 4 Parker Road has been appointed one of the 17 area Thairmen of the Massachusetts Zoological Society membership drive.
The appointment was made by Mr Richard H Miller, president of the society.
Mr Miller declared that every first-class zoo in the world has the support of an active and devoted zoological society.
Information about membership may he obtained by writing Massachusetts Zoological Society, Franklin Park, Boston 21, Mass.
Certificates Richard F Dutting of 12 Wildwood Street and August S Niewenhous of 15 Glengarry received certificates last Friday for having completed an nineweek course in practical politics sponsored by the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce.
Mr Dutting is a project engineer for Camp, Dresser & McKee in Boston and Mr Niewenhous is the superintendent of car service for the Boston & Maine Railroad.
The Chamber’s course in practical politics is designed to assist the individual to develop the political skills necessary for effective participation in politics.
No one quicker than we to admire woman’s outstanding talents, both social and domestic, or admit that her charming presence lends grace and color to the eternal human drama.
Through sheer power of inspiration she has been the instigator of an incalulable number of man’s finest achievements in music, art, literature, science, or invention.
However, in imparting inspiration to man, she has, we fear, retained all too little for herself — which is just another way of saying that in fields of creative art man reigns practically supreme.
The magnificent shell on the Esplanade carries the names of sixty great composers.
The field of great painting is like that of music, practically monopolized by man, as is that of sculpture.
Even as man’s artistic genius provides for woniifn’s entertain ment and pleasure, so does his in ventive genius look after her convenience and comfort.
Consider RUG CLEANING Ca£L PA.906&4 1 CHUfcCH ST COLONIAL Package Store, Inc.
Four Corners Shopping Center Woburn WE 5-2322 BCglS-lf INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HATL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY PURS — JEWELRY HEALTH A ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET R«a.
PArkview 9-1062 FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality L.'quors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
At the monthly board mooting of tho Winchester Visiting Nursing Association hold November 10.
Miss ; New Krmland > prettiest nautical sought in a 4c w England anywhere in England, interested in boating enthusiast is being search for the 19G2 Boat Show Queen.
Boat are skilled nursing care to pa, show in Boston’s Commonwealth AT THE WELLESLEY OFFICE PARK DEDICATION SERVICES are, left to right, Frederi A Moore, general agent; Roger Billings, president of Mass.
Indemnity and Life Insurance Com pany; Governor John A Volpc; and Harold J Tripp, vice-president of Mass.
Indemnity and Life Insurance Company. what happens on a typical weekoverboard one day and drowned, day in the life of a business wo(After the funeral, a friend of the man.
My lady arises from refreshing sleep in a man-made bed, in a luxurious room lighted by man-controlled electricity, in a comfortable house heated by a man-made heating device.
She steps into a bathroom equipped with man-made gadgets; bathtub, toilet, shower, etc., all products of the man-made science of plumbing.
She prepares breakfast with man-made kitchen range, toaster, and percolator, with frequent resource to a man-made refrigerator.
Man’s contribution to her comfort and pleasure carry right through the day, up to and including the musical composition of the opera or concert number that may enliven her evening.
Fortunate, indeed, for women that civilization is blessed with men whose scientific minds, inventive genius, and endless curiosity make them patient, inspired tinkers — and eventual masters — of scores of labor-saving devices, in which the average woman’s interest narrows down to whether she gets the right service on pressing a button, or whether she must call in some man to make the necessary repairs.
Tidbits A thrifty Scotsman asked the bank for a loan of a dollar and was told he must pay four per cent interest at the end of the year.
At the end of the year, the Scotsman came back with a dollar and four cents to clear up his debt, and asked for his fifty thousand in bonds back.
Mr Belden is a manager of the Manufacturing Radio Corporation of Burlington.
Facilities and classrooms at Andover Inn and at Peabody Hall, both on the campus of Phillips Academy in Andover, will be used.
Sponsored by their respective companies, the participating businessmen will be spending one week out of every four at the Center for Management Development until March of 19G2.
This will enable them to interweave learning with on-the-job applications.
Alcoa, Continental Can, and Owens Corn ing Fibreglass are among those companies also having regional sales offices in this, the first of six buildings to be constructed in Wei lesley Office Park.
The Moore agency, which is comprised of 19 staff members, has moved in rank, out of twenty-five agencies, from 15th to 4th in new annual premiums in five and onehalf years.
This agency is responsible for solicitation and sales in Massa chusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
Mr Moore, who together with his wife Cynthia and their three child ren, Lucinda 10, Jonathan 7, and Stephanie 5, lives at 27 Myopia Road, has been a resident of Winchester for 10 years.
A former vestryman in the Church of the Epiphany, Mr Moore is also a past president of the Bowdoin College Club of Boston and a member of the Downtown Club of Boston.
En Ka Workshop Monday, December 4, will be the date of tho Sponge Workshop, to be held by the En Ka Society.
Chester Manimon, 58 Bacon Street, will be the hostess and will welcome any En Ka members who wish to help with this necessary project. tients in their own homos, togeth or with instruction in maternal and infant care, and family health guidance.
Under the direction of the school committee the nurses are responsible for health supervision in the public schools; and under the board of health the nurses are responsible for Well Child Conferences, immunization and tuberculosis clinics, as well as health supervision in parochial schools.
N A.’s services in order to promote the health of all Winchester residents.
Every one I of these fine used ears has been reconditioned by our | factory-trained mechanics.
Avenue, Arlington Center iVUasioft 3-8000 APE 1 ABA OFF GAS “Cl i pit,” the new, better way to clip newspapers and magazines.
INSTANT SERVICE The sooner you obtain your medicine, the sooner you will enjoy its health restoring benetits.
The temperature dial is marked in fabrics not degrees, including one especially for washandwear.
Ultra* violet lamp built-in to givu your clothes the sweet, fresli smell of summer sunshine all year.
In 1048 Winchester’s assessors commenced a complete revaluation of all properties in town, a revalu ation that took about three years to complete.
In the process large area maps were prepared of the various sections of the town showing the individual properties by neighborhoods with their sale prices through the years, the unit value of land per square foot and the history of the assessing of houses or other buildings, garages, etc.
Few, if indeed any other boards of assessors have such maps which the local hoard conceived and worked out to aid them in their work.
The maps are a valuable supplement to the usual property cards, and are used exclusively by the assessors in their valuation work.
In Winchester the assessors arrive at valuations in the field, not around an office table, and to aid them in their determination the big area maps go with them on their assessing trips.
At any time it becomes necessary to look at an individual property in a neighborhood the assessors through their maps appraise; every piece of property in the immediate neighborhood, to see that the valuation of the individual property in question is proportionally sound.
This procedure is followed whenever there is a sale of property or when there is a structural change requiring a building permit.
It is also used to assess new property in accordance with other properties in the immediate neighborhood.
When it is impossible to find comparable property near at hand the assessors cover the maps in the town to find such porperty elsewhere in their effort to adhere to their method of proportional assessing.
VALUATION, continued page 2 ft, w Town Meeting Monday To Consider JHS Funds Town Meeting convenes Monday night, November 2T. at \ :t:> at the High School Auditorium to vote on the request of the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee for an appropriation of I to complete the project, and purchase additional items desired.
Their new junior high school, which opened on schedule at the beginning of the school year, operation.
Divine blessing is asked on the original Thanksgiving feast which took place in Plymouth after the Pilgrims completed a long, hard first winter and succeeded in the struggle to raise the crops vital to survival in the New World.
Discusses Her Travels President’s Mother Gives Address Here A capacity audience was on hand at the McCall Junior High School Auditorium on Sunday afternoon, November 19, to greet Mrs.
Joseph P Kennedy, when she appeared to give an illustrated lecture for the benefit of the Guild of the Infant Saviour.
A program of classical and semi-classical music furnished by Theodore Janner’s Orchestra preceded the lecture.
Guardianship Insurance Plan For Retarded Children in State At a meeting Wednesday, November 15, of the Board of Trustees of the Guardianship Insurance Plan of Massachusetts Association for Retarded Children, Jnc., the final step was taken to put the new revoluntionary insurance plan into effect.
The MARC Guardianship Insur ance Plan is an unprecedented move to answer the question of what happens to a retarded child in the event of the death of the parents.
This contact will include all those areas of human need usually provided by parents other than legal guardianship re sponsibility.
Bradlee Named Member Of Planning Board Experts Air Regional Planning At LWV Panel Here November 28 The public is invited to attend an pen Meeting of the Winchester LWV Tuesday, November 28 at 8:00m., at the Lynch Junior High School.
Father W Seavey Joyce, Mr Ralph Kaminsky, and Mr Howard Whitmore, Jr., will be the panelists who will present the subject of Regional Planning from different points of view.
Father Joyce’s interest in promoting more vital citizen participation in government is reflected in his membership in such organizations as the Boston Civic Progress Committee; Advisory Council to the Massachusetts Self-Survey; American Economic Association, Governing Council; National Municipal League and many others.
Among the awards that he has received in recognition of his contributions to civic-betterment is the National Municipal League’s “Distinguished Citizen” Award.
Mr Kaminsky, an economist, joined the staff of the Greater Boston Economic Study Committee in 1958, becoming first director of Research in 1961.
Mr Kaminsky will explain the place of basic economic research in forecasting trends and interpreting needs of the Greater Boston area.
Mr Howard Whitmore, Jr., was Mayor of the city of Newton from 1954-11)59.
Prior to this, he was Representative, 6th Middlesex Pis ; , mm Photo by Ityerson H GARDNER BRADLEE At a joint meeting of the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board on Monday, November 20, Mr H Gardner Bradlee of 46 Lorenu Road was unanimously elected j triet from 1947-1953, serving also a member of the Planning Board, to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Mr Nicholas H Fitzgerald.
Mr Whitmore has been particularly active in exploring ways in which local initiative could result in better cooperation among neighboring communities.
L.W.V., continued on page 12 This plan will make possible the continued care, comfort, nurture, education and support of retarded individuals after their parents or guardians are unable to do this because of death or other cause.
The new chairman of the Board is Mr Harold E Trekell, a consultant engineer of 14 Keeling Road, Wakefield.
Elected secretary was Miss Deborah Barus of 20 Rice Street, Newton Center, Director of Social Services, the Massachusetts Memorial Hospital; and the new treasurer is Adolf F Monosson, of 85 Baldpate Hill Road, Newton, president Berkley Finance Co.
Representing the Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Company of Philadelphia which is handling the insurance plan was Mr Howard L Borkow of Chestnut Hill.
By giving a pint of blood to a friend or stranger whose very life may depend on you.
At the Church of the Epiphany from 12:45 to 6:45m. on Monday, November 27.
Remember also that a pint of blood assures you and your family of blood needs for the next 12 months.
Most people wouldn’t think of not carrying hospital, house or car insurance.
Call PA 9-2300 for an appointment or drop in at the Church of the Epiphany between 12:45 and 6:45m. on the 27th.
Gracious, unassuming and charming, she completely captivated her audience.
The tea and reception were held in the gymnasium, one half of which was curtained with light grey material as a background.
Beautiful Oriental rugs covered | * the floor, potted plants and jars of large yellow chrysanthemums flanked a tapestry screen before which the receiving line stood.
Comfortable arm chairs and a coffee table holding an arrangement of yellow and rust mums completed this area.
The orchestra furnished background music, and members and their guests declared it a most enjoyable afternoon.
The Guild is very grateful to Koko Boodakian and Sons for their help in the decorations. is now in till Of the building committee’s balance of $13,148, only $3,398 is committed for construction items, plus an architects' fee of $251, leaving a balance of $9,499.
Under the category of “additional items to complete the project,” the committee seeks $22,368, including a maximum of $8,500 to build a fence in the wellfield.
F o r “additional expenditures found desirable” because they can be purchased with Federal aid of 30 cents on the dollar during the time of construction, the committee is seeking $17,623.
The committee is also seeking a $5,000 contingency fund, and a transfer of $3,500 to its fund from the same amount voted earlier by Town Meeting in connection with a study of possible uses of the Wadleigh School for administrative offices.
When the balance on hand and all other items are considered, the committee is asking Town Meeting for a total maximum appropriation of $31,992.
It is understood that the final cost of constructing the welifieid fence has not, as the Star goes to press, been determined, but that the $8,500 figure, in any case, is a maximum one.
A systematic summary of the committee’s appropriation is printed below the editorial to the right.
S Visiting Day at the Lynch Junior I Ligh School is set for Saturday, November 25 from 10tn. to 2 :30m.
Barbara Bailey, speaking for the Lynch Junior I ligh School Building Commmittee of which she is the Chairman.
Visiting days, which are times set aside for the general public to look over the new buildings in which they have invested, have become a custom in Winchester; and the Building Committee and the School Department both hope that many citizens will take advantage of this opportunity to become acquainted with the new school on the Well Field site.
Between seven and eight hundred parents attended the regular Open House held there two weeks ago.
Among observations heard that night were remarks on the building’s great size; its functional versatility; the effective use of color to relieve its economically basic construction; the language labs (which McCall also has) and its modernity.
Editorial Lynch Committee Has Not Over -Spent The Lynch Junior High School Building Committee has definitely NOT' over-spent its appropriation.
The Star regrets very much the unfortunate wording of last week's news story implying that it had.
In point of fact, the Lynch committee goes to Town Meeting for additional funds Monday night with a $13,1 IS balance of available funds still in its building account.
What is more, its school opened on schedule and is operating efficiently.
In building a fine new junior high school for Winchester, it seems to the Star, the Lynch committee has observed sound fiscal procedure.
When it became clear to the committee that it would need additional funds to complete the kind of school it felt the Town wanted, it very properly made no further commitments and prepared to ask Town Meeting for more funds.
Again, as the summary of the building committee's appropriation printed below clearly shows , there has been no over-expenditure.
Wc repeat our editorial judgment of this committee’s work published in the Star of April 6, 1961.
We might add that if all Town committees and hoards were as cooperative with the Star as the Lynch building committee has been there would be greater light and less heat in the conduct of Town affairs.
Knowlton, vetei an grid coach and director of athletics at Winchester High School and director of Physical Education in the Winchester schools.
The presentation was made at the annual dinner of the Football Officials by the outgoing president of the Association, Jan Kozlowski of Dorchester, former Boston Col lege football star.
Coach Knowlton received a standing ovation as he accepted the award and again at the conlusion of his acceptance remarks.
In addition to the plaque he was presented by President Kozlowski on behalf of the officials with a fine 23-jewel Bulova watch.
A fine steak dinner put, every one in the right humor for the speaking program, presided over by Jeorgc “Red” Hill, former Harvard player, who was introduced by President Kozlowski as toastmaster.
Incidental mention should be made of several vocal selections endered by a quartet of officials prevailed upon to entertain by the mammoth Mr Koslowski.
Henry Knowlton. ctiiUt, WimJic’shT High School's football coach, accepts plaque designating him schoolboy footbgll ‘’Coach of the Year” from Jan Koslowski, retiring president of the Association ol New England Football Officials which voted the award, iii^h School Principal W Howard NiblocL, ri^hl, oinilto approval.
Herbert Black Has Been Appointed Medical Writer for the Boston Globe Herbert Black of i Seneca Road, a Winchester resident for 20 years and for the past 12 years assistant day editor of the Boston Cilobe, has been named medical writer for the Globe. lie succeeds to the position held by the late Frances Burns, who blazed many trails in the field of newspaper reporting of medicine.
T he field includes coverage of medical developments in hospitals, medical schools and in the offices of the doctors.
With the Boston area a center for medical and dental progress, the Globe has been a pioneer in interpreting medical information for the reading public.
He was for a number of years the director of high school youth activities at the Unitarian Church.
He has worked on Cub Scout and Boy Scout programs and in various fund drives.
Saving at Winchester Saving Hank earn a healthy harvest of dividends every season of the year.
Enjoy this insured “windfall” yourself by sharing in the earnings of this MUTl AL Savings Hunk.
He has been ' with the Globe ever since, having ; | worked as a reporter, a news edii tor, assistant day editor, and now medical writer.
Herbert i Kenny, a Globe editorial writer, is j now carrying on the course.
Valuation Incidentally, Winchester is considered by experts to be a model town so far as valuations are concerned.
Remember When This week’s picture in the Star’s Remember When series is used this week because of its connection with the award of the schoolboy football “Coach of the Year” to Winchester’s veteran football coach, Henry Knowlton.
Shown is the high school football team of 1927, of which Mr Knowlton was captain.
This team, last to represent Winchester in the now defunct Mystic Valley League, finished in a triple tie with Melrose and Arlington for the last championship of the circuit.
Winchester beat Arlington, Melrose beat Winchester and Arlington beat Melrose.
The league broke up when Winchester withdrew from its meral ‘rship, due to the fact that Arlington, Melrose and Watertown had grown too large for the Sachems, then a relatively small school.
Winchester did well in the league, but really had little chance for the championship.
The 1927 team made Winchester football history by playing the first, and if memory serves, the only post-season game in which a local team has participated.
The Sachems met and defeated a strong Ames bury High team on the Saturday after Thanksgiving, on one of the coldest football afternoon’s the editor can remember.
Coach Knowlton, left halfback, played an outstanding game against Amesbury and was recalled by football fans there for many years.
The 1927 team was coached by Wendell Mansfield, an exceptionally competent coach, now director of athletics at Pomfret School.
Shown in the picture which was taken on old Manchester Field by the late Frank H Higgins, Winchester photographer, are, left to right, kneeling, “Living” McNeil, end; Herb Ross, end; “Bunker Swain, tackle; Guy Wildberger, tackle; “Bull” Franklin, guard; “Nutsey” Amico, center; Pete Coss, guard; Bill Lynch, guard; “Areha” Amico, tackle; Barney Murphy, end.
Standing, Wendell Mansfield, coach; Ray Halwartz, right halfback; Ronnie Simonds, fullback; Henry Knowlton, left half back; “Arbie” Taylor, quarterback.
Coach Knowlton tipped the beam at 156, but there were few lines that could stop him straight away.
Insurance of the retarded may feel the security of knowing that their children will be looked after when they the parents have passed on.
This plan securely establishes a continuing interest in the retarded child for the duration of his or her life on the part of the MARC organization through this Board of Trustees.
This applies whether the child is domiciled in a State School, private school or at home.
Each participant will receive benefits in accordance with his individual needs.
Churl™ H Kerrigan, left, 60 J .orena Road, assistant manager of the Boston office of the 1 ninn Central Life Insurance Company, is congratulated hv company president John A Lloyd for achieving highest sales in nation.
Kerrigan represented national sales force at ground-breaking ceremonies for company's new $8,500,000 home office in Cincinnati.
His automobile which bears a Maine registration, was extensively damaged in the front and towed to Wallace’s Repair shop.
The plun provides all Army enlistees after December 11, and before January 1, 1962, with a guarantee of up to fifteen days chargeable advance leave, beginning on the day of enlistment and prior to any basic training.
Young men taking advantage of this offer by the United States Army receive all military benefits during the leave period, such as full pay, free medical care, and PX privileges at military installations.
Standing firmly by its slogan of “Choice Not Chance,” the Army still allows this group their choice of assignment either in geographical location or field of endeavor.
Young men interested in enlisting under the Regular Army’s “Operation Holiday” can obtain all the details from Sgt.
Jack Bateson at United States Army Recruiting Station 49 Mother of Three In Auto Accident A Chevrolet sedan driven by a 33-year-old mother accompanied by her three children was in collision JOHN C McLEOD Seaman John C McLeod, 20, son of Mrs.
YellowCafeteria Menu November 27 December 1 Monday — Turkey rice soup, sub marine, carrot sticks, Dutch apple pudding, cinnamon sauce, milk.
Tuesday — Oven grilled f rankfort, home fries, buttered vegetable, brownie and fruit, milk.
Wednesday — Fruit juice, cheeseburger on roll, cabbage slaw, pineapple upside down cake, whipped cream, milk.
Thursday — Chinese chop suey, chow raein, fluffy rice noodles, soy sauce, coffee cake, whipped jello, milk.
Friday — Spaghetti and tomato casserole, cheese cubes, nut cranberry muffin, butterscotch pudding, milk.
Tom ftmott oM pointing * dtsorv* only th* boot . i3| frames b y Stevens fotory-to-you prl«Ml Malcolm 6.
MID M., Mtr Arlington < Winchester Home And Garden Club Two outstanding events will highlight the holiday season for the Winchester Home and Garden Club.
On Thursday, November 30, at the First Congregational Church the regular monthly meeting will feature a demonstration of “Holiday Centerpieces” by Mrs.
On December 6 the annual Christmas Greens Sale and luncheon will be held at the Baptist Church Hall.
Both events will offer homemakers colorful and exciting suggestions on home decorations, gifts and accessories for the Christmas season.
Ham is one of our most popular speakers on the art of flower arranging.
Her designs are always artistic and imaginative and are accomplished with an ease which makes it possible for even an amateur to produce beautiful results by applying her special technique.
Her Christmas arrangements are especially lovely and in her talk on Thursday she will feature table decorations and candelabra arrangements using a variety of color schemes and materials in keeping with the holiday theme.
Ham’s talk, the social hour will be omitted for this meeting which will begin promptly at 1:30 m.
Winchester looks forward eaoh year to the Greens sale as an ideal place to start Christmas shopping for distinctive items and ideas on holiday decorating.
Club members are giving many hours of time and talent to insure it’s being one of the finest in recent years.
John Chipman; In addition there will be a specialty table with hand-made items contributed by members.
McCall Family Square Dance All parents and students of McCall Junior High School should mark Friday, December 1 on their calendars.
This is the night of the annual family Square Dance and promises to be as successful as have these affairs in the past.
The affair will be under the direction of the inimitable Mr Meurling whose long experience insures a fun filled evening.
Tickets are limited so get out your dancing shoes, flats that is, and prepare for a lively evening.
Junior Hostesses Two Winchester girls, Miss Susan Pond and Miss Andrea Chapin, will be junior hostesses at the International wine tasting benefit Wednesday, November 29, at 40 Mt.
Both girls spent the summer in Europe with the International Friendship League.
Proceeds from the event will go to the promotion of the student letter writing project of the League.
The young bluejacket enlisted at the local Recruiting Station, City Hall, Medford, and took his “Boot” training at the Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, 111.
He will receive on the job training in one of the many technical ratings of the Navy.
Three Cars In Collision On Main Street A 1961 Chevrolet convertible, a 1965 Rambler, and a 1953 Oldsmobile were involved in a collision on Main Street in last Monday night’s slippery snowy weather near the intersection of Stowell Road and Main Street at 10:10m.
The driver of the Chevrolet, Mr Robert T Winn of 11 Kirk Street, told police that he was proceedingnorth on Main Street when his car suddenly started to skid.
He told police he applied his brakes, upon which the Rambler, driven by Phyllis B Williams of 18 Mystic Aven ue was in collision with the rear of the Chevrolet, and the Oldsmobile, driven by George D O’Leary of 7 Madison Street, Woburn was in collision with the rear of the Rambler.
The Rambler was reported damaged in the rear and front, the Oldsmobile in the front.
John M Geoghegan of 14 Hemingway St., is home on two weeks leave after completing nine weeks of recruit training at the Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois.
Geoghegun enlisted at the local Navy Recruiting Station, City Hall, Medford, under the guaranteed Electronics training program for High School graduates, and has orders to attend a twenty four week course of instruction in the Sonarman rating, ut the Fleet Sonar School, Key West, Florida.
Complete Knitting Supplies, including ribbons and buttons The Knit Shop 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9*1888 Constance Trickett of the High School faculty, and Miss Diane Watson of the Senior Class.
The trophies for the four best actors and • actresses went to Sue Bennett for her part as Dorothy and Jim Reid for his part as Father in the senior play, “Se.venteen Year Old Woman”; Candee Callahani for her part as Lorraine Lotus in the Junior play, “His First Date,” and Betsy McCreery for her part as Glory Busby in the Sophomore play.
The awards for the best director and assistant director went to Carol Coakley and Mimi Barnes who ably directed the Senior play.
The members of the cast were Sally Leighton as Mother, Jim Reid as Father, Sue Bennett as Dorothy, Sandra Simpson as Maxine, and Bill Sandburg as Sidney.
Thanks and recognition also go to faculty advisors Mr Morse, Mr McLaughlin, and Miss Bronson and to the students behind the scenes who helped make it such a successful evening.
Charles M Vanner was hostess for the meeting of the Committee of Safety Chapter D.A.R. on Monday afternoon, November 20.
John B Wills poured at the table with its large and beautiful fruit centerpiece.
Paul F Stoneman gave her most timely and excellent summary report on National Defense.
Members brought gifts and money to be used by the Hillside School in Marlborough for their Christmas.
Mr Richard Whittemore, son of Mr John K Whittemore, headmaster, brought seven boys with him to take part in a play.
He told about the School and urged all to attend D.A.R. day at Hillside in order to see the new building and of the improvements in older dormitories and classrooms so that now there was space for 65 boys.
During July and August Hillside conducts a summer camp on the plan of the Y.M.C.A. of which the speaker had been a counselor for a number of years.
This project has proved most popular with boys of the school, as well as others from outside; some staying both months and others for half the season.
Some of the boys are placed in other private schools on graduation from the 8th grade, and many have been quite successful and made friends for Hillside.
Mr Whittemore then introduced the boys and their character parts in “If wishes were horses” in two scenes in yard of a farm house in autumn.
This was well-done and was much enjoyed by all members of the Committee of Safety Chapter.
Florence Crittenton Bazaar The annual Florence Crittenton Bazaar will be held next Wednesday, November 29 at the Dorothy (Jaincy Suite of the John Hancock building from 10:00m. to 7:00 m.
All circle members, as well as the general public, are invited to attend.
Mae Laskey of Beacon Street will put on the annual fashion show at 2:30m.
Phylis Hanes, fashion editor of the Boston Herald Traveler will do the commentary.
Circle will have a table at the bazaar which will feature their u<ual supply of hand-made mittens, bean bags, and a new item, the very useful and attractive ter rye loth bibs.
James F Walsh of Winchester is chairman of the decorating committee for the entire bazaar.
Discount, too, if you order before December High Street in Medford Square, at the Winchester Star.
Sec our selection of diamond OMEGA watches in models from $125 to $1000.
NOVEMRER 21 , 1961 Page Three Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club Eve proved once again to be the downfall of Adam, as four attractive ladies snatched the apple of] victory away from Barrett and Atj kinson, on November 15th, as that pair made a noble try for a fourth straight win.
Section A showed the following results on 22 boards and North South «n average score of 110. j Robert Arthur ami John Nikula, field.
George Coffin and Alexander OsJ.lV’ I *y, I J I Helen Davenport and R Denier, ini Winchester players were mostly | left strewn on the battlefield in j Section B which also completed 22 hoards for an average of 110.
Barbara Sawyer, chairman of this special event, has reserved the main hall at the Church of the Epiphany for that evening.
The entire net proceeds from that tournament will he contributed to the ACBL charities-of-the-year, Kidney Disease and Family Service.
Barbara's committee includes Gloria ButterRalph Atkinson, Ann Dean, Hawley, Trudy Mainborgor, Fredna Perkins, Alta Stewart and Carl Sittinger.
This week we finally caught up with the dub's foremost bridge expert and induced him to come to the podium for us briefly.
Sons of Italy Hall to benefit tin* Don Orione Home for Frank M (reremonte, Holier Chief Joseph J Derro.
Photo by Ryer.son Working on plans for the Fiesta to he held November 28 at the Aged are, left to right.
Remember that good boards can also be obtained in duplicate on defense.
My partner made the proper op ening of the 8S and declarer won with the KS Tf declarer had cashed the AS before playing hearts, my wife would have been end play er.
Declarer, however, played a small heart to the ace and return ed a heart which my partner took with the king.
If declarer had put up the 9D from dummy, she would have saved a trick, but when she played low I also had the chance to play low and we beat the contract two tricks, taking two clubs, two hearts and one diamond.
We hear that Charles Watson has been working on development of a new potion to make bridge players smarter.
Old Rugged Cross Favorite Hymn 61,445 Vote for Hymns America Loves Best; Interest in Hymn Singing Increases — McVey “The Old Rugged Cross” still is America’s favorite hymn.
More than 61,000 newspaper readers from coast to coast voted in the recent National Newspapers Hymn Pull and 10,482 of them chose “The Old Rugged Cross,” a vivid hymn which describes the traditional meaning of the Cross, as their dearest religious song.
Audience Analysts said this large vote doubtless was due to the song’s popularity at hymn sings across the country.
Third National Favorite The third favorite hymn disclosed by the National Newspapers Hymn Pull was “What A Friend We Have in Jesus,” a song which has earned a place in Americans’ hearts by its warm expression of faith held by Protestants of every denomination, McVey said.
The Christian Herald Singer noted the rise in acceptance of “Amazing Grace” among American churchgoers.
This gospel song, which relates how faith provides confidence, moved from ninth place in the 1960 Christian Herald hymn poll to fifth place with 1,816 votes in the National Newspapers Hymn Poll.
The sixth favorite hymn of the 61,445 Americans who voted was “Rock of Ages,” a religious song which describes man’s confidence in God.
This hymn was 27th in the Christian Herald poll but moved to 10th in the National Newspapers Hymn Poll.
This year's poll, co-sponsored by Christian Herald Magazine, the nation’s largest interdenominational Protestant publication, and newspaper editors in every state except Hawaii and Vermont, recorded more than 1,900 hymns and gospel songs.
McVey said the most important point disclosed by this first definitive survey to determine the hymns America loves best was that American churchgoers do not prefer one type of religious song to another.
The last two years have seen a constant controversy between hymnal editors, who downgrade hymns they feel are. too sentimental and poorly composed and sometimes eliminate those religious songs from hymn books, and churchgoers who prefer hymns that have been the most inspiring to them and easiest for them to understand.
McVey’s Analysis of Voting “The National Newspapers Hymn Poll results show that American churchgoers want to sing sentimental hymns and gospel songs like ‘The Old Rugged Cross’ ” McVey said.
Another son, Charles J Riley | Wellesley Hospital, is widely known in Winchester as days’ illness, local correspondent for the Woburn Mr Haven was the son of Mrs.
He was horn June 15, Peter, and the late Julia ij)02. in Somerville, but came to Hogan.
She was horn in Woburn Winchester at the age of four Franklin K Haven of 45 Eliot | Lane.
Weston, a former resident of I Winchester, died Thursday morning, November 16, at the Newton following a ten July 5, 1877, and was the surviving member of a family of sixteen children.
She was widely known for her interest in community projects, especially those affecting youth, and she assisted her son, Charles, founder of Woburn Day, in conducting that popular event for several years.
Riley leaves four daughters, Eileen Garvey of Woburn, Catherine Phin ney of Billerica, Margaret Collins and Gertrude Eaton, both of Woburn; two sons, Harold L Riley of Woburn and William M Riley of Liberty, N Y., 28 grandchildren, 83 great-grandchildren and one greatgreat grandchild, bom only two weeks ago.
Cox & Sons Funeral Home in Woburn with solemn requiem high mass celebrated xt St.
According to John J Rynne, Manager, Cambridge social security office, even if an employee works one day he must have a Social Security number.
Since the employer is responsible for reporting the wages each quarter and is liable for the tax whether or not he deducts the employee’s portion, he should insist that all employees show him their social security cards regardless of the length of employment.
WANTED Foster Homes For Babies and Children of All Ages Board, Clothing anil Medical Care Provided by Us.
Commander Edward W Hartung and Department President of the Ladies Auxiliary Margaret R Eikrem and her husband were present and expressed their thanks for their invitations.
The Department President brought the greetings of the Department officers and Commander Hurtung stated all members of Middlesex County Council should cooperate with their Commander and President.
He said our organization must assert ourselves by increasing membership.
Master of Ceremonies John Pike asked for a moment of silence for all departed comrades, and read the names of three Past Middlesex County Commanders that passed away during the year.
Woburn thanked the committee in charge and those who attended to help make this annual banquet so successful.
A catered dinner by Shaw Caterers was enjoyed by all followed by dancing ’til midnight to Charlie McLaughlin’s Orchestra. years, growing up in the town and attending the Winchester schools through the Wadleigh Grammar School.
He prepared for college at Boston English High School and was graduated from Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a Bachelor of Science degree in civil engineering in 1923.
Mr Haven first worked from 1923 to 1928 in his father’s firm of Haven & Hopkins, engineers and architects, in Boston.
Later he was associated with the Lampson Conveyor Co. and recently for more than 20 years he had been New England representative for Jervis B Webb Co., materials handling firm, of Chicago.
He was a former member of William Parkmun Lodge of Masons and a member of the Second Congregational Church of West Newton.
His hobby was antique clocks and he made some 25 to 30 grandmother and Massachusetts mantel clocks and Simon Willard banjo clocks.
An excellent craftsman, his models were beautifully done and universally admired.
In 1927 he married Elizabeth Carpenter of Newton and Martha’s Yineyard, and after their marriage they lived in Reading until 1939, going from that town to Newtonville.
Recently he married Marguerite Blanchard of Wellesley, who survives him with two daughters, Mrs.
Haven of Wellesley; four grand-children, his mother, living in Woifeboro, N.H. and two brothers, Roger W., of Wayland, and Dr.
Memorial services were held Sunday afternoon at the Second Church Congregational in West Newton with the minister, Dr.
James A Cullen of Winchester, were held Friday, November 17, at the McLaughlin Funeral Home in Woburn with the Rev.
Ftizgerald died November 14 at the Deaconness Hospital at the age of 85.
She came to this country as a girl and for 75 years made Woburn her home.
She assisted her husband in conducting the business, in emergencies often driving one of the old horse-drawn hacks in all sorts of weather.
She continued the business after her husband’s death and into the era of the motor-driven cabs, and the business is still in the Fitzgerald family, being presently run as a taxi business by her son, Frank.
Fitzgerald’s care of her family and as her own children grew up she continued her interest in her grandchildren.
Thanksgiving Reflections Page Four THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 23.
It is thanks to God ; gratitude to a Divine Spirit that has brought those gathered together for the first Thanksgiving feast through the dangers, suffering and death that beset the Pilgrims from the time {hey landed on Plymouth Rock.
Thanksgiving to these same Pilgrims was not primarily a time for rejoicing, though they had every reason to rejoice.
Rather it was a time to he grateful for the blessings of a Divine Providence and to ask God’s help in the years that were ahead.
The Pilgrims felt they had much for which to he thankful, and it is significant that their thanks was of giving, not getting.
They wanted to return to the nc responsible for their well being something of the gifts they had received at His hands.
Today Thanksgiving is much more the holiday than it is the holy day. d ime and custom have caused the emphasis to he placed much more on the mundane than on the spiritual aspects of the day.
A glance at the observance of Sunday today, and a comparison with the Sabbath conduct of bygone days indicates why Thanksgiving has become a day for having fun rather than an occasion for acknowledging our blessings.
The pilgrims, in their own way, enjoyed themselves on that occasion, and of course in olden times any sort of feast was the best sort of pleasure.
Governor Bradford on that first Thanksgiving called attention to the good things to eat and drink that were a part of the observance.
But the Pilgrims did not permit their holiday rejoicing to set aside, or even overshadow the principal reason for the first Thanksgiving, which was gratitude to God.
In our enjoyment of Thanksgiving we would do well to remember the Pilgrim conception of this day ; to remember the “giving” part of Thanksgiving, to pay tribute to the Divine Providence which has blessed us as a nation and individuals.
We have every reason to he thankful on this Thanksgiving, thankful that we live in a free country, thankful for freedom of speech, for freedom of worship and freedom of the press; grateful for a standard of living transcending that of any other country, and especially grateful for the strengthening of that feeling of brotherhood that is prompting the more fortunate to help those in need.
The beginnings of mutual understanding and tolerance among men, creeds and nations is yet another reason for deep satisfaction.
Let us not entirely forget the more sober side of Thanksgiving this year.
Perilous as arc the times, and dangerous as are the days in which we live, we still have much for which to render thanks.
The heritage we have received from our Pilgrim fathers, in itself is cause for thanksgiving and the dedication of ourselves anew to the principles for which they were willing to risk their lives in a strange new world.
When liquor stores open and grocery stores close on Saturday holidays, the time has come to take a good, sober look at our Blue Laws.
One of the first things that hits you in studying the Blue Laws is their complexity.
And we’re not going to settle this issue in one editorial, no matter how sore we were last Saturday that we couldn’t buy hot dogs to go with our beans.
After all, if the* Bible tells us that we are to keep the Sabbath holy, it also tells us that the Sabbath was made for man and not vice versa.
Again, state laws forbid hunting on Thanksgiving, hut we know that the Pilgrims did.
But maybe if we just poke about and point out some of the things that bother us about Blue Laws, Sunday Laws, Lord’s Day Laws and whatall laws, we can make some headway toward reason in this matter. 1 i i We don’t like schoolboys to play ball on Sunday, because it’s not “holy,” yet many of us think nothing of sitting hack with a can of beer in our living rooms and watching <>1,000 hooting fans see the Giants pulverize the Eagles.
We forbid folks to buy raw clams at the shore, hut they eat fried ones there by the ton.
We say no mowing lawns on Sunday, while shooting galleries and Ferris wheels are a scant half-hour away.
M he big ads insist that families that play together stay together, while at our seashores gift shops are closed to the family on the one day they can go out for a drive.
We close five and ten cent stores while drug stores sell everything from cosmetics to clocks, not to mention paper back hooks and, in some places tee shirts.
Horse-racing was perfectly fine on V eterans Day, but officially, at least, buying Pablum for baby was not.
Well, these are just a few things that gripe us, and maybe our readers can think of more.
They discriminate against some and favor a few businesses, The Blue Laws, because they are in many instances irrational, encourage disobedience and evasion.
If you close supermarkets in Massachusetts, folks can drive up to New Hampshire to get hamburg.
There’s always a way to do what folks have to do, with or without official approval.
Ban a hook and you increase its sales; forbid liquor consumption and you create bootlegging.
It’s the old human story of angering folks into doing something, even if they don’t want to, because you tell them they can’t.
We stress, once again, the Star is not advocating one policy regarding the Blue Laws as opposed to another.
Our point is that whatever the Sunday laws should he, they should he fair and consistent.
And they should represent the interests and wishes not just of a self-appointed elect but of the entire community.
If a Legislature votes to close grocery and clothing stores, it should also close liquor stores and race tracks.
If a Legislature forces state retail business to lose $20 million in one “holiday,” it might give some thought to closing vegetable stands on the highways.
The Protection Of Zoning Every so often in these columns we stress the importance of zoning and urge those who feel its an unwarrantable intrusion in the rights of property owners to take a look at communities where there is no zoning.
So many communities have had irreparable damage done them hv lack of authority to prevent improper development that it is hard to understand why those cities and towns without the protection of zoning do not institute it as soon as possible.
Not long ago a news story from Marblehead told ol two developers making inquiries into the possibility of purchasing land along picturesque Marblehead Harbor for either 1 i or 11 story apartment buildings.
According to the news story there not at present a single zoning ordinance in effect along tin 1 harbor that would prevent a developer from erecting such buildings, or indeed anything that he wants to build.
All that lias to be done is to commence construction within ‘JO days alter a building permit is issued.
Phis fact and repeated rumors that property along the waterfront can he had is giving some Marhleheaders food for serious thought.
Undoubtedly those who do not want to see any change in the picturesque Marblehead Harbor setting would feel much more secure if the land there was protected by zoning.
Winchester has such protection, but from time to time efforts of the i Manning Board to change or modify zoning, tightening restrictions in the public interest, arc strenously opposed.
This is not to say that changes in the zoning By-laws should be voted without investigation or that the 1 Manning Board can do no wrong.
By and large, however, there can he no doubt that zoning has helped Winchester’s development into one of the better communities of the Greater Boston area in which to live.
We would wager Marblehead, or at least those who would keep intact the attractiveness of this picturesque town, would he glad of the protection that zoning give& to u b here in Winchester.
KENNEDY, THE RBESIDENI S MOIHER, in the receiving line with members of the Winchester Infant Saviour Guild at the McCall Junior High School during her visit to Winchester last Sunday.
A serious error has crept into the discussion for or against shelters — that it is a moral issue.
I doubt that anyone would seriously question the desire for peace of the vast majority of ppoplo in all lands, but what peace means to each individual varies greatly.
In the Western world at least, freedom is a necessary ingredient of anything that can truly be called peace.
How to attain it is a matter of individual belief and choice, with due regard to the rights of others.
To imply that the man who builds a shelter for his family is resigned to war and will automatically give up working for peace is as mistaken as the implication of many on the other side of the argument — that the man who does not build one cares nothing for his family ands refusing to face the present dangerous political climate of the world.
Each individual must take the facts and opinions available to him, and choose the actions he feels are most conducive to the continuation of civilization in the world.
In this context, I do regret the tendency of many to give as proven facts much that is, at best, a matter of educated guessing; the “facts” varying according to which expert is chosen for quotation.
The probability of attack, the total megatons delivered, the hypothetical enemy’s ability to deliver the bombs accurately for the greatest devastation, and the actual damage that would be caused under war conditions are all matters of guess work — let us pray they remain that way.
Since those who choose to follow our President’s request to build shelters have been the most severely ridiculed, and called everything from ostriches to warmongers, I would like to point out that taking precautions to increase the chances of survival, and recover from disaster is not a new idea.
Most of us buy fire insurance (and support a fire department), not because fires are inevitable, but because they are possible.
Many pay etxra to have seat belts in their cars, not because they care nothing for the slaughter on our roads, but because they do.
He also does not cease to work for safer and saner driving — if anything he words harder, having faced the fact that death or mutilation can happen to him and his, and is not just something that happens to other people.
Let us not have our eyes so firmly fixed on peace at the international level, that we forget that Christian love and forbearance, that makes peace possible, is learned here at home.
To impugn the character and motives of the person with whose ideas or arguments we disagree breeds anger and hate.
In conclusion may 1 suggest that civilization is not a matter of the industrial capacity which gives us fine homes, cars, and a high standard of living, nor is it in churches, schools, or works of art, dear as they are to us.
No, civilization rests in the heart and mind of man and cannot be destroyed until man, with his capacity to love beauty and to worship God, is himself destroyed.
The Star suspects that a better word than “guesswork” might be found to describe scientific estimates of the effects of nuclear bombing and fallout.
One of the more hopeful aspects of the cold war is, in fact, the remarkable consensus of American and Soviet scientists on the genocidal effects of both.
For informed discussions of this issue, see Professor John M Fowler’s “Fallout,” Norman Cousins’ “In Place of Folly,” and the November 18, 1961 issue of The Saturday Review.
In the last is published a candid appraisal of the nuclear test hazard prepared by Soviet scientists before the recent tests made by their government.
Put we seem to have forgotten that the Russians fear us and our nuclear power, as much as we fear them.
And I do not think that many people realize that if a war were to erupt, it would not be a nice, neat, little war in a little meadow with a band of soldiers fighting, as many people still visualize it.
It will be a terrifying, destructive, nuclear war, and not many will live to tell of its horrors.
Those of you who retire to your shelters as the “inevitable” war approaches are folding up centuries of the progress of man and adopting the primitive life of a cave man.
But let us now assume that some stolid Americans have withstood all the bombs and radioactivity, etc.
And above them circle poisonous clouds, gathered from the nuclear bombs, that will grow, encircle the earth, and eventually fall and either kill or sterilize all living matter.
If a war comes, it will not be one bomb dropped, or two, but many, and there is no end to the resulting destruction.
The thing for us* to do is not go around building our hopes of survival in a bomb shelter, but build our hopes, in the idea that there will not be a war.
Exert your energy in prevention of this war, not in your shelters, because* they are going to be of very little use, if we cannot prevent the war.
We noted also that to achieve this freedom, according to Zen, we must transcend the crippling word-fictions of the intellect and gain a direct awareness of reality unimpeded by concepts.
There is nothing more typically Eastern than Zen, nothing more obviously alien to the rationalist tradition and word systems of the West.
I do not refer to the commercial exploitation of Buddhism in which Boho beauties in black pedalpushers recline in the lap of the Kamakura Buddha to sell book ads, or pre-Ivy League boys stand on the shoulder of bronze Gautamas to sell Madras jackets.
For the Beats, Zen is not the climax of a life of study and self-discipline as it was for the scholars and poets of the East.
It is a mask for ignorance and indolence, a rationale for amorality and incontinence.
Fromm’s view, Zen and psychoanalysis share a common insight and objective.
Their insight is that human sorrow is caused by a man’s false sense of separateness from the world.
Their objective is to free men from the prison of egotism and childish dependence, enabling him to accept the world as it is with maturity, creativity, compassion, and a capacity to love.
Predominant in psychoanalysis, of course, is the method of “free association,” a spontaneous play of thought and emotion in which, Dr.
Fromm says, we “bypass logical, conscious, and conventional” thought patterns, permitting insight into the unconscious sources and correction of maladjustment.
Like the Zen masters, Fromm says, he has found in treating patients that the prime source of suffering is their sense of alienation from the world, other men, and themselves.
The patient feels cut-off, frustrated, half-alive, denied opportunity for self-fulfillment.
Through regression to a state of infantile dependence, or insanity, or death; and Through a condition of being “fully born,” e. developing awareness, reason, and the capacity to love to that point at which, no longer frustrated by our lack of omnipotence, no longer angry because the world isn’t a reflection of our desires, we are able to take life for what it is and work productively within its laws.
Society is a censor. a filter between us and the world, inducing our minds to accept as “normal” or “acceptable” only those ideas and conventions that seem to ensure its survival.
Fromm says, arc concerned with something rather more than ensuring social conformity.
They are concerned with “universal man, the whole man rooted in the cosmos,” whose seat is in the unconscious.
Their aim, therefore, is to penetrate the social fictions of the conscious mind, to bring the unconscious into a state of free expression, and to permit the once alienated individual a sense of solidarity with his fellow men, a sense of creative participation in a world in which he no longer feels like a stranger.
Thus the end of Zen is the end of psychoanalysis, a condition of “enlightenment” or “health” in which subject and object, man and his world are once again united.
Like the Zgn masters, however, the psychoanalyst stresses that he cannot “save” the patient.
He can at best guide him, as a participating observer, into that complete attunement with reality both inside and outside of him which is wisdom.
As in Zen, as in the teaching of the historic Buddha himself, there is no external refuge, no finished set of answers to which one may turn.
Richard A Hakanson, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 • 1954 The Wincheater Star, left at yonr Residence for one year.
I have read the editorial and the letters in the Star concerning fallout shelters, i believe that great harm can he done by letting n<i«expprts present what they believe are the facts.
I therefore urge you to publish the latest release from the Atomic Energy Commission regarding the effect of nuclear blasts.
You will find it, for instance, in the Christian Science Monitor of November 13.
As a nuclear scientist, although not a bomb expert, I feel qualified to help clarify some questions concerning the nuclear radiation released during and after a blast.
Most of the errors and inaccuracies, in the part of the editorial covering this topic, were expertly pointed out by Messrs.
Brooks and Boecker, but I believe some further clarification is needed.
The following points represent mostly observed indisputable facts but also a few educated estimates.
When 1 speak about nuclear radiation, it may help the uninitiated reader to think of X-rays, although the nuclear radiation from a bomb is somewhat more complex. ♦ # r1.
A nuclear bomb will for a split second during the explosion release a tremendous amount of primary nuclear radiation.
The hulk of this primary radiation will be stopped by a few miles of air or 10 feet of concrete or dirt.
The primary radiation is therefore not generally regarded as a danger to anybody far enough from the explosion to survive the heut and blast effects.
The explosion leaves a residue of radioactive material in the air and, what is more important, if lion also takes time to build up i its harmful effect in one’s body.
Therefore, if it were only for l’all| out, Dad would either be able to I get home in time, or he would stay | in another shelter and get home afI ter a few days.
Fallout radiation has about the mme penetrating power as the X rays currently used in deep-seated cancer therapy.
Any material, preferably heavy substances be tween you and the sources, will cut down on the intensity.
Bombs exploded high above the ground produce very little local fallout, which the discussion above has been concerned with.
The radioactive residue from the bomb material will be present, however, and most of it will he carried up to very high altitudes.
Some of the confusion that was evident in the Star’s editorial and also in the answer to Mr Boecker can probably be traced back to this word usage by the sources of information.
What 1 have given above are cold data, presented for the purpose of removing misconceptions about the effects of nuclear radiation from an explosion and from fallout.
The matter-of-fact way in which people with the knowledge talk about these things does not reflect disconcern.
It may reflect the fact that we have lived with the truth for several years already, and that w»» are striving to make the best out of a very unpleasant situation.
I believe they deserve evthe explosion is at or near ground erybody’s support and respect. level, tons of dirt will be made radioactive by the primary radiation and sucked up.
It is very important to note that it is only the primary radiation, because of its natural anti enormous j intensity that will induce radioactivity in other materials.
The radioactive materials are carried by the wind over a wide area and settle on the ground in the form of dust.
The dust particles Sincerely yours, Harald A Enge 26 Prince Avenue In Reply To Mr Enge Ed.
The Star claims no more expertese on the nuclear act as tiny X-ray machines emitbomb and on fallout than does Mr ting a kind of nuclear radiation Edge.
We have, however, studied which is harmful in the same way the abundant literature on this as an overdose of X-rays but is inmatter published in books, pamphcapable of rendering the irradiated lets and newspapers over the past material radioactive.
It should be clear from the above that neither people nor food become radioactive by being exposed to the radiation from fallout.
There is therefore no reason for not helping your neighbor who has few yeurs.
And we consider it our moral duty to report this material and encourage the local debate the subject of human survival deserves.
Moreover, our correspondent’s point of view represents that of one scientist.
As everybody certainly realizfare, issued a joint statement rees, the fallout takes time to settle I ported on page one of the New to the ground.
In an eventful search for treasure, players move ships to various islands and ports of call.
The present writer might add that if he thought a shelter would save his wife and himself he would build one.
He has the alternative of reporting expert data which can help build a world in which men will see that there is no sure shelter but peace.
It is regrettable that so few scientists concern themselves with absolutely documented facts about the contamination of vegetables and milk, for example, that has resulted from radioactive fallout even from nuclear tests suspended in 1958.
Even in 1957, a midwest rainfall contained so much radioactivity as to induce one million Geiger counts per minute per gallon of rain water.
From the tests suspended in 1958 alone some 3,600 cases of leukemia are estimated, not to mention bone cancer, genetic mutations, stillbirths, and diseases of the muscles and thyroid, to indicate just a few.
It is estimated, moreover, that as a result of the Soviet Union’s recent terroristic bomb tests, the present fallout levels will double when the 1962 spring rains bring a large portion of the radioactive material to earth.
We refer to the incredible horror of nuclear fire storms and blast damage.
The Star has reported the scientific consensus that 92 to 94 Vr of the American and Soviet people would perish in a 30,000 megaton mutual attack, yet our reader fails to deal with this fact.
In this connection, we refer our readers to the continued pronouncements of objective scientists like Dr.
Ralph Lapp, who are not committed to the defense of military policies of the Administration and who with some 6,000 of the world’s scientists, have tried to alert the world to the savage truths of nuclear war.
The tables show that the 20 megaton bomb which is 1,000 times bigger than the 20 kiloton bomb, (the one dropped on Hiroshima) has a blast radius of between 5 to 6 miles and an incendiary radius of 30 miles.
First Clans, of tin* Order of the Federal Republic of Germany, from Dr.
Philipp Schmidt-Sglegel, center, in recognition of his services as chairman for Massachusetts of the Natonal German Contest for High School Students.
Schinidt-Sglegel, Germany s consul ut Boston, (luring special ceremonies held at J lilts.
One of the most harmful effects Dresden is estimated to have killed • of the fallout propaganda is that 300,000 people in a single night; j it promotes the idea of the inevitat Hamburg, some 70,000; at Tokj ubility of nuclear war. yo, some 200,000.
Blast proof bomb Just read again the letter writshelters afforded no protection in ten by our Civil Defense Director, these storms; their occupants were in the last issue of the Star.
Within the incendiary radius of a big bomb. . .the basement shelter becomes u fire trap.
The idea that fallout constitutes the principal hazard to the civilian population is a derivation from military theory.
But again, as Mr Piel goes on to show, and as the Star pointed out in its repiy to Mr Boecker last week, military installations have been constructed so close to civilian population centers as to assure the destruction of the latter in the event of war.
And, perhaps most important let us debate the increasing brutality and moral decline in human reflations already in evidence throughout the world as a result of the nuclear threat.
The time has come to replace unwarranted optimism and half truths with a realistic confrontation of the nuclear facts of life. be destructive enough,” “they will cause dangerous fallout,” etc. conditions us to think of war as inevitable.
The growth of such a belief weakens our will to find peaceful solutions for international difficulties.
Since undoubtedly there was no deliberate intention to deceive the public, it may not be fair to call the fallout shelter propaganda “a cruel hoax,” but its effect is the same.
Let us at least have frank discussion of all the implications of the program.
Congratulations on the opportunity you are giving people to express opinions on one of the vital issues of our time, the wisdom of promoting a program of fallout shelters.
I am one of those who believe that the Star is performing a public service in presenting the arguments against the shelter program.
For Mr Brooke to call your editorial “harmful,” “near treasonable” is ridiculous.
Unitarian Choir The Winchester Unitarian Choir under the direction of Mary Rantom Witham will sing several selections from Handel’s Messiah in the pre-service concert on Sunday November 26.
The soloists are Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; Sidney Blanchard, Jr., baritone.
Saville R Davis At Winchester Mornings Subscribers to the Mornings se ries are reminded that the Saville Davis lecture, which was postponed because of the hurricane in October will be held this coming Thursday November 30, in Hadley Hall, Church of the Epiphany.
Three models, plus duplicate bridge boards and un advanced course in contract bridge.
James Donovan of Arlington, has been assigned as one of the pioneer Sisters to open a mission Hospital in the African nation of Ethiopia, upon completion of advanced nursing studies and midwifery training at the International MissiopuKp Training Hospital of the Congregation in Ireland.
She will proceed with two companions to Ethiopia, where they will *be joined by a fourth, and together they will open this first hospital, which will be largely devoted to maternity work.
Page Five Home Building Rate Higher Here urday, December 2, from 9m. to 9m., and will offer many opportunities for Christmas purchases, for games and will specialize in serving excellent meals.
John’s High School in Cambridge, and completed her religious training in the Novitiate of the Sisters at 1 Arlington Street.
Upon successful completion of teh course, and receiving her R.N., Sister M Denise proceeded to the Motherhouse in Ireland for advanced studies.
It is expected that Sister M Denise will remain in Ethiopia fulsome years to assist in the solid foundation 6f the medical mission work in that country.
The Medical Missionaries of Mary in the Novitiate House at One Arlington Street are planning a large Christmas Bazaar to take place on December 2.
It is hoped this year that a large portion of the proceeds may be devoted to assisting in the mission foundation of the Hospital to which Sister M Denise will devote her energies, as well as to the obtaining and shipping of many necessary supplies for the new Hospital.
The Bazaar will be held on SatThanksgiving Service At Christ Scientist Expressions of gratitude for God’s goodness by members of the congregation highlighted the Thanksgiving Day Service of the First Church of Christ, Scientist, Winchester.
The service opened with the singing of “Glory, honor, praise and pure oblations unto God the Lord belong,” Hymn 73, from the Christian Science Hymnal.
Dalziel then read the Thanksgiving Day Proclamation of the President of the United States.
The sale will start at 9m. and continue throughout the day until all baked goods have been sold.
Mothers are going to offer cakes and pies made according to their most treusured recipes, and this being not too early for the first Christmas specialties, they have also been promised.
Rolland Robison, the Ways and Means Committee Chairman, is in charge of all arrangements.
Answers come from the Department of Labor, from industry sources and from the Census Bureau, which has just issued its annual report on the number of private dwelling units authorized for conUruetion in the past year in some 10,000 localities.
Newconstruction, it is pointed out, is a mutter of great importance to every community since it affects the economy in many different ways.
Besides providing work for carpenters, plumbers, bricklayers and other craftsmen, it creates a demand for lumber, for hardware, for stoves, refrigerators and many other kinds of durable goods.
In Winchester, for its size, there was more home building in the year than in most parts of the United States.
The rate compares favorably with the national figure, 6. units per 1,000 population.
Throughout the nation generally, residential construction was in the doldrums in i960.
There was a drop of $2. billion, representing an 18 per cent cut in new dwellings.
Some authorities place the blame for the national setback on the high interest rates and the tight mortgage market that prevailed.
They will affect the housing market “like a wild bull in a narrow' tunnel,” to quote the First Research Corp.
Call PA 9-4190 We -Al & onverSe Wuk IJau Dh OJ-uppieAl Of OhcinL vAcuvincjA Page Six THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 23.
Vf*iting Day for public nt new Lynch Junior High School, Brantwood and Horn Pond B’rook Roads.
November 27, Monday, The Fortnightly Woman’s Club at the Crnwford Memorial Methodist Hall, American Home Day.
Tuesday, IAVV presents “Planning for Greater Boston” at the new Lynch Junior High School, at 8:00m.
Newsy Paragraphs Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic, a place where men can escape for a few minutes of peace, relaxation and grooming.
James Colville, Jr., director of field relations at Nasson College in Springvale, Me., spoke to Winchester High School students who are making plans for college Tuesday morning, November 21.
Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t Miss Meredith Reeves, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Charles P Reeves of 6 Lake view Road, and Miss Mel Newsy Paragraphs Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t Mrs.
D Helen McAweeney of Woburn, wife of Hugh McAweeney who died November 13 at the Choate Memorial Hospital was the sister of Mrs.
Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic, a place where men can escape for a few minutes of peace, relaxation and grooming.
Popular Tommy Drapeau, supervisor of Winchester School Buildings and Grounds returned to work last week after a month’s illness.
PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:09m. apr6-tf Miss Bonny Low, freshman at Vermont College, Montpelier, and Midshipman Richard Low, senior at Maine Maritime Academy, Castine, will be home for the Thanksgiving holidays.
Tel EXport 6-3349 after 6m. apr27-eow Miss Carol Larson a sophomore at Jackson College, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Joseph Richard Donovan of 7 Fells Road, are members of the freshman class at Connecticut College.
His project was cflosen as the most outstanding at the Driver Education Class.
Directors of the Winchester Community Youth Club (PALi present two checks to Michael Baldino, New England representative of the Muscular Dystrophy campaign, for flic muscular dystrophy fund.
Michael Baldino, Muscular Dystrophy representative; Mr Thomas J Dcrro. director; Miss Mary jane Lainbiasc, assistant director.
Angelo Addonizio, was the lucky winner of the 17-day tour through Italy, recently awarded at Marycliff Academy’c Bazaar.
The Winchester Kivanis Club offers the use of these items to Winchester residents.
Four sections of chain link fence behind the Theatre Mobil Station and Reardon’s Texaco station were found damaged by police last Tuesday.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Firefighters responded to a false alarm just outside the Mystic School last Wednesday at 9*28m.
Engine 3, Engine 1, the ladder truck, the rescue truck and the chief’s car responded to this false alarm.
Kodak color prints and Christmas cards should be ordered now at the Winchester Camera Shop. nov2-tf Firemen extinguished a fire in the Town truck at the Water Department building last Thursday on Lake Street.
The fire occurred at about 8:10m. and was apparently caused by a short circuit.
We will deliver. fe2-tf Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t Tuesday morning, just before 8 o’clock, the Hospital called to the fire station reporting a car on fire on Highland Avenue near the hospital.
It was a 1961 Lincoln owned and operated by Mr Jeffrey West of 30 Sargent Road.
The fire was under the hood and was soon brought under control by firefighters.
Hours for the clinic, Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday 4:30 to 8:30. can Win Salomon , Sirman ^Jaclt Si gaged Mr and Mrs.
Robert A Solomon of Wellingboro, England wish to announce the engagement of their daughter, Barbara Ann, to Airman 2nd class Lawrence L Nadeau, son of Mr and Mrs.
He joined the Air Force in October of that year and is presently stationed at RAFB Alconbury in Huntingdon, England, where he is completing a four year tour.
The Fortnightly American Home Day of the Fort nightly will be Monday, November 27 at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall.
Members are asked to bring donations before 10m. or to contact the committee before Monday for collection.
Even if a member has no article to bring, she is asked to come and hid, or for the fun.
For the afternoon program Mr J W\ Howard of the 85-year florist firm of Somerville will show' slides of “A Gift of a Rose”, followed by “Flower Arrangements for the Home,” using fresh flowers.
Donald Wilson of Fontana, California, announce the birth of their third son, William Scott, born November 13th at Kaiser Foundation Hospital in Fontana.
Louis A Percoco of Holland Street announce the birth of their fourth child, second son, Michael, horn November 1 at the Winchester Hospital.
Richard Butler, of Pearl Street Woburn are receiving congratulations on the birth of a daughter at the Winchester Hospital on Sunday November 19.
A Reade Goodwin, , of Rockport, Mass, announce the birth of their first child, a daughter, Ann Margaret, on November 3, at the Addison Gilbert Hospital in Gloucester.
J Community Youth Club Aids On Tuesday evening, November 13, the directors of the Winchester Community Youth Club presented Mr Michael Baldino, a New England representative of Muscular Dystrophy, with two checks which will he added to the Muscular Dystrophy Fund.
The WCYC sponsored a dance from which the. proceeds were donated to Muscular Dystrophy.
Only by their increasing efforts and with their hard work were we able to help in the fight against Muscular Dystrophy.
We would also like to thank A1 Lamhiase for his untiring efforts to help make this dance, and many of our other dances, a success.
A I always works in the background and seldom receives any notice for his efforts.
Their efforts in disk jockeying have also made our dances a success at all times.
They, too, seldom receive any notice of their work especially when both men donate their time and efforts.
Only with the wonderful help of these people have we been able to have more recreational functions for the youngsters in Winchester.
Seminar Norma E Porras of 11 Hutchinson Road has completed the 1961 Postgraduate Seminar in Pharmaceutical Chemistry offered by the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy, Boston.
The program included a series of eight lectures given on Tuesday evenings from September 26 through November 14 to assist the practicing pharmacist in his modern role as therapeutic consultant to the physician.
At the conclusion of the course on November 14, the fifty-eight registrants received certificates in recognition of satisfactory completion.
Garvey Boy Is Injured In Accident Ten-year-old Bruce Garvey of 17 Winchester Place is reported as doing fine at the Winchester Hospital with the fractured knee he sustained in an accident Monday night.
Young Garvey was hit by the left rear fender of a Ford station wagon driven by Mr Harris S Richardson, Jr., of 17 Cabot Street.
Mr Richardson told police that he was backing up to gain traction to go east on Svvanton Street when the accident occurred.
Miss Anne Kittredge, all of Boston, and Miss Emily Hood of Winchester check order lists for the Old \ ie Company s presentation of ““Romeo and Juliet” Saturday evening, January 20. at the Donnelly Memorial Theatre in Boston, benefiting the Regional Scholarship Committee of the Boston Wheaton Club.
The Company’s Boston attraction will be Franco Zeffirelli’s production of Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet” at the Donnelly Memorial Theatre.
Order blanks are currently in the mail to Wheaton alumnae, parents, undergraduates on campus, and friends for the Saturday evening performance on January 20, 1962.
Roger Blunt of Cambridge and Miss Sally Mohrfeld of Boston, PuI blic Relations; Mrs.
James Fenske of Lexinton is the Club President and is an ex-officio member of the committee.
Proceeds from this Wheaton benefit will he contributed to the Wheaton College Regional Scholarship Fund.
Richard C 0’B.rien, 93 Beacon Street, Boston 8, Massachusetts, and Miss Emily Hood, 6 Everett Avenue, Winchester, PA 91323.
CROWN ROOM Provides quiet elegance for your dining serving delicious meals and finest wines and beverages.
A perfect rendezvous for relaxation with friends or business associates.
FOR SPECIAL PARTIES FUNCTIONS OF ALL KINDS UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM Beautifully appointed for banquets, wedding receptions, business listings. dances or luncheons.
Harvey of Lloyd Street, who recently underwent heart surgery at the Massachusetts General Hospital, returned to his home last Saturday, and is reported as getting along nicely, his mobility.
Firefighter Hubert O’Donnell, who was believed to he critically injured in an automobile accident recently on Highland Avenue, has been discharged from the Winchester Hospital and has returned to limited duty at the Central Fire Station.
In addition to a severe shaking up he sustained a broken heel which cuts down sharply on his mboility.
SPECIALS RUN WEDNESDAY, FRIDAY and SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 24, 25 MEATS MIXED NUTS DROMEDARY PITTED DATE JOHN ALDEN SWEET MIXED JOHN ALDEN STUFFED OLD JOHN ALDEN RIPE OLIVES NONE SUCH MINCE MEAT R & R PLUM PUDDING OCEAN SPRAY CRANBERRY CHASE FARM CIDER VEGETABLES — FRUIT and FRESH CRANBERRIES BLUE HUBBARD SQUASH WHITE SWEET POTATOES Also a wide variety of Fancy to mention a few — Honeydew loupes also Fresh Pineapple.
Just Melons, Cranshaw Melons, CantaSPECIALTIES If you are planning to go out for Thanksgiving Dinn Specialty Department for your Hostess Gifts.
I Boxes, Charlotte Charles Fruit Cakes, Petits Fours Pastel late and many others.
Specialists ^Jor 1 'jour (Jjoif Wc take a great deal of interest and cure in outfitting the young gentleman.
Your desire to have him properly groomed heroine* our special responsibility.
You ean select an entire wardrobe for your hoy or young man with the assistance of our fine staff and tailor.
Attending Hunter Trials Miss Gayle Porter, recentlyelected vice president of the Christian College Riding Club, is one of twelve members of the club who attended the Bridlespur Hunter Trials on Saturday, November 18, at the Bridlespur Hunt Club, Huntleigh Village, St.
Mail servicemen's names and addresses to WINCHESTER HOMEFRONTERS PUBLIC LIBRARY NOW Name of Serviceman Rank Serial Number Military Address Aberjona PHARMACY PRESCRIPTIONS See Your Doctor First , Then See Us Home Address Tel Mrs.
DAILY eeptl4-tf GAYLE PORTER Members of the Riding Club who I made the one-day trip were accomI panied by Mrs.
Claud Drew, one I of the nation’s leading horsewomen and director of horsemanship at Christian.
The Riding Club members recently attended the American Royal in Kansas City, Mo.
No Charge for our Alteration Service Men's, Boys’ and Ladies’ Shops 6 Mt.
Vernon Street, Winchester PArkvicw 9-3070 Anne Foley, TB Christmas Seal campaign chairman of Middlesex County thought of a method recently that some residents are using now as they send their checks to the Christmas Seal Campaign.
The original idea Anne suggested a short time ago not only helps to build better community health but also helps residents in balancing their checkbooks.
Anne suggests that when checks are written for the current Tuberculosis Seal Campaign the writer includes the amount shown in the cents column of their checkbook.
Realizing that many people can’t increase their contributions by dollars Anne points out, “If only 10 people sent in 10 cents more than their usual gift. . .well there’s another dollar... and think how it would be if a lot of people did the same thing.
Nickles and dimes can add very quickly to make dollars that fight tuberculosis in Middlesex County,” she said.
Anne entered the TB Hospital in Waltham shortly after the first of last year; resting at home now she hopes to get back to work after the Christmas holidays this year.
Judge William F Henchey of the Woburn District Court had intended to read it during his recent address to the Winchester Rotary and was prevented by lack of time.
Nor allow for the battles he’s fought; His name becomes food for the jackals; For us who have never been caught.
I’m willing to trust in Thy mercy; To keep the commandments Thou’st taught.
The proceeds will be given to Simmons College as part of this club’s annual gift.
CARL DeSUZE Mr DeSuze has become familiar to many in the New England area by presenting his experiences as well as pictures of his travels in various parts of the world.
With other observers of foreign affairs Mr DeSuze feels South and Latin America may well hold the key to the defense as well as the economic health of this country.
Winchester club members working on arrangements and ticket sales include Mrs.
Improve your bridge game with Autobridge, the game you play by yourself anywhere with champions as partners.
NOVEMBER 23, 1961 Winchester Well Represented At Assembly of State Church Council J I lie Rev.
Knapp of W inchester, general >ocretarx of thesoo-i litirch Massachusetts C ouncil of C hurches, speak ini; to Protestant leaders from all parts of the state, stressed that “we be possessed by a sense of urgency which is sufficiently -harp and strong lx>th in Christian social responsibility and in concern for Christian unity.” lie warned that the church “must not lull itself into warm and drowsy self-satisfaction by beautiful odes in honor of such unity.
Knapp was’ one of the speakers on November to at the annual meeting of the Assembly of tin* Massachusetts C ouncil of Churches, composed of twelve major denominations working together.
The dav-long program began with an impressive ecumenical service in historic Trinity Church in Copley Square, and was followed by a luncheon, afternoon business meeting, and a dinner program, in the Hancock building.
Knapp stressed that “each denomination in our fellowship has contributed some emphasis of importance to the total Christian Com munity.
Sees Improved CatholicProtestant Relations Another speaker, the retiring president of the Massachusetts Council, the Rt.
Anson Phelps Stokes, Jr., Rishop of the Massachusetts Episcopal Diocese, told the Assembly, ""The great area of Protestant Catholic relationships can be faced in Massachusetts perhaps better than anywhere else in the country.
Roy Pearson, dean of the Andover Newton Theological School of Newton Centre, pointed out that ""any attempt to establish the church’s self-image almost inevitably ends in the conclusion that the church is a schizophrenic personality in which the church’s images of itself are almost as numerous as the church’s members.
Ecumenical Service Bishop Stokes presided throughout the day, and at the dinner program the benediction was given by a Winchester cleric.
Knapp par ticipated in the Ecumenical Service which included a vested procession of ecclesiastical leaders represent ing the 12 denominations in the Council.
Dil gir, India; Nehemia Chukuzwbe Adimora, Nigeria; and Robert Yau fa, Tonga Islands Dr.
Knapp presented citations to six clergy and lay leaders in recog nition of their service to the Coun cil.
A citation was also awarded Bishop Stokes, who retired alter two terms as president of the Massachusetts Council of Churches Election of Officers Fleeted to succeed Bishop Stokes was Bishop Janies K Mathews of the Methodist Church in New Eng land, and one of the four vice presidents elected was Dr.
Two of the others elected are former Winchester boys, Richard R Higgins of Dedham and Albert O Wilson, Jr., of Lexington.
Higgins and Wilson were among those receiving citations, Mr Wilson, for service as Council treasurer for five years and Mr Higgins for ser vice as chairman of the Council’s Department of Finance for the same length of time.
Alexander Henderson of 0 Standish Lane and elected chai man of the Department of Finance was Mr Wilson.
Among represen tatives to the Board of Directors elected from the Council’s Departments United Church Women was Mrs.
Knapp reported that a new state-wide survey is underway for the purpose of obtaining information about church-going practices He also revealed that the Council’s Department of Public Relations is conducting a state-wide opinion study among clergymen of various denominations to determine their image of the 1800-church Massachusetts Council of Churches and the altar at Trinity Church.
The | the needs they think it should meet “THE GIFT BOX FAIR” CRAWFORD MEMORIAL METHODIST CHURCH Thursday, November JO 6:30 and 7:00m.
Eileen Wolf of Fellsdale Close will hold a joint exhibition of oil paintings for two weeks in the lobby gallery of Shopper’s World in Framingham begin ning November 25th.
Established in 1930 SKI OUTFITTERS to the ENTIRE FAMILY We have been advisers to the leading skiers of the East for a generation — let us assist you in the selection of correct ski equipment and clothing.
Latest models of HEAD KASTLE DYNAMIC KOSSKOPF NORTHLAND and other leading brands of SKIS • Release Bindings, Marker, Ski-free, Dovre, Star, Cubco, O-U Micronmtic, Nevada, Tyroliu.
Trousers in wool gabardine including extra-long for both men and women.
Our policy is to sell only the latest quality equipment at reasonable prices.
Harry Gilson, Superintendent of Schools, recalled the first time he saw Coach Knowlton on the gridiron and congratulated the Officials upon their selection of him as “coach of the year,” stating they could have made no* better choice.
He believed the Officials had not chosen Coach Knowlton because of his admittedly fine won and lost record as a coach, but for his character building and what he has done for the boys who have played under him.
At this point the toastmaster called attention to two coming football players at Winchester High School attending the dinner with their fathers.
Jack Daley, former Williams player, was next introduced and kept his audience in one long laugh while he recounted stories of Mattawamkeag, Maine.
His remarks were strictly entertainment and it would be hard to name the more popular of his anecdotes.
Those about the reasons behind the selection of football officials for Mattawamkeag’s big game, longevity in the same interesting far-north town and the remarkable speed and stamina of Mattawamkeag sick canines were uproariously received.
John D West, former Harvard star and one of Winchester’s greatest fullbacks in the old linebucking tradition of fullbacks, told the banquet guests that every one who had played for Coach Knovrlton had the greatest respect for him.
He said he could think of nothing nicer than to have his own three boys play football under Henry Knowlton.
Howard Niblock got a laugh when he said that he knew some Maine stories acquired during 14 years esidence in the Pine Tree State, but that he “knew when he was licked” and would not venture to tell his own stories after the masterful job done by Mr Daley.
Mr Niblock said that the “coach of the year” award was a great, and well deserved tribute to Henry Knowlton.
In closing he paid tribute to Henry Knowlton, saying he had never known a man of finer character nor one who had done more for boys.
Presenting the trophy, Mr Kozlowski said that friends of football need have no fear of those who want to make nothing but intellectuals out of our boys while men like Knowlton are teaching the game.
Many, he said, look down on football, but properly taught, there is nothing like it to discipline the body, mind and spirit.
Too much emphasis, he continued can be placed on studies as opposed to all around men like Barry Wood of Harvard and Albie Booth of Yale.
As an example of Coach Knowlton’s relations with officials he told the meeting he had been the official in the recent Melrose game who called two fumbles against Winchester.
Henry knew the official had called them as he saw them and in the way he thought was right.
Mr Kozlowski recalled working a game in which Joe Bellino seemed to be roughed up by an opposing player.
The official had not seen the play develop and asked Bellino if the opposing player had deliberately tried to rough him.
This the speaker believed typical of the Knowlton teaching and influence on his boys.
Coach Knowlton, in his acceptance, said that the receipt of the trophy gave him the thrill of his life.
He felt humble, he said, because there seemed so many coaches equally, or more deserving of the honor than he.
Football had been good to him in many ways, he added, and one of them was in the friendships he had made through the game.
He listed many officials among his friends and expressed his admiration for all officials, who he beieves are a very necessary part of any game.
He is not among those, he continued, who believe there is too much whistle blowing.
Rules are made to be enforced and one of the lessons boys who play football must learn is that the game must he played within the framework of these rules.
A respecter of officials himself, he told his audience he has always taught his boys to respect them, and even though he had encountered officials who “carried the ball” equally as well as his best backs, he always believed them to be fair.
He closed his remarks with a sincere expression to the Association of New England Officials for the great honor shown him.
Arvid Gustavson of 74 Salisbury Street, has been named Miss Capezio of 1962.
Recently Miss Gustavson accompanied Miss Nashe on a special tour to Canada as a Goodwill Ambassadress for the New England Council.
At Jackson Sylvia is majoring in elementary education and plans to teach the third or fourth grade.
While at Winchester High she was active in “Curtain and Cue,” the “Aberjona” and intramural sports, including budminton, baseketball and softball.
And by the way “Miss Capezio” is also a member of the National Honor Society.
Among the activities in which Sylvia has modeled included Mayor Collins of Boston’s Field Day at Fenway Park before 35,000 people, shows for sport fans, women’s clubs and retail stores.
She will have a chance to see the ballet, visit many fine restaurants and tour the historical and interesting sights of Manhattan.
Winchester Garden Club Mr J Edward Downes opened her lovely home at 84 Cambridge Street, on Thursday, November 16, for the regular meeting of the Winchester Garden Club.
After a pleasant social hour, when dessert and coffee were served, Mrs. (’handler Sy mines, president, called the meeting .to order.
It. was voted by the club fo send Christmas plants to patients at the Veterans Hospital in Bedford and to also ask each member to bring a gift for a child to the next meeting in December to he sent to the House of the Good Samaritan, a part of the Children’s Hospital, for long term cases.
Sy mines announced that Sears, Roebuck was again staging a contest in 1962 for community projects and also that a Flower Symposium would be held in Horticultural Hall from Thursday, November 30th through Sunday, December 3rd.
Ross thanked those m embers who brought terrariums and it was voted to send them as a gift to the Fruit and Flower Mission.
Robert G Richards of Groveland, Mass., as the speaker of the afternoon.
Richards* subject was “Christmas at Home,” and the members had a delightful afternoon listening to and seeing the lovely work of Mrs.
Richards, who is not only an artist in creating, but an entertaining speaker as well.
She made two separately lovely arrangements with angels and candles and then with the soft music of “Silent Night, Holy Night” in the background, she recited the words.
As part of its years theme “Building A Better World” the Senior Forum of the First Congregational Church will have as its guests for the November supper meeting this Sunday students from other countries who are studying in Cambridge.
Richard Roelofs, protestant chaplain to international students at M.I.T., will secure Christian students to speak.
This program will augment Forum’s winter time International Weekend when a larger number of students are invited irrespective of race or religion.
At the 11 o’clock Forum at Church service the chaplain will be Ned Niblock with Rich Cooper, Tom Dolben, Scott Erskine, Robert Cowles, Richard Halverson and Peter Hichborn serving as deacons and Frank Curtis, Robert Williams Larry Wholley, Reed Lowry, Dan Brink and Paul Johnian as ushers.
Have them laundered where pride in work well done is a tradition known to thousands.
T«l.5-0116 Unitarian Players As the holiday season draws nearer and activities get busier, a large group of dedicated people are working to perfect the production of Samuel Taylor’s ""The Pleasure of His Company” to be presented by the Unitarian Players on Fri| day and Saturday evenings, DeeemI her t and 2.
While the cast works on stage with director Jacqueline Langdon Sibley ami her moral supporter Rev.
Sibley, is being constructed by chairman Bernard Eyden, Robert Low, Frank Thayer, William Miller, James Wooley, and Edward Barker, with set decor by Mrs.
Edward Knowlton handles sound effects while Carleton Maley controls the lighting.
Properties are being secured by Miss Gladys West and Miss Marjorie Bradford, and costumes by Mrs.
The corps of ushers is headed by John Harrison, John Lyman, and Charles Merenda.
Jayeees were president William Bird and John Patterson of the Winchester Jaycee Chapter.
Mr Bird and Mr Patterson attended the quarterly hoard meeting of the Massachusetts Junior Chamber of Commerce held at the Hawthorne Hotel in Salem on Sunday, November 19.
This marked the first time the Winchester Jaycee chapter has been represented at a quarterly meeting and to cast its two votes to the many bids on the agenda.
Guest speaker at the dinner before the board meeting was Frank S Giles, Commissioner of Public Safety of Massachusetts, who spoke on the responsibilities and goals of the commission.
Jaycee president Robert B Dillon, Jr., of Pittsfield, presided at the business meeting, for which the Peabody chapter served as host to the state organization.
President Bird will report the details of this board meeting to Winchester Jaycee members on November 30th, the Jayeees next general business meeting.
Mellon’s third visit | to Winchester, and she is a memher of Winchester Grange, 343, which she joined during her visit j of 1955.
Winchester Telephone Answering Service DEPENDABLE 24-IIOUR SERVICE TO BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL MEN FOR ELEVEN YEARS 6 Nelson Street PA 9-0207 PA 9-3111 ... -ir From »** ea V ««w. used. a ^2XSi». and color. antique cARPETI**® lOl QUALITIES OF mattutactureo.
Bowling League The first half of the schedule is nearing completion, and California is still in the driver's seat, with Notre Danie, Alabama and Harvard trailing in that order.
California downed Bates, with the strong arms of Frank DiMambro and Angie Amico playing a big part.
Of the 98 bowlers eligible for the attendance prizes, three won turkeys, Johnny Mangano, Bob Tatiro and Woozy Giacalone.
Walter Houston Clark, author of The Psychology of Religion, one of the outstanding resources on the description of religious growth in childhood and adolescence will address the parents and teachers of the First Baptist Church on Monday, November 27 at 8:00m. to speak on the psychology of religion.
Clark is dean and chairman of the Hartford School of Religious Education, and past president of the American Association of Schools of Religious Education, and on the Board of Research for the Religious Education Association.
He will describe in his address the origin of the concept of the divine, what the child's religion is like, the growth of religious maturity emerging from the tensions of youth, and the factors which lead to a variety Of religious experience.
This will be the beginning of bimonthly addresses at First Baptist, directed at describing to the parents and teaching staff the broad scope and deep sources of re ligious education.
WALT DISNEY'S 1 Pit riOlLULUU tmm ^teBOBBY IN TECHNICOLOR Also DAVID & GOLIATH THANKSGIVING DAY BOBBY shown at 3:15 & 8:15 GOLIATH show n at 2:00 & 7:00 Wed., Fri.
Susan Hayward Dean Martin ADA Also THUNDER OK DRUMS Sunday cont. from 2:00m.
SKI PARKAS, $5.95 to $30 SKIS all sizes and prices NORTHLAND TOBOGGANS WITH CUSHIONS 5 feet, $28.50 6 feet, $35.50 7 feet, $34 WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Churl’ll Street, WincheHter, Mass.
PArkview 9-1931 Qua fi lif ~3s Our l Host precious ^4 A Set ^ The Sad Story of Fisherman Koch Our New Teachers Mrs.
Margaret Atanasoff, who is teaching third grade at the Wyman School, is a native of Lake Placid, New Y'ork, and for three years taught in the elementary schools of Webster, N.Y., before coming to Winchester.
Left to right, kneeling, John McGann, manager, Charles Tarbell, William Hood, Davis Blanchard, Scott Wallace, Thomas Sullivan, David Swanson, Robert Falzano, Stephen Poole, Gerry Cullen.
Middle row, Frank Provinzano, Kevin Collins, Bill Mahoney, Ron Vigliotti, Boh Little, Austin Broadhurst, Ron MacDonald, Gerry Kean, John Mongiello, Larry Dalton, Alan Eugley, John Brenner, mgr., John Ellis, mgr.
Rear row, Colin Gray, George Moran, Ralph Sexton, Austin Garvey, Paul Soucek, Warren Wilson, David Pywell, Paul Puzzo, Willard Cannon, Tony Silvestri, Jim Harrington, asst, coach.
In t lie inter-school* football match with Lynch Junior High School McCall won 22-8.
Left to right, kneeling, Barry Weeks, Gene Carey, John Bees, Steve Havelli, Garth Nelson.
Hugh Fisher, John Cussen, Steve Harwood, Rick Cassaro, Paul Gentile, Pete Harvey, Bob Gilberti, Charles Dutoit, Jim Kirk.
John Stavros, Jim Crow, Marty Hill, Art Stafford, Bern Tuttle, Joe Franfaglia, Robert Crotty, Boh Kuhn.
YOU NEED A ■M0T0-M0WER 20"" DELUXE POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3>/4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and heavily packed snow.
Moil, Wed., Fri. evenings 5:30 to 8:30 Saturdays All Du> nov9-t/ Exeter and both scored for their schools.
Neville, Exeter quarterback and former Winchester High School play caller, is the son of Mr and Mrs.
Farrar scored two touchdowns in Andover’s 18-8 victory over the Red and Gray, the first in the second period on a one-foot buck, and the second, in the third period on another buck, again from inside the one yard line.
In both instances effective plunging by the big Winchester boy made the scores possible.
Neville, a fine passer, had little chance to show his wares in this department as the Blue Line was rushing him badly.
He did however score the only conversion points of the game after Exeter had converted a bad Andover pass into a touchdown with only a little more than a minute left in the game.
Neville circled right end to get into pay dirt and add two points to a losing cause.
James Parker, former National Congress of Teachers president; Richard Batcheldcr, house master at Newton villc, Mass.
The American Chemical Society presents ""Quality — For the Consumer"" including a fallout filter for water.
As a high school girl she played flute in the band, which was good, she said, because it got her to all the games. y i i Mrs.
Nancy Jane Foss is another Winchester girl who has returned to her home town to teach.
Cartoon Show A Cartoon Show for Children will lie sponsored by the Sodality ot St.
Admission, includes the chance to win one of the attractive door prizes.
Foss was born in New Rochelle, N.Y., but came to Winchester as a child and grew up in town, graduating from Winchester High School in 1956 and from Con necticut College for Women with a B.A. in economics in 1960.
Foss went to the Wyman School for five years and it is in that school that she is teaching the fourth grade this year.
She and Glenn A Foss were married last August and are living in Waltham.
As ac-» tive sports she likes swimming and diving and in the field of music she plays the piano and enjoys the study of music appreciation.
Sachems in Lynn lee Jamboree Coming up Saturday, November 25, the second annual New England High School Hockey Jamboree will hold sway at the North Shore ring in Lynn with fourteen teams expected to furnish hockey fans with three and one half hours of hockey.
Malden Catholic grabbed the North Shore Hockey League title and Archbishop Williams won the honors down on the South Shore.
And once again, these two are expected to have a lot to say about the championship in 1962.
The schedule of games for the Jamboree has Winchester paired with Hingham commencing at 6:30.
The old Latin “quid pro quo"" are the words that spring most quickly to mind as we contemplate the reason for his recently found devotion to the art of terpsichore.
For lo these many years Charlie and Harry Damon have been fishing out of Harry’s place at Chatham on Cape Cod.
From time to time they have been joined in their fishing by Marty Rubin, the barber, and Dr.
Dick Blanche, a pediatrician out of the Medical Building across the street from the Sport Shop.
This fishing activity nas taken place in the summer and ""Grampa"" Koch’s absence from the Sport Shop to engage in this recreational activity has left his wife, ""Maggie"" riding herd on the shop alone.
She did, however, venture a mild protest when ""Grampa"" casually mentioned the fact that he might take a fishing flyer with old Isaac Walton Damon during the early fall.
As we said, the protest was not vigorous and neither ""Charlie"" nor ""Maggie” discussed the proposition further.
It came up again, however, when one day early in September Mr Damon entered the Sport Shop to announce, con brio, not to mention eclat and gusto, that the blue fish were so thick in Pleasant Bay that you could hardly force a boat between them; and further, that they were practically jumping out of the water to attach themselves to worthy fishermen’s hooks.
The boys, said Mr Damon, ought not to miss an opportunity like that, and what did ""Grampa” Koch think about a little fishing flyer come that week-end.
His bad luck of the summer faded into roseate hopes of better fortune to the extent that he even had the temerity to broach the subject of the proposed safari to the Mrs.
Maggie was surprisingly cooperative, acquiescing to ""Grampa"" joining Mr Damon and Dr.
She did feel that if she did this small favor for ""Charlie"", he in turn should do a small one for her upon his return.
He knows better now that it is too late, for all Maggie asked in return for permitting him to partake of the fishing trip was ""Grampa’s"" attendance with her at Mr Curry’s dancing school this fall.
In the first place the Damon timepiece picked the morning of the big fishing day to go ""on the fritz,"" and as a consequence the intrepid fishermen got up at 3 .*30 instead of 4:30, which in the Koch book is grounds for justifiable homicide.
On top of that neither Mr Koch nor Mr Damon got anything for their fishing activity t>ut seaweed.
The Doctor who did not fish, but just relaxed was the only member of the party who realized anything constructive out of the whole business.
As a matter of fact ""Grampa’s"" total return from his entire fishing season, while unusual, would have little appeal for fishermen.
Included have been a whole tree, several logs, a sea anchor and two 35-pound sea skates, which as any angler knows are not worth the energy it takes to land them.
And for this Mr Koch has compromised his status as a free man by taking dancing lessons.
Open House At Noonan Sehool The annual open house was held at the Noonan School on Tuesday, November 14, from 7:30 to 9:00 m. parents had the opportunity to visit their children’s classrooms, to inspect their work, and to have an informal talk with their teacher.
The Room mothers were in charge of name tags for the parents as they entered the classrooms.
A social hour followed in the auditorium where refreshments were served by Mrs.
The splash party consists of one and a half hours swimming and fun in a heated indoor pool.
The splash party is open to both boys and girls of all ages in Winchester.
Buses will leave Winchester at 7:30m. from in front of McCall Junior High School on Main Street, and will return at 11:15m.
Registration will take place at the police station from November 26 to December 1.
Annual Meeting Scholarship Foundation The Winchester Scholarship Foundation will hold its annual meeting in the Speech-Arts room of the Winchester High School on Monday evening, December 1 at 8 o’clock.
Officers will be elected and reports for the past year’s operations will be made.
Neil Borden, chairman of the Foundation’s general committee, will preside, and any one interested in the Foundation is cordially invited to attend.
One-Year Secretarial Course Technical training with supple mentary business subjects.
Liberal Arts-Secretarial Course Combined program of selected college-level studies and technical training.
Wrltm for Catalog BOSTON 16 21 Marlborough CO m moo lift I.M71 Alta Niu Tart, PravMaaao, ■THE WINCHESTER STAR ■ SAY WHEN TRADEMARK i tat av promo sEftvicES. imc.
Based an the NBC-TV Program Excitement in this game runs high as players try to come neo. but not to go over the given goal.
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1961 “The Way of Active Peace” J Subi ect of Christian Science Lecture Today’s challenges point up the need for active thinkers, indi viduals with deep spiritual convictions.
A member of The < ""’hri istian Scienee B oard of Led Lure ship, she spoke in St oneham Town Hall, under the j i u s p i c e s of The Mother Chun ■h.
So these are the things we rnust conquer with love, spirituality, and righteousness.
Healings through wholly spiritual means of epilepsy, broken bones, and other serious conditions were described by the lecturer.
Miss Aultman held that enlightened prayer provides the answer to conflict of every kind.
First, an embattled sense of being in conflict with everything in one’s environment.
This sometimes is just irritation with salespeople, members of one’s family or neighbors.
Or perhaps it takes the form of carrying on silent, heated conversations with anyone from near relatives to our Congressman, telling them what we think of their mistakes.
This is the holy war which is an hourly striving to obey God and grow in Christian character.
It conquers the conflicts and frictions which pose as one’s human nature, replacing them with the realization of one’s divine nature, serene, satisfied, and consequently at peace.
The doors will open on Wednesday at seven o’clock in the evening on a gala holiday event.
Christmas Decorations and other interior decorating items will be featured along with booths of Needlecraft, Jams, Jellies, Foods, Candies.
There will be a Doll and Toy Department and a Children’s Shopping Center.
The unique and highly successful Hat JBar of last year will he repeated and there will be many other features, including the ever-popular Apron Bazaar.
The Center Group of the Woman’s Society will serve a Luncheon at noon on Thursday and that evening the men of the church will serve a dinner.
Mr Walter Fish is again heading this event and promises some unusual and enjoyable features as well as a fine meal.
All day Thursday children will be cared for in a Nursery so that mothers may shop and talk knowing that their children are well taken care of, Mrs.
Glenic Kelley, a registered nurse and a member of the W.S.C.S. will have charge of The entire event is open to the public and there is no admission charge.
Make your selection at the Winchester plays on view It has seemed strange to us during the past year that almost every day several people visit our shop who have never before done so.
The answer, of course, is that there are many more new residents in Winchester and nearby than we realize.
We begin to feel as though we were a new shop just open instead of approaching our fourteenth vear on Winchester Place.
A number of changes are taking place resulting in a different shop, more like the pleasant arrangement of our Nantucket quarters.
Our aim is to feature only a few handmade items to complement small jewelry with color and size in ceramics, stained glass, prints from wood-blocks, and occasionally paintings and sculpture.
Also continuing, the Macefield invention becoming widely recognized as The flower holder, which at each summer’s end is sold out.
During our island summer season we have held to this plan for six years now and enjoy it much more for limiting to stock to be found only in our shop.
Wires and sheets of gold and silver are skillfully and beautifully formed to the exact drawings made either for showcase stock or made to order for special requirements like resetting diamonds and other gems in oneof-a-kind design.
Pick-Up and Delivery Service PArkview 9-2350 nov2-4t APPLICATION FOR AUDITION MISS READING PAGEANT Sponsored by Reading Junior Chamber of Commerce Name Addi Phone Age The Reading Pageant is a preliminary to the Miss Massachusetts and Miss America Pageants.
In the typical self-contained organization, some twenty to thirty pupils are assigned tq each teacher, and each group is placed in a classroom where most of the instructions takes place at the hands of that one teacher.
He must provide as best he can for the range of individual needs and abilities in his group.
In addition, he must ordinarily perform a variety of clerical duties and supervisory tasks on a non-instructional nature.
In contrast, under the team teaching pattern, groups of teachers take joint responsibility for the instruction of a segment of the school population.
The clerical and secretarial needs of these teachers are cared for by a clerical aide.
These and similar questions are constantly raised by the parents of the children in the team teaching program.
Each year an achievement test is taken by every child in the Winchester schools.
Tire results of these tests were just one criteria by which all the pupils in the present fourth, fifth and sixth grades were grouped.
There are one hundred and fifty four pupils in the team teaching project at Parkhurst.
The achievement results of a given subject , were recorded from high achievement to low achievement.
During the first few days of school in September, inventories were given to each group to re-check the results of the achievement lists.
Re-grouping once again took place to ascertain correct placement of each child.
This pattern followed in each subject to be taught in the team teaching project.
The teacher is selected for a given subject area for her specialization and existing talent; one for reading, one in mathematics, another for science, etc.
The pupils are then assigned to each teacher, for each subject, according to their placement of achievement.
This is not confusing to the children, for now they can work together with others facing the same problems.
This grouping makes it possible to place pupils into different ability groups for each subject, with sufficient flexibility.
All the teachers involved in the team teaching project work together to meet the instructional needs of the children by a cooperative organization of planning, as a team with different teachers assuming responsibilities within the group.
They plan together; they observe the plans carried out and onferences for evaluative discus sions of original plans and its operations.
The success of team teaching depends a great deal upon the acceptance, understanding, adaptability, confidence and faith in the program by each teacher.
The enthusiasm of the children, and The cooperation of the parents in understanding the efforts of the school and staff in providing for the children educational facilities to the best of our abilities.
From time to time you will he kept abreast with the progress of the project.
Seek Local Girls For Miss Reading Contest Winchester Hospital Meeting Notice The annual meeting of the mem bers of Winchester Hospital will be held in the dining room at the hospital, Highland Avenue, Winchester, Massachusetts, on Tuesday, December 5, 1961, at 8:00 o’clock, Eastern Standard Time, for the following purposes 1.
To determine the number of directors to be elected and the term of y^ars for which they will serve.
To ratify the acts of the directors, the executive committee and the officers since the annual meeting in 1960, as shown in the records of the meetings of the board of directors and executive committee.
To transact such other business as may properly come before the meeting.
Allen O Eaton Secretary NOMINATIONS FOR THE YEAR 1961 1962 Directors for Three years Alfred D Elliott, Gerald Y Hills, Mrs.
Robert G Ingraham, Jr., James L Jenks, Jr., Robert B Kittredge, Carl B Pitman, Mrs.
Trustee for Three Years William F Morton Nominating Committee for 1962 Harold W Bates, Mrs.
Robert J Grenzeback. nov23-2t Winchester girls will have an opportunity to compete for the title of “Miss Reading,” at the Reading Pageant, to he held in March under the auspices of the Reading Junior (’ham her of Commerce.
Winner of the pageant will participate in the Miss Massachusetts contest in June.
Nils Nordberg, chairman of the entries committee, said applications for the Reading Pageant can he accepted from any community in which a local contest is not being held.
To be eligible for the pageant a contestant must be between the ages of 18 and 28 on September 1, 1962.
She must be a high school graduate by September 1, and must never have been married.
She must possess talent, either trained or potential, which may nclude playing a musical instrument, dramatics, dress designing, singing, or any of the fine arts.
If she wishes to pursue a professional career, such as nursing, she may present a three-minute talk on her reasons for selecting such a career, or on her training to date and her aims in that profession.
Candidates should write to the College before December 15, for the Mount Holyoke Scholarship application form and for the Confidential Financial Statement of the College Scholarship Service.
These forms are sent only to candidates who have applied for admission to the College.
They must he filled in and filed before January 15 with the Executive Secretary of the Committee on Scholarships at the College.
Howard A Morrison, 12 Glen Road, indicating their plans, interests, size of family, etc.
P CHIARENZA WElls 5-2697 nov9-8t Parkhurst Tea Continuing a gracious custom of the Parkhurst School, a social tea for Mrs.
Kenneth R Wiggett third grade teacher, will be given by the room mother, Mrs.
John C Willis, were 1960 graduates of New Preparatory School in Cambridge, and both are majoring in liberal arts at Norwich, Dudley was on the Dean’s list the second semester of his freshman year here.
Guild of The Infant Saviour The regular meeting of the Guild of the Infant Saviour will he held on Tuesday, November 28, at 2 m. in K of C Home.
Albert T McDougall, will preside at a short business meeting which will be followed by “cups and saucers” with Ann Bliss, arranged by the program committee headed by Mrs.
This is a novel program and will he greatly enjoyed by the members and their guests.
John Hoffman, assisted by an enthusiastic group, have graciously offered to serve as usual during the social hour.
Please remember that the Guild is sponsoring its annual rummage sale earlier in the morning, from 11m. to 1:30m.
The “Toys for Tots” campaign for the 1961 Christmas season will he held in this area from November 24 to December 15 inclusive.
This “Toys For Tots” drive is an annual collection of new or almost new toys, given by the general public, and distributed to otherwise forgotten hoys and girls.
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 23 1 Vo I Pngc Eleven nradz. hr#ctJ/z£J FORESTER’S 9 FLOWER SHOP ★ CUT FLOWERS ★ WEDDING FLOWERS * FLORAL DESIGNS PA 9-1077 Eves.
John M Manion, Pastor PA 9-2990 TV Service Phono Radio Winchester Appliance Co. aprl8-tf Rev.
Religious Classes for Hi-School Pupils each Monday at 7 for boys ; each Tuesday at 7 for girls.
To help our less fortunate Winchester friends during the holiday season, gifts of money, food and clothing are earnestly solicited. be sent to the Winchester Community Relief Gifts may Committee.
Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-3000 Sunday, November 26. ‘3:20m.
The Red CCohh Bloodmobile will be at the Chturch of the Epiphany. 7:00m.
Morning Worship, floly Communion at the Worship Services, Fir>t Sunday of the Month.
Message ""Only One Way to the Father"" (Series on What Does Jesus Mean?!: extended session for Nursery through 5th Grade. 3:30m.
Senior High Fellowship at home of Brenda Mosher, 5 Standish Lane, Liturgical Mass.” 8:00m.
Walter Houston Clark, Dean of the Hartford School of Religious Educaion, speaker.
Dinner will be served by the men of the church on Thursday at 6:30 and 7:00m.
Carlton Helgerson, Pastor Baptistic Evangelistic Denominational Non 9:30m.
Style and Comfort in Glasses ARTHUR K SMITH Guild Optician 49A Pleasant Street, Woburn WElIs 3-1704 au 5 -tf 2)r.
Candy, Food, Christmas Decorations, Dolls und Toys, Interior Decorations, Bags.
Christmas Club It was announced today by Mr Vincent C Ambrose, president of the Winchester Trust Company, that checks totalling $145,898. were mailed to all Christmas Club depositors as of the close of business on Wednesday, November 15.
The popular appeal of this particular type of regular savings is clearly demonstrated by the substantial increases which have been shown again this year in the number of individual depositors, as well as the total dollar volume of Christmas Club deposits.
The yearly distribution of this money, saved over a 50-week period, gives added impetus to the pre-holiday purchasing power of a large number of prospective retail shoppers.
The 1962 Christmas Club applications are now available at both offices of the Winchester Trust Company, 35 Church Street and 16 Mt.
The voting players dance and sing to the gray music and will, at times, ask the audience to sing with them.
The first performance of the plays will be given on Friday, December .1, at .1:45m., at the High School Auditorium, under the sponsorship of the Community j The experience and perspective he School Association which each year makes it possible for the children of Winchester to sec and hear good l live theater.
Again the enthusiasm and cooperation of some of the teachers in our community is most gratefully appreciated and adds much to the success of the productions.
The Children’s Theater School is establishing a reputation for an experience which is theatrical yet both cmative and spontaneous.
Their delightful success in their “Noah’s Ark” at the Boston Arts Festival last June has drawn children from neighboring towns to the group.
The cast includes children from Winchester, Reading, Stoneham, Medford, Lexington and Wellesley.
Veronica Sanderson, singing and accompanist; Miss Edna Hatch, painting for the older children; Mrs.
Richard F Brackett, painting and dancing for the younger children; and Mr Tom Morse, high school stage crew.
During one intermission the boys and girls of McCall Junior High School, the Eighth Notes, under the direction of Mrs.
The children in the audience will also participate in singing songs from the play under the direction of Miss Nancy Bellows.
Your children can make a contribution to the rebuilding fund for WGBH Channel 2, the educational television station which brings 21inch classroom programs to them.
Tickets are also available at Hevey’s Pharmacy and McCormack’s Apothecary and will be sold at the door. acquired as Mayor of Newton qualifies him to interpret planning j needs from the suburban point of view.
The concept of Regional Planning is not a new one, but it has become more familiar to the public in recent years.
The speed of change and generally accelerated tempo of modern society has ere ated serious pressures on outmoded urban structures — physical, political, and economic.
The mechanics of planning for change in major metropolitan areas throughout the United States have developed in varying degrees, and with varying success depending upon the communities involved.
For example, most Metropolitan Regions grew from the central city in a kind of overflow pattern, but in the Boston area the outlying communities were established as autonomous political units separated geographically from the core.
On the other hand, local autonomy is granted by the Legislature — it is merely permissive.
Less than 409c of the inhabitants of Greater Boston live within the “core” city in contrast to the overall national average of 609c.
The panel of speakers will analyze these problems, explaining terminology, current impetus, and existing agencies for long-range comprehensive planning.
They will attempt to estimate current trends and future needs in the physical environment of the community.
The Winchester LWV suggests that those who attend this panel discussion will be better equipped to understand and to weigh the needs and responsibilities of Winchester in its relation not only to neighboring communities, but also to Boston as the center of rural services.
A small group of children from the Children's Theatre School pause for the photographer as they eagerly work oil their parts in the three exciting plays, “Midsummer Night’s Dream” , “Heidi” and “Robinson Crusoe.” which will be presented at the Winchester High School Auditorium on Friday, December I, at 3:45m. under the sponsorship of the Winchester Community School Association.
Fairies Marla Johnis, Rebecca Brackett; Queen Titania Kathy Dale; Elves Stephen and Stewart Johnis; Puck Geoffrey Brackett; Snug Stephen Edgell.
Veronica Sanderson of 10 Harrison Street has been appointI ed ns accompanist at the forth| coming productions of three plays | by the Winchester Children’s The| atre under the direction of Mrs.
Anderson j has been a music specialist in English schools, teaching choral singI ing, verse speaking, elocution, mu| sical plays, and free expression of dance.
Wragg, Elizabeth Shepard Jimmy North, George S Hebb, East Middlesex Association For Retarded Children The East Middlesex Association for Retarded Children will hold their monthly meeting at 52 Sanborn Street, Reading, November 29, at 8:00m.
This film was made at the Dental Clinic for Retarded in Road Island, Mass.
Dinner will be served from 6 to 9 and tickets may be secured from committee member Danny Gatti neri at Fashion Cleansers on Washington Street.
Manager THOMAS C MURRAY WALTCR H PALMER Registered Representatives 47 CHURCH ST., WINCHESTER PArkvIow 9-4650 Plooio *ond mo free booklet ""Socuritiat Transactions"" AddressCity -Zone.
ON RADIO WBZ • 10:15 PM Rvmiy Week Night STOCK MARKET A BUSINESS NEWS Another Allyn Service for Inveetpre Beatrice Jasper, Rhoda Feuer Mrs.
Arthur, Lenore Gamage Sir Charles Jasper, Eugene M Pollard Maurice Mullins, George E Connor A Woman, Nancy Dorsey Orchestra, Marie Wingate, piano; Doris Thomas, violin; Mary Sinclair, ’cello Emyln Williams, England’s foremost dramatist, wrote “A Murder Has Been Arranged,” and it had a long run in London.
In choosing this for their fall play, the Parish Players must have known they faced a real challenge in doing it.
Nine people on that stage made an audience actually believe that an old theatre legend had come alive.
The story ninges on a supper party given on the stage of an empty theatre by Sir Charles Jasper on his fiftieth birthday, on the eve of his inheriting two million pounds.
He hopes to prove a legend will came true this same evening — that the ghost of a man murdered in this same theatre will rise again and walk across the stage, even as did another ghost 90 years before.
Sir Charles is murdered before eleven o’clock — his young wife manages to prove that it was murder and not suicide — and Sir Charles’ ghost actually does walk across the stage, sit at the head of his dinner table, and causes the complete collapse of the murderer, who had thought his plan foolproof.
From the moment Phyllis Hollinshead stepped out before the closed curtain and, terrified, asked the orchestra to stop the music, the feeling of suspense began.
She and Elizabeth Shepard had a long scene in which to establish the story of the party and its significance, and both held it well.
George Hebb as the good-looking young man intent on helping Lady Jasper, whom he knows is in trouble, did a truly superb acting job, as did Lenore Gamage as Lady Jasper’s rather worldly mother.
These four actors were given the task of setting the story and the mood of the play.
When Beatrice Jasper comes in, and Rhoda Feuer is one of the most capable young actresses the Players have had in some time, the tension builds.
It is always good to see new people on the stage, but it is equally exciting for audiences to see actors such as Gene, Lenore, George Hebb, George Connor.
His dramatic entrance sparked the action of the play, and he continued to build suspense as he worked out his evil plan, his carefully devised murder.
When he comes on stage at the end of the play, sees his victim at the head of the dinner table, and cracks under the whole apparent failure of his plan, he pulls out every theatrical trick he knows so well.
The curtain closes on him, elegant in his scarlet Cesar Borgia costume, as he completely goes to pieces.
Nancy Dorsey as the woman who has been struck dumb, according to the revived legend, held the audience in the palm of her hand, making them believe in her story in her death.
Shepard was a delightful comedy touch, with her cockney accent; and Otis Jason, with his voice coming from the audience each time, added his bit to the mystery.
The three ladies in the orchestra should have taken a curtain call for their music did much for the performance.
Along with the marvelous lighting effects and the excellent setting of the deserted stage, the music helped create credibility.
He probably knew the play itself had many holes and many facets that American audiences would not accept, but he had his fine cast do the job well, and by their own acting, make the story real.
It was an unusual play for the Players to have chosen, and not a very pleasant one, actually.
Conlon FU E L SER VICE Oil Burner Installations All Work Guaranteed Time Payments WE 3-1720 27 Lake Aveuuc, Woburn Realtors’ Convention Harriett L Wolff, Marion M Moses, and Fred S Gilley have just returned from Miami Beach where they attended the seminars and conferences sponsored by the National Association of Real Estate Boards.
Here the Trefrey agents listened to the most progressive and informed Brokers from all over the country in a mass exchange of ideas all aimed toward just one thing, better and more professional service to the public.
The schedule was quite rigorous with classes starting at 8m. and going through to 4:30m. each day.
This is the fifth straight year of increased business for the Trefrey office and much of this is due to the superior service of the agents available because of their attendance to these conventions.
BMt'\ “ONE of a KIND” WE BUY AND SELL ESTATES, DIAMONDS and COLLECTORS’ ITEMS Expert Appraiser MAKER and DESIGNER of EXQUISITE JEWELRY Repairing •47 Bromfield St., Boston, Mass.
WHITTEMORE, Realtor PA 38 Church Street 9-3320, 0047, 5612, 2672, 1164, 5046. and EX 5-1784 For Rent WEDGEWOOD APARTMENTS On the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center are the newly completed Wedgewood Apartments, where you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electrie living.
Make ail appointment today to see these apartments about which the whole town is talking.
Call PA 9-5860 Monday through Friday. ocifi t 1 REAL ESTATE WEST SIDE EXCLUSIVE Young CAPE in immaculate condition.
First floor features fircplaced living room, full dining room, modern kitchen, paneled den, large bedroom and ceramic-tile hath.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers Gertrude H Murphy, PA 9-1310 Richard H Murphy, PA 9-6213 Marlon R Fcrriman, PA 9-4136 Charles T McCarthy, PA 9-5972 Florence M Salyer, PA 9-1966 James F Quine, PA 9-4750 Halp make Winchester a spotless town.
Uiljanksgiuing Hag (Smtiugs From The Office of Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis Barbara DeCamp Jean Gibb BR 2-3499 PA 9-0373 PA 9-3808 HORACE FORD — Realtor PA 9-58«7 WINCHESTER Distinctive custom-built Garrison Colonial in quiet, desirable, executive location.
Features of this beautiful 10-yearold home include large living room, den, modern kitchen, screened porch, patio, master bedroom with dressing room, two twin bedrooms, 2*6 baths.
PA 9-326S PA 9-2790 — PA 9-5550 RENTALS Large modern Split Level with five bedrooms, two baths.
There are four bedrooms on the second floor, one bedroom on the third, and two baths.
This is a fine home, fairly priced at $31,900, and we invite your inspection by appointment.
Medford Laundromat, and Appliance Service 81 High St., Medford, EX 9-9773 BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES PAINT STORES Expanding National Paint Manufacturer HAS Dealer Franchise Available in Area. 12 to 36 Months Financing Merchandising Demonstrations Promotions National and Local Advertising Arranged.
Winchester P A 9-5.169 novifi-tf James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 nu* 12tt LOST AND FOUND COST A ti| >f ”Mutrh.’’ rer cut. atmvoi Howard oflVi the *nmo (’nil I’ A 1 dnrhLOST November 11. lonp hair ahiifid, brown nnd black.
Upstairs. large mast bedroom, *2 twin-siznl bedrooms, nursery and tiled hath.
Call PA PIANOS FLOORS FLOORS New Floors Laid Old Ones Resurfaced Floors Waxed and Polished CHARLES F MERENDA CO., INC Tel.
Shelvador refrigerator, good running condition, needi minor repairs, so we bought a new one.
FOR SALE — Trains for Christmas, American Flyer layout, including 7 engines, perfect condition.
FOR RENT FOR RENT — Attractive room and kitchenette. one minute from center.
Call PA 9-0898. nov28-2t FOR RENT — Two rooms, private bath, kitchen privileges, separate entrance.
FOR RENT — Professional office space with parking on grounds, central location.
Call WElls 3-2334. eop21-tf FOR RENT — Fiveroom apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments. $190 up.
Call PA 9-5860. oct6-tf MASON W0RI DAVID J SPERO & SON BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE MASONS Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls Brick Flower Boxes New and Repair Work Satisfaction Guaranteed Fro® Estimates Ml 8-2751 octl9-8t calls answered promptly.
Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. *pr27-tf WANTED WANTED Antiques — Buou-Bruc China, Clus8, Furniture, etc.
Call Stoneham.8-1939 JOHN J FOLEY junl-tf WANTED WANTED — Boy's bike in good condition, 24 inch.
HELP WANTED— Woman for general cleaning and ironing on Wednesday and Thursday, 9:30 5:00.
WANTED — Ry local lirm girl with two or three years secretarial experience.
Naturally, the Post Office De 7 part me nt plans to expand its facilities and to provide extra help during the Christmas rush, hut in the final analysis, if you’ll follow these three simple rules, you can be certain not to disappoint friends and loved ones on Christmas Day.
Be sure they are addressed dearly and correctly, and mail all your gifts and cards early.
The Postmaster said further, “I hate to see folks take chances on mailing poorly wrapped packages.
The limits on size and weight of packages varies, depending on where you mail your package from.
As an extra precaution against loss, Postmaster Gilgun advised placing both your return address and the recipients address inside the carton or package before it is wrapped.
If you use Christmas stickers or seals, put them on the back of your Christmas cards and packages so that they will not conflict with the address on the front.
Make sure that correct postage is firmly affixed to each card and package.
When mailing gifts, it's a good idea to place a piece of transparent cellophane tape over the address portion of the label to prevent defacing it in transit.
And always be sure, of course, to include the recipients full name, street address, city, zone and state.
Because the entire Christmas mailing period is primarily a battle against time, “Do it now"" is the slogan from here on in.
Don't put off your Christmas mailings while you still have ample time because this means that dreaded pileups will occur at the Post Office, causing unavoidable slowdowns in deliveries as the holiday approaches.
The Postmaster asks the cooperation of all business firms to delay mailing circulars and catalogs until after December 25, to keep the mails clear for the Christmas push.
The Postmaster said he is most appreciative of the interest and cooperation shown by the mailing public so far, and reminds us that all mail going long distances should be sent by December 10.
Christ mas packages for local delivery should be mailed not later than December 15, and be sure to mail your Christmas cards for nearby destinations at least a week before Christmas.
Jane Day of the Family Service Association of (Boston, an agency which exemplifies the role of the Good Samaritan every day of the year.
It is one of many Family Service Associations throughout the Greater Boston area which share in the current United Fund drive.
Day, a wise and warm person whose title is Director of Central Intake Counselling.
Those who can well afford it pay a maximum of $15 a week for counselling.
Some pay part of this, and many pay nothing at all but get unstinting help in many areas and for as long as the need arises, including financial Jielp in some cases.
One of the valuable services of this organization is the Home maker Service, which provides for “mother substitutes,” capable and understanding women who for a temporary period, when a mother is hospitalized or incapacitated take over the care of children and the normal household routine.
These women are trained under qualified social workers who inter view the family, visit the home and assign a suitable . homemaker for the particular family.
They work an eight-hour day and their sal aries are paid by the association which charges the clients only what they can afford to pay.
Anyone may telephone for an appointment or may simply walk in off the street.
WANTED — Old coins, private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, also top price for other coins.
TeL WElls 81947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There a way out.
Tel. b^Ormundy 5-4520. jun22-ti DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangt*ments through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling your Authoriaud Travel Agent Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out whb you.
New Sales Push UBS Fund Over $5,000,000 UBS Fund of Canada, Ltd., the direct-by-mail mutual fund which, was launched just a year ago, reported that its net assets had ris en above $5,000,000 and that Net Asset Value per share had risen over 14% since early January.
The Fund made its first investments at that time with proceeds from the nitial offering.
Total net assets on November 14 were $5,005,743, up from $3,486,588 on December 31, 1960, the end of the initial offering period.
The inrease was accounted for by strength in the Canadian market and by new sales of over $1. million thus far in 1961, H Nelson, Conant, the Fund’s president, dis closed today.
Net Asset Value per share on, November 14 was $10.88, up 14.5% from $9.51 at the year-end.
The Fund’s shares were first offered in, mid-November 1960 at a price of $10, including a sales charge of 4.9% of the Offering Price.
UBS Fund of Canada shares were sold by means of double-page prospectus ads in major U S. newspapers and by a substantial direct mail campaign.
This is believed to be the first distribution of its kind in the history of the mutual fund industry.
Thus far UBS Fund has more than 2,500 shareholders from 45 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Canal Zone, the Virgin Islands und 15 foreign countries.
WORK WANTED WORK WANTED — Don’t breuk your ba<k shoveling snow, call Gordon ami David Stuck wood for prompt efficient servlcu around Kudid Avenue vicinity.
Public Health Service, gives the latest official figures for every section of the country.
What it shows, for one thing is that lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death among American men.
The num ber of m^Ie deaths has increased six-fold in the past 20 years.
The controversy continues to rage, with medical authorities, torn between statistical and clinical proof, unable to agree as to where the responsibility lies.
However, as to the mortality from lung cancer, there is no disputing the figures.
The official report shows that there were 32 deaths among residents of Winchester from all types of cancer in the year ending January, 1960.
Lung cancer, however, was responsible for only one, or 3. percent of them.
Nationally, it accounted for 14. percent of the total and, in the State of Massachusetts, for 13. percent.
Although the lung cancer toll in the United States is small when viewed in the light of the 260,047 lives taken in the year by cancer as a whole, the fact that it is growing is causing concern.
Not everyone in the scientific field is impressed with the evidence that indicates cigarette smoking is the chief cause of lung cancer.
In proportion to population, lung cancer mortality in Winchester was found to be below average.
In the United States as a whole, the rate was 20. per 100,000 and, in the State of Massachusetts, 23.9.
Dress children in moderately warm, but no very heavy, clothing, with hands and feet well covered.
Eat a good diet, hut don’t use this as an excuse for eating too much fattening food.
Should you become badly chilled, don’t rub snow or ice on frostbitten fingers or toes.
Get inside as quickly as possible and get into a warm, not hot, tub of water.
The symptoms are numbness, tingling, a sensation of cold and ashen color in the affected part.
And if you have an illness causing poor circulation of the blood, be doubly careful to avoid exposure to cold.
Undue exposure to cold, places severe burdens on the circulatory system.
It can cost you a finger or toe, or in the case of prolonged, unprotected chilling, it can cause death.
Humans are warm-blooded animals and ordinarily conserve their body heat by cutting down the surface exposed to the air.
In addition, when your body is chilled, you start shivering; this gives your muscles involuntary exercise and helps warm them.
If you’re still cold, small blood vessels close down all over your body surface, with their blood-flow rate cut to as little as one fifth of normal.
Your body is using your skin literally as a blanket, to conserve heat internally.
At the same time, your heart beats faster and your blood pressure rises, all in the effort to mobilize your internal sources of warmth against the external danger.
This is another case where the ounce of prevention is worth the pound of cure.
WINCHESTER SAVINGS BANK Ralph W\ Hatch, Treasurer. nov23-3t Autobridge, the gume that lets you play bridge any time by yourself and have world champions as partners.
Call ns for free estimates at PA 9-4179 All work guaranteed C OMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
If you desire to object thereto, you or your attorney should Hie a written appearance in Haiti Court at Cambridge within twenty-one (lays from the eighth day of January 1962, the return day of thin itation.
To nil persona intorrated in the estate of FRANCIS MEREDITH COOPER also known h« F MEREDITH COOPER late of Winchester in said County, deceaaed.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARGARET LOUISE COOPER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that .she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a aurety on her bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of .said Court, this seventh day of November 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. novl6-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
To all person* interested in the estate of MABELLE H LORD late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The executors of the will of said MABELLE H LORD have presented to said Court for allowance their first account.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this thirtieth day of October 1961.
A petition has been presented to aaid Court for probate a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by PERCY BUGBEE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed administrator with the will annexed of said estate, without giving a surety on hia bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of November 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. novl6-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of DANIEL C DENNETT lute of Winchester In said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceaaed by Doston Safe Deposit and Trust Company of Boston in the County of Suffolk praying that it be appointed executor thereof without giving u aurety on its bond.
If you desire to txbject thereto you or your attorney should tile a written up pearunce in said Court at Cambridge beiore to o’clock in the foreneon on the fifth day of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
To ull persons interested in the estate of MARY AGNES McCORMACK lute of Winh ester in suid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to suid Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the lust will of said leceused by ROBERT MICHAEL McCOItM ACK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed xecutor thereof without giving u surety on his bond.
Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this sixteenth duy of November 1961 Johu V llui s ey.
To ull persons interested in the trust estate under the will of MABELLE H LORD lute of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of LOUISE FRANCES EBKRLK nnd others.
The tTUSteea of suid estate have presented to suid Court for nllowuuco their first to third accounts, inclusive.
IX you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written uppearnce in suid Court & Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twenty fourth day of November 1961, the return day of this citation.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this thirteenth day of October 1961.
Make ends meet more easily with » . . the low-cost personal checking account service that helps make budgets behave.
School Internationally Speaking The primary thrust of the current campaign for fallout shelters is to convince the American people that the war which we are told is unthinkable can actually he prepared for and survived by a plan which is as normal and prudent as life insurance.
If tension is a contributing factor to heart disease, then no wonder it’s so prevalent.
Even a successful ban on nuclear testing would leave the world burdened with nuclear stockpiles.
Moral goodness may be its own reward, but it’s no protection from the actions of immoral people.
There are, for example, the rights of others to self-government and the free exchange of ideas.
Finast Ticket Offer First National Stores and Boston Garden have announced renewal of the ticket ,offer providing a discount price on tickets for 50 events during the current season.
Vouchers may be presented in person or mailed to the Boston Garden ticket office.
List of events in the offer will be displayed in the stores, as well as on envelopes issued by First National for saving the green tapes.
Areas served by these divisions include Eastern Massachusetts ; and all of Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont.
Here is an American word (if I we may call it that) that is known and understood in nearly every country, in the world.
In fact, it has become so thoroughly imbedded in our daily speaking vocabulary that some of us wouldn’t know how to carry on a conversation without it.
Of course, it’s strictly slang, or at best a colloquialism, and not a word of any degree of literary repute.
Club that supported Martin Van Buren in his candidacy for President of the United States.
K.,” we are told, was their motto to go ahead and raid the headquarters of the opposition.
Special Agent Thomas F McLaughlin. recalled an incident from his boyi hood in Maine.
When he was twelve he was selected by the town fathers to deliver Lincoln’s Gettys* burg address at the annual Memorial Day exercises.
Tidbits You only have two things to worry about one, that things will never get back to normal; two, that they already have.
The trouble with life is that by the time you know your way around, you usually don’t feel like going anywhere.
Third Generation Above my sleeping grandchild’s crib I linger, Finding her year-old-beauty irresistible.
It’s there and it’s extraordinarily active, but the dog is not aware of it and never gives it a thought.
If the dog knew it had a tail, it might be able to do something useful with it.
PA.9-0694 AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNERS PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 1 THOMPSON STREET Rea.
ANYWHERE IN CY e tHIT WINCHESTER t* 3-UI# O BRIEN S LIQUOR MART 2153 Mystic Valley Parkway Medford, Mass.
When you bury your head in the sand, you have left sticking out something that is very vulnerable.
Two cockroaches lunched in a dirty old sewer and excitedly discussed the spotless, glistening new restaurant in the neighborhood from which they had been ejected.
It’s so clean-” “Please,” said the other in disgust, nibbling on a moldy roll.
Leo L Beranek of 7 Ledgewood Road has been appointed a membership chairman for the gigantic subscription membership campaign for the Opera Group of Boston, whose goal it is to enroll more that 13,000 opera lovers in the Greater Boston area for the winter opera season.
Known as “Operation Opera,” the intensive subscription' campaign will officially be launched on December 1, preceded by a huge pre-campaign supper r^lly on November 30.
Beranek is part of an army of dedicated volunteers who are tirelessly working to make the opera season a success.
The Opera Group, led by its founder and present artistic director, Miss Sarah Caldwell, has undertaken an ambitious program.
Massanet’s “Manon,” January 10 and 12; Wagner’s “Die Meistersinger,” March 14 and 16; and Verdi’s “Rigoletto,” March 28 and 30.
All the Opera Group’s performances will be held at the Donnelly Memorial Theater.
New Insurance Firm Opens In Woburn The Artec Insurance Agency of Chelsea opened a new office in Woburn on November 15th, to serve car owners in Woburn and the surrounding communities.
The office is staffed with officers and personnel from Artec’s home office at 22 Everett Avenue, Chelsea, bringing their many years of experience in the car insurance field to the new location.
For the extra convenience of its customers, the new Woburn office will be open evenings and Saturdays.
School on Police Administration last week in the Main Conference Room of the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company.
Division, the school was conducted by Special Agent Thomas F McLaughlin of the Boston F.B.I. office in cooperation with the Committee on Law Enforcement Education of the New England Association of Chiefs of Police.
The school has recently launched a $370,000 fund-raising drive which will provide a group of new buildings to be located on the Tufts campus.
New Dwelling: 31 Robinhood Road Alterations : 3 Orient Street William B MacDonald Building Commissioner An unusual and inexpensive gift.
Footwear for men, women and children since 1866 Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m.
Every one of these fine used cars has been reconditioned by our factory-trained mechanics.
I was up the pole and let the hot lead fall on Spikeright down his neck.
No costly service policies, no annual furnace cleaning bills, no expensive storage equipment, no motor operating cost necessary.
Prove to yourself, Gas Heat doesn’t cost Jr j The sooner you obtain your medicine, the sooner you will enjoy its health restoring benefits.
Our pharmacists, stocks and laboratory are always ready to give you instant service.
Hit the “red or dead” slogan as a defeatist form of “psycho-surrender,” and said these were not the only alternatives open to adult Americans.
This is not just the slick slogan it sounds like,” the Congressman added.
MORSE, continued on page 7 Onc-lfonr Session Sign Warrants On Vinson-Owen School Bills Following the approval of Herman Dine, state director of accounts, and Town Accountant James J Costello, the selectmen signed warrants totalling $11,046.75 Monday night in payment of amounts judged due to the Keystone Construction Co. and Archi tect Donaldson Ray MacMullin for the Vinson-Owen School.
The sum of $2,937.84 in still contested bills is under investiga tion by the town accountant.
The still-contested items concern stone under the water main and swamp work.
Of the $11,046.75 in signed vouchers, $10,220.33 was authorized for payment to the Keystone Co., the remainder to the archij tect, at 8 per cent. a new laboratory in the hospital that will run such special tests as radioactive iodine intake.
While in Seattle he also attended the annual convention of the College of American Pathologists and the American Society of Clinical Pathologists.
Donald Nickerson, former pathologist of the New England Sanitarium and Hospital installed as president of the College of American Pathologists.
Tyler, a former resident of Taunton, graduated from Atlantic Union College and received his M.D. degree from the College of Medical Evangelists in Loma Linda, California.
He interned at the Porter Sanitarium and Hospital in Denver, Colorado, and completed his residency in pathology in Denver, Colorado, and Salem, Mass.
Tyler set up private practice in the field of pathology at the New England Sanitarium and Hospital and is also director of the clinical laboratory.
Tyler is working in cooperation with Atlantic Union College to establish a laboratory school at the sanitarium.
The school will be completely accredited and classes will begin as soon as the necessary details can be worked out.
HI tie Bird Brenda Cantillon, router, makes an advance sale of candy to Governor Volpo for the annual eandv sale of the Camp Fire Girls which opens tomorrow, December 1.
The meeting, which began shortly after 7:15m., was over shortly after 8:45.
Moderator Harrison Chadwick was unable to preside over the session because of illness, and was replaced for the occasion by Mr Philip Wadsworth of 66 Oxford Street, who once served the Town as Moderator.
The Winchester School Committee has decided that the best interim policy in the event of nuclear attack, pending clarification of overall town policy, is to dismiss pupils and close the schools.
The Committee has also voted to authorize the Superintendent to close the schools in the event of imminent attack, and to instruct the Superintendent to notify parents of school children as to procedures to he followed.
A., the Massachusetts Medical Society, the American Society of Clinical Pathologists, the College of American Pathologists and the American Association of Blood Banks.
In addition, the School Committee has voted to suggest to the Board of Selectmen that all school buildings be included in any survey of Town buildings which the Town Civil Defense agency might make to determine their possible use as shelters for the general public.
The Committee announces that parents of school children will receive direct mail notice of the foregoing decisions.
Last month, the committee heard discussion on the subject by members of the parents’ Community School Association.
Subsequently one of its members presented a special report on material obtained, as indicated above, from the offices of the Corps of Engineers, United States Army and the Office of Civil Defense in the Department of Defense.
Whether you re looking for tea cups, toys, or topcoats to put in C hristmas gift packages, there is no real need for you to leave W inchester to get them.
In its own dignified suburban way, Winchester has become a shopping center in its own right with none of the seasonal traffic hazards and crushing rush hours.
Three Plays Tomorrow A pre-Christmas treat is in store for Winchester youngsters and parents, too, as the Winchester Community School Association | presents its annual childrens play on Friday, December 1 at 3:45 m. at the W inchester High School Auditorium.
Carlene Samoiloff’s Children’s Theatre School has been working enthusiastically and diligently to bring these classic stories to life and they have created and painted the scenery to be used in this production.
This versatility in combining the arts fulfills one of the aims of the Winchester Community School Association as they present “live” theatre for children annually.
The largest portion of the funds received from the sale of tickets for this performance will go to the Winchester Scholarship Fund.
Cast For Ht‘idi Heidi Mary Wadsworth Grandfather Almuncle Michael Fiore Goat Peter Brian MacDonald Barbel Adena Krasnow Dete Cornelia Taggart The Grandmother Barbara Light Brigette Leslie Buchanaan Sebastian Stephen Edgell Mrs.
Seseman Donal Murphy THEATRE, continued on page 3 The appropriation secured by the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee was $4,658 less than the maximum of $31,992 the Building Committee thought it would ask for in figures published in last week’s Star.
In last week’s summary of its appropriation, the committee estimated the maximum cost of the fence at $8,500.
The Building Committee’s position was set forth at the town meeting by Mr Louis Wadsworth.
With a balance of $13.14tf in its account, Mr Wadsworth explained, the committee’s appropriation summary fell into three categories, $3,649 in construction items committed, leaving a balance on hand of $9,499.
This balance on hand, in turn, was applied to $18,445 for uncommitted additional expenditures to complete the project, including the Well Field fence, deferred school equipment and furniture, and furniture for administrative offices, leaving a balance needed of $8,946.
In addition, the committee asked for $16,888 for additional expenditures found desirable, including $9,000 for construction items, architect’s fees of $666, and $7,222 for school furniture and equipment.
This left a balance needed of $25,834. i i i In addition, Mr Wadsworth told town meeting, the committee was seeking a $5,000 contingency fund.
This item, reduced by a credit of $3,500 transferred from an earlier ippropriation of the same amount I voted to conduct a study of the I Wadleigh School in terms of pos• sible use for administrative school Ribicoff of j offi ( . es> made a total appropriation Town Meeting Echoes It seemed natural enough to see Mr Wadsworth on the Moderator’s rostrum, as he held this important office not too many years ago.
I le asked the indulgence of the meeting in case anything wonky came before the meeting, but he need not have worried.
No meeting could have gone much smoother, and wouldn't it lx* nice if we could transact all town business with equal dispatch.
It was a fairly expensive meeting for the short time it took, but then, schools do cost money.
When Mr Saltmarsh called for nominations to fill the post of Moderator in the absence of Mr Chadwick, who was ill, it was the Star’s snap judgment that Mr Cullen was the first upon his feet.
It was only natural, however, that Mr Saltmarsh should have spotted first his colleague Mr Ives.
Without in the least questioning Mr Ives’ choice of Mr Wadsworth, we would have liked to know whom Mr Cullen had in mind.
Following passage of enabling legislation by Congress, the Bureau of the Budget appropriated $300,000 for the further equipping and staffing of this laboratory.
Public Health Service and not as before, in conjunction with the atomic Energy Commission. it is estimated that the preparation of the plant’s new equipment will take several months, according to the Congressional Information Bureau.
Davy’s .loe llellino” You shouldn’t shop in Winchester just out of charity for local merchants, although charity, is one of the major teachings of the Christmas message.
You should shop in Winchester, above all, to get the finest possible products with a minimum of fuss, and because the shops now in Winchester through wise supplies; a toy shop; a children’s clothing shop; two jewelry stores; and a camera shop.
We have, in addition, two distinguished super-markets with an amazing stock of holiday delicacies; two Oriental rug showrooms; a thrift shop run for community purposes; an antique store; an applibuying practices are at their peak ance store; a travel agency; a real in quality and fashion Take a stroll through the Centre and see what we mean.
We have a top quality sport shop; two first-rate men’s clothing stores; several women’s lingerie shops, clothing stores, and dress shops; a number of really fine shoe stores on all budget levels; several stores selling a full line of cosmetics; at least two excellent gift stores selling ceramics, silverware, even lamps; a shop selling knitting ly first-class book store that also sells art and gift wrapping supplies, two top-notch stationery stores ; a news store with a fine selection of tobaccos and what-all; four florists, a department store, and a real nice five and ten.
We have two fine bakeries, two or three hardware stores, five drug stores; a candy and ice cream store, a special shop devoted to Christmas card gift wrapping, and gifts; a number of restaurants in which to have a bite while shopping; a shop specializing in eye glasses ground on the spot.
What we’re getting at, of course, is that there is no reason to leave Town to shop for any Christmas gift you may have in mind even if this is an automobile, a phonograph, a barrel of roses, a kiddie cart, or a year’s supply of Castile soap.
And, after all. you do have the satisfaction of doing business with people you know and trust.
Moreover, you have whatever pleasure there is in putting a little more take advantage of federal aid amounting to approximately 30 cents on the dollar for expenditures incurred during time of construction. i 1 i School Committeeman Austin Broadhurst supported the Building Committee’s request, as did the Selectmen and the Finance Committee.
Mr Cullen asked whether the athletic field at the school would be as large as originally estimated and Mr Wadsworth explained that it would be.
He said the School Committee, under the terms of a previous town meeting vote, was responsible for paying for the Well Field fence, not the School Building Committee.
Mr Hewis said that on all items but the furnishing' and equipment of the school the Building Committee had actually exceeded its appropriation, and that they were now coming to town meeting to get more money for these things, as well.
The Star has seldom heard a more masterly choice of words than that used by Mr Broadhurst to describe the need for new ceilings in the boys’ toilets.
And if he intended to convey the impression that the kids had raised hob with the original issues, he was right. 1 i i Mr Wadsworth’s presentation of the reason for the school building [ committee’s need for more money was temperate and commendably brief, surprisingly so in view of the supporting material he carried with him to the “mike.” i i i Mr Cullen wanted to know about the size of the playground, and was assured by Mr Wadsworth that the present discrepancy in size is the contractor’s responsibility and will be remedied at no expense to the town.
It might be well to have some one check the surface of the field for suitability.
The Star has been told it leaves much to be desired. i i 1 Mr Hewis didn’t think the school building committee deserved any particular credit for coming to the town for more money, in view of the encumbrance system now in use in town.
Be also felt the committee should not be paying for the fence around the Well Field and served vigorous notice that McCall School pupils aren’t going to be satisfied with used typewriters from the high school while the Lynch pupils get brand new ones, with or without the state paying 30 per cent of the cost. i i i Mr Carruthers did not sec eye to eye with Mr Hewis on the job the school building committee has done, feeling that when a committee has come up with a more-thanmillion dollar school needing only two per cent additional funds they have done well.
The appointment also makes him a Vice Consul and a Secretary in the Diplomatic Service.
Born in Weymouth in 1936, Mr Becker graduated from the Winchester High School in 1954.
Prior to joining the Department in 1961, Mr Becker served in the United States Army from 1958 to 1961 as a translator.
Mr Becker is presently attending the Foreign Service Institute in Arlington, Virginia in preparation for his overseas assignment.
The hook, which cover* Joe A life from childhood days in Winchester to hi> spectacular performance on the Navy team, was written by Winchester** Dr. and Mrs.
Banmc and is being distributed nationally after receiving very favorable reviews.
Ritirim A Sorokiit of S ( lift Street, founder of the Harvard Sociology Department and author of 30 hooks on sociology' and socio-political subjects, has been named to the advsiory council of the Institute of European Studies.
The Institute is a non-profit organization that conducts foreign study programs for American college students.
Sorokin’s principal task on the council will be to advise the institute on matters pertaining to courses, standards and the over-all objectives of existing and projected overseas programs.
What is perhaps his best known work, a pioneer study of its kind, “Crisis of Our Age,” has been translated into German, Dutch, Spanish, Norse, Japunese, Portuguese, and Czech, j Dr.
Sorokin is also author of “Social Mobility,” “Contemporary Sociological Theories,” “Russia and the United States,” “Sociology of Revolution,” “Social Philosophies of an Ago of Crisis,” and “Reconstruction of Humanity” among many others.
Most of these works have been translated into two or more foreign languages.
In addition to being the founder, first, professor and first chairman of Harvard’s Department of Sociology, Dr.
Sorokin is the director of the Harvard Research Center in Creative Altruism.
An honorary member of several European and American academies of arts and sciences, Dr.
Sorokin’s works are among the most frequently translated sociological treatises in the world and exert a continuing and growing influence throughout the world.
L The Winchester Police Athletic League wishes to announce registration for basketball this week ami next. week.
Registration for both the junior and senior leagues will take place at the police station from 3:00m. to 4 >30m. ami from 6:30m. to 9:00m. every afternoon and evening.
Every youngster that wishes to piny basketball in the league must tile an application.
John Elliott, and his co-workers have arranged a wonderful program for the basketball season.
Those boys who are between the ages of thirteen and fourteen will join the junior league, and those between fourteen and fifteen wij) join the senior league.
Every youngster who joins the leauge will he provided with a uniform and piaced with a team.
Tuesday evenings will be for juniors and Wednesday evenings for seniors.
The league this year has been approached by many volunteers for coaching and refereeing.
These people spend part of their leisure hours one evening a week with these youngsters.
Without these volunteers the league could not provide the appropriate basketball recreation it has for many years.
Those youngsters that join the Howling League will be charged a much smaller amount to bowl than if he or she howled privately.
This could only he done with the tremendous volunteer help of Strike Lanes.
Registration will he taken at the Police Station or at Strike Lanes at 10:00m. on Saturday.
Registration at the Police Station will be the same hours us basketball registration.
Seek Reduction In Tipsy Drivers National Safety Council reports that Massachusetts is in a favorable position in relation to traffic fatalities compared with the other states as we enter the holiday season.
In spite of our favorable position, enforcement officials are fearful as they look at our record of last December when we killed sixty one and injured thousands in highway traffic accidents.
It is a matter of record that during this holiday season, more than one half the drivers involved in traffic accidents had been drinking.
Before the Parkway was put through it is quite likely that Mystic Avenue extended right down to the bridge.
After the construction of the Parkway there was a short driveway from it to the bridge.
A standpipe to fill the old watering-carts on the Parkway stood at the entrance of the drive.
Painted red, the old wooden bridge stood just south of an island that split the river and showed the remains of granite masonry at its northern end.
Story had it that this masonry was the foundation of a bridge that crossed the river, giving access to a summer house on the island that was a part of a big estate in what is now Rangeley.
The wooden bridge was used by commuters from the side hill to reach the old Mystic Station which preceded Wedgemere, though it was not located just where Wedgemere was built.
The bridge was torn down and replaced with a longer structure located just north of the red bridge, that gave access to old Manchester Field.
This bridge that also spanned an island, just north of the one near Mystic Avenue, was removed when the river was moved in connection wtih the building of the present Manchester Field.
NEW CAR L HAGGERTY, Ollie Jean’s Scalp Clinic FOR MEN SPECIALIZING IN IIAIR AND SCALP TREATMENTS Monday Tuesday Thursday Friday 4:30 to 8:30m.
The New England Shopping (’enter on Route | I in Saugus, a “regional’’ or kingsize shopping center in real estate I parlance, is the product of years of creative planning, negotiating, financing, engineering and construction.
Convinced that the urea was natural, Milton (J. and Alan T Green conceived the plan and mobilized the economic resources and the faith it took to proceed from idea to reality.
Their father Isadore, and two brothers Benjamin and Frank, started one of the early 5 and 10c chains.
By 1929 their chain consisted of 50 stores throughout New England and the East.
During this year the Green Stores merged with McLellan Stores and the Green brothers devoted their interest to the real es tate operations of chain store commercial properties.
Milton ami Alan Green entered the business in 1937 and 1950 respectively and now are the two active members of the firm.
Both Alan and Milton graduated from Harvard College and Harvard Graduate School of Business administration where they were outstanding athletes.
Milton cap tained Harvard Track Team and held the intercollegiate and world record in the high hurdles.
During World War II, Alan served in the Submarine Service while Milton was an Air Combat Intelligence officer in Naval Aviation.
They also have diversified and active interests in middle income apartment homes as well as urban and suburban commercial properties.
The year 1954 brought the germ of the New England Shopping Center concept.
Having decided that the time and place were right, the Green brothers negotiated with the Town of Saugus for land that then comprised the Town Farm.
Meanwhile, experts in the field from Harvard Business School, were making comprehensive studies of traffic, population, economic growth, ease of access, labor pool, travel time, retail facilities and all of the varied factors that can mean success or failure for such a venture.
The area was determined to he the most densely populated site of its kind in the entire country.
Ease of access from as far away as ten miles and more was quick and simple.
The entire area I was thriving* Conditions were per] feet for the establishment of a vast regional shopping center with much more than simple local or neighborhood appeal.
The land was purchased in 1955 and the Greens started working immediately.
Architectural plans were discussed with many of the leading architects of the nation, the Greens conveying their own ideas and concepts as to design features they wished to incorporate.
In this center they are located at the very center of the shopping area around a courtyard containing a children’s play area and space for fashion shows, art shows, and seasonal promotions.
Special consideration has also been given to the 16 foot wide walkways around the crescent accentuated by landscaped garden areas, planters, and patterns of brick and concrete.
These walkways provide a continuous weather-protected arcade leading to all stores entrances and thence from the courtyard to the parking facilities in the rear.
Sears Roebuck’s largest store in New England, Baker Shoes, Dorothy Muriel’s and Brigham’s, Endicott-Johnson Shoes, W T Grant, Household Finance Corp., Kennedy Butter and Egg Stores, National Shoes.
Woolworth, Antoine’s Beauty Salon, Elm Farm, Emric’s Luncheonette, Fanny Farmer Candy Shops, Field’s Hosiery Shops, Jay’s j Gift Store, Liggett Drug Co., Lud wig Cleaners, Lynn Five Cent Savj ings Bank, Maytag Launderette, New England Shopping Center Barber Shop, Radio Shack Corp., Rooks Inc., Saugus Trust Co., i Singer Sewing Machine Co., Sher1 win-Williams Paint Co., Young’s Package Store, Zenon Jewelry,’ Lord Greger Men’s Shops, and a medical center.
Six Days New England Shopping Center is open Monday through and including Saturday from 9:30 in the morning to 9:30 in the evening.
With service the watchword, center merchants will follow the trend to more evening hours as a convenience to customers.
Shopping Center Immense expanses of parking area are an outstanding feature at New England Shopping Center.
Parking for over 3500 cars in parking areas to the front, both sides, anil to the rear of the center make it easy for the shopper to park close to the store he intends to visit first.
Drivers parking cars in the wide lot directly at the center’s rear will find easy access to the canopied j walks in front of the center j through the diamond-shaped eourtI yard area in the middle of the I center.
Bus Service Direct to Center Bus stops right in New England f Shopping Center are an additional convenience for the shopper.
The Saugus Transit Company’s modern buses leave every halfhour on the half-hour and hour from Saugus Center and proceed to Cliftondale and thence via Main and Central Streets to New England Shopping Center.
The same company runs buses from Malden Square along Route I directly to the* center.
Direct bus transportation to the center will be available from both Malden and Saugus starting at 0:30m. through 9:30m. six days a week.
Seven years of faith and perseverance on the part of Alan and Milton Green have finally culminated in the full realizatioh of what was once only a glimmer of imagination — a great shopping center contributing materially to the economic growth of the entire Greater Boston and north-ofBoston community.
Paul F Stoneman started auctioning the many and varied articles donated by member for the benefit of the Winchester Hospital Building Fund.
Kingman P Cass, asSccne II The Almuncle tain Hut Scene II T The Mountain Goat.
Peter’s Grandmotht ing Scene IV tain Hut Scene V where Heidi is living in Frankfurt in the city Scene VI Back to Almuncle’s House in the Mountains.
Finale Procession, All sing the lonely goatherd’s song from “Sound of Music” Curtain Audience join in this song, please.
Cast for Midsummer Night’s Dream Geoffrey Brackett Rebecca Brackett Kristen Beard Ronald Marcy Kathy Dale The Almunele’s Moun Scholarship Foundation The annual meeting of the Winchester Scholarship Foundation will be held Monday night, December 4th, at 8:00m. in the Speech Arts Room at the Winchester High School.
SPECIAL I960 HILLMAN 4-Door STATION WAGON Committee called a meeting of those interested in forming a group to study these subjects.
John B Wills were appointed to plan a first meeting on February 6, 1962 at 10m. at the home of Mrs.
Ralph R Meigs Puck 1st Fairy 2nd Fairy King Oberon Queen Titania 3rd Fairy Cara McCarthy Peaseblossom 4th Fairy Marla Johnis Moth CHILDREN’S THEATER SCHOOL CAST rel nearses a scene Irom Kohmsonrusoe, one three plays they will present at Winchester High School Auditorium.
Crusoe and Friday Captain Warbeck and his wife, Cornelia, from tin* mutineers.
I he Friday, December forinanee, at 3:4.*)m.. is under the sponsorship of the Community School Association, day, December 2. at 2:00m., a benefit performance will be given for WGBH-Channel 2 to right.
Will Atkins, Richard Grandficld; Sandy McNutt, Billie Chase; Robinson Crusoe, 1 Marcy; Cornelia, Karen Kimball; Captain Tom Warbeck, Michael Fiore; Friday, Henry ich.
JAMES F QUINE Miss Slagle was given in marriage by her father, and bad as her only attendant her sister, Miss Bonnie Slagle of Arlington.
The bride wore a gown of white silk peau de soie fashioned with a scoop neck, three quarter length tight sleeves and a full skirt extending into a chapel train.
Audience join in this song, please. ano. read her excellent secretary’s report, various announcements were made.
Everett Littlefield said that the Literature Group would meet at the home of Mrs.
Blanche Barnard will give a paper on “American Poetry of the Civil War,” and Mrs.
The next meeting will be “PresiChristmas Greefns Radio-Heater Automatic Transmission The fragrance of pine, clusters of cones and berries, glitter of tinsel and ribbon all these are part of our Christmas scene, and when the doors of the Baptist Church Hall open at 10m. next Wednesday, December 6, the beauty of the holiday season will be withus again.
For here again the Winchester Home and Garden Club is holding it’s annual Christmas Greens Sale.
This has become a traditional event and is regarded as one of the finest of its kind in our area.
Here everything imaginable in the way of Christmas decorations will he displayed.
It is the ideal place to get started on holiday decorating, for with the wealth of ideas suggested by tlie lovely things exhibited, there will surely be something appealing that seems “just the thing” to make our hmnes gay and beautiful for the holidays.
The natural place to begin home decorating is, of course the front entrance.
A musical program, featuring Phylis Howes (soprano) and Bob Phillips will be presented.
John G Hayward, 8th District Director, wearing an attractive corsage made by Mrs.
She also urged the attendance at the Christmas Institute in Boston on Thursday, December ally on the sale know that the Yuletide Spirit is very contagious and extend an invitation to everyone to come and catch that “Merry Christmas” feeling.
Lecture {eliffious Small Enough to Know You ami Larg The Winchester Art Association is fortunate in having secured Celia Hubbard, a dynamic young artist, former magazine art director, and currently the director of Boston’s Botolph Group as the lecturer at next Tuesday’s meeting, December 5, on the general subject of Contemporary Religious Art.
While this lecture Arlington, brother of John S Morgan, Jr. an< Ives, both of Winchester aiiges Mrs.
Bowes introduced Mr Joseph Howard, third generation of the well-known Florists, Inc., of Somerville, who quickly and expertly made arrangements with fresh flowers.
He then divided a dozen red roses, showing that they could be enjoyed instead of vase.
The new owner will take over the pharmacy as of December 2L Purtle’s Pharmacy was established in the early twenties as Pratt’s Pharmacy.
Celia Hubbard's work in the field I of liturgical and religious art is unique.
She has drawn together artists and craftsmen who are available for work on religious subjects, and brought to them a market, whether clergy or general public.
Her services are not limited to Catholics, although by the very nature of the Catholic Church, art plays a greater part in its religious services than in some others.
The gallery on Newbury Street caters to a wide variety of tastes, with wood carvings of religious figures, silver medals, plaques, ceramics, enamels, seriographs, creches, some traditional, some more abstract, all well designed and beautifully executed.
At the same time, a showing of religious prints by Sister Mary Corita and others from the Botolph group will he opened in the North Reading Room of the Library.
George A Marks is in charge of arrangements for this meeting. ing arrangements for various ions.
It is hard to resist the gay little corsages which club members have made of small pine cones, berries and ribbons, under the direction of Mrs.
W Glenalan Gibson announce the birth of their first child; a son, Jeffrey Alan, on November 23, at the Winchester Hospital.
Ghost rs 4.47 has had experience in pharmacies both in Swampscott and Marblehead, and is a member of both the A m e r i c a n Pharmaceutical and Massachusetts Pharmaceutical Associations.
Charles H ment of th< McLaughlin Jr. of Winchester, to Louis E Great-grandparents are Mr and and Mrs.
BROOKSIDE BUTTER QUARTERS SOLID ARE YOU AN Amateur Painter Student Artist Hobby-Craft Painter Model Maker Interior Decorator IF YOU ARE Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club SEE THE Color Match n Mix Art Set THE IDEAL GIFT at Hillside Paint & Wallpaper Co.
Charles Whitten of Winchester, president of the building firm, said that the first unit of the office park will be ready for occupancy in March.
Tenants and their employees will have complete swimming pool, restaurant, and hotel privileges, all of which are located on the same premises.
Lakeside Office Park is the only location north of Boston that encompasses these features, Mr Whitten stated.
The Lord Wakefield Hotel and Restaurant, situated on the shores of Lake Quannapowitt, opens on December 15.
Warren F Barnes of Winchester, former Boston and Philadelphia hotel manager and owner of the Ocean Point Hotel in Booth Bay Harbour, Maine, is president and general manager of the new hotel.
All buildings are electrically heated, air conditioned, and have janitorial services.
Extensive renovation of the Hevey Block is now under consideration. the Star learned this week from the owner of the block, Mr Robert Davis of Arlington.
Mr Davis told the Star that he hoped full details of the plan would be available for publication in the Star's next edition.
Circle Friday, December 8 on your calendar for a one-stop shopping spree guaranteed to satisfy even the fussiest gift-giver.
Santa’s Bazaar will be held in the school auditorium from 3:15 to 5:30 and will feature truly unusual gift opportunities.
Designed as a market place for the children, there will be no presale buying and doors will not open to adults until 4:15.
Remember to alert the children and watch for fuller details in next week’s paper.
For more than two years, the I magic “769$ game” had successfully eluded the concentrated ef1 forts of all duplicate players at the WDBC, until Dick Herlihy and Fid | Sullivan broke the mythical barrier on November 22nd with a partnerj ship percentage of .752.
North -South Martha Walker and Ellen Schofield, 132% Richard Smith and Blair Hawley, 124% Mr and Mrs.
There are probably lots of people who play cozy rubbers of friendly bridge regularly at home, just as regularly beat their spouse or favorite neighbors, and feel that they have achieved bridge Valhalla.
But let them try duplicate and they will soon be in for a rude awakening.
There has been no defen sive bidding and the JD is opened UTOPIA South A A Q 6 4 V A K 10 4 ♦ 9 3 A Q 0 5 East 10 9 8 Q 6 3 J 7 J 8 West A ¥ ♦ K * A North K J 5 3 7 2 A 8 0 5 10 4 Of the eight tables which played this board in a spade contract, none were able to take ten tricks Nine tricks were taken by NS at Now through the Gorham Dinner-for-Eight Plan you can enjoy savings when you buy a service for eight in any Gorham Sterling design. 8 four piece place-settings — save $20. 8 five piece place-settings — save $25. 8 six piece place-settings — save $30.
Come in now — choose your Gorham design, and set the table of your dreams anytime.
Shown loft to right ; S«a $218.00 Rondo $196.00 Blithe Spirit $204.00 Chantilly $204.00 Mew Clasiique $238.00 Price* ore for 32 piece service for eight and include Federal Tax* WARD’S 40 High Street Medford.
Mass. four tables, three declarers were held to eight tricks, and one unfortunate North took only seven tricks.
With the AD and two top hearts in his pocket, North still has to find seven more tricks.
Assuming he can set up a long diamond, he will have to count on the trump suit to produce six tricks.
Declarer might take the first trick with his AD and lead back a low diamond right away, since his task will be easier if he can find them split 3-3.
But West can now win and return another diamond, giving East a chance to discard the 3H and make declarer’s small trumps useless.
If he leads the KD, that, suit is set up for North while ho still has an entry.
Far from I it, for there is a subtle fallacy in' herent in even the line of play | suggested above.
Hilda Libby Ives Sunday morning* at 0:15 at the Senior Forum of tho First Congregational Church.
Ives has been coming to Forum for many years and each year tho young people are interested to hear her brief mention of new great grandchi’.iii . n in the family.
This is her way of keeping in touch with the interests and needs of young peofrom active work as a professor at A n dove r Newton Theological School and from regular pastorates „ , i — ■ in several Maine churches Dr.
Page Ft vi* Congressman Brad Morse Visits Town Recalled to Duty Mystic Glee Club On Tuesday, November 28th, our Congressman Bradford Morse -pent much of the day talking with his Winchester constituents.
During the noon hour and early afternoon, lu* was at the Town Hall to greet and discuss areas of interest with local voters.
At 8m., a large turnout of Republican Committee members from Winchester, Woburn, and Arlington, were on hand to renew acquaintances with Mr and Mrs.
After an introduction by Ralph Bonnell, Mr Morse outlined what he defined as tho three major issue f the past session of Congress.
On the Aid to Education bill, j Mr Morse said, the Rules Com| mittee held the Bill in Committee when the religious issue was interjected.
The Administration forced the bill to the House floor and was i defeated.
The Administration was also defeated on the Foreign Aid hill for a five year appropriation.
He predicted the next Congreasion1 al session will he greatly concerned with Medical Aid to the Aged and the extension of Reciprocal Trade j Agreements.
Lillian Whitman, chairman of the Winchester Republican Town Cotnmit| tee, as well as several other committee members of the fairer sex ter making the arrangements for < ongressman Morse’s successful i visit to Winchester.
Moulton of 1 10 Forest Street, who completed a three-year enlistment in the Army in September, was recalled to active duty November 25 with the 324th Battalion of the United States ASA at Fort Devens.
Ml THIS WEEK ANO NEXT... thousands of extra stamps top you/ Get a headstart on your Christmas shopping with Green Stamps.
KYB0 COFFEE Enjoy the full, heart-warming taste of this rich, full-bodied coffee.
Building In Lynnfield Paul Whitney, local contractor and builder, who developed Briarwood Estates off Johnson Road and the Willowdale Road area, as well as building other fine houses throughout town, is presently engaged in a new development off Main Street in Lynnfield.
Known as Ridgefield, this development includes some 38 homes of early American design with roads and other necessary adjuncts.
Sings at Prison Winchester’s Mystic Glee Club opened its winter season on Monday of this week by giving a special concert at the* Walpole State Prison.
The invitation to sing came from a committee composed of church loaders in the state and prison officials which attempts to bring specially selected entertainment to the convicts.
The program was composed of lighter and more popular music which is proving to be so well received by the club’s audiences.
The listeners at the prison, composed entirely of convicts, guards and officials, particularly enjoyed the selections from the musicals “Gigi” and “My Fair Lady.
The remainder of the program was made up of spirituals, barbershop numbers, sea chanties and a few religious selections which showed the versatility of the club.
Wendell Withington directed the Club and Frances Randall Cabot was the accompanist.
After giving several concerts in surrounding towns and cities during the next two weeks, the Mystic Glee Club will present its annual winter concert December 16 at the Junior High School auditorium and a good turn-out is expected to hear this popular group.
This is a fine chance to win a prize, to develop a youngster’s ability and power of self-expression.
W Appleton Lawrence, former bishop of Western Massachusetts, will conduct a quiet day for the Women of Epiphany on Tuesday, December 12.
Holy Communion will be celebrated at 10m. followed by devotions and luncheon at 12:30m.
Camp Eire Girls Launch Candy Drive Today Winchester Camp Fire Girls launch their Annual Candy Sale on Friday, December 1, along with the (’amp Fire Girls in tin* many cities and towns in the Council for Greater Boston Camp Fire Girls.
High Camp Fire Girls and Horizon Club members will bo busy knocking on doors to bring householders delicious assorted chocolates made by famous Russell Stover Gandy Company of Lincoln, Nebraska.
You will recognize the girls dressed in their red. white and blue costumes and their warm happy smiles.
Mothers, fathers and leaders, too, will be helping the Winchester Candy Sale Committee make this year’s (’amp Fire Girls Candy Sale a real success.
The major purpose of the candy sale is to balance the Council’s operating budget for 1962, so that more girls may be served in the Camp Fire Girls year round program for girls from seven to seventeen years of age.
The Blue Birds are seven and eight years of age and they learn new things and have fun in a program of outdoors and nature, pretend play, music, games, simple homemaking, trips to interesting places, hand arts, doing things for others.
High Camp Fire Girls earn the Group Torch Bearer Rank and then Individual Torch Bearer Rank.
Horizon Club members, 9th graders and above have a grown up program of vocational exploration, personality development, outdoor activities, developing social relationships, and giving community service.
FANTASIA opens a new cocktail lounge featuring for its decor a festive green eanopy over the bar that complements a foliage fountain.
An organ-bar, in the corner, is surmounted hy a colorful canopy in a rose surmounted hy a colorful canopy in a rose ful canopy in a rose motif.
Graceful drapes, luxurious chairs and subdued lighting provide a graciotis, restful air to thi> justly famous restaurant.
This is State Item III on the 1961-1962 Program and deals with a region instead of a core-city area.
Letters With A Purpose Several weeks ago we told of Police Chief Dcrro’s decision to notify the parents of teenagers when their hoys and girls seemed headed in the direction of trouble with his department.
The Chief, from his experience with parents and young people, instituted his notification procedure because be believes in most instances parents of children about to get into trouble do not know anything about their youngsters activities.
W hether they should or should not know about them didn't enter into it at all.
He thought they didn’t know and subsequent events have proven he was right.
Down in W ilmington, Del., the Delaware State Police have been conducting a campaign similar to the one instituted by Chief Derro.
Their program. like the one in Winchester, is designed as a helpful warning to parents that their teen agers, hows or girls, are in had company, arc acquiring l>a(l habits and heading for trouble.
Naturally their program, like the one in Winchester, is going to be no better than the parents permit it to be.
Their interest and cooperation is absolutely necessary if the plan is to be helpful.
In Wilmington the jxdicc thus far arc greatly encouraged with the reception their letters have received from the parents.
In more than TO per cent of the cases parents notified have replied to the police and in most instances have expressed appreciation of the interest shown by the police in their youngsters.
Chief Derro tells the Star that his department has also had a good percentage of repsonse to their letters. i> to ^0 per cent of the parents having either written in reply or called the station to talk things over.
The Chief signs the letters himself, but much of the actual work with young people at the local Station is done by the Juvenile Officer, Jim Cogan.
Parents should understand what the police arc trying to do in this campaign.
They are not, as a few parents seem to feel, trying to interfere with the town’s voting poeple, nor are they attempting to tell parents how they should rear their children.
What they arc trying to do is simply to prevent trouble, to stop it before it gets started, rather than to punish wrong doing after it is done.
The Delaware program lias received national attention, so much so that Maryland is considering a like program.
In Winchester Chief Derro is encouraged at the reception his department has received from parents.
A number of them have come to Headquarters to talk things over with him and Officer Cogan.
Some have brought their youngsters with them to the station to hear what the police have to say about their actions, and get the advice the authorities are eager to supply in their effort to keep hoys and girls out of trouble.
Chief Derro told the Star that since he instituted the letter writing several weeks ago there has been an apparent improvement in teen age actions, and he pointed to absence of any real trouble on Hallowe’en and more recently on the night before the big Winchester-W’oburn football game.
In the past there has been considerable deviltry before the game, ranging all the way from painting bleachers and goal posts to rotten egging cars and daubing the war memorial statue at McCall Junior High School with paint.
Some such system as the letter writing is necessary now, for Police work like everything else has changed.
In the old days the route patrolmen knew all the young people on his heat.
When he saw one of “his” boys or girls in the way of getting into trouble, he stopped by the family home and dropped a hint to the parents.
Sometimes, if he saw the son of a friend making a fool of himself, a cuffed ear or an application of his jxdiceman’s special to the right spot was well within the officer’s province.
Route officers are as scarce as t lie dodo, and the law has stripped policemen of much of their informal punitive powers.
For one thing parents do not know policemen as they did the old route officer and resent any interference on the part of a stranger with their youngster’s complete freedom.
Police, cruising along in automobiles, make scant contacts with young people unless they are sent to break up a fight or to assist at an accident.
They do not know the kids personally as the old route officer did, and do not have the advantage of mutual knowledge and understanding.
What few youngsters were hanging around at night years ago were pretty much known and pinpointed for possible trouble by the police.
There arc just too many youngsters on their own today to make this possible.
The only salvation of the Police in a sincere attempt to prevent juvenile crime lays in the home and parents.
If the Police can get the cooperation of parents, if they can bring to the attention of the parents the awful danger in which their sons and daughters stand because of their anti-social tendencies a start can he made in rehabilitating our boys and girls.
Ignorance on the part of parents of actual conditions as they affect their children has permitted many an essentially good boy or girl to drift into conduct that finally makes necessary punitive action by the police.
It is to prevent this that Chief Derro and his department arc striving.
The best, possibly the only way to enlist parental cooperation and supjxirt is by informing parents of what their hoys and girls are doing.
If parents do not sec fit to avail themselves of the opportunity offered to prevent their youngsters from falling into the hands of the police for criminal behaviour, the fault will not be that of the police.
It would seem the least they can get from parents is cooperation and support.
Decorations, Yes; Coney Island, No With the last of our Thanksgiving turkey finding its way into casseroles, our attention turns to the subject of public Christmas decorations in the Centre.
In a poll concluded by the Winchester Christmas Spirit Committee in mid-January of this year, sixty out of 1 Town Meeting members responding favored “more but conservative decorations,” while T> opposed more decorations outright.
This is a representative cross-sampling of Winchester opinion qn the matter. n balance, it would appear that the Town as a whole favors Christinas decorations at the Centre so long as they are conservative, restrained, simple, and in good taste.
I Wen those favoring decorations, it has been seen, fear gaudiness, excessiveness, and vulgar display.
We know that the Christmas Spirit Committee has considered these opinions with due care and has planned its decorations accordingly.
It would he unfortunate, indeed, if in its desire to increase its Christmas decorations Winchester were to lose the quiet dignity and traditional New England restraint for which we have come to admire it.
It would also he unfortunate if the essentially religious nature of Christmas were to he obscured by factors less noble.
Pictures Tell Story Fisc* where on this page the Star is showing the wrecks of automobiles involved in accidents in Winchester on one day, Thanksgiving.
In one of the wreck> shown two of the three teen agers riding in the car wme killed.
We are publishing the pictures with the hope that Inns and girls embarking on their driving careers will look at them and understand that what happened tu those riding in the wrecked cars can happen to t hem.
W e add the hope that parents of teen agers who have their own cars or ride in those of their young friends will also litx 1 the twisted wreckage something to ponder.
Automobiles, properly used contribute greatly to twentieth century living.
Foolishly nr recklessly driven, they are among the most lethal takers of life extent.
Photo by Ryeraon INCREDIBLE TANGLE OI STEEL AND GLASS is all that remains of convertible in which 18ycar-ohl William Poor of Somerville and 20-year-old Joseph V Astureio of Medford were killed and 17-year-old Thomas MeCormaek of Medford was seriously injured, when their ear crashed into a stone wall near Symmes Corner at 12:25 in. on Thanksgiving.
ALSO ON THANKSGIVING DAY, at 11:55m., the smashed Oldsmohile coupe shown above went out ol control while travelling south on Cambridge Street and smashed into a tree on the westerly side of the road near the W inchester Conservatories.
Treated at the \\ inehester Hospital for lacerations and bruises was 29-year-old Eileen M Fowler of 10 Burt Road in Wilmington.
On the other hand, Dr. .lames Bryant Conant assures us that Germany, in a great change of heart, has turned its hack on its ugly Nazi past and occupies a high seat in the concert of free nations.
If the evidence painfully documented in his book is correct, my vote is for Mr Tetens, a close student of German affairs.
As Mr Tetens points out, Chancellor Adenauer himself conceded in the Bundestag on October 23, 1952 that 66 per cent of Bonn’s higher diplomats were former Nazis.
Adenauer’s Secretary of State, Hans Glohke, was personally responsible in 1943 for the death of 20,000 Jews at Auschwitz and had earlier drafted Hitler’s notorious racial laws that resulted in the planned extermination of all Jews.
He supervises the German diplomatic corps, controls the appointment of government personnel, and prepares Dr.
Mr Ludwig Erhard, Bonn's minister of economics and heir apparent to Dr.
In a nation that insists it is now a “Republic” 88 per cent of the German people polled in November, 1957 refused even to discuss their feelings about the Jews.
According to their own confiscated records their strategy has been to forge identification papers and infiltrate right wing parties.
If we can stomach Franco as an ally, it is not very likely that Washington will reverse its policy town rd Bonn’s neo-Nazis.
But perhaps Mr Teten’s book might he given consideration when we debate giving nuclear weapons to Germany, or when we deal with Germany’s threat to build H-bombs should Moscow and Washington reach accommodation.
Richard A Hakanson, Publisher James H Penallgan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 1954 The Winchester Star, left at yonr Residence for one year.
Whether we buihl home and other shelters in the hope that whatever bombs are aimed at Boston miss their target to such an extent that shelters are of value, the main point, as brought out by your excellent editorial on fallout shelters and many of the letters you have received, is just one thing: The essential point is that our best hope of survival is not a shelter, but in working as best we know how for peace.
We can’t count on all bombs aimed at Boston missing that city and Winchester, by a sufficient number of miles — I would guess 40 or 50 depending on the bombs used — so that a shelter would be worth something.
Each of us can write the President of the United State$, our Senators and Representative in Congress.
Seek agreement that all countries disarm at the same time, by steps, and endeavor by inspection to be sure all have completed one step before the next is started.
Seek a limited strengthening of the United Nations in the field of keeping peace — namely through a stronger police and the ability of the police to take disputes to the World Court (which they can’t do now) — so that countries of the world will feel they can safely give up part of their arms, under a world-wide UN-inspected disarmament plan.
Senate and House of Representatives arrangement, but with definite limits on maximum representation of larger nations.
Seek a greater feeling of good will and trust on the part of all nations.
We may not have | I am of the opinion that the only much time and need to act as quickly as we can. 1 i i Some may say that Russia or Chinu will never listen to any proposal for a stronger United Nations.
Yet no one can say what Russia’s answer would be if faced with the unanimous and repeated proposal of all the non-satellite countries of the world.
Russia has spent much to try to influence world opinion and might hesitate to flout a proposal supported by all.
The chances may be one out of 50, but if this is our only chance we must consider it.
If a bull is chasing you toward an eight-foothigh fence which is the only way out, and you’ve never been over such a fence before, you’re going to try to make it and not just quit first.
When the Anns Control Bill was pending, the United World Federalists informed their members throughout the United States so they might act in time.
This organization seeks to make more effective the work of individuals toward a more effective United Nations.
The undersigned or other members of the Winchester Chapter of UWF will gladly provide information about the organization to those who request it.
Sincerely, Robert B Williams 2 Wolcott Terrace solution for mankind is total nuclear disarmament, policed by World Government.
I have read the new contribution from The Star on the fallout discussion.
I have no wish to enter the pres ent controversy raging over fallout shelters.
However, I would like to voice my agreement with Norma Woods’ letter in last week’s Star.
Let us first inform ourselves, then spend our energies working for pence rather than wringing our hands and waiting for destruction.
Some of the current projects for instance, are the Tufts-Newton Summer Seminar in Public Affairs, the Nine States Youth Citizenship Project and Interchange, a newsletter sharing information among schools in the Northeast concern ing effective instructional programs that have promise.
A repre sentative from the Center is available to explain the program to in terested groups.
The first editorial is one of the most striking presentations I have seen of the case against reliance on shelters; and the Letters response was exciting, moving, and informative.
Here again, your reply to was temperate, informed and shatteringly effective.
The powerful thrust and counter-thrust of the Letters page, and the consequent ventilation of matters too often avoided, seemed to me, to use a word that has a way of being misused American, in the best sense.
The “Red or Dead” editorial deals most effectively with a pro blem that has vexed too many people needlessly; its credo is strongly stated, affirmative, and forward looking.
Again my warmest thanks. constitute one of the healthiest examinations of the issues before us that I have seen.
Ninth-Grade Holiday Dance Ninth graders of the First Congregational Church are sponsoring a Holiday Dance on Friday, December 1, from 8:00 to 11:00m. for all ninth gruders of Winchester.
Tickets can be purchased from Diane Changaris and Debbie Nelson at the McCall school or from Sue Jackson, Sally Worthen, and Scott Wallace at the Lynch school.
Dress will be casual. mtinued from page 1) “I believe that the true revolution of modern times remains the American Revolution,” the Congressman said.
But when we say we’re conservatives, we must remember wbat we’re conserving.
We’re not just conserving our right to clip coupons. although that is a vital aspect of our society, too.
We're conserving the Revolution of 1775 in which we asserted the right of every man everywhere, not just in America, to he free and well-fed.
Congressman Morse at the same time struck out at what he called the “grey flannel” conformity of many Americans today.
He called “the grey flannel thinking of grey flannel minds” unworthy of the American individualist tradition.
GET INTO POLITICS Mr Morse also urged people in business and the professions to get into politics.
CON G BRADFORD MORSE I he forty-year-old Congressj man. who served as chief assi.st| ar| t to Senator Leverett Saltonstall from 1955 to 1958 and as 1 United States Deputy Administrator of Vete inns’ Affairs from 1968 to 19(50, told the Star that he is not now actively seeking the United States Senate seat.
He said he was “available” and would be happy to serve in the Senate should Massachusetts, once again, decide that it wanted more than a “name” in its highest legislative body. (lard of Thanks The family of the late Harry E Brown wish to thank their neighbors and friends for the beautiful flowers, spiritual bouquets and other expressions of sympathy extended them in their recent bereavement.
They especially appreciate the kindness and cooperation of the chief and members of the Fire Department, who were helpful in so many ways.
John B Mercurio Insurance Office In Its 15th Year The John B Mercurio insurance office at 1 Mount Vermin Street is observing its 15th anniversary of service to Winchester this month.
Mr Mercurio servos as insurance agent, while his wife, Mary, serves as secretary-bookkeeper, and his son, John B., Jr., helps out on Saturdays when he is not attending classes in business administration at Boston College.
With John Mercurio, as with so many other Winchester businessmen, the old saw that “the customer’s interests come first,” is something more than a slogan.
To ensure such coverage at the lowest possible costs to the customer, John Mercurio has built up close connections with leading insurance houses over the year John Mercurio’s work in Winchester is not all on tin* business level.
A past president of Kiwanis, he has taken a keen interest, in community affairs.
H«» is a member of the Winchester Scholarship Committee, a fourth degree Knight of Columbus, and a former advocate of the K of C He has also been active in the Sons of Italy Lodge, the Christopher Columbus Club, and the Winchester Lodge of Elks.
Irene J Cannava of 85 Squire Road, and John B Jr., a junior at Boston College in the College of Business Administration.
This is John Mercurio’s 15th year at this Mount Vernon Street insurance stand, but it’s his 28th year in the business.
His many friends wish him many more years of successful insurance business and of valuable eommuhity service.
John Laiii*son, heads the Committee as chairman, with Ralph Hatch, treasurer; and Mrs.
Janies Quine represents the Junior Chamber of Commerce on the Committee, and John J Shanahan, the Board of Park Commissioners.
The Committee wishes at this time to express its gratitude to the many merchants, individuals and groups who have contributed so generously to make its decorating problem possible.
SEARS ROEBUCK CO. and Antoine’s Beauty Salon Baker Shoes Barber Shop Dorothy Muriel-Brigham’s Elm Farm Foods Co.
Jay’s Gift Store Kennedy Butter and Egg Stores Liggetts Drug Stores Lord Greger’s Men’s Shops Ludwig Cleaners Lynn 5 Cents Savings Bank Maytag Launderette National Shoes Radio Shack Corp.
New England Shopping Center is centrally located on Route 1 in Saugus just minutes from most North ofBoston communities.
Broad highways make New England Shopping Center new shopping headquarters for Lynn.
Reading, Wakefield, Lynnfield, Peabody, Danvers, Salem, Swamp, scott, Marblehead, Winthrop and muny other towns.
PARKING FOR OVER 3500 CARS a new concept in shopping centers... designed for you.
Every imaginable convenience awaits you ... including protected walkways and the easiest parking ever.
You’ve never seen Christmas values like these . . . you’ve never seen a fun-filled shopping center like this one.
Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION’S FUNDS S AFEGt ARD the neat egg of your social, fraternal or church organization hy opening an Account in the Winchester (inoperative Rank.
Your club’s funds will earn a nice profit, he fully insured anti readily available.
Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 CHURCH STREET Generous Dividends Paid Regularly nov30-2t (ibituama Newsy Paragraphs Mrs.
Fred M Cameron of Stetson Hall is reported as recovering from surgery at the Winchester Hospital.
Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic, a place where men can escape for a few minutes of pence, relaxation and grooming.
The entrance opens onto the driveway which runs beside the salon at 11 Thompson Street.
Fred S Mitchell of Winchester Place, was in town last week to spend Thanksgiving with his parents.
David attends Thompson Academy, and he brought with him as his holiday guest another Academy boy, Edward Wood.
The pleasure of your company is requested at “The Pleasure of His Company,” December 1 and 2 in Metcalf Hall.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Mr Henry Barry of Main Street and Mr Charles Gill of Foxcroft Hoad are serving on the committee in charge of arrangements for the meeting of the Father Jim Hennessy Mission Club meeting in the Charter Room of the New England Life Building in Boston Wednesday December 6, at 8:15m.
EX 5-6265. janl9-tf Miss Leslie Anne Pendergast of Lexington, formerly of Winchester, has been elected to the Girls’ Leader Corps of the Muzzey Jr.
The Leaders Corps is made up of girls, who are chosen hy the faculty for scholastic and physical ability, personality, initiative, dependability, and of course, interest.
When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 or at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf The New England Dog Training Club, Inc. of Boston (a non-profit organization) will be holding its 26th Annual Obedience Trial Show on Sunday, December 3 at the Maurice Tobin Memorial Building, 1481 Tremont Street, Roxhury.
Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t Jack Volpe, a sophomore at Boston College, has been accepted to pledge Delta Kappa, a chapter of Delta Sigma Pi, a national professional commerce and Business Administration fraternity.
Brink of 33 Samoset Road, former Winchester High School star football lineman, was among those receiving freshman football numerals from St.
A Winchester student, Donald Butters of 10 New Meadows Road is among members of Wentworth Institute’s Band playing at school assemblies and other school functions during the year.
G Lindrov Witham, II and the late Mr Witham of 75 Bacon Street, a freshman at Wellesley College, has had one of her art works, an original abstract sculpture, chosen for exhibition.
Its composition is of insulating brick and it may be viewed later on in the season at the Jewett Art Center, Wellesley College.
Michael Macdonald, Jr., of Bacon Street, is chairman of the hockey game to be played during the annual Bates College Winter Carnival sponsored by the Outing Club.
Kodak color prints and Christmas cards should be ordered now at the Winchester Camera Shop. nov2-tf Mrs.
Lewis M Foster of Lloyd Street, who recently underwent surgery at the New England Baptist Hospital, has returned to her home and is reported as convalescing nicely.
Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t Firemen responded to a call reporting a smoking TV set at the Boyle residence at 15 Russell Road Friday at 5:12m.
On arrival firemen dsicovered that the TV transformer had burned out, causing a good deal of smoke throughout the house.
Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t On Tuesday at 11:00m.year-old John M Kirk of Jefferson Court, Woburn, driving a Chevrolet on East Street, struck an Edison utility pole.
Kirk told police he lost control of his car when the right front tire blew out.
He claimed no injuries, police report, but his car was damaged on the right side.
Clarence Russell of Lovell, Maine, formerly of this town, spent the holiday weekend in Winchester visiting friends and relatives.
Benson for superficial lacerations at Winchester Hospital early Saturday morning when his car struck a tree in front of 43 Mystic Valley Parkway.
Charles D Stebbins of Oxford Street was elected Monday night at the Town Meeting as a precinct member to fill the vacancy caused by the death of F Meredith Cooper.
Mr Albert S Crockett, secretary of the Winchester Personnel Board, was elected a director of the Massachusetts Municipal Personnel Boards Association at the recent sixth annual conference of the organization in Framingham.
At the conference' Mr Crockett discussed the 1961 wage trends as disclosed in the 4th edition of the Associations’s municipal employees salary survey.
Wa will deliver. fe2-tf Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic, a place where men can escape for a few minutes of peace, relaxation and grooming.
Street have sold their home at Symmes Corner and are moving to Winter Park, Florida.
For many years, the old homestead, built in 1881 by the grandfather of Mr Marshall Symmes of Yale Street, was the headquarters of the 11building Symmes Farm.
Dinah Kohner of Belfast, Ireland, now associated with the Children’s Hospital in Boston, is guest speaker at today’s luncheon meeting of the Winchester Rotary in Masonic Apartments.
Toys for boys 8 to 12 years of age are to be brought and wrapped for the Christmas fellowship meeting at the church in December.
Please come, but if you cannot attend, kindly phone and let your hostess know.
Steve Powers of 37 Pond Street md Dick Tierney of 29 Nathaniel Road are Winchester boys playing on the Northeastern varsity hockey team.
Cambridge Center for Adult Education on arrangements for the Center’s Holly Fair at Brattle House in Cambridge tomorrow from l to 9m. and all day Saturday.
Harry Edward Brown Harry Edward Brown, veteran retired firefighter and one of the last of his generation at the Central Fire Station died early Thanksgiving morning November 23, at the Winchester Hospital after four years of failing health.
Flags on the common and public buildings were displayed at half-staff in his honor.
He was horn January 11, 1877, in Effingham, N.H., and spent his early life there, later as a young man living in Woburn.
He came to Winchester in 1916, and built the house in which he lived at 13 Rock Avenue.
He learned the carpenter’s trade and prior to entering the Fire Department was foreman for the local building contractor, George Poland.
During World War I he worked at his trade at the Boston Naval Shipyard.
Mr Brown was appointed a call man in the Fire Department October 1, 1916.
He received a provisional appointment on March 30 1919, and was made a permanent firefighter September 30, 1919.
He served under three chiefs, the late David H DeCourcy and John J German, and the present Chief James E Callahan.
He was appointed to special duty on the department’s fire alarm sys tern April 3, 1930, and retired Jan uary 23, 1943.
During his years in the department he made many im provements at the station through his skill as a carpenter.
He was a member of the Carpenter’s Union and of the Winchester Fireman’s Relief Association.
On January 1, 1901, Mr Brown married Bridget Agnes Cullen of Winchester, who died October 3, 1956.
William W Ring, all of Winchester; 15 grandchildren and 13 great-grandchildren.
The funeral was held Saturday morning from the McLaughlin Fu neral Home in Woburn, with Engine 1 of the Fire Department and the pallbearers, Captain Frank Amico, Lt.
Walter Carroll, and Firefighters, Walter Skerry, John J Flaherty, Charles R Moran and Bernard Stygles acting as escort.
Requiem high mass was celebrat ed at the Immaculate Conception Church by Rev.
A detachment of firefighters under Chief James E Callahan, formed a guard of honor.
Mary Waters Kelley, widow of Erskine Hawes Kelley and a member of the family at the Home for Aged People, died Wednesday afternoon, November 2, at Winchester Hospital after a two months illness.
She was born August 18, 1876, in Charlottetown, P.E.I., but went as a girl to Woburn, growing up in that city and attending the public schools.
They lived for 30 years in Winchester, making their home on Wildwood Street before moving to Andover.
For twelve years they lived in Andover until Mr Kelley’s death, at which time Mrs.
Kelley returned to Winchester to make her home with her son, Erskine H Kelley on Forest Street.
Dorothy Kelley Woodard of Spartansburg, S.C.; four grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.
Committal services were held Monday at noon at the family lot in Wildwood Cemetery with the Rev.
Frederick Noss of the South Congregational Church of Andover officiating.
Sidney Q Curtiss of Sheffield, Republican floor leader in the House, as a member of the newly formed Calendar Committee.
The function of this committee is of the highest importance because it is the job of the minority party to prevent any type of legislation being acted upon which is detrimental to the Commonwealth from appearing oil the calendar without notice.
The members of this committee have been appointed because of their knowledge and alertness.
Chadwick, a town meeting member and moderator in Winchester, has been a member of the Massachusetts House since 1947.
Stephen Cutler Greene and daughter of C Fred, and Louise Eberle of Winchester, died early Friday morning, November 24, at the Putnam Memorial Hospital in Bennington after a brief illness with spinal meningitis.
She had visited her parents in Winchester the week previous to her death, at which time she was in the best of health.
Greene was born June 5, 1928, in Boston though her parents were residents of Winchester at the time.
She grew up in town, attending the Winchester schools and Winchester High School, from which she was graduated in the class of 1946.
A member of the scholastic honor roll, she was a three sport athlete and winner of the Mansfield-Wheeler Sportsmanship Cup.
Voted the girl who had done most for the school, the most popular girl and the best all around senior, she was secretary of the student council, a member of the executive board of the Athletic Association and on the staffs of both the student paper and yearbook.
After two years at Colby Junior College, and her marriage to Mr Greene September 11, 1948, she accompanied her husband to Milford, Connecticut, where she worked while Mr Greene was completing his studies at Yale Divinity School.
Greene accompanied him to his first pastorate at the First Parish Church in Island Pond Vermont.
From this post five years ago they went to Bennington where Mr Greene became minister of the Second Congregational Church.
His wife assisted him with his work in many ways, as a member of numerous church committees and in the general role of a minister’s wife.
Greene who did not like her, and she was genuinely beloved by those, young and old, fortunate enough to know her well.
Always friendly and considerate, with a sincere liking for people, she enjoyed an unusually wide circle of friends, to whom news of her untimely passing brought a very deep regret.
Greene leaves three children, Elisabeth Everts, 11; Frederick Eberle, 8 and Nancy Louise Greene 5.
At the service at her husband’s Church last Sunday there were many clergymen in attendance, some from as far distant as Burlington.
A committal service was conducted at the family lot in Wildwood Cemetery Monday forenoon by Dr.
Cart also conducted a largely attended memorial service at the First Congregational Church on Monday afternoon.
Franklin Pynn Franklin Pynn 73, of 24 Clematis Street, retired superintendent of the Wrought Iron Kitchen Equipment Company, died Tuesday morning, November 28, at the Winchester Hospital after a long period of failing health.
He was born September 15, 1888, at Harbor Grace, Newfoundland, and grew up there * learning the trade of a sheet metal worker.
In 1911 he came to this country and soon after settled in Winchester, making his home in town for half a century.
He was for many years a member and active in Waterfield Lodge of Odd Fellows, and he was also an active member of the First Baptist Church.
For a time after coming to this country Mr Pynn had his own sheet metal business in Boston under the name of Trask, Pynn Co.
In 1944 he became associated with the Wrought Iron Kitchen Equipment Company in Boston, and was shop superintendent at the time of his retirement four years ago.
Florence Chase of Winchester; six sons, Ronald of Medford, Woodrow W., and Carl if Hanson, Robert B., of Guilford, Conn., Russell J., of Duxbury and Franklin Pynn, Jr., of Waltham.
Also surviving are 18 grandchildren and one great-granddaughter; a sister, Mrs.
Andrew H Hughes of Toronto, Canada, and a brother, Willis Pynn of Saugus.
Funeral services will be held Friday afternoon at 2 o’clock at the Graham Funeral Home in Woburn.
Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., pastor of the First Baptist Church, will officiate.
Instead of flowers, memorial contributions may be made in his name to the Winchester Hospital Building Fund or the Cancer Research Foundation.
Joseph T * Callahan Joseph T Callahan of 5 Russell Rond, a constable of Winchester for 10 years and well known in the local oil burner field, died suddenly Thanksgiving night, November 23, at the Winchester Hospital, following an acute coronary attack.
He had entered the hospital on the Tuesday before his death for exploratory X-rnys in no way connected with his heart.
He was horn June 22, 1906, in Winchester and spent virtually all of his life in this town, attending the Winchester schools and graduating from Winchester High School in the class of 1924.
He first worked for the Winchester firm of Kimball <fc Earle, and later formed the partnership of Kelley & Callahan.
He had been for the past 10 years associated with the Fitzgerald Fuel Oil Co., as credit manager.
He had served the town as constable since 1951 and had been a special police officer for 15 years.
He was also a deputy tax collector and had been a town meeting member for Precinct 6, serving from 1928 to 1941, and from 1951 until his death.
He was a member and past exalted ruler of Winchester Lodge of Elks and was in the communications division of the Winchester Civil Defense.
For six years he served as manager of the original Immaculate Conception Drum and Bugle Corps.
The funeral was held Monday morning from the late residence with solemn requiem high mass at 10 o’clock at the Immaculate Conception Church.
Mary Callahan Dockham was organist and Arnold Callahan, cousin of the deceased was soloist.
Bank Purchases Survival Kits The Winchester National Bank has purchased food and medical survival kits containing a two-week supply of food, water and medicine, should it be necessary to use them in the event of nuclear attack, a Brockton survival firm tells the Star.
The firm quotes Vice President William Sullivan of the National Bank as describing the kits as “an imlortant step” and says that the bank official hopes that other businesses, institutions, and private homeowners will see fit to follow suit.
Miss Mabelle R Nickerson M iss Mabelle Rosalie Nickerson of J 1 Stetson Hall, a long time and widely known resident of Winchester, died Saturday morning, November 26, suddenly at her home.
Born in Boston, she grew up in the old Boston Highlands district, now’ Roxbury, being educated at private school there.
More than 50 years ago Miss Nickerson came with her parents to Winchester to make their home on Calumet Road.
After the death of her parents she moved into Stetson Hall, being among the first to take an apartment there after the hall was built.
As a young woman she taught in the church school and was a member of the Women’s Guild.
Funeral services were held Tuesday afternoon at the Church of the Epiphany with the rector, Dr.
Coming events Town Meeting Mr Carruthers disagreed with what he called “one or two misstatements by Mr Hewis.
He said he felt the Building Committee had observed good business judgment, that their school had opened on time, that they had done a “fair, decent, and respectable job” in coming within 2 or 3 f /r of their budget estimates.
The town meeting passed the appropriation by unanimous voice vote, no one dissenting.
At this point Acting Moderator Wadsworth bade the town meeting to rise in tribute to three recently deceased town meeting members, Joseph T Callahan, F Meredith Cooper, and Denton W Randall.
After the tribute, the town meeting took action on article two, unanimously approving the transfer of the $3,500 from the Wadleigh study account to the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee account.
The town meeting adjourned at 8:49 with audible relief and no evident sense of discomfort at facing the chilly drizzle outside.
Novcmhor 24 and 25, Friday and Saturday N<> film pr«nn am at thr Public Library.
Library will bo open Friday from 10m. to 9m. and Saturday from 10 m. to 0m. an usual.
Viaitinir Day for public at new Lynch Junior Hfwh Sch*>ol, Brantwood and Horn Portd Brook Ronds.
November 27, Monday, The Fortnightly Woman’s Club at. the Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall, American Home Day.
November 28, Tuesday, the Friendship Guild of the First Congregmtional Church will meet nt 8m. in Chidley Hnll.
Members, friends and the jrirla of Troop 9, extend cordial invitations to the mothers of all the Kiris to attend.
November 28, Tuesday, LWV presents “Planning for Greater Boston” at the new Lynch Junior High School, at 8:00m.
The speakers will bo Father W S envoy Joyce, Dean of the College of Business Administration at Boston College; Mr Ralph Kaminsky, Director of the Greater Boston Economic Study Committee; Mr Howard Whitmore, Jr.. ex-Mayor of Newton.
December 1 and 2, Friday and Saturday, Unitarian Players present ""The Pleasure of His Company,"" 8:30m. in Metcalf Hnll.
Tuesday, at 7 :45m. in the Rich Room of the Library, Art Association Lecture hy Celia Hubbard of the Botolph Group.
FOR SPECIAL PARTIES FUNCTIONS OF ALL KINDS UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM Beautifully appointed for banquets, wedding re« >-pt >ns, business meetings, dan. . s «>i lun> heons.
C PARTY THINS EDUCATOR CHOCOLATE MINT COOKIES EDUCATOR CRAX SUNSHINE KRISPY CRACKERS SUNSHINE CHOCOLATE NUGGET COOKIES P k g35c P k g37c P k g39c pkg31c P k g29c pkg29c Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday Special, December 4, 5, and 6 Fresh Pork Chops 69c lb.
He has served as president of the Olericulture Club, has been a member of the Ski and Marketing Clubs, the Roister Doisters and the Carnival, hind Carnival Ball Committees.
He also played freshman hockey and was in campus Varieties as a junior and senior. if $ gifts for your Saint Mary’s Sodality J The regular meeting of Saint Mary’s Sodality was held on Tuesday evening November 21.
Father Turke announced the reception for all new members would be on December 5 at 8 o’clock in Saint Mary’s Church.
Ch ri SfmaS You‘11 find them in our Men s, Roys or Ladies' Shops . . . whether it is “The Gift' or the little stoeking items.
No, it’s not a government agency, nor a South African instrument, nor a new game of chance.
It was organized some years ago by interested and faithful friends and parents for the purpose of supporting the members of these groups.
The Friends are those cheery, enthusiastic people who serve you hot dogs and drinks at the home football games.
It has grown steadily through the years until this misty cold Thanksgiving morning about sixty faithful workers were down there early to sell over 3000 cups of hot drinks and 1100 hot dogs, etc., to the thousands of hungry fans.
May I say here in your column how gratifying it is to work with such pleasant, cooperative people, who respond so willingly when called upon, and who make this project of the FOBO’s a great deal of fun.
Those Friends who helped dining the past football season were Mr Byron Graves Mr and Mrs.
George Needham • fine liquors • vintage wines • choice beer and ale -At the -JJou.^e fif fjootl ^piril.
We trust you have sold them by nowand perhaps have planned a brief Social Hour before heading for the Town Hall (Last call for supper at 8:30 sharp.
Also, please make every effort to mail ticket receipts and unsold tickets before the dance, to Lindy Lane at 11 Robinhood Road.
A few tickets will be available at the door but advanced receipts are badly needed to operate with.
Your immediate action now means a personal share in the future success of our Charter Night Project.
To anyone interested in attending our Charter night Buffet Dance please call either of the above numbers.
A reminder to all members that there will be a business meeting on Thursday November 30 at 8:00 m. at the Red Cross House.
Most parents of teen-age children would be unable to state just how much their particular costs are in this direction.
It takes twice as much, for example, to support a 15-year-old as it does an infant.
The Chamber of Commerce re ports that the consumption of food, milk, soft drinks, chewing gum and candy increases until it reaches a peak in the late teens.
As to clothing, the pattern is similar except that the change is most marked when the child enters into his teens.
A breakdown shows that $790 a year is required to maintain the average 13-year-old youngster, that the cost is $855 for a 15-year old, $910 at age 17 and $940 at age 19.
At the midway point, which is at age 16^, the average annual expenditure is $890.
On the basis of this average, the overall amount spent in Winchester per year in behalf of the teenage population, which the 1900 census set at 2,165, is estimated at $1,927,000.
The nation’s teen-age population will be growing rapidly in the next Star Of The Future few years, ft is pointed out.
Between now and 1967 there will he an additional 1,100,000 of them each year.
If Winchester follows this national rate of increase, the number of teen-agers locally in 1967 will be 3,180.
They will make an even greater impact on the local economy than they are making today.
Already, retailers are finding it worth while to cultivate this booming market.
Named To Educational Committee Several from Winchester have been named to the Interim Committee of the Massachusetts Council for Public Schools for the purpose of recommending to the legislature what it believes should be the scope and depth of a master survey of public education in Massachusetts, the amount of funds needed for such a survey, and the qualifications of those to be appointed members of a Master Survey Commission.
The members of this Committee will act as individuals and their recommendations will be free from any outside dictation.
It will include 16 distinguished citizens, 11 top educators and four members of the State Legislature.
Among the luy citizens named is William E Spaulding, president of Houghton Mifflin Company, publishers.
Fern Horne, Pittsburgh guidance coun selor; Earl Moore, high school guidance counselor from Iowa.
Kven with his background as a terrific halfback for Winchester High, Tilton School, and the UN 11 freshman Serieka could not crack UNH’s starting lineup this year.
The reason; Co-Captain Dick Mezquita, who led the Wildcats and the Yankee Conference in rushing last year and topped UNH in ground gained and scoring this year.
The hall was attractively decorated in the colors of both schools by Alan Macdonald, Sue Wallace Joanne Hess, Jane Hess and Charlene Bertolucci.
Fred McCormack, proprietor of McCormack’s Apothecary introduced Peter Sullivan who acted as master of ceremonies.
At intermission the Em Cee presented the outstanding player awards, the Fo ley Memorial Awards for Woburn players and the Hevey and McCormack Trophies for Winchester players.
The Foley Award for best Woburn lineman went to Co-Captain Tommy Quinn and that for best Tanner back, to Eddie Foley.
The Hevey Award for best Winchester lineman went to Tom Mooney, center; with the McCormack Award for best back going to Captain Mike Bellino.
Latest models of HEAD KASTLE DYNAMIC ROSSKOPF NORTHLAND and other leading brands of SKIS • Release Bindings, Marker, Ski-free, Dovre, Star, Cubco, O-U Micromatic, Nevada, Tyrolia.
Last year Dan led the UNH freshmen in scoring and twice ran over 75 yards for touchdowns.
This fall with Mezquita on the sidelines with a touch of the flu, Serieka again waS the leading scorer for the Wildcats.
However, when Mezquita recovered, Dan dropped down to the second string, a move has tened hy a sore knee.
However, an official ruled interference on the play and gave the ball back to Connecticut.
Three plays later the same official again ruled interference on a play to give Connecticut the ball on UNH’s 4 yard line.
Quarterback Bo Dickson fired a pass over the middle to Serieka for 19 yards and a first down at midfield.
On the next play, Dickson tossed to fullback Charlie Beach who lateraled to Serieka.
Dan hugged the sidelines all the way down to the UConn 12 before two men pushed him out of bounds.
He might have gambled on a cutback but such a maneuver would have used up all the time remaining on the clock.
On Jhe next play, Connecticut defenders eliminated Serieka by pushing him in the end zone while tackling UNH’s end.
The officials chose to ignore both cases of interference and UNH lost the game.
The following week against Springfield, Serieka gave UNH fans a hint of things to come as he returned a punt 50 yards in the first period and scored his first and only touchdown of 1961 in the third to ice the game for New Hampshire.
Before then, Dan also hopes to make a name for himself as a baseball player with the Wildcat diamond team as a hard-throwing, hard hitting catcher.
Danny or “Chief,” as he was known at Winchester High, is carrying on the gridiron tradition of the Serieka family being the younger brother of Ed “Jocko” Serieka, all time Winchester back who later starred at Xavier.
Library Film Program A reporter writes to a boy in Letter from Alaska, the color film featured in this week’s program.
A review of Alaska’s history from its discovery in 1741 to the present is included with information on the people, cities, industries, climate, agriculture, and geography.
The history and romance of silk are described in Naturally Silk, another color picture which covers sericulture, dyeing, weaving and end uses of the fabric today.
A film to encourage children's creativeness and imagination is entitled Animules.
Methods for constructing entirely imaginary animals out of wet paper, paste, and temperu are shown as are the final results of one group of young artists.
This week’s program is designed to interest young people as well as elementary school children and their parents.
Group of the New England Modern language Association, to be held Saturday, December 9.
Machine translations and Inter lingua, a relatively new auxiliar language for international us age, will be the subject of thi day’s main address by Dr.
At 10 o'clock, the teachers will begin a series of individual Ger man, Italian, Russian, Spanish and French programs dealing with li terary, professional and “Broadly cultural topics,” according to Dr Harry Zohn, chairman of the Mass Group and associate professor of German at Brandeis.
Gode's talk at 2m. will be given at a general session in Nath an Seifer Auditorium, following uncheon, a business meeting and a welcoming address by Kermit Mor rissey, assistant to the Brandeis President.
There were three co-editors of the i961 Aberjona in addition to a large and contributive staff.
Joseph Maloney, a freshman at Wellesley; and Malcolm MacKen zie, son of Dr. and Mrs.
To help our less fortunate Winchester friendB during the holiday season, gifts of money, fgod and clothing are earnestly solicited.
Maxwell R MeCreery, Treasurer 4 Curtis Street, PA 9-2036 Miss Nellie M Sullivan, Secretaiy 44 Spruce Street, PA 9-0096 It wasn't the best day possible, weather --wise, but considering the pre-game heavy rain the field was in surprisingly good shape.
The scats held between seven and eight thousand and there were surely two thousand standing around the field and on the hill, possibly more.
Both the Woburn band, un der Edson Kimball, und the Win Chester Band, under Fred Murray entertained at half-time with the Winchester Tumblettes also doing their stuff.
Fred Murray, who has replaced Wendell Withington as director o the Winchester band, didn’t even have a topcoat on against the weather.
Fred works so hard with his musicians that perhaps he did n’t need one.
He rates an accolade from the Star for eliminating th< trumpet fanfare from the Star Spangled Banner.
At half-time the Winchester band did its usual Thanksgiving routine, forming a big church and playing “Come, Ye Faithful Peo pie, Come” as the cheerleaders and tumblettes entered the church and knelt in the nave.
Winchester didn’t have too much to be thankful about as far as the game was concerned, but the loea fans did have the satisfaction of seeing their team stay in there and score in the last minute or so of play.
That sophomore baekfield Coach Knowlton trotted out to score Win Chester’s final touchdown looked very good.
Bob Bran ley barked sig nals to halfbacks Ed Cutting and Silm Rotondi with Steve Goldin at fullback.
There was the usual collection of dogs on the gridiron, and one white setter really gave the ofifi cials and players a bad time as he dashed around the field looking for a place to get out.
We noted that Trainer Lou Goddu did not partiei pate in the effort to round him up Joe Bellino, former Winchester football star and Navy All Ameri can, sat in the stands at about the fifty-yard line, watching his broth er, Mi key, bow out with a great exhibition.
Coach Knowlton thought h team played its best game of the season against the potent Tanners Asked whether he thought Woburn could beat Wakefield, he said such a game would be a dilly, but that he would hpve to pick Woburn.
Coach Walter White of Woburn thought Bellino was the best back his team faced all season.
He took a tre mentions beating from the big Wo burn line and must have been i very tired boy when it was all over Tommy Quinn, center, and Ed Foley, quarterback, were voted Woburn’s outstanding lineman and back in the game and received the Foley Memorial Awards.
Center Tom Mooney and full hack Mike Bellino got the Hevey and McCormack Trophies for best Winchester lineman and back.
Cliff Keane of Winchester, a member of the SNOW iOBLEN YOU NEED A M0T0-M0WER 20"" DELUXE POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3V4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and heavily packed snow.
Remote control chute handle directs tne stream of snow 25 feet in the direction you want.
Mon., Wed., Fri. evenings 5:30 to 8:30 Saturdays All Day nov9-tf Boston Globe sports staff, covered the game and was impressed with the Tanners’ Fnley.
Most popular place on the field was the chuck wagon with its hot dogs and coffee for the chilled inner men and gals.
Well, it’s all over again for another year with the series standing 27 wins for Winchester. for Woburn, and seven ties.
Thanksgiving Assembly At Lincoln A program showing how the Indians and Pilgrims lived together in a friendly way was told in pageant form by the girls and boys of Miss Beatrice Hutchison’s third grade for a Thanksgiving Assembly.
Dressed in Pilgrim costume Mary Belliston introduced the audinece to a group of Indians led by John Sarapina as Massasoit, Richard Maggio as Squanto and Gary Colbert as Samoset.
How the Indians built their tepees and hunted for food was told by Sandra Cavallo, Camille Figucia, John Crysdale, and Betty Ann Ellis.
Aided by Michael Stevenson and Victor Judge, Bruce Jones demonstrated Indian language with Tom-toms.
Deborah Rolli, Donna Penta, Nancy Casterlin, Michael Stevenson and Anthony Pizzo gave the poem “Indian Children” in choral speaking.
Bruce Hill and Mary Ann Bates told of their hard voyage to this country and the Pilgrim father, Sam Nowell, and mother, Jane Todesca, brought the invitation to the Indians to join in a great feast.
Readers Carol Bradley, Debbie Snow, Wendy Walker and David Benson provided interesting accounts of back-ground events in the life of the Pilgrims.
The group joined together in singing a hymn of thanksgiving such as the Pilgrims might have done just before their first Thanksgiving dinner.
WHS \1usi< dans Art* Honored Eighteen High School musicians have earned the honor to represent the school in the fourth annual Northeastern District Concert to be held in Marblehead on December 15, it was announced today byWendell S Withington. director of Music.
The largest number ever to be chosen from Winchester, the eighteen students passed competitive auditions held with musicians from the more than fifty high schools making up Essex and Middlesex Counties, which comprise the Northeastern District.
Traveling to Marblehead to play in the Northeastern District Orchestra will be Neal Baker, Robert Carroll, Betty Hauek, Paul Johnian, Joan Segerstrom and Joan Wilson.
Of these three have been accorded special honors by being selected to play solo chair in each of their respective sections.
Tohnian will be concert master, first violin; Miss Hauck, viola, first chair; and Miss Wilson second violin, first chair.
Kenneth Carlson, Robert Chase, Gwen Eugley, Laurel Ingraham, Deborah Nichols, Janet £Ules, Donald Orton and Susan Waldron.
L O E W 1 5 WINCHESTER Theatre — PA 9-2500 NOW PLAYING ENDS SATURDAY fRAncis of ASSISI with Bradford Hillman in Cinemascope and Color Also.
A crowd estimated as in excess of 10,000 turned out for the classic on a damp cold day, and despite the one-sided score, saw an interesting and exciting hall game.
Woburn was just too good for Winchester, hut to the Sachems’ credit it should be said that they never quit trying in the face of heavy odds.
Eddie Foley, Woburn’s crack quarterback lived up to all his adthe deep field men into the end 1 ed and arched a pretty pass to Mevance press raves, passing beauti| zone fully and running very well on Sachems' Best Showing roll-outs.
Without taking a thing from either of these boys, the Star will submit that it was the huge Orange line that made the difference and made it possible for both Foley and Durkin to shine as they did.
They completely outplayed the Sachem forwards, and it was this big edge up front that permitted the Woburn backs to get started and Foley to pick out his receivers.
At times the Tanner quarterback was all alone behind the line, simply standing there waiting for a receiver to show up.
No Winchester rusher could get through the Woburn protecting linemen to harry him at all.
Passing under such conditions just has to be effective with a sharp-shooter like Foley throwing.
Great Line Play On rollout plays by Foley and off tackle drives by Durkin the first line of Winchester defense was generally wiped out by the surge of Orange blockers ahead of the runner, and once around the corner, both Durkin and Foley had the necessary speed to go a long way It would have been interesting to see how Foley and Durkin would have done behind Winchester's line.
Certainly Eddie would not have been standing still on pass* plays motioning a receiver to get into position, and neither he nor Don would have gotten into the clear so easily.
It would have been equally interesting to see how Mikey Bellino would have fared given the help the Woburn backs received from their interference.
There were at least a couple of times, when a down field block would have let the flying Rellino go all the way.
On defense he made key tackle after key tack le, postponing for the time being at least Woburn scores apparently in the making.
As a matter of fact the entire Winchester team played its best game of the season, and though the Sachems left the field defeated they were far from dis graced.
Statistically the game was a lot closer than most would think after hearing the score.
Offensively Foley was the difference, but don’t forget the part that horrendous Woburn line played in his effectiveness.
For a wet cold day the ball handling was very good, and the field was in good condition.
With everyone in the huge crowd around the gridiron on his feet, Chilly Vozzella kicked off for Winchester.
Jim Periera ran the ball back 10 yards to the Woburn 30, and what followed made it look like a long cold morning for Win Chester.
Eaton was racked up hard at the line, but still picked up three, and Foley immediately passed to Dulong for a first down at the Winchester 43.
Foley carried to the 34, but on the next play the Orange was offisde, and the ball went back to the 39.
Once again Foley passed, this time to Periera, who was hauled down by Graham at the Winchester 21.
McDonough picked up five to the 16, and on the next play Winchester was called for defensive holding, and the ball was moved ahead to the nine.
Woburn Scores Mooney postponed trouble by dropping McDonough back on the 11, but Durkin bulled through to the five and then to the two.
Here with Winchester braced for a buck Foley flipped a dinky little pass to McDonough for the touchdown.
On the try for points after Foley was trapped well back of the line of scrimmage, but with two men hanging to him spotted Dulong alone in the end zone and hit him easy as pie.
A short kick was downed at the Sachems’ 43, and Bellino swept for 24 yards and a first down at the Woburn 41.
Then with Bellino carrying seven out of ten times Winchester moved to the Tanner 14 where on fourth down Colliander hit Timpone with a pass, only to have the Tanners drop the big end at the 10 and take the ball on downs.
Effective running by Foley and Durkin, coupled with passes to McDonough and Durkin gave Woburn a first down at the Winchester 30 as the first quarter ended.
McDonough, Foley and Durkin reached the 17, and here Foley fadCHARLIE KOCH is pleased to announce that he has just received a supply of FANNY PAKS also 50 DIFFERENT MODELS OF SKI PARKAS all winterized and ready to wear WOMEN’S SKI SWEATERS, up to $20 Charlie advises you girls to wear the sweater rather than trying to ski with -them.
WINE FLASKS — 3.95 6.95 WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
PArkview 9-1931 “Quality Jj Our Wait Prttioul -Amt ” Donough, just inside the back line of the end zone.
McDonough was hit by Bellino with a jarring tackle on the play and was taken out, just before Foley passed to Periera for the two bonus points that made the score 16-0.
Winchester couldn’t go after the kickoff, though Bellino brought the crowd to its feet with a scamper from his own 41 to the Woburn 39, a 20 yard sprint.
Two plays lat er big Rocky Nelson broke through to drop Colliander on a pass play back on the Winchester 49 and Bellino had to kick.
Here Winchester braced and forced Foley to kick, and his boot went only eight yards to the Woburn 28.
Sachems Score Rowe picked up four and an offside against Woburn put the ball at the 19.
With the ball at the 14 Bellino swept to the Woburn two and then in two bucks got over, though he was hurled back by the huge Orange line after the score.
On the kickoff Woburn was called for a personal foul and the ball went back to the Orange 24.
Foley faded and flipped a little screen pass to Durkin and the big half back, behind fine interference, rambled to the Winchester 21 where he was hauled down from behind by Donlon.
Foley immediately rolled out and was just knocked outside by Bellino at the Winchester three.
It took big Durkin two tries at the line to get over, and Foley on a rollout added the extra points.
Winchester had a chance to yell in the final minute of the half when Colliander, from his 41, hit Donlon with a pass and the left end lateralled out to Bellino, who was knocked outside at the Woburn 35.
A little more running room or one of those down field blocks would have sprung Mikey for a score.
As it was three passes fell incomplete and it was 24-6 as the teams left the field.
With the resumption of play in the third quarter Winchester got a bad break when shortly after the kickoff Bellino ran 35 yards from his 30 to the Woburn 35, only to have the ball brought back to the Winchester 21 for a clipping infraction.
Kick Blocked Bellino had to kick, and his boot was squarely blocked by Doherty and recovered by Sapienza of Woburn at the Winchester 10.
Foley immediately swept the Winchester left flank behind effective blocking to go into the end zone standing up, but his attempted pass for thfc extra point fell incomplete.
Facing a 30-6 count the Sachems scored in three plays after the kickoff which Donlon ran back to the Winchester 40.
Colliander hit Timpone for seven yards and Bellino drove through to midfield.
Great Run by Bellino From the 50 Bellino broke through the line and cut out to the right.
He got a good block up close and then cut back in, twisting away from one tackier, faking another and dodging a third.
Bellino failed to get over for the bonus points, but the score seemed to buck the Sachems up and they stopped Woburn after the kickoff, Foley kicking to Macdonald who got to the Winchester 38.
Woburn was called for holding on the kickoff, but instead of accepting the penalty and forcing the Orange to kick from their fifteen instead of their 30, the Sachems refused the penalty.
The teams swapped offsides and then from the Winchester 37, Colliander hit Donlon, who again lateralled to Bellino, Mikey being knocked outside at midfield.
An eight yard pass to Timpone and a quick opener with Cutting carrying reached the thirty.
Rowe picked up five and Bellino, on a sweep left was knocked outside at the Woburn 11.
As it was, tries at the line by Bellino and Cutting made nothing Bellino got only three on third down and a fourth down pass fell incomplete.
Foley on a roll out fled along the near sideline to the Winchester 17, where he was dropped from behind by Graham, after being slowed up by Bellino.
Here the drive might have ended when a Foley pass went squarely into the arms of a Winchester defender, only to be muffed to keep Woburn alive.
Bellino ruts in oil hi> 50-yard touchdown sprint Donlon on knees after throwing block.
Colliander in background. the Photo by Ryerson third quarter. 29, as the third quarter ended.
Foof Woburn defenders in the end ley just missed a first down on a roll out and then sneaked to the 18.
A pass to Dulong reached the eight, and Eaton on a sweep, fumbled and recovered to reach the two.
Eaton drilled through inside tackle for the touchdown, hut a sweep for the extra points by Foley was no good.
Here the locals missed a probable score after a pass to Donlon and a Cutting run off a fake kick reached the Woburn 41.
Colliander threw to Donlon to start a forward lateral play, but Bobby’s lateral intended for Bellino, was wide of the mark and Dulong dropped on the ball for Woburn.
Had the lateral been completed Bellino would have been long gone, with no one in position to stop him.
Durkin swept right, reaching the Winchester seven where he was brought down by Bellino.
At this point Coach Knowlton | had a lot of second team men in | action, including a sophomore backj field led by Boh Branley. zone for the touchdown.
Goldin was piled up short on the try for extra points and four plays later the final whistle blew.
Mahoney, DulTy, J Minucci ; It, Nowell, Vozzella, Zenga, Bates ; le, Donlon.
W Branley ; Kotondi ; fb, Wobu rn Winchester 4 12—42 6—18 Touchdowns, McDonough.
In The Exeter Lineup Bellino On the Air Winchester’s Joe Bellino, a superlative football player at Winchester High School and the United States Naval Academy, will be on the air Saturday afternoon with Sports Announcer Curt Gowdy and Paul Christman at the Army and Navy football game at -Soldiers’ Field in Philadelphia.
With Joe will be Army’s great full b a c k of yesteryear, Felix “Doc” Blanchard, the inside runner, with Glen Davis, the outside, of one of the most devastating onetwo punches in the history of intercollegiate football.
Winchester’s Bill West played in the Army backfield with “Doc” and Glen.
Both Joe and “Doc” will be heard Saturday commenting on the game, which if any urging is needed, should get a lot of TVs switched on for this most colorful of all football battles.
Sophs Score for Sachems Starting at the Woburn sparked by seven yard gains Rotondi and Cutting Winchester made a first down at the Woburn 27.
Richard H Bateman of 88 Ba49, i con Street, was another Winchester boy in the Exeter lineup in the New Hampshire prep school’s losing football game with Andover relinst I ( tin tly.
Tom, a 6 ft. pound end, Woburn put the ball on the 12. | has been hampered with injuries IT « u . i .. i | this fall, but made his letter and Here Goldin, running hard on a sweep right reached the three, and ,1S an upper middler will he availDonlon passed to Graham in a knot able for next year’s team.
Have you been DISAPPOINTThe Winchester Sons of Italy Bowling League will resume action this week after a two weeks break because of the Thanksgiving Holiday.
The ninety-eight participants are rolling them off as you are reading this column.
This particular affair is planned every second year in honor of the immediate Ex-Venerable and those before him.
Brother Michael D Saraco was the M.C. and after explaining the meaning of “Venerable’s Night,” he called upon the present Venerable Frank “Boss” Dattilo who said he was very happy to be Assistant Venerable during Anthony “Chick” Vespucci’s regime and thanked Chick for the valuable assistance given him in learning about the conducting of meetings and planning for various functions.
Carmine “Mingy” Frongillo was next to he introduced and it was mentioned that Mingy was a charter member of the organization and its first venerable in 1930.
Mingy has served three terms as the man with the gavel, has been elected a delegate to the annual S.O.I. annual conventions each year and has throughout the years.
In closing, Mingy recalled how the Winchester Lodge has grown to be one of the best in the state.
Brother Dattilo brought the audience back to the days when the first meetings of the S.O.I. were held at the Lyceum Hall, Chester Street, the old homestead on Swanton Street, and then moved to the fine new quarters on Swanton Street.
Angelo “Musky” Tofuri was then called forward and said he was happy that wives were attending this affair because previous to now Venerables’ Night was always a stag event.
Those asked by the M.C. to stand be recognized for the fine work they have done in various activities were Randy Kazazian, Bill and Mrs.
Venerable Frank “Boss” Ijattilo had the honor of presenting a beau tiful bouquet of roses to Mrs.
Saraco when Chick was presented with a wrist watch for his excellent two terms as Venerable, on behalf of all members of the Mens’ Lodge.
In accepting the gift “Chick” mentioned that his work as Venerable would not have been so successful had it not been for the fine men he had on his committees and for the support the members gave.
Chick” then closed by thanking all who worked for him and under him and wished the best of luck to the present office-holders for a most successful year ahead.
Saraco extended an invitation to all to remain for refreshments and dancing to Bob Fiore’s music makers.
Frank A and “Boss” Dattilo, Dom Provinzano, Angelo Tofuri, Gene Rotondi; Mingy Frongillo, Randy Kazazian, Pat Bruno, Carl Bertolucci, Richie Penta and chairman Mike D Saraco.
The next regular meeting of the Mens’ Lodge is to be held at the Club Hall on Monday evening, Dec.
At this meeting it is urged that all members of the champion Softhall Team, S.O.I., he present because sweaters are to he presented to those hoys who represented the S.O.I. during the Town Softball League contests last summer.
Strike Lanes dropped further back of the pace while Atlantic Gelatin gained attempting to take over third place from last year’s champs.
The biggest three string total seen in a long time was rolled by B Fiore, of 363, who may also take the top spot from B Kelley if he retains his present pace.
PARKVIEW 9-0029 Page Twelve THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 1961 Local Woman s Sets, Gostumes [n Washington Show When the curtain went up in Washington last week on a headline-making production of ‘Tinian’* Rainbow,’’ the sets and costumes of the Tracy Music Library of Boston were the first item on view.
This has much W inchester interest because the president of the Library, Mrs.
The production, staged by the American Ligiit Opera Company, made local and national news when the Department of Defense issued a directive 72 hours before opening that the three male leads, all servicemen, could not be in the show.
The ban, allegedly issued because of union pressure, was lifted by the Department of Defense within 24 hours after the Pentagon was deluged with complaints from interested parties, inclduing the office of the Secretary of Labor.
Objection was withdrawn, reportedly, when it was learned that members of the American Light Opera Company cast were unpaid.
The story made headlines in the three Washington daily papers, the local radio and television stations, and was carried by UPT and AP wire services and the ABC and NBC networks.
Metcalf, president of the Tracy Music Library, which has supplied the ALOC with costumes and sets for each of its shows.
Gene Barth, who for five years was artistic director of Theatre Marque, offBroadway.
The sets and costumes were executed by Tracy Music Li brary and, after this production will become part of its vast lend ing library which supplies theatre groups across the country.
Christmas Vespers Planned For December 10 On Sunday afternoon, December 10, the Senior Choir of the First Congregational Church will present a Christmas Vesper program in the main sanctuary from 4 to 5 m.
The program will consist of excerpts from Benjamin Britten’s “A Christmas of Carols” and other Christmas choral favorites.
A great range of musical styles will be presented dating from the 16th century up to the present time.
Robert Anderson, harpist, will be the featured guest instrumentalist for the program.
Anderson will present harp solos in addition to providing an accompaniment for some of the choral music.
The entire community is invited to attend this program of Christmas music.
This program is being planned and directed by Robert A White, choirmaster.
To determine the number of directors to be elected and the term of years for which they will serve.
Trustee for Three Years William F Morton Nominating Committee for 1962 Howard W Bates, Mrs.
Robert J Grenzeback. nov23-2t Attended Seminar Mary M Cipolla of the “Studio of Electrolysis” in Arlington, attended the seminar of the American Electrolysis Association Sunday, November 12, at the Sheraton Plaza Htoel.
Medical lectures and electrolysis forums were the highlights of the seminar.
William Montagna, dermatologist, spoke on the “Biology of Hair Growth” and Dr.
New officers were installed in A.E.A. followed by dinner and entertainment.
PARKVIEW 9-0029 WGBH-Channet 2 Benefit This week end at the Winchester High School Auditorium the Children’s Theater School, under the direction of Mrs.
Carlene SamoilotT and her assistants, will present the results of ten weeks of hard work on its current production to the public.
The forty young people help in all phases of the theatrical production, taking an active part in the designing and painting of the scenery, the casting of the plays and the creating of the characters.
The musical background gives children an opportunity to play their roles in the scenes from “Heidi,” “Robinson Crusoe” and “Midsummer Night’s Dream” with vivacity and verve.
Everyone will enjoy the singing and dancing of the lively and talented actors.
The Friday, December 1, performance at 3:45m. is the annual Community School Association live theater presentation.
The proceeds of the performance on Saturday, December 2, at 2:00m. will be given to WGBH-Channel 2.
Tickets are also available at Hevey’s Pharmacy and McCormack’s Apothecary and will also be sold at the door.
Local Musicians In Reading Event On Saturday, December 2nd, at 8:15m., the Rending Symphony Orchestra will give the first concert of its twenty-ninth season in the Reading Memorial High School Auditorium.
Weston L Brannon, well known in Winchester, will begin his thirteenth year as conduct 1 or of the orchestra.
Local musicians who will perform in this concert include Theodore Messer, violin; Mary Jane Anderson, harp; and u young newcomer to the orchestra, Robert Mingolelli, trumpet.
Any Winchester musicians who are interested in joining this wellestablished orchestra will be most welcome, and should contact Weston Brannen, 2 Lincoln Street, Stoneham.
The all day sale, from 9m. to 5m. will feature hundreds of special items, including gifts from prominent citizens.
The sale is being sponsored by the Woman’s Auxiliary to Morgan Memorial which maintains the Goodwill Day Nursery, caring for 50 children of working mothers.
Elected to the hoard of trustees was Edward V French of 2 Ledgej wood Road.
Charles E Greene j of 7 Lewis Road was elected a corporate member, and Mr Lewis M j Foster of 34 Lloyd Street was named to the executive committee.
David Anderson, professor of Physics at Oberlin College will he the speaker.
Increased convenience of overall directory usage by grouping telephone numbers into geographical areas.
Easier handling of Boston Directory because of more convenient size and weight.
Listings of all other telephones in Boston and Vicinity appear in one of the three existing regional directories — the North Suburban, the South Suburban, the West Suburban.
YELLOW PAGES DIRECTORY CONTINUES The Boston Yellow Pages Directory will continue to be published without change.
It will cover the same area as formerly and every business customer will continue to be listed in it.
Suburban Directories will also have their Yellow Pages sections as at present.
The City of Boston, including Downtown Exchanges Brighton Charlestown Dorchester East Boston Jamaica Plain Mattapan Roslindale Roxbury West Roxbury and for: Brookline Cambridge Somerville PLEASE INDICATE FUTURE DIRECTORY REQUIREMENTS With the completion of the delivery of new directories in December, each customer will have a complete set of four — plus a return postcard.
The postcard is to be used to indicate future directory requirements, and should be filled out and mailed promptly.
ADDITIONAL DIRECTORIES ON REQUEST If additional copies of any current directory are required, they may be obtained, without obligation, from any Telephone Business Office.
TELEPHONE 1 Page Thirteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 1961 FORESTER’S FLOWER SHOP ★ CUT FLOWERS ★ WEDDING FLOWERS ir FLORAL DESIGNS PA 9-1077 Eves.
Trvinjr Street wishos to express her thanks to the Winchester Police Department and to the auxiliary police for their kind assistance in rushing her father to the Hospital on November 7.
CZ//z£J fooLcj.aiee^-^ PA 9-2990 TV Service Phono Radio Winchester iance Co.
SPECIALS GENUINE BLACK FOX COLLARS *19.95 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats CASHMERE SWEATERS WITH MINK COLLARS AND LINED *47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED INTO A CAPE, STOLE or CAPELET at a labor charge of $ 20 SWARTZ FURRIER 24 College Avenue Davis Square Somerville SOmerset 5-3399 oct6-eow Sunday.
The Senior MYF will leave the church by auto to , attend Handel’s ‘‘MeHHiah” at Symphony Hall.
The sacrament of Holy Communion will be observed, This will be “Christian Enlistment” Sunday for all members and frienda of the church.
Meeting of all canvassers for the Christian Enlistment will meet at the church. 6:00m.
Let us tell you about the advantages of oiL Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-3000 iukr2-lt EVENTS OF THE WEEK Tuesday, December 5.
Meeting of the Ministerial Association at the First Congregational Church. 8:00m.
PA 9-2220 Roy W Horn, Prop. july20^^ IMMACULATE CONCEPTION CHURCH 1004 Main Street, Winchester Rev.
Sunday School is held at the same time n« the Church S*»rvfr*» Wednesday evening testimonial meeting at 8 :00 o’clock.
Spiritual understanding of God’s creation helps mun meet everyday problems.
This is a leading point of the Lesson-Sermon entitled “God the Only Cause and Creator” to be heard at Christian Science churches Sunday.
The Welcome Wagon Hostess Will Knock on Your Door with Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors und Your Civic and Social Welfare Leaders ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies EVENTS OF THE WEEK Monday, December 4.
Advent Corporate Communion for men and boys followed by breakfast in Hadley HaJl. 9:15m.
F News On November 26, the Y.P.F. started a new series on “ YoungMarriages.
M A movie entitled “How Much Affection” was shown and was followed by an interesting discussion.
Next week, December 3, there will be a program on “The Special Problems of Teen-Age Marriage” with speaker Mr Batten, our wellknown director of Christian Education.
Men J<imUt Rolerl C JJajley 39 Church Street Winchester PArkview 94)200 Page Fourteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 30.
LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE OF EVERY DESCRIPTION 44 On Tuesday morning of this week at the home of Mrs.
Gardner Bradlee, 46 Lorena Road, a “decade coffee” was held for recent graduates of Wellesley College now living in Winchester.
This social get-together was sponsored by the Winchester Wellesley Club.
Charles T Main, 2nd, president of the* club were present to welcome these young alumnae, among whom were several who have only recently moved to Winchester.
Let’s Sing Along With Marycliff Marycliff Academy will present its second annual Minstrel Show on Friday evening December 1.
The show, co-sponsored by the Sodality and Mission Club, will be held at 7:15 in the school auditorium located at 15 High Street, Winchester.
For the second year, Father David Cummiskey, S.J., will direct the girls efforts.
Vernon Street PA 9-3400 novl0-tf 5 Vi<yo Interest on Your Savings INVESTED IN CATHOLIC CHURCH AND HOSPITAL BONDS In Units of $500 or More KEENAN & CLAREY, Inc.
PA 9-2696 WI Name Address City The Symmes’ Back from Tour Of the Orient Mr and Mrs.
Marshall Symmes of Yale Street have returned from a two-month tour of the Orient, in which they visited the major cities of Japan, including Tokyo, Kamakura, Nara, Osaka, Kobe, Kyoto, and Yokohama.
They also visited the Presidential Palace in Manila, and the war memorial to those lost in World War II located just outside Fort McKinley in the Philippines.
Incised in its marble is the name of Anthony Duquette, formerly of Winchester, who was captured by the Japanese on Corregidor and perished in a ship at sea.
At Kamakura, Japan, the Symmes visited the famous “Daibutsu,” or Great Buddha, which they say is some three stories tall, and of course, a great tourist attraction.
In Tokyo the Symmes stayed at the Imperial Hotel at the same time that President Sukarno of Indonesia and his entourage were booked at the hotel.
Naturally enough, the Symmes did not get to travel in Communist China, although they did visit the port of Kowloon and looked across the “bamboo” curtain, which is, of course, actually an electrified chain link steel fence.
The Symmes also visited the beautiful port of Hong Kong, and stopped off at Hawaii on the way home.
On their way to Japan they flew to Seattle where they had supper, thence flying by night over the Pacific to have breakfast in Tokyo.
We suspect that with the hundreds of pictures they took during their new travels, the Symmes travel lectures will be still more interesting.
In any case, Marshall Symmes made it back to Town Meeting Monday night in time to keep up his record of attendance.
Mother M Helena and Sister M Joan bold huge teddy bear that is among the prizes for the Christmas Bazaar of the Medieal Missionaries of Mary December 2 at their novitiate house on Arlington Street. insurance AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 1 THOMPSON STREET Rea.
The LORD WAKEFIELD Hotel and Restaurants will open on or about December 15 • Rapid access to all major routes joining 128.
Whitfield Properties 40 Holton Street, Winchesver PArkview 9-3700 The Medical Missionaries of Mary announce their annual Christmas Bazaar for Saturday, December 2, at their Novitiate House on Arlington Street.
The Bazaar will be open from nine in the morning until nine at night, and will feature many booths well stocked with lovely and attractive articles for Christmas gifts, as well as bouninteresting to note that during the next week, two Sisters from Winchester will join with their colleagues from England and Ireland to travel to East Africa.
Sister M Denjse Donovan, M.M.M., R.N., S.C.M., is flying on December 6 from Dublin to Croyden, England, via Amsterdam and Cairo to Addis Adak, Ethiopia.
She will reside temporarily in the capitol, Addis Abteous bakery tables to which many of Winchester’s ladies contribute their finest cakes and specialties.
The public is invited to attend, and to partake of the excellent meals served for their enjoyment.
Among them is one of the largest Teddy Bears ever seen in Winchester, which will thrill the hearts of all youngsters at the Bazaar.
Bazaar Aids Missions Proceeds of this Bazaar will be devoted to the support of the work conducted by these medical Sisters in various parts of the mission world.
It is j aba, with Medical Missionaries of Mary assigned there, until the new ‘ 1 "" ' ’ j hospital in Jimma is ready for occupation.
Sister M Elizabeth, M.M.M., B.S., a registered Medieal Technician will also leave Ireland in December, travelling by boat to Tanganyika, via the Suez Canal.
Hospital in Dareda, Tanganyika, and will work under the former Superior of the Winchester Novitiate, Mother M Therese, M.M.M., who is now in charge of the Sisters stationed in Dareda.
A third mission group is now on the high seas, bound via the Suez for the Island of Taiwan (Formosa) where they will open the first Oriental hospital of the Medical Missionaries of Mary.
Generous support to the mission work of the Sisters will be given by many people of Winchester, who are led by an outstanding group of volunteers belonging to the Men’s j Committee, and to the ladies in | charge of the various booths.
Exclusive Broker MURRAY & GILLETT PArkview 9-3600 $18,900 — EXCLUSIVE New-to-the-murket six-room older Colonial on quiet street in Washington School area.
Three chambers, ceramic-tile bath, private hath with master bedroom and 22x22 family room.
Lower level has large recreation room with fireplace and oversized workshop area, lavatory, laundry, dark room and two-car garage.
This interesting home was designed and contoured to tit a most delightful tree-studded lot.
WHITTEMORE, Realtor .18 Church Street I* A 9-1320, 0047, 5612, 2672. 1161, 5016, and EX 5-1784 WINCHESTER Charm and dignity lend enchantment to this large, gracious home in the Myopia Hill section.
Entertaining will be easy with the facilities of an ultra-modern kitchen.
If you appreciate the exquisite woodwork and solid structure of an older home situated on threefourths of an acre of land, you should make an appointment today to see this value at only $43,900.
Winchester P\ 9-6100 REAL ESTATE PARKHURST SCHOOL A PICTURE CAPE with all the rooms you need.
Living room, dining room, fully equipped kitchen, paneled den, master bedroom and tiled bath on the first floor.
Upstairs you'll find a large bedroom, another even larger, and a sceond tiled hath.
Paneled recreation room, breezeway, and two-car garage complete the picture.
Exclusive with RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers Gertrude 11.
Murphy, PA 9-6213 Marion R Ferrimon, PA 9-1136 Charles T McCarthy, PA 9-5972 Florence M Salyer, PA 9-1966 SOMETHING SPECIAL FOR THE DISCRIMINATING BUYER Three-year-old, traditionally styled Cape Ranch in one of Winchester’s finest locations, on beautiful wooded, landscaped lot.
Quality construction and architectural design are evident at first glance.
Three twin bedrooms, two baths, spacious fireplaced living room, dining room, modern kitchen with breakfast area.
Lower level is completely and artistically finished and includes a family room with fireplace, a large play area, laundry, workshop, lavatory, plus a newly constructed fallout shelter.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis BR 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp PA 9-0373 HORACE FORD — Realtor PA 9-58«7 Jean Gibb PA 9-3808 WINCHESTER CAPE Attractive pre-war Cape, offers large living room, dining room, modern electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor.
Unusual four-bedroom, 2 ^ -bath home with den in secluded wooded area near Washington School.
Features of this three-bedroom house include ultra-modern kitchen, 1 V L» baths, small den in addition to a living room and dining room.
PA 9-326S PA 9-2790 — PA 9-5550 ONE OF ROYAL BARRY WILLS’ FINEST Long, rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shingle English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline.
Large reception hall with graceful curved stairway, step-down 17x28 baywindowed fireplaced living room, panelled den, 20-foot fireplaced dining room, all-electric built-in kitchen, jalousied porch, powdei room.
Six bedrooms and three baths on second floor including fireplaced master bedroom suite.
For appointment call exclusive broker, BLXBY & NORTHRUP 24 Thompson Street REALTORS PArkview 9-4240 A COLONIAL CHARMER This home is located in our absolutely best West Side location.
JOSEPHSON Real Estate 5 Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 For Rent WEDCEWOOD APARTMENTS On tin* shore of Wedge Pond in W inchester ('(‘liter are newly completed Wedgewood \partmcnts, where you ,... v enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living.
Make an appointment today to sec lliese apartments about which the whole town is talking.
Medford Laundromat and Appliance Service 81 High St., Medford, EX 5-9775 j BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES PAINT STORES Expanding National Paint Manufacturer HAS Dealer Franchise Available in Area. 12 to 36 Months Financing Merchandising Demonstrations Promotions National and Local Advertising Arranged.
PArkview fr-4572 janl9-tf CLEANING WINCHESTER CLEANING SERVICE Storm Windows, Floors, Paint Washing, Rubbish Disposal.
WElla 5-0169 augl2-tf Gutters Cleaned and Oiled ROOFS REPAIRED STORM WINDOWS installed PA 9-5917 Call after 6:00m. nov28-2t CONTRACTORS FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTORS Established 1914 Bulldozing — Excavating Driveways — Roads Landscaping — Trucking Loam, sand, gravel, crushed stone, shrubs Tel.
WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 Fireplace Wood Well-seasoned flak & Maple.
H<> sizes 4-6 woman’* clothing. »i suits, topcoat. size US; 9*12 Mi ac. household items.
Winchester PArkview 9-3193 93 Spring Street, Medford EXport 6-7300 Edward P Lynch RUBBISH REMOVAL 48 White Street, Winchester Tel.
Far the finest, most dependable TV-BADIO -HI-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMBOS TYPING SERVICE l WILL DO any kind of typing.
Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. apr27-tf WANTED WANTED Antiques — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc.
Call Stoneham.8-1939 JOHN J FOLEY juul-tf FOR SALK Universal electric range 3Hin.
Ruy my pracliLnldy new J‘Vf«0 Hillman f » »• only Demonstration arranged.
FOR SALK — Frigidnire G.M. refrigerator only 7 years old, family size, storage <k>or.
Call OUver 8-3293. | nov30-4t * FOR SALE — 1951 De Soto 4-door sedan. »td. shift.
Call MO 3-3836. nov23-3t * REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because we UBe remnants.
Haverty, WElls 3-6889. septl2-tf FOR SALE — Direct from owner, $26,600 compact English brick in excellent West Sitle location.
Pleasant center entrance hull, 22-foot fi replaced living room, dining room, kitchen with dishwasher, disposal. screen porch.
Upstairs, large master bedroom, 2 twin-sized bedrooms, nursery, and tiled bath.
FOR SALE — 1955 Pontiac convertible in good running condition, but needing Rome body work.
FOR RENT FOR RENT Combination living-bedroom, private bath, kitchenette, all utilities, parking.
Call PA 9-0898. nov23-2t FOR RENT — Professional office space with parking on grounds, central location.
Call PA 9-5860. oct5-tf WANTED WANTED — Old coins, private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, also top price for other coins.
Call PA 9-3340. nov30-3t \y ANTED — Winchester High School teacher needs recent model Chevrolet.
HELP WANTED HELP WANTED— Reliable woman will mind children and do light housekeeping two days a week.
Will you have money for a Christmas Luw-uwuy 7 Avon Cosmetics will show you how.
WORK WANTED WORK WANTED— Reliable young wornan wishes to* cure for children in her home for working mothers.
Excellent care given, ( all PA 9-6138. nov30-2t HELP WANTED Asks Fare In Winter Driving “Many accidents and serious traffic delays on # Massachusetts highways during past winters were* caused by cars being stuck in snow or skidding on ice.
Much of the trouble encountered by motorists could have been prevented by proper vehicle maintenance, equipment and more thoughtful driver practices,’ said registrar ('lenient A Riley today.
Good snow tires can provide up to 51 per cent better traction in loosely packed snow and up to 28 per cent improvement on ice than will regular tires if road conditions are not too severe Or grades too steep.
A car with regular treads travelling 20 MPH on dry pavement can be stopped in 21 feet.
Use of vehicles only when necessary when snow and ice are on highways or when serious storms are threatened will reduce the hazards of driving,” concluded registrar Riley.
WINCHESTER SAVINGS HANK Ralph W Hutch, Treasurer. nov23-3t WORK WANTED WORK WANTED — 21-year-old Swedish girl wishes work as mother’s helper, live in.
TcL WElla 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There is a way out.
All makes ineluding Japanese manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service.
NOrmandy 5-4620. jun22-tf DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home und industrial use.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and nil Over The World can be niude at tar ill rates by calling your Authorized Truvel Agent.
A petition bus been presented to said Court for probute of a certain instrument purporting to be the lust will of said deceased by BEATRICE L SMITH of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond. if you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should lUe a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge hefore ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyfirst duy of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
John C Leggut, Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this twenty-seventh day of November 1961.
To all persons interested in the estate of FRANCIS MEREDITH COOPER also known as F MEREDITH COOPER late of Winchester in snid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to snid Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the Inst will of snid deceased by MARGARET LOUISE COOPER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex pmying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by PERCY BUGBEE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that be be appointed administrator with the will annexed of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond.
A libel has been presented to said Court by your wife JANE E ZIMMER praying that a divorce from the bond of matrimony between herself and you be decreed for the cause of cruel and abusive treatment and praying for alimony and for custody of and allowance for minor children.
John V Harvey, Register. nov23-3t STONEHAJV^ /LUMBER 1)1 11. l ( 21 J MAIN STREET 4.18.
To nil persons interested in the estate of MARY AGNES McCORMACK late of Win Chester in Sliid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ROBERT MICHAEL McCOR MACK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying thnt he be appointed oxecutor thereof without giving a surety on his bond.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this sixteenth duy of November 1961.
THEN DIAL PA 9-0029 Mr Clarence Blake spoke on pewter at the November meeting of the Antique Study Group.
He started his talk by explaining that pewter is an alloy composed principally of tin with copper, antimony, bismuth and sometimes lead as the other ingredients.
Next he told how early pewter was manufactured, comparing the English method with the American.
These are quite different from the large, deep hammer marks of modern pewter.
Mr Blake gave the names and dates of the leading early pewterers of this country.
He told members what is rare, what is desired by collectors, what was made before 1825 and what pieces followed.
Most of the pewter made after 1825 is really Brittannia This is a superior grade of pewter and was used for all sorts of household objects.
Marks were explained and again comparisons were made between the English and American.
Marks help but one with a good knowledge of pewter can recognize a piece as being made by a certain man by telltale characteristics.
Any members wishing to do re search on pewter know what books to read and where they can be found as Mr Blake was, as always, generous with his knowledge.
Blake for bringing so many pieces from their own collection for the group to see and study at close range.
As Mr Blake was explaining he was showing a piece to illustrate his remarks.
Those of us who can never hope to own a piece of early pewter can be happy in the knowledge that Brittannia ware offers variety, pleasing design and sound workmanship.
The pre-service music at 10:40m. will consist of traditional carols sung by the full choir and the male choir, followed by selections from the Christmas Oratorio by SaintSaens.
The choir soloists are Estelle MeNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; Sidney Blanchard, Jr., baritone.
Old-Fashioned Thanksgiving Four generations gathered for Thanksgiving this year at the home of Mr and Mrs.
Heading the group were Mr C E Clarke of Winchester and his daughter, Marion, father and sister of Mrs.
C Emery Knight and their children, Linda, Barbara and Judy; Mr and Mrs.
Charles F Deroo and their children, Nancy, Charles, Beth, I George and Helen; and Mr and Mrs.
Rounding out the gathering were ; two family friends, Miss Mabel Burns of Cambridge and Miss Marguerite Troop of Winchester.
Don’t Put Off —Send $1.50 for ITCH-AID Now — PHARMACY GIRL, Inc. f Labs Fifth Ave., Brookfield, Conn.
Food, medical and baby survival kits available for use in case of nuclear attack.
Carefully balanced diet, assembled according to Civil Defense specifications.
By providing checking accounts, so that bills can be safely paid via the postal route; and banking-by-mail service, so deposits can be made any time at the depositor’s convenience.
And our policy of acting promptly on applications for creditloans to help meet urgent home repair needs, for example— has saved local people countless dollars.
Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Finger In The Pie Congra tula tions One of the most awful things about this war hysteria is the cal lousness of mind that it breeds.
Oh well, then \V<* now speak of spending mil lions of lives as we do millions dollars. of Shelters have apparently become a status symbol on the order of swimming pools.
IF, according to our President we now have a more than adequate stock of nuclear weapons, then let us not follow the lead of the Abombinable Tyrant in the Kremlin and emulate Soviet brutality; let us not fall into the trap of a vicious circle; let us maintain dignity. decency, and Christian charity and refrain from further testing The Soviet resumption brought terror to the world; let us not add to it the despair of nations.
Man If I had time, I think I’d brood Upon my grievous aptitude For sanding wood, repainting chairs, And miscellaneous repairs.
My friends and neighbors call on me To stop a leak, replant a tree, Upholster chairs, adjust a clock Remodel rooms, or fix a lock.
Leonard K Sehiff Helping TWO Ways Anne Foley, TB Christmas Seal campaign chairman of Middlesex County thought of a method recently that some residents are using now as they send their checks to the Christmas Seal Campaign.
Mickles and dimes can add very quickly to make dollars that fight tuberculosis in Middlesex County,” she said.
One may, of course, walk out on it, hut possibly the feature is to follow, and we hate to sacrifice our seat.
One way out, we have discovered, is to direct our attention, not to plot or action, but to the sheer me chanical manipulation of the many and various factors involved in the production of even a poor picture Let us assume that a book or play has been accepted for the screen.
Immediately an intricate and complicated series of events springs into being.
Hangings are selected in the drapery department, which incidentally, is a complete little shop with shelves of material, samples, counters and clerks.
The restaurant feeds the players and prepares any scenes of a culinary nature.
Headquarters and Maintenance Support Company of t lie 79 1th Ordnance Battalion, 94th Infantry Division, was awarded the Military Order of World Wars Trophy for having the outstanding combat or combat support company in Greater Boston.
The Hinxinans live at 53 Shore Road, Winchester. ting department edits the whole, and the picture is then ready for other departments concerned with distribution.
The wonder is that, with all the multifarious departments and thousands of individuals concerned, and with outdoor scenes frequently bunched together for fair weather days and indoor scenes for rainy ones, anything ever emerges that provides even a semblance of continuity, of naturalness, or of life itself.
Tidbit There was once a backwoodsman who boasted that his hound Tige was the best hunting dog in seven counties.
He said he never went hunting that Tige did not tree a varmint, and that by the way he barked old Tige always told him what the varmint was.
A newcomer to the settlement, who thought that the old-timer must be stretching the blanket a bit, offered to bet that old Tige could not tell one varmint from another.
When they reached the tree and held up their torch, sure enough there was a bobcat.
The newcomer was ready to pay the wager, but the night was young and old-timer was eager for more hunting.
Then suddenly his bark hanged to a long howl that seemed to shake the trees and hills.
Chairman for the evening, Joe Maloney, will introduce Leo L Laughlin, agent-in-charge of the Boston office of the F.R.L Because of his wide experience, the club is assured of a very interesting evening.
Plans are underway for the “Holiday Hop” on Friday evening, December 29.
John and Virginia O’Grady and Charles and Helen McLaughlin, tickets; Ray i and Kay Dunn, refreshments; and Oscar and Mary Baerenwald, decoI rations.
Israel Bonds In the first response to the request for the enrollment of 3000 volunteers, more than 2000 Greater Boston men and women have enrolled as workers for Action Day Sunday December 3, in the all-out effort to help boost Israel Bond sales to the 1961 goal of $1,500,000.
On Action Day, the volunteers will visit more than 30,000 Jewish homes in the Greater Boston area to sell Israel Bonds.
He ofrered these helpful hints on how to mail your Christmas cards and gifts to insure prompt and safe delivery before December 25.
Sent by First Class mail, they are sorted and delivered first, and if you include your return address on each envelope, they will he forwarded in the event of a change of address, or if they are undeliverable, they will be returned to you.
Also, you can write a personal message on the Christmas cards sent by First Class mail; whereas, only your signature is authorized on cards sent at the 3 cents, unsealed Third Class rate.
Put an extra label carrying the recipients and senders name and address inside every package.
In conclusion, the Postmaster said, “By taking a little extra care with your Christmas mailings right now, you’ll avoid disappointing friends and loved ones.
Admission for members of the V.F.W. and it* auxiliary is a 1962 Dues Card.
Any ladies or men from Winchester interested in joining the V.F.W. or its auxiliary are cordially invited to attend.
It is hoped many veterans from Winchester who have served overseas and their wives, mothers, sisters, daughters or grandaughters 16 years of age or older will attend this social.
Stoneham, Medford, Melrose, Malden, Everett, Reading and North Reading.
Quality Footwear for men, women and children since 1060 Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m.
Avenue, Arlington Center Mission 3-S000 ► ee + ANNIVERSARY ■kaVvV FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
The Governor has granted this time to his home town high school to speak for a purpose to which he is known to be dedicated.
The talk is regretfully not open to the public as the auditorium accommodates only the student body.
Governor Volpe, who resides at 10 Everett Avenue, is himself a graduate of neighboring Malden High School as well as Wentworth Institute in Boston.
That Gamblers Contact State Legislators State ReprescntTitrve Harrison C hadwick <>t"" 21 Everett Avenue challenged House Speaker John F Thompson this week to conduct public hearings to review Rep.
Chadwick’s charges that state legislators and higher political figures maintained contacts with organized gamblers.
Mr Chadwick was quoted as saying that hookies have contacts with Massachusetts legislators, notably lawyers, and that “in many instances bookies are able to throw organizational workers and very considerable finances into a campaign to defeat someone whom they feel is hurting their operations.” high is On Mill i B ontL Too Getting Around Though his All American football days are now behind him, Winchester’s Joe Bellino is still in demand for personal appearances.
Last Friday Bullfct Joe went to the White House to present President Kennedy with the yearbook of the Annapolis Class of 1961.
While there he presented the President’s son with a copy of “Navy’s Joe Bellino,” the popular history of Bellino's life in Winchester and at Annapolis, by Dr. and Mrs.
Saturday Joe will be in Baltimore for radio and TV appearances and to autograph copies of his hook at Rutzler’s, big department store.
Christmas In Center Decorations Up Of Town Today High hopes, hard work, and many hours of planning come to fruition today when the first public Christmas decorations in years go up in W inchester Centre.
And the people to credit for this lie Christinas decorations in years are lighted in the Centre.
There will be four large wreaths on the arches of the Boston and Maine overpass in the Centre proper.
There will be two large wreaths on the B & M overhead at Watertield Road.
In addition, the large tree on the Mill Pond island will be decorated with blue lights.
The decorations were made possible by generous contributions from Winchester merchants and firms, plus a $300 appropriation voted by Town Meeting last Spring.
At least two contributions came from former Winchester residents now living in other parts of the country.
Follower Of Schweitzer Unitarians Hear Jungle Doctor Winchester Unitariansturned out in force Sunday.
December 3 to hear a sermon by tin* world-famous follower of Albert Schweitzer.
Theodor Binder at the First Unitarian Church on Marlboro Street in Boston.
Binder, who left a thriving practice in the capital city of Lima, Peril to serve as a doctor to the sick and poor of Peru’s jungle interior, urged his listeners to transcend the “mass anonymity” of their impersonal age and make a personal decision to decrease human suffering.
Binder said that ultimately we can blame no one but ourselves for the type of world in which we live.
The hospital, named for Albert Schweitzer, was founded on January 11, 19(50, and is patterned after Dr.
FILM IS SHOWN After the sermon Sunday, Winchester Unitarians saw Erica Anderson’s extremely moving film, “A Clearing in the Jungle,” which brilliantly evoked the heartache and suffering of these Peruvian jungle people.
The hospital attempts to serve by itself a 200square mile area in which eight out of ten children die of tuberculosis before age ten.
With restraint and artistry Miss Anderson’s camera moved through the hospital from bed to bed, from young face to old face, from pain to greater pain, from the anguish of illness to the emerging joy of recovery.
Mr Ralph Kaminsky of the (ireater Boston Study Committee and Mr Howard Whitmore, Jr., of Newton were in full agreement on the need for some kind of advisory planning committee fur this area.
In the public reaction that resulted very harsh words were exchanged by Governor John A Volpe and Mayor Collins of Boston.
The mayor charged the Governor with inaction in the face of corruption in the Boston police department.
The Governor replied from his California vacation spot that he would take vigorous action on the disclosures immediately upon his return.
VISITS STAR In a special interview at the Star, Representative Chadwick said he had first heard that Mr Thompson had sent him a letter when he was informed of this fact by a Boston Globe reporter.
That the hearing be open to the public and the press; and That he be accorded the courtesy of bringing with him such legal counsel as he desired.
Singing New & Group , Father Joyce made the point that the need for long-range planning is national in scope and is not confined to isolated cities as we are accustomed to view them.
Winchester is a part of the Federally-defined standard Metropolitan area which included 77 eities and towns tied to Boston by various services.
Father Joyce cautioned the audience that planning is essential if we are to avoid tragic mistakes in building for the future.
He used the transportation problem to illustrate the direction or growth that a Metropolitan area can take.
He said that planning is simply consideration for the future, and stressed in governmental citizen interest in governmental implementation of plans.
Answering the fears of some communities that they would surrender autonomy in a planned region he said that “The desire for lutonomy and desire for Home Rule is a failure to understand the nature of the problem.
Mr Whitmore urged onsideration of the present bill coming before the Legislature this year which would set up an Advisory Council and would in no way Dad to metropolitan government.
All three speakers made an eloquent and logical plea for more public interest and better political leadership to cope with the complex problems created by our grow1 weather it is hoped to put the rink ing metropolitan areas. j into use.
Winchester has a new singing group, a male quartet formed with the help of the Two By Fours, the community’s eight-year old male double quartet.
Members of the quartet were selected from 11 candidates who tried out for the four parts during the past five weeks.
Singing in the new group will be Robert Horne of 24 Mayflower Road; Bradford Johnson, a former Winchester resident now living in Watertown; Dr.
It is understood that the quartet, at present without a name, will not he directly associated with the Two By Fours, although it will perform many Two By Four arrangements suitable for four-part singing.
We fully and humbly recognize our presumptuousness in daring to make selections from so able a group of candidates and did so only in view of what appeared to be a job that we felt needed to be done.
SINGING, continued on page 4 Transportation Authority HARRISON W CHADWICK At the Star office.
Representative Chadwick repeated his statement that he would talk anywhere on this matter, so long as any hearing on the question was not closed to the public and press. “1 think this is a matter about which the public and press have not only a right but a duty to be informed,” he explained.
MORAL ISSUE Mr Chadwick said that the question of alleged liaison between legislators and officials and organized gambling was at once a moral, economic, and political issue.
It passed, the bill would take the form of enabling legislation permitting W inchester and whatever other tow ns would like to join it to lease the track for use as a commuter line.
Mr Chadwick has filed the bill, he told the Star, in response to information from Mr McGinnis, president of the B & M line, that rail service may be discontinued as of May, 1962.
It has been Mr McGinnis’ position that the opening up of Route 93 has cut into commuter use of the railroad so badly that operation of the railroad is no longer financially supportable.
Alone, Mr Chadwick believes, Winchester could probably not break even financially in operating such a transportation authority.
It is highly probable, however, he pointed out, that if such towns as Lowell and Nashua on the B & M New Hampshire division, and other communities like Wilmington, Lowell, Woburn, and Andover join with us to operate Budd car service, we could break even.
Upon completing his studies he became associated with the Beggs and Cobb Tanning Company until the company ceased its Winchester operation in December of 1957.
I bis group of anti-litter buggers is on the war path against every hit of refuse in every corner of Winchester.
It there s a single gum wrapper left between Cambridge Street and Forest Street when they gel through, it won’t be their fault.
New Outdoor Skating Rink The park department has constructed an outdoor skating rink at the corner of Shore Road and Spruce Street in the graded area to the west of the Little League baseball field.
The banked area will be flooded and with the advent of colder The citizens of Winchester,” writes their spokesman, Mr James F Fitzsimmons of 4 Robinson Circle, are proud of this town and are now making :ui effort to make this the outstanding town in the state.
A lot of this is due to the lack of proper trash containers, but steps are now being taken to provide facilities where rubbish may be deposited.
In weeks to come, it is expected that Mr Fitzsimmons and his supporters will step up their drive to make Winchester a still nicer place in which to live.
They earnestly seek the help of anyone who shares their pride in i x cu*i\\c their town, and point out that the ' litter problem here has really cached great proportions, as a 7 -y \\ inchcstcr teenagers in ehestra gather at Boston I nivcrsityN Sargent Gamp workshop.
Shown with Gomhirtnr Marvin Rahin of casual trip to the Centre will show, rows, Robert \\ ilson, Betty Hauck, Paul Juhniuu, ami Joan \\ ilson.
Ho-toii Uni variety l*lu>to Service the Greater Boston ^ onth Syinphom thin New Hampshire tor a week-long music Needham, left, arc, left to right.
Drop in * 0011 . \\ «* also pay pontage BO’I H way* when yon *ave-hv-mail.
O’Connell Feted at Testimonial Banquet Friends, relatives and former associates ot* ftiecr Archie T O’Connell, retired member of the Winchester Police Department, gathered at a testimonial banquet in his honor Monday evening at the Town Line Cafe in Woburn.
Tames A Cullen, former chairman of the Board of Selectmen and of the Middlesex County Commissioners, ably filled the important role of toastmaster, and seated with him at the head table with the guest of honor were Officer O’Connell’s brother and sister-inlaw, Police Lt. and Mrs.
Nancy O’Connor; Sherman W Saltmarsh, Jr., chairman of the Board of Selectmen; Police Chief Joseph J Derro and Retired Police Officer Benjamin O’Connor of Lynn.
The head table guests were introduced and several speakers paid tribute to the years and quality of Officer O’Connell’s service to the town.
Chief Derro, on behalf of the Police Department, presented Officer O’Connell with a purse of money and his own thanks for the honor guest’s cooperation and devotion to duty.
Mr Saltmarsh, on behalf of the town, praised Officer O’Connell’s long and faithful service to the town, and presented him with a gold police badge, adding the best wishes of the Board of Selectmen and the entire community.
John Elliott, presented Officer O’Connell with a handsomely engraved Hamilton wrist watch, the gift of his many associates and friends.
It is of interest that among the guests was an old police “buddy” of Officer O’Connell, Benjamin O’Connor, retired member of the Lynn Police.
Officer O’Connell, previous to joining the Winchester Department, worked wrth Officer O’Connor in the Metropolitan District Police.
Dancing to the tunes of Daniel Noonan of Woburn brought the testimonial to a pleasing close.
Anchors machine firmly, reduces noise, lessens fatigue and increases 6peed and accuracy.
FOR SPECIAL PARTIES FUNCTIONS OF ALL KINDS UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM Beautifully appointed for banquets, wedding receptions, business meetings, dances or luncheons.
Organist Mr Robert White, Director of Music Coffee Hour in Chidley Hall following Program Winchester College Club The 1902 Evening Study Groups of the Winchester College Club have been announced by Mr and Mrs.
Six books from a list including Thoreau, Machiavelli, Graham Greene, and Sherman Adams will be selected for discussion, and meetings will he held on alternate Mondays beginning January 22.
Forest Maddix will again instruct the Contract Bridge Group, with Mr and Mrs.
There will he eight two-hour sessions of supervised play with review, theory and discussion of the techniques of a good bridge game with a possible look at duplicate bridge if the group so desires.
The Great Decisions Group, under the chairmanship of Mr Malcolm C Boggs, will meet for eight Thursdays beginning February 8.
Each meeting will commence with the group watching a half-hour television discussion of some aspect of U S. foreign policy.
Group discussion will follow, with background information available in kit form.
Meeting on alternate Tuesdays beginning January 30 will be the Investments Group, to be led by Mr and Mrs.
Investment objectives will be carefully analyzed, as well as planning to meet these objectives.
Sources of information and advice will be covered, and a few investment portfolios will be examined.
While no formal lectures are scheduled, experts will be present to make suggestions and answer questions of the participants.
Mill St., near Arlington Center year is under the chairmanship of Mr and Mrs.
Members in previous years know the excitement of adventurous tales accompanied by vivid color slides that may be expected from the meetings, to be held this year on alternate Mondays starting January 29.
Folders with further information on fees and registration instructions have recently been mailed.
Plans are also under way for the opening dinner meeting for all groups which will he held on January 15 at 6:30m., at the Craw---u ford Memorial Church.
The three were Vincent Caputo, a senior center and co-captain of the team, Peter Sullivan, a senior j quarterback, and Roger DeMinico, | a sophomore end.
Head football coach Vic Fusia complimented the j team collectively for their selfless efforts which resulted in the Redmen’s second consecutive winning season.
Warren P McGuirk, Dean of the School of Physical Education and Director of Athletics, and Dr.
Worker* for lln* Don Orione Horne shown at reeent benefit j dinner at Sons of Italy Hail.
I Hall Charity's sweet name received high honors Tuesday night when the Winchester Friends of Don Orione held a highly successful dinner and evening of entertainment at the Sons of Italy Hall.
The excellent turnout showed the kindly spirit felt for this great charitable cause by so many of our citizens.
The sincere thanks and appreciation of State Chairman Leonard Barbo and local chairman Dr.
Angelo L Maietta were expressed for the wonderful cooperation received from the committees and the Winchester Star.
Chief Joseph Derro was lauded for his superb job of handling the funds of the drive and Mrs.
A ldo A Minotti for her diligent work as secretary and chairman of publicity.
Mr S Cantella of Prince Macaroni was especially dted for his great generosity in supplying food and chefs.
Mr Joseph Canarozza provided splendid entertainment with Sal Cavieehio, star of radio and TV, and the Wandering Minstrels Barbershop Quartet.
Mario Buzzotta was in charge of the telephone committee and her girls worked diligently for two weeks making calls.
Miss Eunice Maietta and her girls did a fine job of handling the ticket collections.
Lucy Maiullari, who was in charge of waitesses, worked very hard with her group, who all looked very pretty in their caps and aprons.
Ollic Jean’s Scalp Clinic FOR MEN SPECIALIZING IN HAIR AM) SCALP TREA TMENTS Monday • Tuesday Thursday Friday 4:30 to 8:30m.
Most Hearing Aids Room 1, Masonic Building Winchester, Mass. dec7-2t Harvard Club Meeting All Harvard Alumni living in Melrose, Reading, Stoneham, Wakefield, Winchester and Woburn are invited to attend the next meeting of the Harvard Club of Eastern Middlesex.
It will be held at the Winchester Country Club (Route 3 at the Winchester-Arlington line) on Tuesday, December 19, 1961, with a social hour at 6:30 and dinner at 7:30.
Baaron Pittinger, Jr., Director of Sports Information at Harvard will be the speaker and will show the movie “Highlights of the 1961 Season,” Harvard men are requested to notify the secretary, Edward J Sullivan of 8 Plymouth Road, Winchester, if they can attend.
This promises to be an interestingreview of the football season with Harvard co-champions of the Ivy League.
For the past year he has been an assistant to the Fleet and •Truck Manager, and also on the Board of Directors of Sun Auto Rental Company, Inc., an affiliate of West End Chevrolet.
This fall he completed an intensive five-week course at Chevrolet Motor Division’s Post Graduate School of Modern Merchandising and Management in Detroit.
Luscious Squash And Apple Pies Old Fashioned Plum Puddings Rich Fruit Cakes Real Butter Rolls FINE BAKED FOODS Super Market 7 Mt.
FILBERT’S MARGARINE KRAFT SLICED AMERICAN CHEESE HOOD’S COTTAGE CHEESE Hi. :iic 12-oz. pkg.c 2 pkgs.c — COOKIES and FAMOUS ASSORTED COOKIES SESAME THINS EDUCATOR NOEL COOKIES EDUCATOR SALTINES SUNSHINE ClIEEZ-ITS CHOCOLATE NUGGET COOKIES CRACKERS — p k fi29c l> k S27c 29c l> k £21c pkfj. 29c I'M29c Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday Special, December 11, 12, 12 Chicken Breasts 69c Ih. 59c Ih.
Chicken Legs Jaycees Hie Winchester Jaycees held their 2rd general business meeting Thursday, November 30 at the Red Cross House.
Rill Bird presided, and during the meeting swore in two directors, Larry Smith and A1 Ruggles and presentled them with their Jaycee Pins, j Secretary and Charter Night chairman Jim Ferriman reported the final plans for the upcoming bugfet dance to be held this Saturday evening, December 9 at the I own Hall at Hm.
Ticket reservations have been great, but some tickets will be available at the door.
Miss Lexington, Susan Nanry of Winchester, will be among the invited guests, and will display her fine talent with several songs during the evening.
Miss Lexington as sponsored by the Lexington Jaycee Chapter, and several Lexington members will attend, as well as Jaycees from Boston, Burlington, Woburn and other surrounding towns.
Bird thanked all members who contributed to the preparation of this big event, and anticipates a very successful evening. Miss Lexington, Susan Nanry of Winchester, and Mr James Ferriman.
Sec. of the Winchester Jaycees and Chairman of the Jayceo Charter Night Buffet-Dance to be held Dec. at the Town Hall.
Several projects were discussed it the meeting, and among these were a Bicycle Safety Program, a Youth Activity Program, and Community Development.
Temporary chairmen will look into these projects and give their reports at the next general business meeting, January 2.
Lindy Lane, Internal V.P. served refreshments at the close of the meeting.
Unitarian Post During the past two years Mr Richard Parkhurst ably filled the office of Local Chairman of the Unitarian Service Committee.
He has been in charge of fund raising for world wide projects in India.
Africa, South America, Greece and Korea as well as in our continental United States.
The Service Committee is a non-sectarian organization, aware of the basic needs of mankind the world over, and devoted to helping man help himself.
Davies is a past President of the Winchester Alliance and a past President of the Alliance of Unitarian Women, the continental women’s phase of the organization extending to Hawaii, Canada, Alaska and the Canal Zone.
At Bowdoin he culminated three years of work on the “Orient,” the student newspaper, by being elected editor-in-chief of the paper in his senior year.
He was a member of the board of the Bowdoin Publishing Company, contributed to the “Bugle,” the college yearbook, and was a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity.
The Columbia sub-chapter, the only one of its kind, was organized May 11, 1961.
Its initiates will he given opportunity upon graduation to become professional members of the Deadline Club and other professional chapters of SDX throughout the country.
Buren H McCormack, vice president and editorial director of the “Wall Street Journal,” new national president of SDX, was guest of j honor and principal speaker at the j initiation and accompanying banj quet.
Christmas Tea A lovely Christmas tea, program and meeting have been planned for the.
December meeting of the Florence Crittenton League, Winchester Circle, for this Friday, December 8, at 2:30m. at the home of Mrs.
Monbleau’s talk will feature the relationship of music to the Christmas story as it is told in the Bible.
She is a well-known speaker and director of music, and the circle is eagerly looking forward to hearing her.
Adams and her tea committee have planned a beautiful tea in the lovely setting of Mrs.
An interesting feature of this will be the report to be given by the bazaar chairmen on the recent Christmas sale in Boston.
All members, new and old, are urged to begin the holiday season at the Florence Crittenton Christmas meeting tomorrow.
Attending Seminar Miss Dorothy Sprague Clove, Director of the Children’s Own School and Mrs.
Helen Means, head teacher of the pre-school division of that School, will be attending this week a Seminar sponsored by the American Montessori Society at Greenwich, Connecticut.
The seminar is to be held at the very interesting and much publicised Whitby School.
DAILY l*ti *mr PLEASE SEND ME A ONEYEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THE WINCHESTER STAR NAME > ADDRESS TOW N Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COl PON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
And because they are human beings, because they, like we, are alive, we are responsible for them.
We in the West have brought much suffering to the world, as well as many blessings,” Or.
Schweitzer w rites, “is nothing else than Reverence for Life, a, universal ethic.
Reverence for Life affords me my fundamental principle of morality, namely that good consists in maintaining, assisting and enhancing life, and that to destroy, to harm or hinder life is evil.
It is a warm hand of assurance to an old woman at a hospital bed, an operation to restore health, a clean bed in which a stricken body can find rest, a super that helps a tubercular patient or leper find strength.
Schweitzer once said, “so that I could practice the ethic of Jesus without having to talk "" It is this ethic which inspires Dr.
But I one senses a pride, an exhiliration j in him, too, a warmth that spills over and infects those near him.
The writer watched him say goodbye to two Winchester children before he left the church.
It is no doubt this innate kindliness that has inspired Peruvian tribes once mutually hostile to help one another.
Edward Rendall of Ardley Place served as his host and hostess, while Dr. and Mrs.
Binder will soon be on his w r ay back to the jungle, after doing what he can to secure help from charitable institutions of all churches.
Santa’s Bazaar Christmas lights are shining now, the weather’s growing colder.
And the lucky families of the George Washington School will have a prime opportunity to stop and shop at Santa’s Bazaar tomorrow afternoon in the school auditorium.
The doors to this bargainfilled wonderland will open for the children at 3:15 and for the first hour they will have an unhurried chance to select beautiful and unusual gifts for every member of the family.
In addition to the ever-popular toys and games tables, there will be others featuring plants, jewelry, grabs and a chance table with baby doll, two wiggle walkers and an etch and sketch kit for wideeyed winners.
Of special interest to mothers will be the table of exotic and glamorous Christmas decorations, the fathers’ table with unique barbecue aprons and travelling shoe bags, the babies’ table with handmade dainties and knitted goods, and the mothers’ table with an absorbing array of giftables including aprons, hand-made dusters and ring holders.
Alice Perkins and her hard-working ways and means committee, Claire Ball, Mary Ciroli, Betty Pease, Jean McGoldrick, Evelyn Penta, Martha Loftus, Nancy Russo, Polly Lombardi, Ruth Barry, Jean Wrisley, Mary Villari, Mary Jones and Grace Johnson.
James R Stewart, Jr., president of the Winchester Council of Girl Scouts, officiated at the ceremony.
Twenty-two girls made their Brownie Scout promise and were pinned and welcomed into the troop.
Karen D’Andraia, Christine Delano, Barbara Doe, Kathy Dowd, Julie Downes, Janet Dunn, Dorothy Elliott, Susan Friborg, Janye Greco, Barbara Harkins, Ellen Harper, Kristine Lindberg, Jacqueline Nadeau, Becky Osgood, Linda Rawding, Holly Reed, Pamela Speers, Anne Spooner and Rebecca Spooner.
One of the highlights of the afternoon was the centerpiece on the table, a Brownie doll peering into a miniature “pool” banked with greens.
The new Brownies are looking forward to many happy and useful years as part of the Girl Scout Organization. Dec. Juliette Low Meeting cabin, 3:45 5:00m.
ITCH-AID is COOLING, COLORLESS, STAINLESS, IN STANT DRYING . . . octZti-tf First Baptist Women’s Fellowship Mrs.
John A Volpe, wife of the Governor, has accepted the invitation of the Women’s Fellowship of the First Baptist Church to be a guest at the annual Christmas tea.
The tea will he held in the social hall of the church on Wednesday, December 13, at 1:30m.
Members and friends of the local women’s groups also have been invited to attend.
The Bell Haven “Bell Ringers’* of Westori will present a delightful program of music.
C Francis Whittemore, director, will tell about her bell collection and the hobby which grew into this organized bell-ringing group.
She and Mr Whittemore are members of the American Bell Association and now have a complete set of 61 Whitechapel Handbells from the Whitechapel Bell Foundry in London, England.
The Bell Ringers give many concerts during the Christmas season, and frequent concerts throughout the year.
Lucille Sheppard, extends a cordial invitation to members and friends to come and bring their friends.
Baby-sitting will be provided in the nursery for pre-school and kindergarten-age children.
Christmas Tea The Foster Parents’ Program of three Rod Feather social service agencies, the Boston Children’s Service Association, Church Home Society and Children’s Mission, are having their annual Christmas Tea for their Foster Mothers on Wednesday, December 13, at 2:00m.
He will discuss, and also illustrate with a color film, a baby’s first year of growth and development Dr.
Meyer is the acting chief of the Child Health Division of the Children’s Medical Center.
At an executive board meeting of the Wyman Parents’ Association held at the home of the recording secretary, Mrs.
Donald King Lewis was unanimously elected the new vicepresident to succeed Mrs.
Morrill is moving out of the state, which necessitated her resignation.
Lewis will assume her j new duties currently, as she will I l>e the president-elect for 1962.
Ham is an old fr iend to Winchester audiences ami to Garden Club members in particular.
Her fine philosophy of life, which she artfully weaves through all her talks, her sincere appreciation for everyone’s creative achievements make her own artistic ability happily received by her audiences.
She has a great gift for sparking an' audience’s enthusiasm and sending them home inspired to create the beautiful things they have seen.
Few speakers can take the simple and the ordinary everyday things and make of them such gay and artistic decorations.
Her theme might well be “The Art of Living as Well as Decorating.” beginning promptly at 1 :30m.
George Ham, who gave one of the finest Christmas programs the club has had.
She sent everyone away with a real feeling for the true spirit of Christmas that transcends all real Christmas decorating.
Brad Johnson, a graduate of Winchester High School and Amherst College, is second tenor.
Brad started singing with the Winchester High School Glee Club and First Congregational Church Choir.
Frank Bates, baritone, is a graduate of MIT and Harvard Medical ""School.
Singing experience includes high school chorus, barbershop quartets, Augusta Choral Society, Lexington Choral Society and First Congregational Church Choir.
In December they will entertain at the Florence Crfttenton House in Brighton, at the Winchester Country Club, and for a Christmas party for employees of the Charlestown Savings Bank.
Charles Potts of Standish lane is on the Charlestown Savings entertainment committee.
The double quartet is also rehearsing new music for events scheduled during the winter and spring seasons.
First of all, Cadillacs are built in one plant by craftsmen who share their skills with no other car . . . who know only Cadillac’s high standard of quality.
Secondly, the average Cadillac craftsman has been working to these high standards for more than a decade.
And finally, all these skills are checked by more than 1400 separate inspections.
A revelation drive at„ your authorized dealer will give you the story of Cadillac craftsmanship first hand.
Zipper Skinned — Heavy with Juice — Rich in Flavor tangerines 2 Grapefruit Peppers Green Cabbage Indian River Seedless, Low in Calories Fresh, Crisp Adds Zest to Salads New — Firm, Fresh Green Heads Calls Accepted NOW and Through Dec.th For In Time For Christmas or New Year's GREEN STAMPS SHE1MAR Inc.
The Reverend Cyril R Dej laney, S .1., a member of the faj eulty of the College of t he Holy I ( foss, Worcester, will be celebrant ""1 the 7:45m.
STAMPS wi, £ z ° ny NEP CO CRYOVAC CORNED BEEF EXTRA Z-’U: STAMPS wit s l j' z ° ny Colonial Master Smoked Shoulder with an 8 oz pkg FINAST LARGE BOLOGNA EXTRA &VC STAMPS Lean and savory, fine quality, Chuck Roast of Beef — Juicy, tasty and oh so tender.
STAMPS f^baked FINAST BLUEBERRY^ PIE EXTRA W: STAMPS fYnasT FRESH PUMPKIN SQU ARE EXTRA frM: STAMPS ^ t a ]Z FINAST ENGLISH MUFFINS EXTRA STAMPS HtHoaf FINAST RAISIN BREAD ican$° n Jewelers Inc.
STAMPS p ?' ,h ot a 4 FINAST ENGLISH MUFFINS Weatherly by Lenox Place Setting $19.95 Chanson by Lenox Place Setting $2.3.95 4-pc.
Place Settings from $24.50 Teaspoons from $4.75 Serving Pieces from $5.00 If you are giving her some of the missing pieces in her ( hinn, Silver or Glass to complete her set, you are sure to find it at Swanson’s.
Sx j Methodists Return To 11 0’Clock Service The hour of the Morning Worship Service at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church will revert to eleven o’clock starting this Sunday, December 10.
For the past ten weeks th‘e service was slightly earlier, but this was done on an experimental basis and it is now deemed advisable to return to the former time of eleven o’clock.
This will also effect the Nursery, Kindergarten and Primary Departments of the Church School.
The features of the Youth Choir, Youth Sermon and rehearsal periods will be retained in the program as now.
Roland Nadeau, will sing an anthem appropriate to the season of Advent and Mrs.
The Senior Methodist Youth Fellowship will meet in the sanctuary this Sunday evening at 6:30 o’clock.
The pastor will speak to the group on the “Holy Communion” and, with the assistance of the Rev.
James J Connelly of Mystic Valley Parkway are the parents of a third child, first son, James J Jr., born December 4 at the Winchester Hospital.
Marvin Russell Wilson of Reading, a first child, a daughter, Deborah Anne Wilson, November 21, at the Richardson House, Boston.
Gary Cooke of Topeka, Kansas, are the parents of a son, born December 5.
Charles R Whitten announce the birth of a son, Robinson S Whitten, II, on December 4 at the Winchester Hospital.
For A Permanent Building Committee The Lynch Junior High School building committee had no trouble at last week’s special town meeting getting the needed funds beyond their original appropriation.
The one voice raised in opposition questioned the building committee’s paying for Much items as a wellhrld fence, and tvqyewriters, feeling that by the terms of the original vote to take the land for a school the fence was the School Committee’s responsibility, and also believing that the purchase of typewriters is not within the province of a school building committee.
The Lynch committee has done a good job, had the school open for business when they said they would, and came out within some two per cent of their appropriation.
As we listened, however, to the committee’s request for more funds and the school committee’s supporting arguments, we wondered if perhaps a permanent group, selected for their knowledge of building procedures could not have foreseen some of the things that needed adjusting, or additional funds after the school was completed.
Building a school costing a million and one half dollars is a complicated job, requiring technical knowledge possessed by few citizens appointed to municipal building committees.
This is in no sense a reflection upon either the ability or integrity of any Winchester building committee, present or past.
It is simply a fact that your average citizen, well trained though he may be in his own particular field, does not know t he pit falls in his path when lie undertakes to serve on a committee responsible for building a million dollar school, or other building. on a site incidentally chosen in advance at town meeting. 1 i i Letters To The Editor Building a school nowadays is a cor.. plicated business, much more so than it used to he.
But up a building in the old days with a solid foundation, good roof and plumbing, and the requisite number of rooms .and your job was pretty much over with.
You didn’t have to Worry about audio-visual aid. language laboratories, speech rooms, conference rooms, kitchens and other adjuncts of modern education.
It is quite possible for a building committee to become so engrossed in some of the features thought desirable by the school authorities that they spend money on side issues which should have gone, so far as the building committee was concerned, for straight construction and necessary furnishings.
It is the Star's opinion that the Lynch commit tee could have completed this school within its appropriation if it had not been for features sought bv the school committee.
We do not question the desirability of most of these features. but a good argument can be made for their not being the building committee’s responsibility.
In discussing the possibility of a permanent building committee with one who lias had considerable experience with school building commit‘ tees we were told that such a committee might be a good thing.
Such a committee, we were told, should include an accountant, a lawyer, ail engineer and some one acquainted with building procedures and contracts, some one who could talk the language of the architect and contractor.
Such a committee would take over once the town decides to build anything.
Its members might of course make mistakes, hut from their specialized knowledge their mistakes should not be serious, and should grow less as the committee continues to function.
Its members would start with a knowledge of building your average building committee member has to acquire by costly trial and error.
He had just been cut off as he was entering \\ atertield Load from the I’arkway by an operator headed in an opposite direction who, without warning of any kind, swooped to a l turn in front of his automobile to sneak into a parking spice that was just being vacated. nly exceptional control of the car cut off prevented a broadside-on crash.
As the Star secs it the visiting operator’s estimate of W inchester drivers carries more than a little truth.
More and more people are doing more and more crazy things with cars around the center, and with the Christmas rush of shoppers just ahead we may well have an accident that will sadden us all for the holidays.
Let its all drive with more consideration for the other fellow, and what better time could there be to do so than al Christmas.
I have read with the greatest interest your excellent editorial on civil defense and the letters of reply.
You are to be commended for having performed an important public .service in your community by creating a public discussion on this issue, which has previously been the subject of one-sided and misleading handouts from the Civil Defense authorities.
The scientific statements made in your editorial are in the main correct, and the small corrections submitted by Dr.
First, defense against anything but an unimaginably small nuclear attack is not possible.
That is, al though some individuals might survive, the destruction to our economy and social structure would permanently end democratic government.
And second, false security engendered by the civil defense program materially increases the danger of war, thus offsetting any potential, marginal protection offered.
RADIATION DATA Your readers may by now be tired of numbers in this connection, but the following data, taken from an analysis by Prof.
Gordon S Christiansen, chairman of the Chemistry Department at Connecticut College, may serve as an antidote to the totally unrealistic letter of Mr Boecker.
In a region remote from the blast and fire area, but in the direct path of the fallout, the radiation level at the end of the first hour would be 7500 roentgens per hour.
In any area which for any reason has a higher level, for example being a little closer to one of the explosions, or as the result of a larger attack, there might well be as much as 15,000 roentgens per hour.
Under these conditions not only would it be absolutely impossible to come out of the shelter after two weeks, but between the 0th and 12th month, the average level would be 7 roentgens per hour, coming to 3000 roentgens for this period, very likely a fatal dose.
Under these conditions it would be possible to emerge only for very brief periods of say an hour a week for the first six months.
How one expects society to be rebuilt in the face of all the other obstacles with only that much labor is a mystery to me.
Perhaps it would be more appropriate for us to ask them the same thing.
Wooden structures out to 18 miles would be flattened before being ignited.
These fires would cause a firestorm which would burn until every combustible item in the fire radius was consumed.
Such a firestorm was caused in Hamburg in World War II by 2. kilotons of incendiary bombs, boiling the water in the canals and glazing the bricks in the buildings.
Such a firestorm on a very small scale occurred in Los Angeles in the recent brush fire, destroying Dr.
Libby, whose syndicated articles on thermonuclear survival are appearing in newspapers throughout the country, is a noted nuclear physicist and an expert on shelters.
In this case, the intense heat set fire to the railroad ties which were used to reinforce the shelter.
Not to labor the point, it suffices <> say that within the firestorm area, almost everyone will die, Tom asphyxiation, carbon monoxide poisoning, or burns.
There is no reason whatever to loubt that, if they wished, the Russians, with their giant rocket boosters, could place in orbit, bombs of much larger size which ould do that much damage without even being brought to earth.
It is absolutely untrue that the Russians are unable to deliver such weapons in view of their ability to orbit very largo satellites.
But even if they could not, one of their trawlers could very easily drop such a weapon into the ocean off our coast, where, when it exploded, it would do almost as much damage to our nearby coastline, and deliver much more radioactivity.
FREE SPEECH The above considerations also answer most of the points of your corespondent Mr Brooks.
He raises the question of treason in addition, however, and this is worth a few words.
In view of the fact that Mr Brooks thinks that honest differences of opinion are “near treasonable,” I am puzzled as to why he wants to defend this country at all.
Surely, free speech is one of the things which distinguishes America from Russia.
We have received about 1.000 re plies to date, of which 90 per cent supported our viewpoint.
Other faculty members around the country are republishing the letter with hundreds of additional Signatures There is evidence already that the Administration is making drastic changes in its program and down grading individual shelters.
I hope all this will give your critics reason to reexamine their position.
In connection with the debate on fallout shelters, how refreshing is the news that a California housewife, Mrs.
Wayne El wood of Palo Alto, has sent as a donation to the United Nations the $1,000 it would have required to build a fallout shelter.
Pledges of similar action have been received from 28 persons in North Carolina.
Here is a new and healthy trend, a civilized and unselfish way of facing up to the cold reality that confronts us.
Publication of the Government’s new booklet on instructions to citizens in the event of nuclear attack has been held up because of disagreement among scientists.
Estimates of destruction and deaths depend, of course, on the exact nature and extent of a possible attack, and the particular objectives on which it would be concentrated.
Also under debate is the effectiveness of shelters, whether they would prove havens of refuge (comfortable and semi-luxurious ahodes of family togetherness, as the ads would have us believe) or fiendishly efficient death traps.
Even the doubtful protection that shelters may provide can be shared by only a small section of the community.
We know that possession of individual shelters is already resulting in un-neighborly and un-Christian attitudes toward our less fortunate friends and neighbors.
In addition, billions of public or private money spent to this end are at best profoundly speculative, quite possibly wasted.
We do know that, assuming survival, the world to which we would emerge would be a veritable nightmare of horror, with knee-deep ash, radioactive fallout for an indefinite period, transportation and communication obliterated, buildings reduced to rubble, millions upon millions of dead bodies, enormous gaping holes in the ground and widespread looting.
The one thing worthy of intensive thought and action is the development of retaliatory power that can be understood by even Russia (which, I am confident, has been and is being done), plus redoubled exertions for negotiations tending toward international disarmament and nuclear control.
The Star is very grateful to Mr Jones for citing the inspiring action of Mrs.
Elwood in giving to the United Nations the $1,000 with which she had intended to build a fallout shelter.
Aware of the facts concerning the unrealam of shelters in a nuclear war, Mrs.
These are three of the most solid, thoughtful, and responsible editorials I have read in the Ameri can press in many a day.
In a time when many are falling into the “Red or Dead” panic, we need very much to have this kind of steady and thoughtful journalism.
There is one other aspect of the present situation which would deserve the same kind of factual and thoughtful treatment one of these days.
The primary issue separating the Soviet Union and the United States from agreement on anything else of importance at the present time is the question of Germany.
The people to the east of Germany who have suffered so frightfully from attacks from that couptry and especially from the Nazis have, understandably, an almost pathological fear of the Germans.
However, there is no blinking the fact that some of the topmost military commanders of Western Germany are former trusted officers of Hitler and in some cases, there is little or no evidence of their having changed their ideas very radically since those days.
As an example, one may take General Hans Heussinger who was chief of Hitler’s high command in the Wehrmacht after Hitler had dismissed the generals in whom he had lost confidence as not certainly loyal to him.
His appointment was protested by several countries of Western Europe who had Jonger memories than we, but there he is.
In the long run, it might be as advantageous to us as to the Russians to reverse this build-up of military power in the hands of people who have not shown the highest degree of reliability in the handling of such power.
I am not suggesting that we now begin a hate campaign against the Germans.
However, I am suggesting that we ought not to be so eager to risk all the people of the United States and indeed, the population of the world for the sake of defending our right to place such frightful power in the hands of such men as General Heussinger.
We Winchester parents and our children have lost one of our best friends.
Miss Lillian Salice, Mystic School fourth grade teacher, impeccable, was the modest possessor of great inner warmth and intelligence.
She was truly capable of encouraging the best in those entrusted to her care and direction both intellectually and morally.
Through the years this dedicated woman of the world’s noblest profession gave of herself entirely and our children have come away better human beings for just having come under her sphere of influence.
To her and all those like her who endeavor so selflessly and then pass quietly from our legions just as they lived but who have left an indelible mark in our hearts, go our everlasting gratitude.
This group of humanitarians do not look down on folks who are at their wits end.
I heard recently of a family in small town surrounding Winhester, who had no blankets and who are without food a great deal ind their light bill needed to be paid, and someone notified the Salvation Army.
Anyone feeling generous at hristmas would he doing a fine thing to do something for this family.
I am learning much from the debate on shelters which is taking place in the Star, and I feel greatly indebted to you for initiating it and contributing to it, and also to those who have written letters.
The news item on the policy of the Winchester School Committee, (to send pupils home in the event of nuclear attack) it seems to me, points up our greatest need at the moment.
This is the basic source of our confusion, both locally and nationally.
There is as yet no “overall town policy” and there is as yet no clearly-defined overall national policy.
And this is so because the elected representatives of the people have not as yet faced up to this question and debated it to the end of defining a policy, as sooner or later they must.
What has happened is the announcement of a program of building family shelters on the part of the federal administration on the advice of the Pentagon.
Because it has raised so many questions it has now been abandoned in favor of a program of community shelters, which raises just as many questions.
Before we muddle along any further down this road, which involves the waste of public funds as well as serious effects for pubic morale, I for one want our elected representatives to arrept. their responsibility for thinking through this matter, so that we may have a public policy.
This is an extremely complex issue, which involves much more than questions of military expediency to he decided by the Pentagon.
And it is a matter of life and death, not only for individual Americans, but for the whole human race.
If the tremendous moral as well as military potential of our beloved country is to be allowed to make its positive contribution to humanity, we must work out a policy through our elected representatives on every level of government.
Involving at it does the fate of humanity, this should be the number one item on the legislative agenda.
Let us as citizens demand that it he confronted and thought through now, before we get any more confused.
Sincerely yours, Donald T Rowlingson 15 Ridge Street tions were completely disastrous for both extreme right and leftwing parties.
Thus, one would he more apt to conclude that Nazism and Communism are on the decline in Western Germany rather than on the comeback.
In essence, what I am trying to point out is that one should have some idea of the political and economic picture, both past and present, before judging a nation.
World understanding is not furthered by biased and unsupported arguments.
Tctens, author of “The New Germany and the Old Nazis,"" reviewed in last week’s Star, is a reputable scholar who has taken great pains to doc ument his book.
The Star will publish Mr Tetens’ reply, and will forward a copy of it to Mr Stepper when he returns to Germany next week.
Reading of the review in the Winchester Star of November 30 of “The New Germany and the old Nazis” must be a challenge to every German citizen.
The Germans slowly have become accustomed to accusations of being “militarists” or “neo-Nazists"" from sources behind the Iron Curtain.
However, it is disconcerting to hear the same arguments emanating from the Western side.
It might not be known that many people joined the party because of political and economic pressures, similar to conditions prevailing in East Germany today.
As a matter of fact, relatively few people knew about decisions of the top party council due to the excellent propaganda machinery conducted by Goebbels and his staff, nor did many attempt to find out because of fear of the Gestapo.
When Mr Tetens now, 1(5 years after the end of the third Reich “comes to the inescapable conclusion that the Nazis have had a quiet comeback almost everywhere” he can only refer to those party members who passed the “Entnazifizierungs"" proedure conducted very thoroughly by American.
And Mr Tetens as a “Germanic scholar” should know that only those who were cleared by the Allies were allowed to accept a public position.
A careful reader of newspapers will also have noticed that German courts have prosecuted many of the Nazi officials responsible for crimes conducted during the Nazi regime.
I would agree with Mr Tetens’ opinion that Mr Globke perhaps should not be in his present position.
However, Mr Tetens’ opinion of the others mentioned in the article is incredible. doubt that it can be substantiated by real facts.
A social tea for Miss Quinn, second grade teacher at Parkhurst School, will be held by the room mother.
Reciprocal foreign trade builds vital channels for the free exchange of ideas.
Trade is as essential to the well-being of a country as oxygen is to a human.
Here is the point; conservative elements in our country rejoice in labelling people un-American.
Of these conservatives, Representative Mason of Illinois is a prime advocator of protectionism;e., the abolition of free reciprocal foreign trade, and thereby supports a system that is a serious threat to America’s standing and well-being.
Protectionism, also a major plank of the large conservative group’s platform, is something of the past, something that would rot this great country.
Hanna Hall of 4 Holton Street observed her 9(5th birthday on November 22.
She observed it quietly with no particular fanfare, though there are not too many, even in these days of longevity, who reach such an advanced age.
Hall suspect that plans were underway for a big party and reception in her honor on Saturday evening.
She was greeted with an enthusiastic rendition of “Happy Birthday to You” as she entered the living room.
She received many flowers and other anniversary presents and thoroughly enjoyed every minute of the evening, during which entertainment was presented and refreshments were served.
Natalie Hall; and the four great-grandsons, Robert, Richard, Jackie and David Hall.
Though many of the younger guests at the party stiffed an occasional yawn the day after, Mrs.
She is generally in excellent health, keeps her end up with the household chores and can, if necessary, do a trick in the family delicatessen.
Hall is the widow of John A Hall, for many years an employee of the Water Department.
She has made her home in Winchester for 55 years and enjoys a wide circle of friends.
To their host wishes the Star adds its very special congratulations to one of our most popular senior citizens.
Parkhurst Tea For Miss Quinn PSYCHOLOGICAL LIGHT ON THE COLD WAR By WILSON SULLIVAN EastWest hostilities are assessed in terms of psychology by Dr.
Subtitled “An Inquiry into the Facts and Fictions of Foreign Policy,” Dr.
It deals boldly but competently with “the nature of the Soviet system,” the problem of China and Germany, and the callous arithmetic of nuclear war “computers” like Kissinger, Kahn, and Morgen stem.
Fromm’s rebuttal of Mr Kahn’s unrealistic estimates of nuclear war and amoral appraisals of “acceptable” mass deaths is the most effective I have seen.
Fromm’s most durable pages in this 252page study are those in which ho examines the cold war in terms of humanist psychology.
Fromm observes, the sane man distinguishes between subjective reactions and objective facts.
Fear and hysteria exist between Washington and Moscow, he says, because both see each other not realistically as they are but in terms of their rigid ideological views of the world.
The Soviet Union looks at America and “sees” not a reformed and progressive capitalism characterized by great social mobility, effective labor unions and social security, but as a fictional 19thcentury feudal state in which merciless Wall Street tyrants whip hungry workers to heel.
Similarly, Fromm argues, we look at the Soviet not as the comparatively conservative and highly class-structured managerial society it has become but in terms of a 14th century Muscovite empire, with no justice for anyone.
Brit there is every indication that the Stalinist error has been reduced and that economically Soviet Communism is moving closer to capitalism. i i i Both Russia and America look at themselves with equal unrealism, Fromm believes.
The Soviet Union likes to picture itself as a classless workers’ and peasants’ state encircled by “war-mongering” capitalist vultures while it strives onward and upward toward an egalitarian state with equal rights and duties for all.
In fact, Russia is ruled by a bureaucracy, permits severe salary differentials, is sharply divided into managerial and worker classes and has placed the interests of the Soviet nation above those of the international communist movement whenever the two have conflicted, as in the case of China.
Similarly America likes to consider itself a bastion of Thoreauvian individualism, Dr.
Fromm, says, in spite of the fact that we are becoming a nation of faceless “organization men” characterized by collective thinking and worshipping the Almighty dollar with more evident solemnity than the Almighty.
Both sides, looking unrealistically at themselves and at their world, cannot come to terms at the conference table, cannot make the best of a had show.
He does say, however, that the change must ultimately be accepted either violently or voluntarily.
Fromm says, is that while we arc technically and intellectually in the Atomic Age we are emotionally in the Stone Age, morally not much better than the Aztecs and their ritual sacrifices.
The cold war blunts our sensibility to pain, subverts our faith in the power of democracy’s competitive strength and thrusts us into an irrational “red or dead” psychosis in which we seem to believe that the only alternative open to us in life is capitulation to the enemy.
In peaceful competition they can arrive at an understanding tolerable, to both, if not totally satisfactory.
Their prime arena of competition; aiding the two-thirds of the world that goes to bed hungry and suffers a standard of living only 5 to 109r of ours.
Unless we deal with this world rationally, Fromm concludes, neither we nor the Russians can expect victory even in peace.
I l Richard A Hakanson, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 1954 The Winchester Star, left at your Residents for one year, $4.00 in Advance Single Copies, Ten Cents The Winchester Star assumes no flnsnrial responsibility for typograhpiral errors in advertisements but will publish without 'hsrge a correction in the next issue, or republish that portioa u the sdvertisement which is incorrect.
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 1961 Page Seven 96 th Birthday DaiffaIBP Hi* Photo by Ryenton A GARDENIA FOR “THE COLONEL/' Mrs.
Hanna Hall, known to many as “The Colonel/’ at the recent party in honor of Mrs.
Unitarian Choir On December 10 at 10:40m. the Winchester Unitarian Choir will present the fourth pre-service program of sacred music.
The choir under the direction of Mary Ranton Witham will sing some unusual carols from foreign lands as well as some traditional Christmas music.
Soloists will he Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; Sidney C Blanchard, Jr., baritone.
Mary’s S Church on Saturday morning, November I Miss Anne Mar Donald of Winchester became the bride of ; Joseph Failla of Woburn.
Driscoll, pastor of the Immaculate Conception Church, was seated in the sanctuary.
Given in marriage by her uncle, Mr Edward MacDonald of Winj » poster, the bride was attended by | Miss Cerardlne Cannon of West j Roxbury.
The bride wore a floor length gown of nylon lace with a fingertip veil and carried a bouquet of white roses, chrysanthemums and stephanotis.
Her maid of honor wore a royal blue satin dress with matching accessories and carried a bouquet of bronze chrysanthemums and French flame roses.
James Abbrezzese of Revere was Mr Failla’s best man, and ushering wore William MacDonald, brother of the bride, and Michael Stoico of Woburn.
After a reception at the home of the bride on Stone Avenue, Mr and Mrs.
Robert A Storer, Minister of the Unitarian Church in Winchester, will speak at the Senior Forum Chapel Service Sunday at 9:15m. at the First Congregational Church.
Because of his great love for all young people in the community and his ability to speak to them in terms of their own interests and needs Dr.
Storer has long been a favorite guest of Forum and his visits are always eagerly anticipated by the youngpeople.
Larry Wholley and Richard Starkweather will be chaplains with William Keeton and Robert Ryder serving as deacons and Robert Cowles and Douglas Cann as ushers.
Members of Forum are busy this week in preparation for the food sale which they are sponsoring this Saturday at the Converse Market to benefit their Spring Trip Fund General arrangements are in charge of Gwen Eugley.
The tree sale which Forum has held in re** cent years will be omitted this year.
On Sunday evening December 17 at 7:00 the Forum Dramatics Com mittee will present their Christmas play in Chidley Hall to members parents and friends.
James Hollinshead advisor. ;nna Miss Rose M McKenna, formerly of East Boston, who had been living in Winchester with her niece, Mrs.
Until her re| tirement she was a clerk in the ^ Registry of Probate for Suffolk I County and was well known to j Registry personnel as well as to those who regularly transacted business there.
In East Boston Miss McKenna was a member of Sacred Heart Church, and in Winchester she was a member of St.
Besides her niece in Winchester, she leaves two nephews, Hugh, and Edward F McKenna of Staten Island.
The funeral was held Monday morning from the Richard C Kirby Funeral Home at Orient Heights in East Boston with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at Sacred Heart Church.
Marycliff Guild Meeting Reverend Mother Jannin R.C.E. and the officers of the Marycliff Guild are presenting an unusual program for the monthly meeting on Thursday, December 14, at 8 m.
Parents, friends and students in the seventh, eighth and High School grades will be welcomed.
Father Powers is a distinguished musician and director who received his training at the NewEngland Conservatory of Music and at Harvard.
He is noted as the first producer to present an amateur production of any Rodgers and Hammerstein Musical.
With his opening line, “Christ j mas is a time for song and story,” | Father Powers joyously sets the theme of that first Holy Night.
Ronel ’s TOY SHOP » Si * CHILDREN S SHOP * Si « SHOE SHOP Open Evenings Till Christmas — Except Saturdays Walter E Murphy Walter E Murphy of 2925 South West (54th Avenue, Miami, Florida, a former resident of Winchester and father of Mrs.
John A Horn of Hemingway Street, died Thursday, November 30, suddenly at his home.
Following his retirement and before he went to Miami ten years ago he made his home with his daughter in Winchester.
Horn he leaves three children in Miami, Frances, Sherwood P., and Walter E Murphy, Jr.; a daughter, Mrs.
Velvin Kelly, living in Connecticut, and Reginald K Alley of Watertown.
The funeral was held at the Lane Funeral Home Monday afternoon with the Rev.
H Newton Clay, pastor of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, officiating.
She was born April 27, 1904, in East Cambridge, blit came as a child to Winchester and grew up in | town, attending the Winchester I schools and graduating from Winj chester High School in 1921.
From September of that year until June of 1949 Miss Saliee taught the special class at the Lincoln School with great skill, enjoying the liking of her pupils and the respect and esteem of their parents.
After a Sabbatical year in 1949 to 1950, she returned to her teaching and was assigned to the third grade at the Mystic School.
There she remained through last June, heloVed alike by her pupils, her teaching associates, and by all who knew her.
Miss Saliee was a member of the Winchester Teachers Club, National Education Association, Massachusetts Teachers Association and the Sodality of the Immaculate Conception Church.
The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at the Immaculate Conception Church.
A delegation of teachers, headed by Superintendent of Schools Harry V Gilson attended the service.
Burial was in Wildwood Cemetery where the committal prayers were read by Father Kenny.
He is an excellent speaker and deserves the attendance of all the members of the Society.
Marion DeMinico of 38 Florence Street, widow of Angelo DeMinico and a long time highly respected resident of Winchester, died Tuesday morning, December 5, at her home following an illness of six months.
DeMinico was born December 14, 1884, in Italy, but came as a girl in her teens to this country and for the past 58 years had made her home in Winchester.
Thomas Raftis and Miss Josephine DeMinico, all of Winchester; four sons, Carmine, John J., both of Winchester, Francis A., of Stoneham, and Alfred F DeMinico of Malden.
The funeral will be held Saturday morning from the Lane Funeral Home at 9 o’clock with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at St.
Visiting hours at the funeral home will be on Thursday and Friday, from 3 to 5 and from 7 to 10 m.
Cecilia C Lowe, widow of Alfred J Lowe and mother of Richard A Lowe of 6 Thornberry Road, died Monday, December 4, at the Winchester Hospital after a brief illness at the age of 81.
Lowe had been visiting her son here for several months when she became ill.
Stella Gray, wife of Freeman M Gray, of 9 Hillside Avenue, died suddenly Friday, December 1, at her home.
She had lived in Winchester for the past seven years, and is survived only by her husband.
Burial was in Bethel Cemetery, Paramus, N.J. — S l even J — — $(tlen On Friday afternoon, November 24, at St.
Richard Carter Alden of Rochester, N.Y. became the bride of Charles William Stevens, son of Mr and Mrs.
Frederick P Taft read the service and a reception followed at the home of the bride’s parents.
The bride was gowned in white silk, appliqued with clusters of white satin roses, her gown being fashioned with a fitted bodice and a full skirt.
Her headpiece was French illusion veiling caught to a circlet of orange blossoms and pearls and she carried a bouquet of white roses.
George W Chase of Plainfield, N.J., sister of the bridegroom; Miss Melinda Marsters and Miss Jo Anna G Edgell, both of Rochester.
Their gowns were of emerald green velvet and they carried bouquets of white chrysanthemums.
The bridegroom had his father attend him as best man and ushering were George W Chase, Stanley G French, Jr., Webster H Francis, III, and John M Alden of Rochester.
Stevens attended Columbia, and Hartley schools in Rochester, the Villa Mecedes in Florence, Italy, and also studied in India.
He graduated from Army Language School in Monterey, California and served in West Berlin.
Tickets have been distributed to youth council members by Miss (Jail Snelling, recreational chairman.
Women’s Alliance The Women's Alliance of the j Winchester Unitarian Society will j meet on Tuesday.
Miss Crawford, who is well known to students of art in Winchester from her lectures and gallery talks at. the Museum of Fine Arts, will have slides from the museum’s collection of paintings of the Holy Family.
By explaining the meaning behind the symbols used in the Nativity and Holy Family scenes, she greatly enriches our enjoyment of the paintings.
Her well illustrated and lucid explanation of the pictures is of value to the layman as well as to the serious student of art.
An added treat in this program will he Christmas carols sung by a group of young people from the j Junior High Glee Club.
There will also be a sale of Christmas gifts and decorations in the Sy mines Room.
Every one ■ of these fine used cars has been reconditioned bv our ■ factory-trained mechanics.
Avenue, Arlington Center Mission 3-8000 ■ ■ Personalized stationery for every one.
I A % A % A A * -H 4 1 I 5 J « With the hope that the season will bring you abiding happiness.
Comfy Slippers This comfortable slipper conies in fabric or leather and provides you with that extra warmth and comfort.
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 1961 Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION’S FUNDS SAFEGUARD the neat rgg of your aocial, fraternal or church organization hv opening an Account in the Winchester Cooperative Rank.
Your club's funds will earn a nice profit, he fully insured and readily available.
Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 CHURCH STREET Generous Dividends Paid Regularly novHO-’/t Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club Newsy Paragraphs Wild bird seed, paraKeet seeds, all kinds of seeds.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Miss Emily Mabel Fish, of Winchester, has been elected vice president of the Choir at Fairfax Hall, Waynesboro, Virginia, where she is a member of the senior class.
Dorothy Ellis, serving WinchesI ter with Curtains, Draperies, Window Shades, Fixtures and Venetian Blinds, 52 Wyman Street, West Medford.
The book NAVY’S JOE BELLINO is available at the Winchestar Star, the Winchester News and Mary Spauldings.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf Two Winchester boys, Joel Peckham and Vandy French, are playing on the varsity basketball team at Tufts this year.
Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t Get your personally autographed copies of NAVY’S JOE BELLINO while they last at the Winchester Star Office, and the Winchester News Store or Winchester Publishers.
Any young person who attended Winchester High School will appreciate receiving this as a Christmas gift.
Paul T Mulloy, Jr., of 15 Ware Road, recently received his varsity letter as a member of the Worcester Academy unbeaten football team this fall.
Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t Mother Dorothy McGuire of Marycliff Academy and W Howard Niblock, principal of Winchester High School, are among the educators who will attend the 76th annual meeting of the New England Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools Friday, December 8, at the Statler-Hilton Hotel in Boston.
PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf Maternity Sweaters, all types.
Miss Myra Brennan of Clearwater Road is among the guests recently arriving for a winter vacation at Pinehurst, N C., where she is registered at the Carolina Hotel.
Walter Murphy, 76, a former resident of Stoneham and Woburn who died suddenly last week in Miami, Florida, leaves a daughter in Winchester, Mrs.
Harrison Chadwick of 24 Everett Avenue has been re-elected as a director of the Massachusetts Moderators Association.
College Club Art Group will meet at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts in the Huntington Avenue lobby at 10:15m.
First Congregational Church Mission Union Guild Luncheon, Chidley Hall.
All garments returned in beautiful Christmas garment hags — wonderful for wrapping Christmas presents.
Earlier in the year, the “Big Chief” had taken the club’s individual tournament laurels, and last month he and Lolly won the Belfry Club’s open pairs event in Lexington, making 1961 a banner year for Dick.
Proving that she can score well even without her celebrated husband (who was out at the nationals in Houston), Marion Davis was in fourth place along with partner Lydia Splaine from Lynn.
Ernest Pinson of Hanscom Field, along with our own queens of hearts, Barbara Sawyer and Fredna Perkins.
The real hero of the evening in our view, however, was club treasurer Ralph Atkinson, who sacrificed a shot at the title by stepping aside at the last minute and volunteering to direct the second section, an FMP Howell offered for those not competing in the championship.
The Section B results were (average 22%) Maxine Glynn and M Blakely, 30% Ralph Atkinson and Mr Hayes, 26 Gertrude Cox and Molly Fitzgerald, 24% Rose Hickey and Lillian Sheridan, 22 Be sure to mark the evening of Wednesday, December 20th, on your calendar, when the club will hold its annual Christmas party and open house.
In the championship session held last week, two hoards were placed at each table.
Charlie Watson were sitting, and they were able to amass only 4% points out of a possible 20.
Meat, fish and poultry saasoning, truly a miracle, | it makes food taste so good.
Top score was shared between the teams of Bill WetmoreHerb Wood and Alta Stewart-Donna Redpath.
Presumably, they were not doubled because of the fear that they would run out to 4 Spades, not realizing that Spades, too, could he doubled.
It is hard to believe that such seasoned players as A1 Oszy-George Coffin could thus get only % point instead of 7%, because they did not double.
Their N-S contract of 4 Spades was punished to the extent of 1400 points.
E-W Vulnerable North A Q 5 2 ¥ Q 10 8 4 KQJ6543 West East, Dealer A A K 8 1 3 A J 10 9 6 ¥ A K J 6 1 3 ¥ 9 7 5 2 4 4 10 A Q 9 A A K 8 7 South A 7 ¥ 4 A 9 8 7 2 A J 10 6 5 4 3 2 Board No 6 is one of those rare* hands that can he slammed from either side.
It is also unique in that a Diamond small slam can be made against any lead and a grand slam, against any lead except a Spade.
All this can lie accomplished with but 15 of the 30 or 40 high-card points generally required for slam bidding.
However, this defense was not found by the two pairs that played against contracts of 6 Hearts and 6 Spades.
Top NorthSouth score was won by Gloria and Lloyd Butterfield when their contract of 7 Diamonds was attacked with the lead of the Club Ace.
Care must be taken in the play to ruff at least one of the Clubs with a high trump and leave a high Diamond in the South hand to bring in the remainder of the Clubs for three Spade discards.
East-West top was scored by Arthur-Nikula when they brought home their contract of 6 Spades, doubled.
Pass; Pass; 1 Heart; 2 Diamonds; 2 Hearts; 6 Diamonds; Double; Pass; Pass; Pass.
I don’t know whether Blair, as declarer, thought of me as an idiot or a genius for this strange 6 Diamond hid, but I suspect the former.
He recovered his composure quickly enough, however, to make his contract and give us a good score.
These particular cards were new and were some of those which were donated by Draper, Sears & Co., the well-known local investment firm.
I am not sure that the results obtained from them were | good examples of the way to make investments in the stock market.
Elks News All members of the Winchester Lodge of Elks are reminded that | the Homecoming of District Deputy, Francis Lappin will be held this coming Sunday, December 10, at Liberty Hall in Lowell Auditorium at 3m.
Rep 1002 Q King-a-Ding Ding Rep 1001 Q Your Favorite “Pop” Pianists ROGER WILLIAMS Greatest Hits Songe of Soaring '*» Till Kapp 1260 Kapp I2.
Songstress CONNIE FRANCIS u Never on Similar” ami Other Themes MGM 3063 □ Connie h Favorite Folk Songs MCM 3969 Q Connie’s Created Hits, Vol.
Field, Thanksgiving 1 Day morning the Sachems concluded a football season that certainly would not rank with t lu i r Iwrst.
Four wins, four losses and a tie wouldn’t constitute ton had a record at many high schools nun 1 1 Kira hie to Winchester, hut t,he year-in, year-out record of Knowlton coached teams has made local j fans impatient with anything but a lopsided figure in the win column.
Breaking even on a season is ; tantamount to defeat for a Winchester team, whereas many another team would he happy to win as mam as they lose.
Hy to Ryan, whose shot from Ih.-U Saturday afternoon at l-ymj thp rlifht winif Hew by the .stum.e.
I he young team led by < ap Winchester’s scoring* was com1 tain Paul Ryan played fine hockey j pleted at 7:04 of the third period I after opening-period jitters.
A j when Paul Ryan drew the LexingWinehester penalty led to the first j ton defense to his side and passed Lexington -score when Victor Lawsmartly to Cutting, who scored his I I I « 35t Si i m % Sachems Commence Hoop Work Women’s S 0.
I Bob Y'agjian and John Kerrigan Of these Fahey stands 6ft 4in, Papadinis, 6ft Sin, and Faietta, 6ft lin.
To date Winchester has scrimmaged Malden Catholic, Winthrop and Watertown, and has done well enough, though handicapped by lack of height.
The return of the football group has .helped, and the Sachems are looking forward to their first game with Woburn Tuesday afternoon, December 19, at the high school gym.
Their second engagement is with Arlington here on Friday night, December 22.
With football packed away in moth balls for another year the W inchester High School Sachems are now dividing their time between hockey and basketball with a squad of more than 60 reporting to Coach Jim Phillips for the 1961-62 hoop campaign Winchester doesn’t face the new season with any great degree of veteran strength, with only one really experienced player, Mike Bellino, a guard, available for action this year.
Coach Phillips made his first cut in his huge squad last week in an effort to get his candidates down to a working number, and with the reporting of the boys who played football during the fall the team is commencing to take shape.
There are several boys with more or less experience on hand to round out a lineup, but Coach Phillips stressed the fact that no jobs on the club are secure, and some of those expecting to win varsity berths may well find themselves displaced by hard working newcomers.
Coach Phillips has among his retained candidates Lennie Timpone, big 6ft 3in football end, a forward; Bob Watson, 6ft 3in and Richie Bond, 6ft 2in centers; Jim Devaney, 6ft 2in forward and another forward, football end, Bob DonIon, 5ft 1 1 in.
From his defense position last season, Scott scored one goal and five assists for a total of six points.
The Red Raiders opened their third season in their new indoor ice rink Friday, December 1, against Rutgers.
A rugged 22-game schedule plus a Christmas tournament at Providence awaits the Maroon sextet.
Among the teams on the schedule are Bodwoin, Williams, Cornell, Princeton, Northeastern, Western Michigan, Army, and Middlebury.
Liberty 2-7070 — BUY FROM EXPERTS — nov28-4t Bowling League The league resumed bowling this week after a week’s absence due to the Thanksgiving holiday.
The Jades maintain their posi tion in 1st place and have a strongenough lead to proclaim them winners of the first half.
The Jades are, Captain Ann Caggiano, Gloria Monterisi, Mae Rotondi, Vi Bruno and Bette Cammarata.
This leaves second place in contention and the competition will be between the Rubies, Emeralds Diamonds, and Pearls.
In second place now are the Rubies, Captain Rose DeTeso, Virginia Macinanti, Jennie Amieo Anita DollofF. and Mary Fiorelli.
Emily Buzzotta was selected to assume the captaincy for the Opals, replacing former captain Mary Forgione.
A newcomer to the century club, our very capable treasurer, Marie Pizzo with a single string score of 103.
Last week’s top scorer was our chairlady, Ginger Maggio who bowled a total high three string of 288, and the high single of 110.
Team Standings Jades 37 7 13,071 Rubies 26 18 12,678 Emeralds 24 20 12,985 Diamonds 23 21 12,862 Pearls 22 22 12,843 Cameos 19 25 12,707 Sapphires 19 25 12,680 Gurnets 18 26 12,728 Opals 17 27 12,605 Topazes 17 27 12,463 “Clipit,” the purse or pocket size gadget to clip newspapers or magazines, quicker and better.
STOP FOR 1 PAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE ON ALL CHRYSLER BUILT CARS ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc.
At times this potential showed up strongly, as in the Lexington, Reading and Melrose games, and even in the defeats by Wakefield and Woburn the Sachems looked very good offensively at times.
Winchester, in every game save that with Stoneham, showed it could move the ball well, but its offensive strength was not enough to counteract defensive weakness, especially against teams with good offenses of their own.
The Sachems were weak all year against effective passing, and at times woefully weak against sweeps and off-tackle slants to the right.
Winchester defensive players were continually being caught out of position, perhaps because of a lack of experience.
Winchester started the season with only two regulars back, Captain Mike Bellino, fullback, and Joe Dattilo, guard.
The defensive play of the wingbacks was ineffective all year, and against fast moving teams like Wakefield and Woburn, fatal.
At times, eyen against Wakefield and Woburn the Sachems looked as good offensively as any team they met all year, but defensively their play was ineffective, especially on the line, where generally speaking, the local boys were outplayed, badly by the outstanding teams.
Winchester finished fourth in the Middlesex League behind the winners, Wakefield, Melrose and Lexington, who were tied for second.
Offensively Winchester was about as good as any team on the circuit, with the possible exception of Wakefield.
Gone will be Captain Mike Bellino, Winchester’s big offensive threat this year, one of Greater Boston’s high scorers, and his runner-up Bob Benincasa.
Other letter backs graduating include Richie Casalinuovo, George Neumann and Neil MacArthur.
The all around play of Bellino will be a real loss another year as will be the running and tackling of Benincasa.
On the line Bob Donlon, end; Dave Whittaker and George Nowell. tackles; Dan Mahoney, Roger McNeill, Joe Dattilo and John Chane, guards; and Tom Mooney and Ned Niblock, centers; are letter players who have played their last game for Winchester.
This leaves Coach Knowlton with letter players Lennie Timpone and Bill Graham, ends; A1 Kimball and Dave Mullen, tackles; Jim Menucci and Dick Starkweather, guards; and John Colliander, Rich Rowe and Scott Erskine, backs.
If nothing happens in the meantime this will constitute a much better rounded group than that starting the past season, and with the addition of several promising sophomores, like Ed Cutting, the outlook may not he so drub.
There seems to be several promising sophomore backs in the offing, but what they will run behind another year is a question, and a big one that must he answered to ensure a winning season.
Senior members of this year’s roster were Bellino, Benincasa, Casalinuovo, Chane, Dattilo, Donlon, Mahoney, Macdonald, MacArthur, McNeill, Mooney, Neumann, Niblock, Nowell, Whittaker and managers, Ennis and Bennett.
Juniors were Anderson, Bates, Bavuso, Borggaard, W Branley, Cervizzi, Cleary, Colliander, Duffy, Erskine, Gaffney.
Graham, Lindsey, Menucci, R Menucci, Mullen, Rotondi, Rowe, Snelling, Starkweather, Swanson, Timpone, Vozella, Walker, Wardwell, Winn, Zammarchi, Zenga and managers Eaton and Peckham.
Sophomores were Aiello, R Branley, Crockett, Cutting, Kimball, Doherty, Donovan, Eriksen, Ferazzi, Frongillo, Faietta, Grant, Goldin, Johnson, Larson, Lawson, Lowe, Migliaecio, Papadinis, Puffer, S Rotondi, Stavaridis, Tonello and managers Cowles and Spignesi.
This year’s team was again coached for the 21st consecutive year by Henry Knowlton, captained by Mike Bellino and managed by Reuben Ennis with Mel Bennett as senior assistant.
Winchester, Winchester, Winchester, Winchester, Winchester, Winchester, Winchester, Winchester, Winchester, 28; Concord, 6.
Northeys rink of the Toronto Cricket, Skating and Curling Club won the bonspiel by going undefeated through three ends of play.
Winchester scored an “eight end” in the second round of play, a feat even more rare than a hole-in-one in golf.
In addition to Neill, the Winchester curlers were Rod Bullen, lead; Tom Downes, second; and Dave Shean, Jr., third.
Sam Blanc, junior high school curriculum director in Colorado; and Richard Schulz, Iowa school consultant for science and mathmatics.
Albert Rains discusses “The Housing Bill and Y'ou” when Washington reports to the people.
Dick Lowry, senior Lexington center, converted a nice pass from Ray Doneski at 2:13 of the period.
Winchester settled down into fine position play and set up a nice triangle in the Lexington zone.
A pass back to the defenseman from Paul Ryan was shot low and clean into the lower left-hand corner for the tieing goal at 7:19.
Lexington scored again at 8:53 when Ed Whittemore banged a long shot from the blue lino past the Winchester goalie.
Coming out for the second period, Winchester looked like a different team.
Finally at 2:03, with Lexington a man short, the Sachems set up their power play with Vic Lawson hanging the puck in to Ed Cutting, who slithered the disc to Paul Ryan, who tied the game again with a sizzler into the strings.
The players skated their position well and appear to have mastered Coach Frank Finigan’s style of play.
The defense of Johns and Lawson did an adequate job, and Gerry Hills made some gotni moves in the nets.
Three models, plus duplicate bridge good at 5:53 when Sophomore boards and an advanced course in George Murphy gained control of contract bridge.
Helping in the win were Listed of a spare, a strike, a spare, j Frank DiMambro, Angie Amico | M ten, three successive spares, a| and Rudy Fiore.
These and other Fine LIBERTY Albums available at eKOwQJCj Winchester Appliance Co.
L O E W ’ 5 WINCHESTER Theatre — PA 9-2500 Tony Chefalo out of high single by 17 pins and it looks like a sure bet to remain for the remainder of the schedule but one never knows the way these 98 members of the league go at it.
Although Alabama split with Navy, it still has a firm grip on third place.
Harvard is still in fourth place despite the fact it lost three points to last place St.
Mary’s victory were Tony Chefalo and Mike Sara co while Phil Murphy and Correc tion Fiore were hot for Harvard.
Fifth place teams are Maryland and Navy when considering wins and losses but the former takes the lead in pinfalls.
They both challenged each other last week and Maryland walked off with a 4-0 victory with the help of Babe Tofuri and Emile Doucette.
Joe Marrone and Big Ted Peluso did well for the losers but their efforts were in vain.
Moose Bellino’s Holy Cross team had a rough time with Penn but finally came through with a 3-1 win.
For a time it looked like Jeff Caudioso and Louie DclSolio would pull Penn ahead but Moose and Peter Fiore saw to it that they didn’t.
FOREMANS ILK GUNS Of NAVARttK In CINEMASCOPE and COLOR Shown Daily at 1:55 and 7:10 • Sunday at 2:00, 5:00 and 8:00 WEDNESDAY DEC. 13 th— ** i i Charlie just told me about all the Christmas gifts he has for children.
CHILDREN’S SKIS Steel Edges • Plastic Bottoms $9.50$20.00 CHILDREN'S SKI POLES HATS SKI PARKAS PANTS BONGO BOARDS $16.50 WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
She got her teaching experience as a teaching assistant at Lincoln a year ago.
Dan Gattineri, Richie Bucci and Art Dunbar fell far below their usual performances.
There may be several changes in the standings this time next week because the top teams are competing against each other.
The big event will he first place California facing off against runner-up Notre Dame.
Fourth place Harvard should gain some ground when it takes on next to last place Georgetown.
Two attendance prizes were drawn last week and none other than ex-Venerable Chick Vespucci and Andy Buzzotta were the lucky ticket holders.
League Standing Won Lost Pinfall California 31 9 16,649 Notre Dame 28 12 16,676 Alabama 26 14 16,683 Harvard 25 15 16,384 Maryland 24 16 16,277 Navy 24 16 16,221 Holy Cross 20 20 16,325 Yale 19 21 16,126 Penn 19 21 16,107 Boston College 17 23 16,322 Bates 13 27 15,634 Army 12 28 16,159 Georgetown 12 28 15,944 St.
Because Indians played a very important part in the history of Winchester the children have been enjoying a Social Studies unit of work about Early American Indians.
At this time, all children dressed in the Indian clothing which they had made.
Brent Hochdradel served as an Announcer as many pupils read their original reports about Indian life.
Guests included the children from kindergarten, the first three grades and parents.
M0T0-M0WER 20"" DELUXE POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER Breeje through snow removal with this rugged 3 «, 4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and heavily packed snow.
Mon., Wed., Fri. evenings 5:30 to 8:30 Saturdays All Day novfl-tf Marry is the daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Maurice G Tompkins of 3339 Daleford Road, Shaker Heights, former well-known residents of Winchester.
As a matter of fact Marey herself lived in town as a child and is remembered by many of the teen-agers here.
Frederick B Craven, live on Atherton Road and her grandmother on her father’s side, Mrs.
Marcy commenced shooting in 1958 at Brown Lodge Camp near Burlington, Vt., and she took it up with the idea of proving to her parents she could do something well at camp.
From the first she liked shooting, but it wasn’t until last winter when she qualified for the Shaker Heights Junior Rifle Team that she began practicing outside of camp.
There she shoots six hours a day, but she is limited to a few hours weekly during the school year.
Marcy is the only girl on the five-member Shaker Heights rifle team and was selected by her coach to receive the National Rifle Association medal awarded to the best all-around member of the team based on shooting, sportmanship, attitude and attendance.
She gets a lot of support in her shooting from her parents, who follow her to every match possible and shoot every shot with her.
Her father, a former Winchester High athlete, taught marksmanship in the infantry during World War II, and used to shoot with Marcy frequently.
Marcy is so fond of shooting that she urges all her friends to give it a whirl, and occasionally her urging backfires, when some of the boys who compete with her find themselves on the short end of the match.
Born in Chicago, III., Miss Bonnaffon went with her parents to Philadelphia after only two weeks in the Windy City.
S Touring Team to play through the month of March 1962, one game in Copenphin she went to England where hasron ’ Denmark; one in Ireland; she completed high school and conone in Scotland; and seven in Hngtinued to summer both in England land, and Switzerland.
Barker’s husband studied architectural engineering and now has his own business designing and constructing buildings.
He and his wife have six children, the oldest a junior at Winchester High School and the youngest in kindergarten.
One of the children is a Korean boy whom the Barkers adopted just before the opening of the school year in September.
Barker simply said that with her teaching duties, her studies at Tufts and caring for her husband and children she has little free time in which to indulge any hobbies, whatever they might be.
Miss Margaret Russell, who is this year teaching Combination Grade 3-4 at the Lincoln School, practice taught at the Lincoln back in 1957 when she was studying at Lesley College in Cambridge.
Miss Bonnaffon names skiing skating, drama and the study of voice as her hobbies.
Town Bowling League Last Tuesday night showed no change in the standings of the top four teams.
Pucksters Face Melrose Winchester’s young Sachems face a favored Melrose team this Sat unlay at Lynn at 3m.
The Sachems won their opener 5-2 against a strong Lexington team, but Melrose battered Belmont 7-0 in a surprise.
It is expected that the MelroseWinchester game will till the Sports Center.
Coach Henry Hughes of Melrose would like to wallop Winchester because of the last two seasons, in which Winchester spoiled Melrose’s chances for the Middlesex League title.
A CHANCE TO HELP Many elderly ami infirm pe rsons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Christmas if this holiday is to be a happy occasion in accordance with the American tradition.
Maxwell R McCreery, Treasurer 4 Curtis Street, PA 9-2036 Miss Nellie M Sullivan, Secretary 44 Spruce Street, I J A 9-0095 novlMf Photo by Ryerson MISS MARGARET RUSSELL Miss Russell was born in North Branford, Conn., and prepared for college at St.
She spent a year at Ithaca College of Music before graduating from Lesley.
She first taught elementary grades in the base school for children of the Military at Ramey Air Force Base in Puerto Rico.
She then went to England for a year, traveling in that country and on the continent.
She taught in public and private schools in Stamford, Conn., before coining to Winchester.
Miss Russell lives in Cambridge and lists her hobbies as music, art and skiing.
Miss Bonnaffon, who is teaching 4th grade at the Lincoln School under the Harvard internship teaching program, speaks with a delightful English accent acquired during the years she spent with her family in England.
Winn Longshots 83 82 70 61 52 50 17 47 37 28 10 6 13 14 26 32 44 46 49 49 59 68 86 88 Pinfall 17.592 17,736 17,067 16,788 16,658 16,807 16,21 1 15,881 16;125 15,825 15,253 14,028 Top Ten Bowlers B Kelley 109.
S Team on record ever to play the English L Team, the strongest learn in the world, in the Wembley Stadium, Wembley, England, before 55,000 spectators.
This year the National Tournament was made up of 18 teams from the following sections of the country, two from Great Lakes, two from Mideast; two from Midwest, three from New Atlantic, three from Northeast, four from Philadelphia, and two from Southeast.
As usual Winchester was well represented with a player on Northeast 111.
Peg McNally; and four players on Northeast I, Agnes Bixler, Marilyn Chase, Alison Hersey, and Ellie Keady, former Winchester coach.
In Beaver Swim Show Two Winchester girls, Louise Harrison Coady of 8 Wolcott Terrace, a sophomore, and Diane Elizabeth Doten of 52 Lorena Road, a freshman, are participating in the Beaver College Synchronized Swim Show.
A graduate of Winchester High School, she is majoring in elementary education.
Miss Doten is also a graduate of Winchester High School and is majoring in biology at Beaver.
You think you're winning, and the next card sends you back where you started.
PARKVIEW 9-0029 Page Twelve THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 1961 At B Conference To Sing Christmas Vespers At First Church Sunday \ typist’s dream come true.
Maurice Freeman are among the patrons sponsoring a talk on Monday, December 18 by Dr.
Edward Teller at 8:15ni. at the Roman Catholic Paulist Center, 5 Park Street, Boston.
Teller will discuss the nuclear issue in terms of the dangers of atomic fallout and the question of nuclear testing.
Mesdames Fred Greene, Philip Hovnanian, Aram Mouradian, George Thompson, Donald Van Roosen, Robert White, and the Misses Natalie Bellows, Diane Barchard, Barbara Croft, Flora Mardigian, Leonor Rich, Mary Dean Snell, Grace Vodola.
Branches, princess pine, centerpieces, straw flowers, ruscus, pine cones and other materials for do-it-yourself decorating.
The Women’s Association of the church is sponsoring the concert and preparing for the social hour immediately following the concert.
Robert Anderson of this town will be the featured guest instrumentalist. in addition to providing an accompaniment on the harp for the “Ceremony of Carols” by Benjamin Britten, she will also provide harp solos.
James Guild of The Infant Saviour Promoted In Korea K0K0 B00DAKIAN & SONS, INC WHERE YOU'RE Shoppers counting the days until Christmas will have a fine opportunity to select unusual gifts and ; holiday accessories at the Christ> mas sale being held on Tuesday, December 12, at K of C Home, from 10m. to 5m.
This annual bazaar is sponsored by the Guild of the Infant Saviour, with the president, Mrs.
All of the attractive articles on sale, including hand-made knits, jewelry, novelty stuffed toys, homecooked foods and candy, will represent the varied and creative abilities of the members of the guild.
Michael H Hintlian Thread and Needle Shop — Mrs. chairman, remem Koko formerly the lemmens Distinctive Christmas gifts and decorative accessories for the Home Sp/4 TONY TOFURI Last month Specialist Tofuri W’cnt to Japan on leave and enjoy ed himself very much being greatly impressed with the beauty of the country.
He had originally been due home this month, but now his plans have been changed and his duty in Korea extended by four months.
The use of 1961 plates in 1962 will be validated by a wandshield sticker.
Place this sticker at the middle of the bottom of your windshield December 31.
The last day for receipt of 11)62 registration applications through the mail is Monday, December 11.
Has electric eye that sets the lens automatically for a good shot every shot . . . plus built-in filter that lets you use same roll of color film for both indoor and outdoor shooting.
Open the flash compartment, and the “autoihift” shutter is automatically set for flash— close it, and you’re ready for outdoor shots.
Built-in flash . . , fast f/8 lens . . . takes color and black-and-white snaps, plus color slides.
Camera takes black-and-white or color snapshots and color super-slides.
DECEMBER 7, 1061 Pnr*o Thirteen FORESTER’S * FLOWER SHOP * CUT FLOWERS ir WEDDING FLOWERS if FLORAL DESKrNS PA 9-1077 Eves.
The new owner, Mr Paul O’Neil of 2f> Park Avenue, took title to the business on December 1, not as the Star announced on December 21.
Mr O’Neil is now operating the pharmacy as owner and will be pleased to welcome all his patrons and friends old and ne^v.
Fiction Catch — 22, by Joseph Heller The Executioner, by Pierre R<>. ulle False Entry, by Hortenae Cal isher For Every Hero, by Sylvia Wilcox The Game of Kings, by Dorothy Dun nett Night Song, by John A Williams The Old West in Fiction, by Irwin R Blacker, ed.
Winfred Van Atta Non-Fiction Clarence House, by Christopher H ussey Death in the Afternoon, by Ernest Hemingway The Divided Union, by James G Randall The High-Stepping Horses, by Frances K Clarke, comp.
Robert A Storer, Minister 33 Glen Green, PA 9-1384 Sunday 9«»rvic*» at 11:00m.
The comforting and assuring message of the Keautitudea < Matt.f* ) will be featured at Christ inn Science service* Sunday.
The Losson-Scrmon on the subject ""God the Preserver of Man” will consist of Scriptural texts and correlative passages from “Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures” by Mary Baker Kddy.
Junior Hi(rh P.F. will put on a play on the life of Moses for their parents. 0:30m.
Shirts Laundered in 24 Hours Same-Day Dry Cleaning Two-Day Tailoring Service on Most Garments EMBASSY Laundry 6k.
FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH Christmas Music On Wilson Organ A Christmas concert will be played by Douglas Rafter, director of music and associate of the American Guild of Organists, on the Albert O Wilson Memorial organ at Boston's historic Park Street Church, Sunday , at 4The organ, dedicated earlier this year, was named in recognition of the faithful services of the late Albert 0.
Wilson of 23 Yale Street, and the Wilson Family assisted the memorial with a substantial gift.
Rolland Tapley, first violinist of the Boston Symphony and conductor of the North Shore Philharmonic, is guest artist.
Dwight L Cart, D.D., Minister PArkview 9-0328 THE LUTHERAN CHURCH OF THE REDEEMER Montvale Avenue at Prospect Street, Woburn Mr Raymond Shannon, Organist and Choir Director.
SPECIALS GENUINE BLACK FOX COLLARS s 19.95 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats CASHMERE SWEATERS WITH MINK COLLARS AND LINED s 47.50 IT IS NOT TOO LATE TO HAVE YOUR FUR COAT REMODELED FOR CHRISTMAS INTO A CAPE, STOLE or CAPELET at a labor charge of $ 20 SWARTZ FURRIER 24 College Avenue Davis Square Somerville SOmerset 5-3399 Sunday, December 10. 9:46m.
Mes»nge “The Cost of Pence” ; extended sesnion for Nursery through 6th Crude. 3:00m.
Annual Christmas Vespers at the First Congregational Church, ull invited. 6:15m.
Junior High Fellowship, “Christmas In Japan,” illustrated with slides, nt the Ondrejkn home.
Senior High Fellowship guests of Medford First Baptist Youth Fellowship.
Couples Club, dessert and coffee at the Ralph Swansons, 44 Swan Road, proceed to Lexington to hear the “Messiah” to be given by the Lexington Choral Society.
The pastor will speak on “The Meaning of the Holy Communion” and will administer the Sacrament.
The title of his sermon will be ""The Kingdom Within You.” 9:15 and 11:00m.
Elmer Orinnell and the program “Script and Score” by Langdon und Anderson, monologist and harpist.
Those who cannot attend the banquet will be welcome for the program which follows at 8 :00 o’clock.
Board of Christian Education EVENTS OF THE WEEK Monday, December 11. 1:16m.
Mass. orrosirs pihst conoucoationai. church Charming, useful, and quaint are the new 1962 “calendar towels,” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star.
Since the close of World War II Mr Brown has been in charge of all sales activities of Pilgrim Laundry Co., Boston, most recently as vice president-sales and member of the Board of Directors.
Prior to the war years Mr Brown was sales manager of Glendale Farms and Harrington & Co., retail and wholesale milk distributors in the Newark, New Jersey area.
While in Newark, he also was an editorial contributor and columnist for several trade journals of the dairy industry.
In addition to his business activity, Mr Brown is widely known in New England for his interest in rocks and minerals.
This hobby activity has led him to acquire one of the largest and finest collections of fluorescent minerals in New England.
His interest in the earth sciences has also led him into putting together a very strong library of earth science material, books and publications, probably the largest in the Ejoston area, outside of the colleges and universities.
Both in relation to his business activity and his hobby interests, Mr Brown has frequently been a speaker at various meetings and conventions, as well as a contributor to various publications.
He is currently a member of the Advertising Club of Boston, the Boston Sales Executives Club, the Boston Mineral Club, Advertising Federation of America, National Sales Executives and the Mineralogical Society of America. of Boston.
A panel discussion on “The Sunday Observance Laws” was featured after the Cardinal’s message.
Following the panel session, all delegates marched to Holy Trinity Church.
The new Archdiocesan treasurer Mr Flahive, is a past president of Immaculate Conception Holy Name Society, and served also as treasurer and secretary of the Woburn District.
He is a former Archdiucesan program chairman and has just completed the term of Archdiocesan secretary.
Other Archdiocesan officers installed were Leo C Renard, Jamaica Plain, President; Joseph H McPherson, Jr., Newtonville, Vice President; and J William LeClair, Quincy, Secretary.
New Sliderule Makes Musical Keys and Scales Easy Most of us are familiar with the mathematic slide rule we see engineers so often refer to and which is now standard equipment in mam high school pupils’ sc hool hags Once mastered these precision instruments take much of the actual mechanical drudgery out of mathematical computations.
You have completed your mathematical problem with sufficient accuracy for all intents and purposes.
Roswell M Boutwell, 3rd, of Sheffield Road was one of the Speakers who conducted tours Tuesday evening at the Museum of Fine Arts for the foreign students and their friends who were guests of the Museum.
While the French students were admiring the Museum’s great French Impressionist collection, students from the East were discovering the Museum’s Chinese and Japanese art collection, the finest in the Western world.
These students, studying at Harvard, Radcliffe and Wellesley, were being introduced to the Museum and its collections by Speakers from the Museum’s Ladies’ Committee.
The Museum hopes during the year to be able to acquaint interested foreign students in the cultural and recreational advantages offered free of charge and within easy reach of their colleges and universities.
Each foreign student was accompanied by an American student who will continue to give a helping hand.
The Student Committee who assisted the Ladies’ Committee included from Radcliffe the Misses Ann Jennings, Carmine Omstead and Belinda Burley; from Wellesley the Misses Sandra Willett and Caty Thronow; and from Harvard Mr Thomas Wardell, Mr Thomas Mayer and Mr Gil Leaf.
Few people, on the other hand, realize that a musical slide rule has been completed by a Winchester man, whjch does for scales arid keys in music what the orthodox slide rule does for figures.
Its inventor, Herbert F Rondeau of 57 Thornberry Road, calls the musical slide rule a “scale chart” and says it has been designed for the piano and associated orchestra instruments.
If you have ever played an instrument which requires transposing to play with open instruments like the piano, strings and trombone, the chart scale will interest you especially, for a simple manipulation of the chart scale tells you in just -what key to play.
Mr Rondeau was born in Cambridge Springs, Pa., and was graduated from high school there.
He got a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Case Institute of Technology and has spent 24 years in industry.
Professionally he is now an industrial physicist, advanced design engineer and consultant in materials, measurements, analysis and design.
A relative newcomer to Winchester, (he has lived here only 19 months), Mr Rondeau is the holder of three patents, two more applied for and three in process.
His hobbies are oil painting, theological philosophy and the study of musical engineering.
Even the basic chords or triads which add body and color to a melody are clearly displayed.
Not only are the more common major and minor scales shown but also the less common and perhaps more exotic harmonic and melodic minor scales.
Also a window displays the sharps or flats in the treble and bass clefs of the musical score that represents a given scale.
In such an event the musician must transpose the score to a key other than that played by the piano.
The Scale Chart makes this transposition for the three types of wind instruments in a single setting.
Also a chart is given which correlates the eighty-eight piano keys with the corresponding musical notes on the treble and bass clefs.
And its unique display of information will speed up the comprehension of these basic facts of musical knowledge.
This is why music teachers stress the importance of a thorough knowledge of them.
Present With a Futurel A gift of securities rivals any other present for originality and thoughtfulness.
It’s a wonderful present for anyone— youngster • . • new investor . . . or market veteran.
And it’s a gift that can keep on giving year after year because it represents a share in American industry.
Allyn office or mail coupon for free folder entitled “This Year Give Securities.” ri i • • i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i d Co.
ANNE R WILD 45 Church Street PA 9-3268 nov.'i-tf INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER’S # PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 1 THOMPSON STREET Rea.
PA 9-1693 ON RADIO WBZ • 10:15 PM Evmty Week Night STOCK MARKET Sc BUSINESS NEWS Another Allyn Service for Investors JOHN B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED"" HOMEOWNER S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage al Less Cost I Mt.
Vernon Street PA 9-3400 novlO-tf Fortnightly To Observe 80th Birthday One of the Fortnightly’s highlights this year will he the celebration of its Fughtieth Birthday ;ind Presidents’ Day on Monday, December eleventh in the Social Hall of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church.
Charles E Shepard, president of the Massachusetts State Federation >f Women’s Clubs and Mrs.
A reception for the invited Presidents and guests and Club members will be at one o’clock.
Ralph W Hatch, the club's president, will honor the guests by cutting the Birthday cake during the Social Hour at one-thirty which has been arranged by the social chairmen, Mrs.
Herbert D Thompson, program chairman, will present the talented and familiar entertainers, Phyllis Howes Soprano and Robert Phillips Organist.
Team Roy Horn dropped in Tuesday morning to tell us our statement that the 1927 football team at Winchester High School, captained hy Henry Knowlton, was the last to play in the old Mystic Valley League is incorrect.
According to Roy the 1928 team, captained hy “Nutsey” Amico, was j the last to play in the Mystic League.
Legion Stamps For Rehabilitation Eugene J Riagi, Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee of the American Legion, Dept, of Massachusetts, has just mailed to each member in the State their Rehabilitation Stamps (shown in illustration above) for 1902 and already contributions arc being received from all parts of the Commonwealth.
The income from the sale of these stamps goes towards making the life of veterans in the hospital a happier one.
It gives them a pack of cards, a carton of cigarettes, a personal needed gift, a radio for a recreation room, small projects on which to work and help while away the long, lonely hours, and in many instances assistance for needy families of hospitalized veterans.
Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf $16,600 EXCLUSIVE LEXINGTON — Four-bedroom Cape , radiant heat.
Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area.
Call PA 9-5800 Monday through Friday. oct6-lf Myopia Hill Winchester Built on the site of the original Myopia Hunt Club is this King-Sized Family Home with woodwork that cannot be duplicated today, done hy master craftsmen of yore.
This home is in beautiful condition, with most attractive modern kitchen and a new heating system.
If you would choose a home of conservative elegance with an air of great cheerfulness, wc suggest that you call us as Exclusive Brokers for appointment to see this real value.
In the Thirties Three-bedroom, two-bath Ranch with den, family room and two car garage.
Throe-bedroom, two-and-a-half-lmth Ranch with family room and two-car garage.
Throo-hedroom. one-and-a-half-bath brick-front Colonial with large paneled den, family room and two-car garage.
Murphy, BA 9-6213 Marion R Ferrimon, BA 9-1136 Charles T McCarthy, BA 9-5972 Florence M Salyer.
BA 9-4750 HELP KEEP WINCHESTER SPOTLESS WINCHESTER Comfortable family home near center.
Two living rooms, dining room, kitchen, heated porch on first floor; four bedrooms and hath on second; finished third floor.
Located on a dead-end street, this is an ideal home for a family with children.
Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis BR 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp PA 9-0373 Jean Gibb PA 9-3808 HORACE FORI) PA 9-58R7 Realtor WINCHESTER CAPE Attractive pre-war Cape, offers large living room, dining room, modern electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor.
Unusual four-bedroom, 2Vi> -bath home with den in secluded wooded area near Washington School.
GRACIOUS CENTER-ENTRANCE COLONIAL whose large dining room, living room, music room and lovely reception hall invite entertaining.
Four large bedrooms, one with fireplace, on the second floor, and three more on the third floor, plus a sun porch and two-car garage add further value to this desirable property.
PA 9-2790, BA 9-5550, BA 9-3268 ONE OF ROYAL BARRY WILLS' FINEST Long, rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shinglo English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline.
Large reception hall with graceful curved stairway, step-down 17x28 baywindowed fireplaced living room, panelled den, 20-foot fireplaced dining room, all-electric built-in kitchen, jalousied porch, powdet room.
For appointment call exclusive broker, BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 21 Thompson Street PArkview 9-1210 WINCHESTER It is very difficult to find a split level with four large bedrooms, but we have one.
Main features include 2 , *s baths, den, basement play room, and a large kitchen with all the latest equipment.
Out-of-town owner is asking $44,500, but will consider reasonable offers.
JOSEPHSON • Real Estate ft Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings PArkview 9-1617 — 9-1693 — 9-3657 LEXINGTON — $43,500 For the discriminating buyer we offer a young spacious Ranch situated midst the atmosphere of Revolutionary days. 24x16 living room, with fireplace and hay window.x14 dining room, wall-to-wall carpeting included.
Lower level has large recreation room with fireplace and oversized workshop area, lavatory, laundry, dark room and two-ear garage.
This interesting home was designed and contoured to lit a most delightful tree-studded lot.
DA 2-3997 deo7-4t FLOORS ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES, WASHING MACHINES REPAIRED Dressmaking, Alterations.
Medford Laundromat and Appliance Service HI High St., Medford, EX 5-9775 nov30-2t CARPENTERS Home Repairs & Remodeling Carpentry, Complete Additions, Kitchens, Roofs, Gutters, Painting, Plastering <& Masonry.
WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 nuv30-4t ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AM1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
PArkview 9-5123 augl2-tf JEWELERS FIREPLACE WOOD Firepl ace Wood Well-seasoned Oak & Maple.
Speciatijls in fabric Caro eep29-tf MASON WORK DAVID J SPER0 & SON BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE MASONS Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls Brick Flower Boxes New und Repair Work Satisfaction Guaranteed Free Estimates MI 8-2751 octl9-8t FOR SALE FOR SALE —Hockey skates, si*e* 4.
FOR SALK — Completely rebuilt Itcndix Gyromntic Automatic Clothe** Washer.
Also two ballet costumes, sizen 8 and lu, worn once, (haul Christmas gift.
PICTURE FRAMING iWWWWWWWW* _ Picture | Framing 3 at 5 Winslow Press 3j 2A Mt.
Bud liners ; 30 freight can* including automatic operators; 3 transformers, 15 automatic switches, stations, trestle, numerous buildings and accessor iw ; complete truckage and 16xIH ft table.
FOR SALE — iy58 hard top Impalu Chevrolet, 2-door, &., and uut. transmission.
FOR SALE — New two rose-colored foamed armless chairs ami one gray, never sut on.
New 1961 famous make, equipped to sig-zag, buttonhole, darn and monogram, $23.
FOR RENT— In Winchester. room upper apartment, fireplace, oil heat, porch, garage.
FOR RENT — Professional office space with parking on grounds, control location.
Call WElls 3-2334. »ep21-tf FOR RENT — Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedge wood Apartments. $190 up.
Call PA 9-5860. oct5-tf FOR RENT — Ct»ey 3-room furnished apartment, bedroom with twin beds, living room, kitchen, bath with shower, private entrance and parking space, near center.
FOR RENT — Pleasant room near transportation. business gentleman preferred.
WANTED WANTED — Old coin**, private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, also top price for other coins.
WANTED — Ladies’ second-hand skis approximately 6'7"", reasonably modern.
College Club Art Group The December meeting of the College Ulub Art Group will be held at the Boston Muaeum of Fine Arts on Friday, the fifteenth, be ffinning at 10:15 in the morning.
At 10:15 we shall have the privilege of being’ conducted through the lovely, newly-decorated French Galleries by Miss Morna Crawford of the Museum staff.
Here Miss Crawford will show us paintings by many of our favorite and familiar artist friends, Cezanne, Matisse, Van Gotfh, Gauguin, and others.
These painters belong to the group who followed the Impressionists (such as Monet and Renoir), hut because they stressed different emphasis and changed their approach to painting, they became known as the Post-Impressionists.
As she has spoken to the Winchester Art Group many times in past years, it is with happy anticipation that we look forward to hearing her again on Friday, December 15th.
The second important opportunwhich the Museum offers us on this same day is to see the outstanding exhibition of “Chinese National Art Treasures” which is on view through January 14th.
Since 1949, the Government of the Republic of China has had these words of art stored in subterranian vaults, for safe keeping from the mainland Communists.
This important collection includes Chinese paintings, bronzes, porcelains, jades, and other masterpieces of art, never before shown in Western countries.
We suggest that after Miss Crawford's talk in the French Galleries our group go down to the lunch room at 11:30 (before the rowds), and afterward meet in the Chinese Exhibition Gallery on the second floor.
We can go around to gether, even if we do not have a gallery talk; for it is the custom of the Museum to have no gallery talks on these large, special exhi bitions.
Those who are member of the Museum must show their membership cards; others will be asked to pay the usual small en trance fee.
This should be one of the most delightful and important meetings of the Art Group.
WORK WANTED WORK WANTED — Reliable young woman wishes to care for children in her home for working mothers.
Far the finest, most dependable TVRADIO HI-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 l A GALAMBOS ‘ » o* ooo o o a o «ic « TYPING SERVICE James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 auglZ-tf I WILL DO any kind of typing.
Call PA 9-5758, or write N alley K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. apr'27-tf WANTED WANTED Antique* — IJric-u-Brau China, Glu**, Furniture, etc.
Call Stoneham.8-1939 JOHN J FOLEY juoA-tf AVON COSMETICS . . . help# you own ua you learn.
TeL WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker 1 Ifhere is a way out.
AH makes including Jupunese manufacture, 35 yearn of prompt, courteous service.
John V Harvey, Register. nov23-3t Secretary To Purchasing Agent Winchester Hospital FULL TIME COMPETENT TYPIST NO SHORTHAND Call Mr Dobbin PArkview 9-6434 DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE— Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World cau be made at tariff rates by calling your Authorised Travel Agent.
Let us know your travel plans and w# will be lutppy to work them out with you.
THRN DIAL PA 9-0029 Winchester Jaycees For those interested and members who could not be present at our monthly business meeting held Thursday night, November 30 at the Red Cross House, this report will inform all just what business was discussed and acted upon.
President Bill Bird opened the meeting and Pat Patterson led the members and guests in reciting the Jaycee creed.
Ted von Rosenvinge’s treasurer’s report was read and it was announced there are still some outstanding dues to he paid.
Jim Ferriman chairman of Charter Night, to be held Saturday night, December 9 at our Town Hall, buffet, ceremonies, dancing, reported that all plans are completed and all members should report reservations now to insure a table.
To date are twice as many reservations us against last year’s attendance.
Larry Smith announced that he and Elliott Walters wore attending the town Christmas Decorations Committee meeting Monday, December 4 and that they would give a report at our next business meeting on Wednesday January 3.
Bill Bird passed out a list of other possible 1962 projects which members have submitted.
Lindy Lane and Craig Wal k have done a great job in completing the Charter night program book.
The books will he distributed at the dance and will also be sent to other Jaycee chapters and to our most worthy advertisers.
Projects were discussed one by one and it was voted that a committee be selected and investigate the facts and possibilities of each.
The temporary committee chairmen will report their findings at our next meeting.
Welcome Wagon A1 Stiles PA 9-6374 If you have ideas on other possible projects which the Winchester Jaycee’s might incorporate, call Bill Bird PA 9-6496, or bring them with you to our next meeting.
The meeting was closed by the presentation of Directors pins to A1 Ruggles and Larry Smith.
Soloists for the identical concerts will be Taeko Fujii, soprano, Rosalind Hupp, contralto, Carl Olsen, tenor and Lyle Jewell, bass.
Since the capacity of Cary Hall is limited, admission to either concert is by free tickets, which may be obtained from any member of the Choral Society.
Gerald Lauderdale of Nashoba Road, Concord, will accept telephone orders.
She announces that since demand for tickets is heavy, reserved seats for sponsors and patrons will be held only until 8:20m. then all seats will be opened to general admission.
Toys and refreshments will he given out and there will he entertainment.
Toastmaster will he Walter Morgan, Past Golden Rodent, Dugout 103, N.O.T.R. of Winchester, and Mrs.
Helen Morgan, Past Golden Cat, Rat Trap 103, N.O.A.C., of Winchester will be chairlady.
Home from Wells Two Wells College students will return to their homes in Winchester on Dec. for an 18-day Christmas holiday.
Herbert H Uhlig of 14 Mason Street, and Elizabeth M Alt, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
BUTTERW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry jUiy6-tf COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
To all persons interested in the estate of MARY AGNES McCORMACK late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of u certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ROBERT MICHAEL McCORMACK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed executor thereof without giving a surety on his bond.
John V Harvey, Register. nov23-3t Eaton’s personalized stationery for men and women.
To all prisons interested in the estate of LETITIA F HOPPER late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The executor of the will of said LKTITIA F HOPPER has presented to said Court for allowance iu first and second accounts.
WINCHESTER SAVINGS BANK Ralph W Hatch, Treasurer. nov23-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate <d FRANK B SMITH late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by BEATRICE L SMITH of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on h»Mbond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile u written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in tho forenoon on the twenty first day of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this twenty-seventh day of November 1961.
Whether he plans to buy or to build, the prospective homeowner can look to the bank for experienced advice; budget-fitting terms that increase his equity monthly; and, last but by no means least, low financing cost.
A valuable “extra” is the fact that he also establishes a useful banking connection.
Mr O’Donnell, who is associated with the Brake & Truck Supply in Everett, completed his work from the Manufacturing Workshop.
He completed his work from the Advanced Marketing Management Workshop, conducted by N U. for the first time this year.
VI-DE-FA BS-tablets 100, $4.25 — 300, $11.00 News Of the Rosses “Herb’* and Marion Ross of Lake view Road, who are in Europe while Mr Ross sets up a European Central Technical Establishment for the United Shoe Machinery Corporation, have been doing a lot of traveling since their arrival abroad in the early fall.
After three weeks in England and Scotland and two weeks in Sweden and Denmark, they are presently in Germany, from where they will go on to France, Belgium, Holland, Spain, Italy and Austria before returning to their permanent European residence at Lausanne, Switzerland, overlooking Lake Geneva.
Herb describes his Switzerland headquarters as a beautiful place with its unobstructed view of the lake and snow-capped mountains in the background.
The Rosses’ daughter, Martha, who is in Europe with her parents attending the American School, Leysin, 5,000 feet up in the Swiss Alps, is enjoying her experience and a brand new ski outfit which she is using continuously.
Martha will be with her parents for Christmas and the occasion will he a real family reunion with older daughter Nancy coming up from her newspaper work in Paris and son Bjlly going over from this country.
No one can sell soap, insurance, refrigerators, washing machines, TV sets or automobiles faster than we.
The constant patter of commercials over TV and radio must hring desired results, or it would not be there.
Johnson) in the interest of that “pointed-toe look “has removed the tips of the little toes of a | couple of hundred women.
Yet we doubt 1 if any affects more people, assumes more disguises, is capable of a greater variety of complications, or causes more unemployment.
Moreover, it resists with an obstinacy equal to that of cancer all attempts to find a cure-all.
In addition to an infinite variety of shelters (one dealer offers life-time guarantee”) there are now on the market “survival kits,’ radiation detectors, civil defense gear, emergency food and water kits, baby machine guns, and the like.
Army Kids Fit Opportunity In the Navy For men 17 to 31 the Navy now offering a better career than that 76 per cent successfully passever before.
Head-table guests at testimonial banquet for retiring Patrolman Archie O’Connell Monday evening at the Town Line Cafe.
I)er Haus by Der Road Mit dwellen insiden ein haus by der road, Ich ben watchen der folkers gepassen — Der gooten und baddish, der richers und poorisch, Und also der middlischer classen.
They excite thought; stimulate the sense of beauty, the sense of pity, the sense of sympathy.
If a book helps a little to under stand our fellow-creatures; if it moves to laughter or tears; if it throws light on dark problems; if it awakens conscience and thus directly influences our conduct — if it accomplishes any of these things, then it has succeeded.
For the world of books is the world of man’s thought and effort, joy and purpose and inextinguishable hopes, as they pass in heritage from the past to the present, and as they are born of each immediate moment.
A borrowed book is hut a cheap pleasure, an unappreciated and unsatisfactory tool.
To know the true value of books you must feel the sweet delight of buying them.
Tiny fragments of eternity, mutely ranged along an unadorned wall, you stand there unpretentiously in our home.
Yet when a hand frees you, when a heart touches you, you imperceptibly break through the workaday surroundings, and as in a fiery chariot your words lead us upward from narrowness into eternity. have permitted her to do so.
Moreover, it is possible that her presence there might have caused a derailment of the locomotive which struck her and a serious wreck, perhaps involving loss of human life.
ERASMUS Tidbit Up in Minnesota a railroad train killed a cow belonging to a Scandinavian homesteader.
Now the claim-agent was a plausible and persuasive person, or he would not have been a claim-agent.
Having found the man and introduced himself by his official title, he proceeded to make out as strong a case in rebuttal as was possible under the circumstances, with the hope, of course, of inducing the injured party to accept a moderate sum.
We deeply regret that your cow should have met her death on our tracks.
In the first place, that cow had no business straying on our right-of-way, and you, as her owner, s hou 1 d not Boats Registered Like Cars State Director Wilton Vaugh of the Division of Motorboats announced that the system of the State Registry of Motor Vehicles in requiring owners to re-register their numbers three months in advance will be adopted next month for the registration of boats.
He pointed out that the law provides that boat registrations expire on the owners' birthdays so that the work of registration will be spread over the entire year and not result in last-minute rushes which require the hiring of temporary help at considerable expense to the boaters.
The State Director recalled that many boat owners obtained registration numbers to correspond with their automobile, telephone, house numbers, college or high school or some other numbers which they covet for sheer luck.
Not only will the late-comers lose their boat numbers but they will lose their right to the reduced $3 fee for renewal and be forced to pay $5 for a new number.
This will make it necessary for them to repaint at least the bows of their boats and brush on the new numbers or they will have to remove the old plastic or other attached numbers and buy now ones.
Marshall W Symmes will entertain the Christmas Meeting at her home on Yale Street the Committee of Safety Chapter, D.A.R. on December 18th, beginning with dessert at 1:30m.
The test was part of a tri-ser** vice program to test and implement the President’s Youth Physical Fitness Program.
The Army is now requiring under the President’s program a minimum of 15 minutes of vigorous activity daily for all pupils in its world-wide dependent school system.
Modern 1 FISHER Stereo FM-Multiplex • Stereo FM-AM Stereo Phonograph in beautiful cabinetry The qualify FISHER components and the magnificent styling of its consoles make the FISHER Futura HI the perfect answer to the discriminating music lover with a critical eye as well as ear.
The excellent reception of Multiplex and standard FM programs with the FISHER Wide-Band Tuner and the superb reproduction of your stereo and monophonic records are but a few of the dividends of musical enjoyment it will bring to your home in the years ahead.
Evergreen Hoping PA 9-( k °' ka * And ^ reens ""Convertible” Fountain Pen with 14K Gold Point A brand new kind of fountain pen.
You can load it with a big Super Quink cartridge, and write up to 10,000 words, or a clever converter lets you fill the 45 from a regular ink bottle.
Trim, tapered barrel available in blue, black, green, red, charcoal or deep blue.
DECEMBER 7, 1961 Page A very thing for #•00 for the ladies As usual . . . the unusual for those important gifts for your feminine favorites.
Vernon Street PArkview 9-3070 Page TC THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7.
HAPPY HANDS'* \Y inchester IIOBBY SHOP 43 Thompson Street — PArkview 9-4117 New this; month is n paperback edition of the book ’‘Buckskin ami Blanket Days” by Thomas Henry Tibbies, for which Mrs.
Barris said that her husband used to tell her about his grandfather having spent a winter with a band of Indians when he was a young man and later in his life having given up his work us a newspaper editor to devote his full time to help get legislation through that would help the Indians.
After selling his grandfather’s nemoirs to Doubleday, Inc., how*vei\ Mr Barris passed on before the book was published.
Barris said he would have been very pleased if he could have known that it was to be on best sellers’ lists at two different times, that it was to go into its third edition and that the “Wintering with the Indians” section of the book was to run serially in the Satura London printed in s “Epoca” at Winchester High School, also studies violin at the y School of Music in ( am i» ami obtained his Student’s License for flying this fall.
Harris said he supported his ■ lessons by mowing lawns. to gain recognition for the the American Indian as a person with equal rights before the law.
A junior at the university, Cadet Inman is one of several juniors to hold officer rank as part of a training program designed to develop leadership as well as to acquaint juniors with positions which they will fill next year when controlling the cadet corps.
The innovation, known as “junior week,” is one of three such weeks held at the university during the academic year.
A 1 lister R MacKay of 9 Lockclund Road; and Parker W Gray, son of Mr and Mrs.
Upon completion of the course both will be eligible for commissions as 2nd lieutenants in the Air Force Reserve.
TK \INS PLANES sinus DINKY TOYS “MATCH BOX’* TOYS XACTO FOOLS GAMES BIRDS OF THE \\ OKI I CHEMISTRY SETS TELESCOPES MICROSCOPES STAMP & COIN B0OK.‘ ci stomi/im; cars DOGS OF THE WORLD model motoring in ji. scm.k Salvation Armv Opens Holiday Campaign from frjwson Senior United States Senator ; from Massachusetts Loverett^Saltonstall officially opened the Salvation Army Christmas Program j with a generous initial contribution today at the traditional kettle tended by Lt.
The Senator pointed out that this special financial assistance is needed during the Christmas season to guarantee toys for youngsters, clothing for the very neediest children, baskets of groceries for underprivileged families, dinners for homeless men and other services provided by the Salvation Army at Christmas.
Senator Saltonstall noted that over 20,000 individuals were assisted by the Salvation Army last year at this time.
With our full co-operation, he concluded, they can help even more this Christmas.
Mail and Phone Orders Filled Call PA 9-4117 in festive foil rolls — Y smart new patterns — gift ribbons and bows — gift cards and tags— v to add beauty to your Christmas Gifts newspaper Italian in in Rome.
The paperback edition just released was printed by Bantam Press and contains the full text of the original hook.
In 1906, that was, when he had yet another if less eventful twenty-three years to live in a world he definitely helped to make.
It is a ‘primitive’ in the way that the paintings of Grandma Moses are primitive — the natural gift is there but it has not been subjected to the rigors of professional training.
VIVIEN BARRIS “Seldom from the smelting pots of literature comes a bar of pure golden Americana.
Park Street PA 9-0342 — jecidon j KjreetingA At this Holiday Season we desire to express to you our sincere appreciation of our pleasant relations and to extend to you and yours best wishes for a Merry Christmas and a Happy and Successful New Year.
The Middlesex TR Christmas Seal Association has received a few inquiries from County residents asking if this Association is the same as the Somerville Association.
Until recently the Middlesex TB Association had its office on Broadway in Somerville.
Now with its new offices at 35 Winn Street, the Association’s Board of Directors feel the Christmas Seal Association can offer services to Middlesex cities and towns easier since it is located in approximately the middle of the County.
Hood ;md Sons for 25 years, was honored yesterday for his long service to the company.
This year’s figure represents nearly $320,000 more than was raised by the United Fund last year and is the largest amount ever recorded for the Fund.
John S Howe, president ’of the Provident Institution for Savings, was named campaign chairman for next year’s campaign.
The new chairman has long been associated with the United Fund campaigns, as well as wtih agencies sharing in the Fund.
Large Firms, $4,959,819, 4.7; Commerce and Industry, $1,101,514, 5.3; Public Service, $730,388, 7.9; Advance Gifts, $1,923,207,1. less than last year; Metropolitan, $787,223, 1.1.
Her prize, a valuable cashmere cardigan sweater, was delivered recently from the Chicago offices of Helene Curtis, contest sponsor.
Launched in behalf of two of the firm’s well-known hair care products, Knden Dandruff Treatment Shampoo and Suave Hairdressing the contest was unusual in that it offered 1,000 winners “first prize” awards.
In each case, the prize was a Bernard Altmann cashmere sweater valued at $25. no.
The Suave-Enden prize sweaters were offered to contestants in a choice of size and five colors, pink, black, blue, white and sand.
Based on the choices of winners, the favorite sweater color this winter will he sand, reports the hair care firm.
More than oncthird of the total winners selected sweaters in this shade.
Among names selected by the independent firm of Reuben H Donnelley Corp., were winners in two new states, Alaska and Hawaii, as well as most of the mainland states.
Donald T Rowlingson of 15 Ridge Street, whose work was “Jesus the Religious Ultimate”; and Prof.
Motet Choir To Sing Bach The Motet Choir of The First Church in Cambridge, Congregational, will give an Advent concert on Tuesday evening, December 12> at 8:00m., at First Church, 11 Garden Street, Cambridge, under the direction of Dr.
S Bach, the Evening Service by Thomas Weekes, four chorales for chorus and recorders by Johann Cruger, three Sacred Concerts by Schein, and solos of the early Baroque sung by Signe Quale soprano.
The concert is open to the public without charge, but a collection will be taken to help defray exj penses.
VS from McLaughlins INSULATED 9.95 to 14.95 For Dad, Mom, Big Sister, Brother or the Small Fry Skating is Fun.
PA 9Open Every Nite 'Til Christmas Call PArkview 9-1400 Page D THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 1961 Park hurst Xmas Bazaar bazaar is for th<* their Christmas that have prices d budgets, are welcome to pate.
They, pnr-j >y the fine bake | and respective The Parkhurat Christmas Bazaar, after Its postponement last year, will be held again on Friday, December 8, at 11:16m., in the Hchool auditorium.
Primarily, thi children to do shopping for gifts geared to child However, mothers attend and partici] ticularly, will cnjc table.
CS 8471 m m & Thompson Academy Unifjue School When David Mitchell came home from Thompson Academy to spend Thanksgiving with his parents, Mr and Mrs.
Frederick S Mitchell of Winchester Place, many wondered as they read the notice of his visit in the Star what sort of a school Thompson Academy is, and where it is located# Thompson Academy is located on an island in Boston Harbor, and up to five years ago used to be called Farm and Trade School.
Many will recall this name, and more and more are coming to know of this unique school and the good work it is doing.
In addition to the usual classroom activities of any school, students to do farm work.
Each boy has a two to three hour work period, milking cows, feeding chickens, working on the school’s boat, in the dining room or doing other odd jobs to help defray his tuition.
The actual cost of board, room and tuition is $1600, but necessary adjustments are made between the parents and the dean of admissions.
Many of the pupils at the Academy are boys from broken homes, boys with problems but definitely not problem boys.
The school takes care of needy youngsters, many from large families, as well as boys with problems.
The Academy is privately endowed and receives help from various charitable organizations.
Hanscom Field, Bedford, were the means of the 11th Special Forces getting to the proper place at the proper height.
This particular exercise was directed by Colonel Dona J Lacouture, Operations Officer of the Wing.
Their team was flown up to New England especially for this exercise, which was the first Parachute Jump by Reserve Army Troops in History, in New England.
The actual parachute jumps were LEAPING FROM AN AIRPLANE IN FLiGfIT at parachute exercises of the 11th Special Forces is Lt.
Winchester Parachutists Make First Special Forces Jump Winchester was well represented on Sunday, November 26, when Paratroopers of the lltli Special Forces Group , First Special Forces made a proficiency jump at Fort Devens.
Led by the Group Commander, Colonel James R Stewart, Jr., of 7 Winslow Road, and Plans and Training Officer Major Donald C Van Roosen, of 49 Allen Road, more than 40 Reserve Army Officers and Enlisted Men made a highly successful parachute jump.
Although a freak gust of wind forced a few of the troopers to land in low trees surrounding the jump field, there were no injuries.
The field exercise envisaged a mass drop of especially trained Special Forces troops into enemy held territory where a reception team of guerilla fighters had prepared a landing strip or “Drop Zone” in anticipation of the U S. troops.
Members of the 11th Special Forces who have not had the opportunity to qualify as paratroopers as yet, simulated the guerillas as they “secured” the drop zone from “enemy” forces, made radio contact with the U S. troops and prepared ground panels and smoke signals for the jumpers.
The panel signified all was clear, and the smoke indicated the direction and speed of .the ground wind the parachutists would encounter as they neared the ground, so they could take the proper precautions.
These indica1 non-tactical, in that the trooperB did not carry full equipment down with them, hut, once on the ground, they were required to “roll up” their ’chutes and assemble at a predesignated point as if they were going right into a problem.
In spite of the few cases where the parachutes had to be pulled out of trees, the elapsed time from plane exit| to finish roll-up was slightly over 15 minutes.
Many observers from Fort Devens, Newspapers and TV Stations were in attendance to witness the historical event, as well as many relatives of the jumping paratroopers.
In an interview after the final phase of the exercise, Colonel Stewart indicated that he hoped this success would encourage former paratroopers to apply to the 11th Special Forces for consideration for specialist positions which are now open for additional personnel.
At the Boston Army Base, Section 4 C West, any Tuesday night, Colonel Stewart said there was a team of personnel designated to interview prospective Reservists with a notion to jump and reap the bonus pay thereby allowed.
He said that the unit is especially interested in men qualified in Communications, Demolitions and Medical Services.
JOSEPHSON REAL ESTATE { WALTER Y JOSEPHSON INSURANCE 'rim tn*m a?'.** tnm trim trim tnm tnm *n** \ Cambridge School i Reunion St Mr and Mrs.
The Bayleys* daughter at school is Diane; the Gilhortis’ .laughter, Joyce.
They’re the finest and freshest in the world — made with table butter and dairy cream, fresh fruits and nuts, the smoothest, creamiest chocolate.
The “Merry Christmas” Assortment shown is an all-time favorite . . . and there are many more.
I'hcse recommendations are being incorjMirated into a hill t<> he tiled with the state legislature by j Senator Ralph C Mahar of ( M ange.
Members of the Interim Cotn| inittee wiil act as petitioners tor the hill.
A A comprehensive study of the quality of public education at all levels in Massachusetts which would clearly define its strengths and weaknesses and make specific proposals for the achievement of educational programs that would meet the needs of ail children and youth of the Commonwealth.
Specific attention would be given to the programs of public elementary schools, public secondary schools, public higher edueducation such as vocational training, libraries, educational television, and adult education.
B A study of the problems involved in delegating responsibility for policy, control, and administration of public higher education in Massachusetts, which will define 1.
The roles and inter-relationships of public and private institutions of higher education in Massachusetts.
The administrative structure which will be most effective for public higher education.
The responsibility for the making of public educational policy at the state level in Massachusetts.
C A study of current and future financial needs of all public education in Massachusetts.
D A study of the role, organization, and necessary financial support of the State Department of Education.
The Interim Committee also voted unanimously on the following recommendations in connection with a Survey Commission.
A That a bill be filed with the General Court incorporating these recommendations.
B That a Survey Commission should consist of fifteen membersfive members of the General Court, five educators, and five lay citizens none of whom would be professioncation, and related fields of ally connected with education or ft WcCormacL’l s^potliecan own acre j s^rpol PArkview 9-2700 V dec7-3t JS -• frmmmmmm ww m im **;»•* mmmm mm mm mm mm wmmm mm mmmm m Season ’s Greetings | £ Tt a time again to call your attention to our wide variety of quality liquors and fine wines, also to t lie fact that we are located in an area handy to most people in ^ this community.
If is a short drive down Cambridge Street l Route 3) past the Star 1JSF Market to the section of Woburn known at the West Side’s Four Corners.
The Interim Committee believes that the work of the Survey Commission would take more than two years to complete and that the annual expense would approximate $100,000.
It is the hope of the Interim Committee that the Survey Commission if and when established will consider the advisability of appointing a consultants group to be composed of the leading officials in public education in Massachusetts.
Clarence Gay, 58 Westland Avenue held a social tea on Tuesday, November 28, for Mrs.
Also attending were Mr Albert Sutula, principal, and Miss Barbara Connor, senior at Boston College, who is assisting Mrs.
Byron Jackson pouring. mmkmk M Methodist Women To Hear “Script and Score” Two entertainers from Winchester, Jacqueline Langdon, monologuist and Mary Jane Anderson, harpist, will present their joint program for the women of the Methodist Church on Thursday evening, December 14.
Miss Langdon was for years a leading player in radio dramas and Miss Anderson is an accomplished harpist.
The feature picture in the programs this Friday night and Saturday morning is State Troopers.
The viewer follows the activities of a recruit of the Connecticut State Police to learn the training and equipment necessary to produce a first class c rime lighter.
In another selection poor little Michael isn’t happy just being a brother so he experiments with various other identities until Daddy brings home a surprise.
The spirited drawings and amusing verse of the children’s book Magic Michael are faithfully reproduced in the film of the same name.
Through the resulting experiment, we learn about cleanliness and we see a little-publicized phase of Japanese life in the film Michio, Schoolboy of Japan.
Harvey’* and others Wines From France Germany Portugal Spain Greece Denmark * Italy etc.
Keenan’s Service Station Tires Batteries Accessories ROAD SERVICE WHEEL BALANCING Cor.
Killer , Arteriosclerosis December is the most dangerous traffic month of the year; it is also the period of greatest darkness when the hours from dusk to dawn are longer,” said Registrar Clement A Riley.
Driving on Massachusetts highways in December can present man problems resulting from unpredictable road and weather conditions.
Since blowing snow can also bring about visual hazards, even in daylight hours, clear windshields are extremely important.
THE BOOT OF THE SEASON John A Hartford, chairman respectively of the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co.
The Hartford Foundation granted $9 million in 1950, primarily for the support of medical research, according to its president, Ralph W Burger.
General research team is making a two-pronged attack on the prohelm of arteriosclerosis.
It is undertaking a basic study of the mechanisms by which fats are transported in the blood.
Last year, sixty-one traffic deaths were reported on our highways during December.
We are striving Exquisitely sheer in perfect proportions fora trim fit.
Heavenly new tone, $1.00 for teens, 1.35, 1.65 ^ BUDGET BOOTS ^^|jfi§gg|gF 'ft Children’s, $8.95, Sizes 1 1 to 3 IS Men’s and Women’s, 10.95 | FOR THE HEALTHY PLEASURE | OF ALL THE FAMILY | McLaughlin’s Shoe Store y Open Every Evening until Christmas fatty deposit that blocks arteries is pian, research assistant. derived fr°m fat carried in the Dr H atch has a special interest blood.
The question is. what is the t(u , future with four youngsters nature of the transportation sysof his own Rowing up in Lexingtem and what could go wrong with ton Their activ i ties help keep him ' from getting lost in the laboraThe study of patients who detory.
He is about as far from the velop arteriosclerosis early in life general picture of an absent-mindis being done on the basis that e( j researcher as one could imasuch persons may have abnormaligine. ties in their internal biochemistry severe enough to be detected by ^ * presently available methods.
If the disease developed faster, in other words, the condition may be more marked.
In older people the disease may have developed so slowly that the abnormality that brought it on may be too slight to detect.
May Benefit Both The combination of laboratory studies and studies on patients is one, Dr.
The researcher sees the patient, and the effects of the disease on him.
Frederick T Hatch, chief of the arteriosclerosis unit, is trying to find out why arteries harden and thicken and finally become obstruct ed.
PA 9-0900, PA 9-0901 heart attacks, strokes, kidney failure and a broad spectrum of damage. is not only a aging.
I | ; | | \ | pleasure and ;* . . j^yMay this be the merriest of Yuletides for you and yours.
IVbjj this Hoh'dau Time he one of jrcat Joij and Happiness... oody Motor Sales AUTO BODY and RADIATOR REPAIRING Parker T-Ball Jottcr-Parkcr “Write fine” Pencil Everyone needs this practical ballpen-pencil writing combination.
Jotter with exclusive T-Ball textured point assures practically skipproof writing.
CHRISTMAS GREETINGS onS joodalucin C are happy to axtpiui to their Winchester IMayers in Roller LEVINE & co One hundred fellowships for study at Cornell and Stanford Universities during the summer of 11*02 are being offered to high school science and mathematics teachers and supervisors by Shell Companies Foundation, Incorporated.
Called the Shell Merit Fellowships, the program is designed to help improve instruction in high school chemistry, physics and mathematics and at the same time to recognize meritorious teachers in these fields.
The fellowships are available to high school teachers and supervisors of science and mathematics who have had five years* experience and have shown qualities of leadership.
LYNCH, PROP | TAILOR and CLEANSER BEST WISHES FOR THE NEW YEAR ^bcaferA in Hine Oriental RUGS and BROADLOOM CARPETING PARKVIEW ROAD 1 he musicians, ranging in age from 13 to 18, come from as far away as Fall River and Marblehead to rehearse on Saturdays and perform special Sunday afternoon concerts for the benefit of various school music programs.
Newton High School, December 17; Needham High School, January 14; Quincy High School, February 4; and Jordan Hall, Boston, March 4 and 6.
A sixth concert will be performed out-of-town in April, with date and place to be announced.
Under the tutelage of 15 professional musicians, including several from the Boston Symphony Orchestra, the group began building its repertoire, which each year includes both traditional and contemporary classical compositions, plus some works commissioned especially for the orchestra.
Winchester members of the orchestra include Neal Baker, son of Dr. and Mrs.
James G Baker, 7 Grove Street, Winchester High, cello; John Burrows, son of Mr and Mrs.
William A Burrows, 6 Oneida Circle, Winchester Junior High, trumpet; Betty Hauck, daughter of Mrs.
Virginia H Hauck, 41 Canterbury Road, Winchester High, viola; Paul Johnian, son of Mr and Mrs.
Aram Johnian, 19 Hillside Avenue, Winchester High, violin; Joan Wilson, daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William Wilson, 8 Oneida Road, Winchester High, violin; and Robert Wilson, son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jr <k|L EMBASSY LAUNDRY 1 AW AND DRY CLEANING | 5 PARK STREET PA 9-2220 & F LIGHTER Silvery Lustraloy Metal To seek a choice gift // ""Convertible"" Fountain Pen with 14K Gold Point Holiday Greetings TO YOU and YOURS JOHN B MERCURIO INSURANCE and REAL ESTATE founded on inspired thought Just slip in giant size cartridge of Super Quink ink or insert converter in place of cartridge and it fills from an ink bottle.
Converter and giant ink cartridge free with pen. and clever workmanship 1 Mount Vernon Street Tel.
PArkview 9-3400 d«c7-3t ;• •find first a source of production One in Winchester.
Joslin is enrolled in the Evening Program at Babson Institute of Business Administration.
The subject matter embraces courses in Accounting, Distribution, Economics, Finance and Production, all of which are studied from a managerial point of view.
George A Marks of Foxamong the hostcroft Road waesses for the big reception and preview of the Chinese National Art Treasures Exhibition on November 30 at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.
Joining His Excellency and Madame Kiang in the receiving line were Perry T Rathbone, director of the Boston Museum, and Mrs.
WALLETS FOR MEN AND WOMEN, ELECTRIC ^ SHAVERS, BRUSH AND COMB SETS, MEN’S SETS and iuauy types of CHILDREN’S GIFTS which w • will ^ be happy to gift wrap for you.
Handy of the American Radio Relay Tuesday, the 12th, in Chidley Hall I national association of radio amateurs, with luncheon hoinpr served at. :00 m.
DWIGHT L CART The Guild is very fortunate during this holiday season to be able to present as speaker Mrs.
She will discuss the symbols and traditions of Christmas around the world, taking her listeners hack to the various countries where our own customs originated and explaining why they began there.
Also, as a special holiday treat for this meeting, the Guild has the good fortune to he able to present in a musical program Miss Yuko Mayashi, the organist of the First Congregational Church and Mrs.
Mission Union extends a cordial invitation to all women of the church to share in what is sure to he a delightful and informative program.
The festival setting wi 11 take place around the World Fellowship Christmas tree decollated with international ornaments by young YWCA members in costumes of their native lands.
Augustus Zanzig, nationally known music educator and song leader, will conduct the audience Christmas Carols. i } Mrs.
Shirley Paukulis will do I her own contemporary interpretation of the meaning of Christmas.
Folk dances, teen-age actors and pre-school dance students will perform in turn around the tree.
Following the performance and the serving of wassail, the Workshops Annual Christmas Exhibit will open.
The show includes displays of all Workshops groups, enameling on copper, jewelry, paint ing, pottery, and weaving.
The public is invited to the opening of the exhibit on December 10 from 4:30-6:00 and from 0:00 to 5:00 daily, except Sundays, holidays, and December 23 and 30. ordinntor, is to band together members of the amateur radio service in his community to perfect arrangements for emergency radio communication by hams in the event of natural disasters or other emergencies.
In addition to use of normal station equipment working from commercial power, amateur stations use self-powered radio transmitting and receiving equipment as needed.
Mr Baldwin as ARRL emergency coordinator, will call local meetings of amateurs, establish common operating procedures, and arrange regular drill periods when | the hams’ personal stations may be mobilized under simulated emergency conditions.
His duties also include liaison planning with the local chapter of the American Red Cross and other relief agencies, as suggested in the working understanding the ARRL Emergency Corps has with the national headquarters of the American Red Cross and other agencies.
Liaison will be established also with local protective services, such as fire and police departments and civil defense communications will receive much attention.
In announcing the appointment, Handy pointed out that radio amateurs have traditionally had the responsibility of being in constant readiness to offer assistance in time of need with ham-acquired skill, emergency-powered transmitters and a wealth of community spirit.
Christmas Evergreen Dance The Congregators of the First Congregational Church Will usher in the holiday season with their annual Christmas Dance.
This fes tive dance will he held in Chidley Hall on Friday, December 15th, 9m. to 1m.
Music for the gala affair will he provided by Norman White’s fine orenestra.
COMPLETELY IMMERSIBLE Water sealed heating unit plus new integrated automatic heat control in handle permit* quick, easy “under water"" washing.
Get them at the Win* mbeam CONTROLLED EVEN HEAT FRYPAN One of the highlights of the meeting of the Executive Board of the Women’s Republican Club held at the home of Mrs.
Charles N Sweetser at 20 Cabot Street on November 27, was the announcement that the club membership has increased during the year by 33.8%, the total number of members now being 523.
Plans for the December meeting] with a High School Chorus selectvvere discussed at length.
Wilbert E Underwood at 9 Ravenscroft Road on December 13 at 2:30m., promises to be another delightful Christmas party in the tradition of former years.
Mary Ranton Witham has planned an unusually fine program ed from the Unitarian group as her carol singers.
The group of singers includes will be interspersed with readings Betsy Aiken, Christina Harrison, Jennifer Rochow, Virginia Stearns, Jane Littleton, Judith Morrill, Alison Morrill, and Patricia Morrill.
The “Christmas Cradle Song” will he sung by Judith Morrill and the group and “Gesu Bambino” by the three Morrill sisters.
It will he a memorable program which no club member will want, to miss and an inspiring introduction to the Christmas season.
Look for the Frypan with the “Cloverleaf Design” heating element that guarantees perfect heat distribution on entire cooking surface ... for finest resultsl <§)SUNBEAM Winchester Appliance Co.
PA 9-2990 OPEN EVERY NITE 'TIL CHRISTMAS tlec7-3t “Clipit,” the new, better way to clip newspapers and magazines.
Thompson Street l'A V-0330 devT-St & Give the New & the Great in I Christmas Gilts ^Jlt.
Monaural . m This vocal group is an all-time groat night club sensation.
PA 9-2990 Open Every Nite Til Christmas i m Magnavox Spectacular 1+00 sq. in. screen Only from Magnavox, the biggest, clearest pictures automatically — pictures half again as large as 23-inch screens— more than twice as large as 19-inch sets . . . with fully automatic operation.
Now, just select your program, the exclusive Video-matic makes all adjustments automatically to give you the best pictures you have ever seen, day or night.
Chromatic optical filter eliminates glare and reflection that cause eyestrain and the sound of Magnavox high fidelity puts the breath of life into every scene.
NOW ONLY Magnavox tfU6 stereophonic-high-fidelity Only Magnavox attains the spectacular dimension of stereophonies and tonal beauty of high fidelity through its advanced acoustical system that projects sound from sides as well as cabinet front to surround you with the beauty of music.
Silver Seal Warranty guarantees picture tube for one year, service and all parts for 90 days.
Danish Cosmopolitan has Micromatic record player, four speakers including two 12"" bass, powerful stereo amplifiers, library space for fifty records.
American Contemporary with Micromatic record player, four speakers and powerful stereo amplifiers.
Without such approval by the state legislators. the referendum reforms cannot become operative.
Winchester Rep. larrison C hadwick filed the referendum bill in the Mouse of Representatives on Monday, December 4th, two days before the December 0 deadline.
In order to be voted on in the March 5th election, the statute must be passed hy both houses of the Legislature and signed by His Excellency, Governor Volpe before January 8, the date on which the Warrant closes, Town Counsel Vincent Clarke told the Star.
He said that, legally the referendum question was part of official Town Meeting business.
Counsel Clarke added, however, that should the enabling statute not be passed in time to meet the deadline, the Selectmen could reopen the warrant to permit its inclusion in time for action hy the voters of Winchester in March.
Chadwick Holds Firm On Gambling Hearing Again Declines Closed Session Bid ; Reports Heavy Mail Supporting Him W inchester Representative Harrison Chadwick of 2 1 Kvcrett Avenue held firm this Week on his refusal to attend a closed hearing regarding his recent charges on T.V. that organized gambling maintained contacts with Massachusetts legislators.
In a letter dated Saturday, December 9, the W inchester legislator again declined Mouse Speaker John Thompson's invitation to attend a closed hearing before the Mouse Rules Committee to provide further details concerning his allegations.
Mr Thompson had maintained FOUR REFORMS The referendum reforms, four in number, were approved by the Town Meeting in April, 1961 and in a referendum hy the Town at large on May 15.
Requiring the signatures of 3 f r of the Town's registered voters on petitions for referenda; Clarifying and simplifying the language of referenda so as simply to ask approval or disapproval of a specified action of Town Meeting; Requiring a simple majority vote in referenda to approve a given Town Meeting action; and Requiring the signature of 20'/, of the Town’s registered voters to reverse an action of Town Meeting.
Representative Chadwick said he anticipated no roadblocks in the way of prompt passage of the legislation.
When the Legislature convenes, he told the Star, the bill would go to the Committee on Towns, would he aired at a public hearing, and would then be reported out to the House and Senate, after which, if approved, it would be signed into law by the Governor.
COMPOSITE PHOTOGRAPH designed by Star photographer William Ryerson shows new Christmas lights in front of the post office, on Mill Pond, on the railroad arches and on the Common.
These are t lie first Christinas decorations to be put up in Winchester for a number of years and were generally well received.
MAst Of itnnnrs Published Christmas Lights Aglow In Center Town reaction to the new C hristmas decorations in the Centre this week was mixed, hut generally favorable.
But the consensus of the town was one of approval of the Christmas Spirit Committee’s efforts in planning the decorations and the generosity of Winchester businessmen and private citizens in making the decorations possible.
In addition to the $300 voted for the decorations hy last spring’s regular town meeting, over $1500 was donated for decorations hy businessmen and private citizens.
Cash Chitel’s Colonial Perfumers Columbus Ladies’ Club Converse Market Sophie Bowman Coulter Bettie Donald CHRISTMAS LIGHTS, cont.
The group is becoming increasingly popular with audiences because of the extremely varied program which it offers, particularly with the trend toward the popular show tunes and old-time favorites which show off the fine blending of the club.
Dillon, Jr., presented the W inchester Jayeees their Charter last Saturday night, December 9th, during the Charter Night BuffetDance held at the Town 1 1 all.
President Bill Bird accepted the Charter from President Dillon, and stated that, the number-one project is to keep as many niemlters active in some phases of Jaycce work at all times.
S Today As the Star goes to press it is still expected that Winchester’s two leading public citizens, Governor John A Volpe and Representative Harrison Chadwick will he speaking at a special allschool assembly at the High School this morning.
Governor Volpe is speaking to the students on the subject of their civic responsibility present and future.
Mr Chadwick will introduce the Governor and will moderate any discussion which follows the talk Ik* gives.
GOVERNOR VOLPE In view of the national spotthe wake of the recent television exposure of gambling in the state, the students are looking forward to this assembly with real excitement.
Harry V Gilson, Superintendent of Schools will be host to Governor Volpe at the High School Auditorium.
The subject* of citizenship is one being emphasized at the High School this year, according to W Howard Niblock, Principal, whose absence from school today was dictated by the changed date of a National Educational TV meeting in Minneapolis, at which he is representing the New England As cert have a special treat in store for them in the persons of Hilda Abrevaya and Lee Fowler who will be appearing as guest artists.
This popular husband and wife team recently completed their second nation-wide tour with the Boris Goldovsky Opera Company and are regular recitalists at Boston’s famed Gardner Museum.
For their appearance with the Mystic Glee Club here, they have selected a pleasing group of numbers which blends nicely with the choral selections.
Master of ceremonies, Jim Quine introduced the many visiting Jaycee Chapters from surrounding towns, and kept the evening’s activities moving quickly with his usual charm and wit.
After a fine buffet, president Bill Bird and the other officers and directors of the Winchester Jaycees were sworn into office by State vice president, Don Peterson of the Burlington Jayeees.
Ron Mackenzie, Burlington Jaycee president, presented a dinner bell to president Bird.
It was the Burlington Jaycee Chapter that extended to Winchester, and helped them to get started.
President Robert Dillion of Pittsfield, spoke on the importance of the young man serving his community hy partaking in its improvement and development.
The development of individual members through leadership training is another important purpose of the Jayeees throughout the country, as well as in the chapters in 65 other countries in the world.
James Fitzsimmons of them progress during this past Robjnson Circle bas brouKht this ^ eal ‘ I problem forcefully to the attention JAYCEES, continued on page 3 'of the Town.
Co-operative Bank Donates Baskets To Fight Litter At their monthly meeting held Monday, December 11, the Board of Directors of the Winchester Cooperative Bank voted to donate six litter baskets to the Winchester Park Department as a contribution to Winchester’s current drive to fight litter.
Mr Billman said the Bank directors felt this would be a positive and effective way to do their bit toward making the Town cleaner.
They are attached to utility poles at just below shoulder height and are easily used by pedestrians.
The bank directors at the same time urged all Winchester residents to cooperate to the fullest extent possible in the campaign to end local litter.
In recent weeks a campaign to end litter which has been sparked in a letter dated December 5 that custom and wisdom dictated a closed hearing on any matter in which the “character, personality, and reputation of the parties” are involved.
The lines defining the direction in which this commonwealth will move are now being drawn.
At the same time, Mr Chadwick told the Speaker that he would he most happy to answer questions to the best of his ability should the Speaker decide to conduct a hearing open to the press and public.
HEAVY MAIL Meanwhile, the Winchester representative reported to the Star that he was receiving a comparatively heavy amount of mail on the subject, at least 30 to 40 letters and double that number of telephone calls.
CHADWICK, continued page 7 In Modern Mode Plan Face-Lifting For Hevey Block A major renovation of the Hevey Block promises to give Winchester Centre a bright new look for 1962.
The entire firstfloor frontage on the Main Street side of the 80-year-old building will he remodelled, from Hevey \s Pharmacy right down to and including the recently vacated quarters of the Winchester Provision Company.
Key items on the remodelling agenda will he the re-division of store areas; and the remodelling of the store fronts.
In the remodelling division, all Main Street store fronts will be recessed nine feet to permit the construction of a garden-terraced ramp.
This ramp will serve the dual function of eliminating existing five-step store walk-ups and beautifying the building facade.
The lower section of the facade will he finished in white stucco, the store fronts in aluminum, glass and redwood panels.
The interior of the stores will also be remodelled extensively, in accordance with the wishes of individual tenants.
Hevey’s Pharmacy will he expanded to include the quarters now occupied by the Puffer Insurance Agency.
The Puffer Agency will move into one of three areas in the quarters recently vacated by the Splendid Lunch.
Mr Whittemore is now doing business on Church Street, while the Hobby Shop is doing business on Thompson Street.
F^VCE LIFTING, cont. page 3 A Solemn Reminder A dramatic reminder of the potential tragedy that rides in every moving car was displayed on the front lawn of the abandoned Wadleigh School this week.
As a reminder to young people to drive carefully, Winchester Police Chief Joseph J Derro put on public display the mangled wreckage of the automobile in which two teenagers were killed and one seriously injured at Symmes Corner in the early morning hours of Thanksgiving Day.
The Chief made his decision after consulting with the Board of Selectmen, which agrees with him that if in seeing the wreck even one Winchester youngster drives more carefully and thus saves his own and other lives, the exhibit will have been worth while.
I would be very grateful if every youngster in Winchester could go over to the Wadleigh School and take just one look at this wreck.
Jr., presents Winchester Jaycee deal W illiam Bird*with Jaycce charier.
PRAISE FOR TOWN The attorney general, looking neat and fit, opened his talk in Mr Murphy’s lighthearted vein.
He had praise for C’hicf Derro's cooperation vsith state law enforcement agencies, and for Coach Honr> Know It on’s being named “Coach of the Year” “You Winchester people do everything in a big way,” the the Attorney General said.
Another one of your fellow townsmen in his first real crack at politics gets to be Governor.
After reviewing the functions of his office (he said that criminal matters require the attention of only 5 of his 50 lawyers) ho answered questions put to him from the floor.
McCORMAC’K If anyone has information concerning gambling in Boston, the j Attorney General said, he should submit it to a grand jury, and observe the legal procedure of indictment, conviction, and sentencing.
The attorney general opposed what he called “exposure for the sake of exposure,” and said that as a matter of fact possessing information concerning crime and withholding it was as had as the crime itself.
In response to a question as to whether the film was not shown in Massachusetts because certain Massachusetts people might have suppressed it, the attorney general replied that he was not able to read what was in other people’s minds.
By and large, our police officers are dedicated public servants who risk their lives for very little pay.
X SHAKE ' HANDS with a “beginner” Winchester Savings Bank is a “beginner' in more ways than one.
For here, savings BEC, <i\ in Winchester and the first home financing began, too, in 1871.
Beauty In Religious Art Many of those present at the December meeting of the Winchester Art Association must agree with Celia Hubbard, the speaker of the evening, that most people have developed the faculty of looking at church art without seeing it, or thinking about it.
Much of it is a relic of a bygone era, and is used in a random, meaningless manner as decoration, out of step with the art and attitudes of the present day.
Much of it is very poor work, bad painting, poor statuary, meaningless carving.
The ail in many churches would give the idea that religion is very dull, sterile, stereotyped.
Miss Hubbard illustrated her talk with colored slides showing how the architecture, including interior decoration of many new European churches, and some American ones, has succeeded in expressing religious feeling with modern materials and modern engineering in a truly inspirational and beautiful manner.
Religious symbols are used effectively and singly to emphasize their meaning, rather than scattered all over the church.
Glass is used often as whole walls, with artists designing the colors and patterns in a manner most calculated to create a worshipful atmosphere.
The Botolph Group, of which Miss Hubbard is the director, continuously influences the churches to use better art, especially more contemporary styles.
They also make available, in their gallery on Newbury Street, near Copley Square, Boston, many beautiful small religious pieces, instead of the gaudy, poor ones often found in religious supply stores.
All pieces are in good taste, whether jewelry or statuary, wood carvings, paintings, or Christmas cards.
The exhibition in the North Reading Room of the library has surprised most people by its beauty and freshness.
There are silk screen prints by Sister Mary Corita, who teaches at the Immaculate Heart College in Los Angeles.
After the meeting in the library, all present were invited to the home of Mrs.
Police say that the pole was broken off at the base, and that the front end of the Cadillac was badly damaged.
Wallace Repair Shop towed the car away and the telephone company was notified of the damage to its pole.
Mr Berkley pointed out that the primary responsibility of the Scholarship Foundation is to enable, Winchester High School students needing financial aid to enter on the first year of training beyond the high school.
On the other hand, when Winchester students of more advanced standing in college meet situations that threaten ability to continue, further aid is extended.
All applicatoins for financial need are carefully studied, i tinl within the Scholarship Committee and all confidential records are destroyed at the end of each year.
The balance of funds of the foundation as of June 30, 1901, was $91,227.
One of the named funds listed was the Laurance Owen Fund of approximately $2900, which was raised by the high school students through sale of tickets to a rugby match last May.
During the meeting, Mr Stephen Dee, representing the high school student council, presented a check of $50 in memory of Mr Meredith Cooper, long-time teacher at the school, to be added to other donations made by friends of Mr | Cooper at the time of his death in lieu of flowers, as requested by the Cooper family.
I Chairman — Neil H Borden Treasurer — Charles W Butler Secretary— Mrs.
WATERF1ELD OPTICIANS offer A COMPLETE OPTICAL SERVICE Physicians* and Hospital Proscriptions Accurately Filled (Hasses Fitted Lenses Duplicated Hand Readers Frames Repaired Batteries, Cords and Repairs for Most Hearing Aids Room 1, Masonic Building Winchester, Mass. il«o7-2t Members of the Finance Committee— M John H Van Dyke, chairman, Mr Lester (Justin, Mr Ralph 11.
Bonnell, Jr., Mr George L Hillman, Mr Frank Grabiec Member of the Scholarship Committee for four years Mrs.
Rob ert G Ingraham Trustee for six years — Wade L Grindle Publicity Chairman — Philip O’Rourke Nominating Committee — Arthur L Johns, chairman, Mrs.
Ralph T Jope, and Mr Arthur Dolan Among those attending the mooting were the general committee of the foundation, the governing body, which is made up of repreen tali v»* of ome twenty-five organization! . und five members elected by the meeting to repreI sent individual donors.
NEXT WEEK WE'LL BE FEATURING — Apple, Squash and Mince Pies; Light and Dark Fruit Cakes; Donuts, and arurrmg Breod. . . , Everything you’ll need for your festive table.
Beauty Parlor — S 25 Doll and accessories; Playmobile — like real car; Dream Kitchen, Man in Space, Cuddly Cathy Doll, Fire Chief Set, State Trooper Set, Trailer Trucks, Racing Cars, Crayola Packs, etc.
Jl/ore £fof/cfof/ Food I7n£i<€9«* 10 LB $|05 ""Kitchen Tested'' Gold Medal flour sack Muffin Mixes — Date, Orange, Raisin Bran Betty Crocker “kc 2 35* Boston Cream Pie Betty Crocker % oz 43* Strained — All Varieties Clapp Baby Foods 10 4 JARS Z 92* I Dessert Topping Lucky Whip 9 oz can 53c Friend's Mincemeat 1 lb 12 oz can 55a Carnation Evap.
Milk 3 14 Vi oz cans 47a Grandmothor's Mincemeat 1 lb 1 2 oz Jar 53e Finest Mincemeat 9 oz pkg 25a Finest Pit Crust 9 oz pkg 13a Famous Assortment Nabisco Cookias 1 2 oz pkg 39c Nestla's Chocolate Qulk 1 lb can 36a Plllsbury — Date, Banona, Chocolate Nut Cake Mixes reg pkg 41 c extra W STAMPS with a 3 lb can FINAST Shortening HIGHLY UNSATURATID The Best for All Baking Needs.
Jim Quine then introduced Miss Lexington, Sue Nanry of Winchester, who sang several favorites.
This beautiful and talented young lady was another of the high spots of the evening.
Ted Bernard’s fine jazz orches Face Lifting The area formerly occupied by the Winchester Provision Co. will be occupied by a new firm called ] the Winchester Meat Co.
At present no renovations are j planned on the top of the 80-yearChristmas Lights Mystic Glee Club Mrs.
The upper affair, with the “twist” as one of n c _ _ 1 floors of the building are now octhe most popular numbers.
The Winchester Jaycees wish to thank everyone who contributed, ami who has supported the Jaycees throughout this past year, and for all their support to make the Charter Night Buffet-Dance a most memorable occasion.
The next general meeting of the Jaycees will he held January 3, at the Red Cross House at 8:00m.
Girl Scout News The Junior and Senior girls will have a get together at the Unitarian church December 19 at 7:30.
It is known, however, that the owner, Mr Robert S Davis of Arlington, who purchased the building in April, 1961, plans to renovate the Mt.
Vernon Street entrance to the Masonic Apartments as well as the stairs leading up to the second floor.
In addition, the entrance to Hevey’s Pharmacy now on the corner of Mount Vernon and Main Streets will he taken out to make way for a circular corner display window.
Present plans also call for an entrance to the pharmacy off the Main Street ramp and, ultimately, a door on the Mount Vernon Street side as well.
This is the first time since 1880 that the building has been remodelled on the outside.
Its owner, Mr Davis, is confident that its renovation will provide a big boost to the appearance of the Centre and to local business.
Mr Jerome Bailey Foster, Winchester architect has drawn up plans for the renovation.
Leo Garvey Handcraft House Hannon Shoes Hillside Paint & Wallpaper Hevey’s Apothecary Kivvanis Club Loralune, Inc.
Wilde & Son Wilson Upholstering Winslow Press Winton Hardware Winchester Appliance Winchester Barber Shop Winchester Camera Shop Winchester Drug Wineheser Hobby Shop Winchester Jewelers Winchester News Winchester Optical Shoppe Winchester Star Woolworth’s Carol Singing On Common Once again this year on Christmas Eve, commencing at 7 o’clock, The Fortnightly Woman’s Club will sponsor carol singing on the Common.
This is the 36th year that The Fortnightly has sponsored this carol singing.
Mary Ranton Witham, wellknown organist and choir director, will again direct, and a brass quartet from the High School will provide an accompaniment for the voices.
If you haven’t participated in a carol sing on the Common, this would be a good year to begin a custom we predict you will find rewarding enough to continue from year to year.
Chudleigh-Candish Glee Club Sweethearts Romberg Romany Life (Czardas from “the Fortune Teller”) Herbert Theme from “Carnival” Merrill The Highest Judge of All Rodgers When the Children Are Asleep Rodgers Hilda Abrevaya, soprano Lee Fowler, tenor Carol Rand, accompanist Carol of the Drum Katherine Davis Lo, How a Rose E’er Blooming Praetorius See That Babe in the Lowly Manger Ryder The Christmas Song Torme-Wells Familiar Carols Glee Club Danehy Mrs.
Abigail Ludlam Card of Thanks We would like to express our sincere thanks to our many friends and associates for their kind words of sympathy during our recent be reavement.
For the many other expressions including spiritual cards, flowers and messages of condolence we will always be grateful.
BILLIE BAZAAR says ""We have plenty of tree trimmings, stocking fillers, gift wrappings, Christmas (j candy, gifts toys sleds skates hockey sticks I toboggans and snow shovels ji if Red Barn Shop and Gardens 9 Bedford Street Burlington, Mass.
Abigail Ludlam of 78 SalisFourt Street Woburn, who died j bury Street passed away after a December 8 following a short ill four-day sickness at thePond View ness, lived in Winchester until 1920, after coming to America from County Kerry, Iceland as a Nursing Home in Stoneham, Mon day, December 1 1 at the age of 73.
Surviving are three sons, John of Dayton, Ohio; Webster and Charles of Woburn; two daughters Mrs.
William J Murphy, Jr. and Miss Mary Danehy; thirteen grandchildren and twelve great grandchildren.
Funeral services were held from the McLaughlin Funeral Home Monday morning at 8:15m.
Tribute To the Late Lillian Saliee At the last meeting of the school committee the committee voted a tribute to the late Lillian Saliee which will lie incorporated in its minutes and in the town report.
To all with whom she came in eontuct, pupils, faculty and parents, she was the epitomy of the dedicated teacher.
Her warmth, sympathy and human understanding enabled her to teach equally well every child so fortunate as to be one of her students.
Her modesty and humility could not conceal her consistently superior performance as an educator whose quality and contributions will be preserved in the memory of those she served.
Winchester ten years ago from Milton, and was active in the Fortnightly Club.
Funeral services were held at the Bennett-Norris Funeral Home on Wednesday, December 13, at 1 :30m. with the Rev.
William Thibeau Mr William Thibeau of 1 Town Way died Sunday, December 10, at the Lawrence Memorial Hospital in Medford following an illness of two weeks.
Husband of the late Clara (Fournier), Mr Thibeau is survived by three daughters, Sister Marie Claire, S.S.J., Leonette M., and Mrs.
Funeral services for Mr Thibeau were held from the Gaffey Funeral Home on High Street, Medford, yesterday, December 13, at 8:00 m., followed by a Solemn High Mass at Saint Mary’s Church in Winchester at 9:00m.
Card of Thanks The family of the late Lillian Saliee wish to thank their neighbors and friends for the many beautiful flowers, spiritual bouquets and other expressions of sympathy extended to them during their recent bereavement.
They especially appreciate the thoughtfulness of the Mystic School Faculty, the Teachers’ Association of Winchester and the Mystic Mothers’ Association.
William J Dowd Jr. of Portland Maine, who died last week, lived in Winchester until about twenty years ago.
Mr Dowd is survived by his wife, Helene Dowd, seven children, an aunt, Marion L Brady of Woburn, and an uncle, Walter McMahon.
STORE-WIDE OUR PRICES ARE LOWER THAN ANY DISCOUNT HOUSE IN THE AREA mm Mystic Honors Miss Saliee Friends of Miss Lillian Saliee are cordially invited to a program of memorial tribute to her in the Mystic School Auditorium on Tuesday, December 19, at 2:00m.
Last June before her illness Miss Saliee agreed to present for the December meeting of the Mystic School Mothers’ Association a Christmas pageant created by her and given every few years for the whole school by her third grade.
Ruby White has taught that grade and will carry on the program as it was planned, with music by the sixth grade choir and Miss Jean Louden, Supervisor of Music.
Instead of the usual business meeting preceding the program, necessary announcements will be printed and a standing tribute to Miss Saliee will he read by a mothMr Raymond Dickman, principal, joins the Mothers’ Association in inviting to join us on this occasion, Miss Salice’s family, special guests from the School Department, and all who feel their families’ lives enriched by Miss Salice’s teaching. her of the Commonwealth’s ori9, at the age of 73.
Miss Bancroft ginal Commission on Administrawas stricken suddenly while attion and Finance, died Thursday tending a lecture in Malden and forenoon, December 7, at the Win’ passed away at the Lawrence MeChester Hospital after a brief illniorial Hospital in Medford, ness.
McCormick to the cenMiss Bancroft was educated in ter on a shopping trip, at which Manchester schools and graduated time he seemed in his usual health, from the Bradford Academy.
She That night he had a fall at his moved to Winchester about 40 home, and was taken to the hospiy ear j* ago and lived first on Glen tal shortly before midnight.
Miss Bancroft, well loved and respected in Winchester civic circles, was active in community work right up until the last.
In 1903 Mr McCormick came back to Boston and became associated with the United Drug Company, first as a bookkeeper and later as auditor and treasurer.
During that time he was detailed by Mr Liggett to arrange for the annual conventions of Rexall dealers in Boston and other large cities.
After a year he was named by Governor Channing Cox to the State’s original Commission on Administration and Finance, serving as comptroller.
He remained with the commission for six years, servine under Governor Cox and Governor Alvan T Fuller.
Very active civically, Mr McCormick first served the town as a member of the school building committee of 1931.
He was named temporary treasurer of the town on May 29, 1936 when the then encumbent, Dr.
Harrie Y Nutter, became ill, continuing until November 30 of that year.
He served in a similar capacity from August 1, 1941, to March 2, 1942, at which time he was elected treasurer, continuing in office until September 30, 1943.
He served as a selectman in 1937, was a member of the Insurance Committee and a town meeting member for Precinct 5.
Mr McCormick was a member of the Winchester Country Club, Commonwealth Country Club and Belmont Spring Country Club, having been on the committee that raised the funds to build the last named.
He was also a member of the Algonquin Club of Boston and of the Clover Club.
For many years she served faithfully and efficiently as secretary of the Winchester Historical Society. in addition, Miss Bancroft was an active member of the Willurd Family Association, the Bradford Academy Alumnae Association, the Audubon Society, the Winchester Women’s Professional and Business Club, the Boston Harbor Ramblers Association, and the Bay State Historical Association.
She had a lively interest in the fine arts and was a warm supporter of the Boston Arts Festival.
Miss Bancroft is survived by two sisters, Miss Ada Bancroft of Milford and Mrs.
Funeral services were held yesterday December 13 from the Ripley Chapel at the First Congregational Church, with the Rev.
Interment was in the Bancroft family lot at the Pine Grove Cemetery in Milford.
Edwin Ginn Son of Late Publisher Former Winchester Resident Edwin Ginn 65, of 64 Mt.
Vernon Street, Boston, who died Tuesday, Dec., at Phillips House of the Massachusetts General Hospital, was the son of the late Edwin Ginn, publisher, and lived as a boy in Winchester on the old Ginn Estate.
His father, head of Ginn & Co., publishers, lived in the big brick mansion type house with its later-added music room which was torn down at the time of the Cusack development of the estate, bounded by Bacon Street, the Boston & Maine tracks and Rangeley.
Ginn Field, now used as a playground for girls field hockey and Little League baseball was named On July 31, 1917, Mr McCormick | ^ or the Seriior Ginn, married Anna Willis Moore of ^ f T “ Framingham Center, and they lived in Brookline until they came to Winchester in 1919.
At that time they lived at 6 Everett Avenue, present home of Gilbert Hood.
McCormick survives with two daughters, Miss Annette M McCormick of Baton Rouge, La., and Mrs.
Family services were held Monday afternoon at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister.
Burial was in the Moore family lot in Edgell Grove Cemetery, Framingham Center.
Curling Boots Shearling Lined Moccueiu Slippers Edwin Ginn, Jr., was born in Marblehead, but lived as a boy in Winchester.
He was educated at Middlesex School and Harvard, from which he was graduated in 1918.
He was a member of the Hasty Pudding Institute of 1770, of the Fox Club and of the Harvard Musical Clubs.
A ’cellist of more than average ability, he appeared with his mother and aunt in a program of string music for severul years at Christmas time at the Church of the Epiphany.
Mr Ginn worked first for Ginn & Co., but after four years with the publishing house he joined the investment banking firm of Hayden Stone & Co. in Boston as a broker.
A solemn requiem Mass was celebrated Friday morning at the Church of the Advent in Boston.
For Mom For Dad 1 McLaughlin s shoe store I Open Every Evening until Christmas Tel.
PA 9-2588 j® mmmmmmmmmmmmS Miss Catherine Langford Miss Catherine R Langford of 85 Wendell ^Street, a lifelong resident of Winchester, passed away Saturday, December 9, at the Massachusetts General Hospital.
Miss Langford was born in Winchester, the daughter of the late Thomas and Delia Langford.
Until her retirement ten years ago she had been associated with the Raytheon Co. in Waltham and with the Massachusetts General Hospital.
Miss Langford is survived by two brothers, Frank of Winchester and Thomas of Medford.
Interment was in Calvary Cemetery, Page Four THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1961 The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr.
A Memo On Gambling l nlil evidence is presented to a grand jury, indictments are secured, and convictions are obtained, the question of organized gambling in Massachusetts will remain the subject of extreme bitterness it has been in the past two weeks.
In any event, it seems to the Star, that whoever has evidence concerning gambling should lose no opportunity to present it through proper legal channels.
It also seems to the Star that once in possession of this evidence state courts and officials should act on it with promptness and firmness.
We must be extremely careful in this matter involving the reputation of citizens that strict due process of law is observed.
When everything has been said, the legal machinery of the Commonwealth remains the most efficient and fair way to deal with crime.
After all. there is a very important distinction between being right in fact (if you are), and proving that you’re right in court.
We must be extremely careful lest this question of organized gambling become a divisive political or even religious issue.
Anyone who truly loves Massachusetts and respects its interests will protect the innocent as forcefully as he exposes the guilty.
The Star is also concerned with the suggestion that the exposure of wrong-doing constitutes a betrayal of Massachusetts.
It seems to the Star that the revelation of truth, by its very nature, can “betray” no one but the guilty.
No innocent person need fear the full light of publicity on organized gambling in Massachusetts.
A genuine l>etrayal would occur, however, if responsible public figures were to suppress evidence they possessed, or to play it down merely because it was not in harmony with the public relations “Image” of the State.
The Image of Massachusetts, after all, can only be as pure as Massachusetts is.
All the public relations in the world cannot make figs out of thistles.
Let’s get the facts about gambling in Msasachusctts, and take these facts to court.
Conserving A Revolution We may rejoice over the news that conservatism is having a re-birth in the U.S.A., if it means that Americans will take a more careful look at their traditions.
If they do, liberty and justice for all, including Negroes in Northern suburbs and Southern class rooms, will be strengthened throughout the land.
For whenever we “conserve” the American tradition we arc conserving a revolution.
If we get old and stodgy, it will not be because wc pursued this revolution to its logical end ; it will l>c because we walked out on it, because wc lost the nerve it takes to remain rebels.
As embarrassing as it seems to some Americans, our Founding Fathers were not standpatters.
Unlike much of suburbia today, they did not fear “Controversial Subjects” as the final heresy.
They were rebels to a man, and when they rebelled they didn’t stop at declaring their own right to freedom and food.
That is why even today, in spite of all our errors, rebellious nations still look to us for support.
They left us the Constitution as a firm legal basis of order, a set of ideals, a point of departure from which every generation could approach its own problems as new occasions required.
The past, to them, was not something to escape to, but something to work from. i i i Needless to say, this is not how the self-styled “conservatives” now waving 51 -star flags look at American traditions.
Their speeches and editorials, in fact, sound more like the memoirs of George III than George Washington.
They are certainly not the words of men responding rationally to the realities of the 20th century.
In the same silly vein, “conservative” high priestess Ayn Rand, whose followers wear 14karat dollar signs, insists that the “Witch Doctor” mysticism of the Sermon on the Mount threatens human liberty and that the regulation of child labor constitutes an assault on the boss’s economic integrity.
But the laurels for crackpot “conservatism” go to Arizona’s always amazing Barry Goldwater, On I'Ih* announcement by the Winchester Cooperative Bank that it would donate six litter baskets o tlu* Park Department as a contribution to clearing Winchester of litter, should serve as an example t«» everyone interested in keeping Winchester clean.
And the way to help translate this somewhat strained slogan into a serious fact is to use one of the many baskets now being placed about I own to get rid of that candy \v rapper.
It would who is no less an embarrassment to Republicans than to the Republic.
In Mr Goldwater’s blackand white world, social security is defined as a “socialist” plot, while old-age benefits are derided as “un-American” coddling, “handouts” that retard the “spiritual welfare” of the old, sick, and poor.
It is aristocratic and reactionary, not conservative, a barely warmed stew of dogma that was entirely discredited first by the American and later by the French revolutions.
It indicates a continuing lack of faith in the validity and endurance of democratic institutions.
It suggests that if Mr Goldwater and Mr Buckley & Co. had lived in 177(5, they would have come out for King George III, and joined the 53 per cent of the colonists who opposed war with the Crown.
When you get to the point of calling Dwight D Eisenhower a Red, as the Birch crowd has, you’re too silly to listen to.
We’re talking about Americans with tired blood who are losing heart in the never-ending fight to keep freedom alive and up-to-date.
We’re talking about Americans who think that unpleasant ideas can be bombed out of existence, or that the only way to fight totalitarian is to adopt their methods.
All of this seems to the Star had thinking, for when we cease to be a republic we cease to be worth saving.
The world outside is hungry and angry and we won’t live happily in it by trying to stifle change or by placing stability before liberty in the choice of allies.
We can influence the world toward our ends, but we cannot dictate what this world will be.
The Star believes that the American Revolutionary tradition remains the world’s supreme revolution of the modern era.
We believe that if America remains true to its conviction that every man in the world has a right to he free and to he fed, we can compete with all challengers.
But the American Revolution today is only as strong and young as we arc.
Litter certainly not he fair to ask whether he was brought up in a barn, because most barns are cleaner than any corner or gutter in Winchester Cent re.
Tom Mooney, center and outstanding lineman, is the first winner of the “Doc Hindes Award” going yearly to the Winchester High School player who through his team spirit and loyalty shall be adjudged in the opinion of the coaching staff to have done most for the season.
J Churchill Hindes, retired dentist and for many years a loyal supporter of all Winchester High School teams.
A player in his schoolboy days at Vermont Academy, he has maintained an active and intelligent interest in football throughout his lifetime.
The award was made Monday evening at a football dinner sponsored by the Varsity Club and held in the school cafeteria.
A delicious catered barbecue chicken dinner was served to some ninety members of the 19(51 football squad.
Bob Benincasa, star halfback on this year’s eleven and president of the Varsity Club, welcomed the guests and his teammates and called upon School Principal W Howard Niblock to say grace.
Seated at the head table with the toastmaster, former football coach and present hockey coach, Frank Finigan, were Dr.
Brink, chairman of the school committee; Mr Brink, President Benincasa.
Head Coach Henry T Knowlton, members of the coaching staff, Frank Provinzano, Jim Phillips, George Watson, Niles Nelson and Bob Kessler; Dr.
William D Barone, team physician; Charlie Koch, Track Coach “Izzy” Battino, who takes the game movies; this year’s team captain, Mike Bellino; manager, Reuben Innis, Guest Speaker Dave Thompson of Tufts, outstanding among college tackles in New England; and the guest of honor, Doctor Hindes.
Brink recalled her first meeting with Doctor Hindes was at freshman football practice several years ago, and she got a laugh when she said she had always had faith in his football judgment since the day he picked her son Mike, now captain of the St.
She regretted that the last Bellino has played for Winchester, but told the audience there are several “Brinks” coming along, whom she hopes will be playing under Coach Knowtlon at Winchester.
Hindes, in a simple but obviously sincere address, spoke of the honor he felt at having a Winchester High School trophy named for him, and told of his pleasure in the sort of trophy the Hindes’ Award is.
Stardom is not necessary to win the award, though a star player is not ineligible for it.
He asked the winner of the trophy to look upon it as a way of life, as good 25 years from now as now.
Any one, he said, living their ilfe with loyalty, team spirit and sincere effort, can not help but succeed.
Hindes was given an ovation and announced the first winner of the trophy as Tom Mooney.
He then presented the handsome trophy with its small replica for the winner to Mooney, who was taken completely by surprise.
Dave Thompson spoke of the connection between sports and studies, claiming the boy who participates in sports and learns to budget his time often does much better scholastically than one who has no tiring outside interest.
He said the football player, after a strenous afternoon of practice, is quite ready to sit down with the books and not seek further diversion.
He said the only time his own studies give him any concern is at the time when he has no other athletic activity.
Gilson told the 19(51 squad that its record of four wins, fourlosses, and a tie, while not too successful on Winchester’s standard, is nevertheless a good one.
In pointing to the Woburn defeat on Thanksgiving he said many felt Winchester had played its best game in that defeat.
Mr Niblock humorously asked to be excused from speaking, saying that the football team had to listen to him at assemblies throughout the year and that he felt they could forego any remarks from him.
Coach Knowlton, who rounded out his 21st year at the helm of Winchester fotball this year, paid tribute to the loyalty of his assistant coaches, and especially praised the work done with the junior high teams by Coaches Phillips and Provinzano.
The excellence of their coaching makes my work so much easier, he said, when these junior high candidates come out for the varsity.
Coach Knowlton presented varsity insignias to this year’s lettermen, and ealled upon Coach Nelson to do the same for the junior varsity.
The meeting was growing restive for the announcement of the new football captain, and this year’s captain, Mike Bellino, announced his successor as Jim Menuc-ci, offensive guard and defensive line-backer on this year’s team.
He sustained a hand injury in the Melrose game, and was used sparingly against Belmont and Wakefield.
Manager Innis then named the 19(52 managers as Dave Eaton and John Giger.
In passing it should be said that Coach Finigan ably filled the toastmaster’s role and that much of the credit for the successful evening was due to his efforts.
Christmas Greens Sale The Christmas Greens Sale and luncheon, sponsored by the Winchester Home and Garden Club, which was held last Wednesday, December 6, will be remembered by all who attended as an exciting and enjoyable holiday event.
The Baptist Church hall was resplendent with the lovely Christmas decorations and the warmth and enthusiasm with which everything was admired was a compliment to the combined talents of the club members, husbands and 0 friends, who worked so diligently to make the sale a success.
Edward Devlin, and their committee, was beautifully served on tables attractively decorated with red and green centerpieces.
SOROKIN LOOKS AT THE COLD WAR Hy WILSON SULLIVAN Among the apparently irreconcilable differences between the United States and the U.S.S.R., writes Dr.
The tract is startling because it is objective, documented, courageous, and ruthlessly honest.
It is hopeful because it defines a similarity between Russia and America which, once accepted by Moscow and Washington, could provide a reliable, because realistic basis for peace.
Sorokin’s thesis that despite ritualistic namecalling and cold war military policies, the differences between the United States and U.S.S.R. are less deep than they seem.
That is to say, despite the official ideologies of both countries, practical experience and cold war requirements have forced actual, if officially “unrecognizable” changes in both societies.
Sorokin shows, both America and Russia have developed economically in directions contrary to their formal ideologies.
Actually, we have become a highly collective “corporation economy,” characterized by an increasing degree of impersonal regimentation.
Sorokin reminds us, none of the directors owns more than 5 per cent of corporate property; they serve more as managers than as owners.
Sorokin says, is that given increasing military contracts and impetus toward centralized planning to fight two world wars, the Federal government now controls the largest sector of the economy.
This, plus the government’s proper humanitarian concern for social security and aid to the old, sick, and poor makes the government’s control of our allegedly “private” economy decisive.
Sorokin says, is more properly described as a “familistic” mixed economy.
Sorokin points out, also contradicts in practical fact the major dogmas of its ideology.
Russia, he says has moved from its early vision of a classless state and total regimentation to a socio-economic form more like our own.
The Soviet economy today is managed, like ours, hy an economic elite, comparable to ours in number and function, with the major difference being their responsibility to the government rather than to shareholders.
More powerful, now, and less threatened by civil revolt, Moscow can afford to permit a larger private sector in its economy.
Moscow’s recent excursions into such “bourgeois” devices as installment buying support this idea.
But he believes that the practical requirements of coexistence are narrowing their differences.
These narrowing differences, he says, also characterize all fields of thought,g.
In the natural sciences, in which East and West scientists increasingly share methods and insights; In the social sciences, in which we find that bhe Soviets, by opposing our prevailing relativism, are actually cast into a more classical, conservative role.
They oppose Freudianism, and even Frommism for example, as grossly materialistic over-simplifications; and Even in religion, the Soviet leaders are less totalitarian than they were.
Sorokin says that they actually subsidize the 50-million-member Russian Orthodox church.
All this, of course, despite Russia’s officially espoused dialectical materialism, and despite our own formal espousal of idealism.
Sorokin believes, is that the United States and U.S.S.R. increasingly share each other’s good and bad characteristics.
More hopefully, he adds, it means that, excluding irrational or stupid commitments to nuclear war, each society may grow into a third type of society serving human needs better than either does now.
Kenneth A Rae of 74 Sylvester Avenue announces the en gagement of her daughter Judith Evelyn to A-2C Francis H Butler, son of Mr and Mrs.
T.awtvnce Dallin of i>s, when Miss Patricia M Ficoci42 Salisbury Street and Chatham. j e llo. daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Auj announce the engagement of their | gustine A Flcociello of 71 Swani If hrfhtn — WacMf, an c* ravie (LCjravaffese Teachers’ Christmas Tea The Winchester Teachers* Association recently held its annual daughter.
JUDITH EVELYN RAE Miss Rae, daughter of the late Kenneth A Rae is a graduate of Winchester High School, class of 1958.
Fire and Crash Rescue Firefighting Academy in Denver, Colorado, and is presently stationed at Hanscom Field, Bedford.
MISS JUDITH DALLIN Miss Dallin is the granddaughter of the late sculptor, Cyrus E Dallin, of Arlington, and also Mrs.
Ralph U Sawyer and the late Mr Sawyer, long time residents of Winchester.
A Summer wedding is planned. <$€arj 3 Church Street, Winchester — PA 9-3300 JOHN 1.
The 2 o'clock ceremony was performed at the Blessed Sacrament Chapel by the Rev.
James M Kennedy. v The bride wore a waltz length gown of white satin and Chantilly lace made by her aunt, Mrs.
Her veil was caught to a crown of pearls, and she carried white orchids and stephanotis.
Dorothy Ann Buddemeier of Baumholder, Germany, was matron of honor; and Miss Barbara A Ficociello of Winchester was honorary maid of honor.
William Gibbons was best man with Eugene M Dalton of Burlington, brother of the bridegroom honorary best man.
Dalton, who is serving with the Army in Europe, graduated in 1955 from Boston College High School. aid E Worthen of Swansea.
Mis* Honnio /'““^December 2> Miss rum ,„ ( , Grate j tiful V.ns.m-Owen School, la the Mrs ' olu, BaUoy ' V:u I.HIun ""V Gr “va1leae. daughter of Mr and 1 <•»>«■<', ful wetn . nn « , , . . . jvfvaii n r i i j come, a lovely Christmas tree ar7 Parker Road, became the brrfe | Mw.
Alb,, t C„ avulle.se of JO LedL 8ti( . allv adovned with or . of Mr Roger Kenneth W orthen, yard Hoad was married to Sttlva1 nament ; and ill um jnuted most ofaon ot the late Mr and Mrs.
Don1 tore P Curavicllo. dr., of West i (V, lively with a large floodlight.
I holilay season, uncle of the bride, officiated at th ceremony &t which the Papu Blessing was bestowed on the newlyweds.
Among other posts to be filled at this election will be two vacancies on the Board of Selectmen.
As of the moment no future candidates for the post of Selectman have made their intentions known.
Collector’s postage stamps and albums now on sale at the Star office on all price levels.
An excellent way to give youngsters a sense of geography and history and a constructive hobby.
John W Ellison, rector of the church, officiated at the wedding ceremony, for which the altar was decorated with white gladioli, snapdragons, carnations and chrysanthemums with seven branched candelabra.
Given in marriage by her father, the bride wore a Hour-length gown of embroidered white satin in princess style, with portrait neckline, long pointed sleeves anil bellshaped skirt.
The bride’s train was of Watteau chapel length of matching embroidered satin lined with white taffeta.
She wore a pillbox headdress of matching embroidered satin, and a ballerina-length veil of white illusion.
She carried a cascade bouquet with a white orchid centerpiece, white carnations and stephanotis with ivy sprigs.
Her gown was of red taffeta, with fitted bodice, scoop neckline, and short sleeve.s.
It was of street length, with flared skirt and shirred back panels trimmed with self-material roses.
She wore a circlet headdress of red tulle petals and pearls and a red face veil.
She carried a Colonial bouquet of Mamie Eisenhower carnations outlined with variegat ed holly and trimmed with red satin ribbon streamers.
Bridesmaids were Miss Marilyn Casella of Medford, and the Misses Madelyu Mouradian and Janice Fernald, both of Winchester.
They wore green taffeta gowns and headdresses matching that of the matron of honor.
They carried colonial bouquets of red carnations accented with white miniature carnations outlined with variegated holly and trimmed with red satin ribbon streamers Mr Richard H Brice of Swansea was best man.
Donald C Worthen and Robert E Worthen, brothers of the bridegroom, Mr John T MacLellan, brother of the bride; Douglas B Mullen and Donald P Ouelette of Boston; and Mr Richard L Haynes of Way land.
The bride’s mother wore a streetlength fitted dress of gold brocade with a gathered left-side panel and a matching hat trimmed with gold rose.
H Louise Worthen of Melrose, wore a street-length afternoon dress of Alice-blue lace with a matching ribbon hat.
Her corsage was of white miniature carnations and pink sweetheart roses After the wedding ceremony a reception was held in Hadley Ball, after which the newlyweds left for their wedding trip to New Hampshire ski resorts.
For her going-away suit, the bride wore a Chanel jacket of magenta and turquoise plaid with black frog closings and magenta skirt.
Her hat was a black velvet band trimmed with black velvet rose and u black face veil.
The bride graduated from Winchester High School in I960 and is employed by the John Hancock Insurance Co.
The bridegroom graduated from the Joseph Case High School in Swansea in 1954, is employed by the Euldo Bros.
Co. of Boston, and is attending Bentley School of Accounting and Finance.
John is majoring in Education and Susan in the Division of Continuing Education.
Given in marriage by her father the bride wore a gown of pure white silk faille with laced front outlined in scalloped edging from the waistline to the cathedral train, and embroidered with pearls and sequins.
The bride wore a silk handmade mantilla sent to her from Barcelona, Spain.
She carried mother-of-pearl hand painted missal outlined with white eucharis lilies and red roses bound with green satin.
She wore a gown of cardinal red peau-de soie with princess front, bouffant back, and self rose ending in slight train.
She carried a casual spray of large spider finger mums and roses with rhinestone lilies of the valley bound with green satin on each St&tll.
She wore a bouffant gown of cardinal red peau-de-soie in ballerina length, and a rhinestone tiara hold ing her chapel veil, and carried a white basket of finger mums and roses.
Bridesmaids were Miss Marie Tirella and Rita Messina, cousins of the bride; Dorothy Batehel der, and Loraine Guarino, niece of the bridegroom, and Julie Gravallese niece of the bride.
The bridesmaids were dressed the same as the maid of honor and carried large spider finger mums with rhinestones lilies of the valley bound in green satin.
Ushers were Albert J and Ronald M Gravallese. brothers of the bride, Michael J Tirella cousin of the bride; and Charles Falzone, brother-in-law of the bridegroom.
The bride’s motnev wore an ensemble of electric blue peau-desoie designed and made by Marie of Boston, with matching accessories.
She carried two eucharis lilies with holly leaves on a white French beaded bag.
Following the ceremony a re ception was held at the Sidney Hill Country Club in Newton, after which a buffet was held at the bride’s home.
Therafter, the newlyweds left on a wedding trip in which they planned to spend seven days in the Poconos and two weeks cruising in the West Indies.
The bridegroom, who attended Medford Schools, Newman Preparatory School and the Wagner School of Art, is vice president of Sulvy’s Sportswear Co. in Boston.
He is a member of the Basketball Writers' Association of America, the Football Writers' Association of America and the New England Turfwriters' Association.
Delicious refreshments consisting of ice cream, petits fours, and coffee were served.
For this festive occasion the McCall Junior High ninth-grade vocal ensemble under the excellent direction of Mrs.
Sopranos — Lynn Keppler, Deborah Nelson, Jean Hutchings, Carol Nash, Carla Ilutzenlaub Altos — Margery llickey, Judith Carucci, Janis Carucci, Diane Changaris, Rita Gramzow Tenors — William Gustin, Barry Weeks, Hugh Fisher, Peter Harvey Basses — Portei* Mul ford, Walter Harwood, Lee Sullivan, Louis Briasco, David Weaver There was enthusiastic applause for this outstanding program.
The group of teachers in charge included the Misses Patricia O Doherty, Paula Y Caffey, Ann E Dolan, Betty M Gardner, and Nerissa E Purrington.
The association gratefully thanks the program committee for this deligfhful and social time.
Saturday Winches1 u-r police n«mM to a report neckt cheat and hi injurieS( ac . °‘ a "" “ ccWent al th * inte ™ ect,on I online to the polite report.
Tamos Mur; end> Mr Mun . ay , laimed no in . lay, o . von venue, aite i '■ juries, police say.
Adams Terrace Restaurant Is Open All Day Adams Terrace Restaurant is the brand new name for Carroll's Restaurant on Winchester Terrace which is under new management.
The waitresses heretofore associated with the restaurant will remain, but the policy of food service, Mr Adams says, will change decidedly.
From now on, he says, food will be cooked right on the premises and the restaurant will remain open from 7:30m. to £:00m.
Mr Adams brings considerable exxperience to his new Winchester restaurant, having served the Government for four years as a dietitian.
He is confident that Winchester people will be more than pleased with the new atmosphere and higher quality food which the Adams Terrace Restaurant will serve.
Mr Adams tells the Star that Grand Opening plans are already formulated.
In the meantime, the restaurant is operating a full schedule even as the changes are being introduced.
Mr Adams has the good wishes of Winchester residents and merchants as he begins management of his new restaurant. of 9 Everett Avenue, age 7f», was in collision with a 1960 Lincoln Convertible driven by Mrs.
In the collision, police report, the Lincoln lurched across the street striking a directional sign on the south corner of Fletcher and Wildwood Streets, knocking it down.
The Lincoln came to a stop when it hit the traffic island between Willow and Wildwood Streets.
Barone for head, 4/r l ays for Tots"" Collection Is Extended “Toys For Tots,” the collection of new and good toys for unfortunate children, has been extended for an extra five days until Wednesday, December 20th.
Tor a lifetime or proud possession O OMEGA 14K GOLD WATCH A diamond-set Omega is an unforgettable gift.
Breathtaking beauty artfully combined with world-famous Omega accuracy.
FOR YOUR SHOPPING CONVENIENCE mmwz'mmmmmmmmmmmmxwvwitm Page Six THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1961 Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION’S FUNDS SAFEGUARD the nr«t egg of your Aoeial, fraternal or church organization hy opening an Account in the Winchester Cooperative Hank.
Your elub*n funds will earn a nice profit, he fully insured and readily available.
Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 CHURCH STREET Let's Co-operate and Keep Winchester Streets Clean Newsy Paragraphs Newsy Newsy Paragraphs Paragraphs Wild bird seed, paraaeet seeds, all kinds of seeds.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf A Chevrolet pickup truck reported stolen from the side of Neno’s Market Monday morning was recovered later on in the lot behind the White Spot at Four Corners.
When you plan to replace your present car with a new > Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 or at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf The following Winchester girls have been accepted at Mt.
For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. tf Maternity Sweaters, all types.
John A Volpe was named honorary President of the Massachusetts Girl Scouts at the organizations recent annual meeting at Cedar Hill, Waltham.
Bennington, a unit of the First Fleet taking part in recent exercises off Southern California.
PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf Mr Thomas Raphael of 5 Oneida Road was honored Monday at the Arthur D Little Co. in Cambridge for his work in developing pulp pellets and the apparatus for making them.
The Little Co. holds semi-annual luncheons to give recognition to inventors on its consulting staff.
Jameson of Robinson Park was awarded a letter for participation in freshman track last spring, at Springfield College awards December 1.
Loring P Gleason of 7 Worthen Road visited Sarasota Jungle Gardens November 5 during their recent vacation on Florida’s Lower West Coast.
George B Field of Maxwell Road has returned home after an early-winter visit with friends in Florida.
Mr George A Goolkasian of 30 Willowdale Road attended the Annual Alumni Banquet of Phi Delta Chi fraternity of the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy at the Parker House December 5.
Winchester firemen responded on Friday afternoon about 3:20 to a report of a brush fire on the High School grounds and had the fire under control promptly.
Coming Events December 15, Friday, Collect* Club Art Group will moot at the Boston MuHcum of Fine Arts in the Huntington Avenue lobby at 10:15m.
Congregations’ Evergreen Dance with Norman White’s Orchestra at First Congregational Church.
Richard V Murphy of Myrtle Terrace, announce the birth of their first child, David Harris Murphy, on Dee. at the Winchester Hospital.
Peter Farnsworth of Seattle, Washington announce the birth of their fourth child, third son, Donald William on November 28.
Harold French of Winchester and Mr John Collier of Tyngsboro. f i i Mr and Mrs.
William P Holland of 74 Arlington Road Woburn wish to announce the birth of their fifth j child, fifth son, Michael Francis, born November 30 at the Choate Memorial Hospital.
Wallace F Caldwell of Manhattan, Kansas announce the birth of their second child, first daughter, Anne Marie, born December 4.
CALL PArkview 92038 Fo Place Your Christmas Orders For / Oo>i FINE BAKFD FOODS Christmas Cantata And Pageant At Second Church This Sunday night, “The Story I of Bethlehem” by William R Spruce will be presented at the 1 1 Second Congregational Church, j The Chancel Choir under the dir, ection of Mrs.
The parts of Mary and Joseph will be played by Miss Nancy Clark and Mr Stanley Cruwys respectively.
Everyone is invited to attend this service of Christmas music and pageantry.
It is the desire of the participants that this program 1 1 might help those who attend to j I celebrate the real meaning of the advent season.
The “Holiday Hop” will be held on Friday, December 29, from 9 to 1, at St.
John O’Grady, Helen and Charles McLaughlin Refreshments — Kay and Ray Dunn Decorations — Mary and Oscar Baerenwald As always, the Christmas dance promises to be a very enjoyable evening.
In order to facilitate arrangements for refreshments, please plan now to attend and make reservations early.
For the high schooler, faculty o-r student, stationery imprinted with the Winchester Sachem in red.
C FAMOUS ASSORTED COOKIES P k 829e P k 829c P k g39c P k S29c P k S* 29c P k S39c Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday Special, Dee., 19, and 20 Minute Steaks 99c lb.
The prayers of this family go with you . . -Letters have also come to the Winchester legislator from Florida.
New Jersey and Vermont, as well as from other cities and towns in Massachusetts.
I have received your letter of December 4 in which you conditionally accept my invitation to appear before the House Committee on Ruleu and explain the statements attributed to you in the public press in connection with your recent appearance on a C.B.S. telecast.
As you are undoubtedly aware from your long experience in the Massachusetts General Court, it is customary that appearances before the Rules Committee of either branch, or the joint Rules Commit tee of the General Court, in matters of this nature are held privately in executive session.
Where the basic integrity and personal reputation of members of the House have been subjected to at tack on the basis of completely unsubstantiated general allegations, particularly when these allegations arc made by another member of House, it is the duty of the House Committee on Rules to demand that the member making such allegations explain his position in full and produce whatever evidence he may have, if any, to support his charges.
After hearing the expla nation and evaluating the testi mony, the House Committee on Rules must then determine what action it should recommend in its report to the full membership of the House.
You’ll find our wide selection of modern formals perfect for the occasion . . . they’re designed for comfort as well as elegance.
East Arlington MI 3-6464 OPEN EVENINGS dec 1 4-3 t personality, and reputation of the parties, it is my judgment that the fundamental wisdom of the longstanding general custom estabj lished by my predecessors in office of conducting such hearings in executive session cannot be denied.
All members of the House, including yourself, have a right to Vie protected against unwarranted and unjustified remarks and innuendoes, insubstantial or inconclusive evidence, and unfair inferences inherent and unavoidable in a hearing of this nature.
From your yearjf of service in the House and your knowledge of the legislative process, I am sure you will agree with me upon reflection that this course of action is in the best interests of all concerned.
You may, of course, avail yourself of the opportunity to be represented by such legal counsel as you desire.
In addition arrangements will be made for a stenographic report to be taken of the entire hearing.
Such safeguards, together with the presence of members of your party on the Committee and in attendance at the hearing, should certainly assuage any doubts, if such existed, of my desire to accord you every courtesy in the conduct of the hearing.
I have no desire to preside over a kangaroo court, or for that matter a Roman circus for the benefit of the press.
I can find no compelling reason for altering our traditional policy and holding a public hearing at this time.
While I do not as yet have a complete transcript of your remarks, I have respectfully invited you to appear to explain in full the statements attributed to you originally in the Boston Traveler of Friday, December 1st.
In all matters of this kind, the public is properly aroused and indignant.
But this fact has not in the past, nor does it now justify what can only be regarded as the unwise and precipitous course of legislative action which you have suggested.
Ample opportunity will exist, if you are able to substantiate your serious charges concerning your fellow legislators, to bring your position and evidence to the attention of the public.
If, at a later point, a public hearing appears warranted on the basis of your testimony at the hearing, such a public hearing will, of course, be conducted.
But for the present, I have no alternative but to respectfully extend to you once again an invitation to appear before the House Committee on Rules in the Speaker’s Office on Monday, December 11, at 11m.
From our famous collection of magnificent rings . . . featuring the finest in diamonds at remarkably moderate prices.
Prices Include Tax $350 CONVENIENT PAYMENT PLAN Member American Gent Society nso ft Jewelers Inc.
I greatly appreciate your detailed letter of December 5. 1 regret to say, however, I still do not find your reason for a closed hearing convincing.
In my opinion, the interrogations you propose to conduct will serve the public best if they are held in the open.
Since you have ruled otherwise, I must decline your invitation to appear before the Rules Committee on December 11.
Should you decide later to have an open hearing, I will be most happy to come before the Committee and answer questions to the best of my ability.
DAILY I 1-t.f The attorney general defended the position taken by Richard Cardinal Cushing on the matter.
In a speech last week the Cardinal made a general statement of confidence in the Boston police force, said that since people do gamble we should face up to it, and called the T.V. crime documentary a “betrayal” of the city.
Mr McCormack said that he felt the Cardinal’s remarks had been misconstrued.
He said that Cardinal Cushing was not saying that we should permit gambling, but only that people do gamble.
McCormack quickly agreed that it did not and said far from condoning such action on the part of police he felt that they, as exemplars of civic morality, should be punished even more severely than regular citizens.
During the luncheon talk the attorney general said that he had made definite plans concerning his political future, but declined to comment on them.
He also said that, party politics aside, he and Governor Volpe enjoyed amicable relations for which each was criticised by both Democrats and Republicans.
When the attorney general had completed his talk he was given a standing round of applause and was presented with the traditional Rotary letter opener.
Florence Crittenton Christmas Meeting The Christmas meeting of the Winchester Circle of the Florence Grittenton League was held on Friday, December 8, at the home of Mrs.
Meyer’s home was attractively decorated for the season and provided a perfect setting for the meeting.
Woodford Wilcox reported on the successful sewing meeting held in November.
Henry Marchionette, service representative, gave a fine report of the various activities’ at Crittenton Hastings House.
Walter Watson, co-chairmen of the Bazaar, gave a report of the success of the pre-sale held at the home of Mrs.
Lester Gustin on November 15 as well as a full report of the sale in at the John Hancock Building on November 29.
Fred Cardin, Ways and Means Chairman announced that her plans call for a dessert and bridge party to be held in the spring.
Monbleau gave a very entertaining account of a recent trip to the Scandanavian countries stressing particularly the hospitality of these countries.
Hospitality as a topic fitted into the Christmas atmosphere of the meeting.
A beautiful tea followed the program and was prepared and served by Mrs.
TOWN Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
Theresa Balclosed with Benediction, lacci, Georgette Berbuhe, Sally | The social which followed im'ause.
Mary Harrington, Prefect, largaret Hoffman, Eleanor Leverextended a warm welcome to all no, Mary Lewis, Grace Creamer* the guests and a special welcome lelen Keane, Gertrude Mac Kay, to Monsignor Garrahan who was felon McDonald, Rose McLaughcelebrating his 87th birthday, n, Mary Wernig, Elcnor WoodEntertainment was provided by ridge, Constance Ellis and KathNancy Collins who sang selections rim* Roy lan.
The two door prizes were won by Margaret Hoffman and Elenor Woodbrldge.
Delicious refreshments were then served by chair •man, Peg Grotty, co-chairman Eleanor Repucci and their committee.
Mary’s of Winchester and j Saint Mary’s of Hull remained in | a tie for the top berth in the CYO Hockey League as the two teams j fought to a 2-2 draw last Sunday j at McHugh Forum.
Mary’s of Hull wasted no time in grabbing a 1-0 lead when a centering puss was slid into the Winchester net at 67 seconds of the first frame.
The remainder of the period was scoreless and was featured by close checking on the part of both clubs.
Mary’s of Winchester took command of the second period and I allowed the opposition only two shots on goal while Jim Moran and Dick Norberg repeatedly bombardj ed the Hull net only to be frustrat| ed by the spectacular goaltending of Runny Cararra.
The final stanza began as a rerun of the first with Hull netting an early goal to take a 2-0 lead.
With slightly more than two minutes remaining in the contest, Dave Hession found the mark after a scramble in front of the Hull cage and Winchester closed the gap to 2-1.
A minute later Winchester January’ltb marks the opening of Winches tor’s 1902 College Freshman face Coach Isidore 1 Lit lino's boys here til March 24th when the State Team Championships will he ceptions, are to he held every Friday or Saturday nights. fee of 26c for students and 60c for adults will he charged.
Winchester’s team was undefeated until the midpoint of the season when it lost some key men due to injuries.
At the State meet at Minnechuugh Regional, Winchester placed fifth, being beaten only by a small margin by three of the teams. that it had previously beaten.
Only three of last year’s key men were lost through graduation while many new sophomores were gained, some of whom have already made varsity.
January 12 — Springfield College Freshmen, 7:30 January 19 — at Newton North, 3:30 January 20 — at Needham, 7:30 February 3 — Wakefield, 7:30 February 10 — Framingham, 1:00 February 16 — Minnechaug Regional, 7:30 February 23 — at Melrose, 7:30 February 27 — New Bedford, 3:30 March 3 — at Wellesley, 7:30 March 9 — at Andover, 7:30 March 17 — North Quincy, 7:30 March 24 — State Team Championships, 7:30, at Winchester March 31 — State Individual Championships, at Andovef gymnastic season when the Springfield at 1 :30m.
Meets, with only a few exhis year, for the first time, an admission Melrose Wallops Winchester Crawford Memorial Church Basketball sextet mexpe serve basis.
The affair will be a cabaret style with noise makers and music for dancing all ready to Chester defenseman out in front and rebounded by the Winchester goalie.
The Sachems picked up slightly in the second period as they made seven shots to the eight of Melrose but three goals in little more than a minute from 4:39 to 5:57 of the period were backbreakers.
Paul Ryan kept Winchester from being shutout on a pretty goal as he drove by the strong Melrose defense to hit the strings with a quick shot.
The hustle Randy Kazazian, Carl Bertolucci Skitchy Fiore had and Master praise for the growth and progress of the Lodge’s Scout Troop.
When first chartered two years ago there were five members and this number has grown to forty.
The members of the Lodge agreed to purchase proper neckerchiefs for the Scouts and have agreed to make Bruce Garvey as happy as possible while at. the Winchester Hospital as a result of an auto accident.
Although Bruce is in a cast, his spirits are high and we of the Sons of Italy wish him a very rapid recovery.
The members of the Lodge also were whole-heartedly in favor of remembering the families of deceased members of the S.O.I. by sending them Christmas plants.
Toward the end of the meeting Venerable Frank “Boss” Dattilo hud the privilege of presenting beautiful sweaters to the members of the championship Sons of Italy softball team.
Y GARLAND • BANFF DARLENE • BROUN IE # OLYMPIC Roth (Aussie unci Dressmakers Sizes 34 46 from 3.98 to 29.98 A Large Variety of Versatile Sweater Fashions Are Y ours for the Asking St.
Mary’s Pucksters In 3-2 Win rose team that has paid off for Winchester in tile past was just not enough.
Each one was the victim of some poor defensive play, but on Saturday Melrose was just a superior team.
Mary’s hockey team staved off a last period surge by defending champions, St.
Anne's of Readville and gained a 3-2 victory to initiate the new C.Y.O. hockey season.
Mary’s team grabbed a 1-0 lead when Frank Manzie passed to Jim Moran, who had no trouble in beating the Readville goalie.
Mary’s captain got his second goal, taking a pass from “Pepper” Cunningham and sliding the disc neatly under the falling Readville net minder.
Midway through the final frame it was “Pepper” Cunningham who took a centering pass from Moran and lifted the puck over the prostrate goal tender, thus giving St.
Mary’s a 3-0 lead. with four minutes reNoonan School Chapter of CSA Over 75 Years in Medford OPEN EVENINGS TILL CHRISTMAS WINCHESTER The Noonan School Chapter of the Community School Association of Winchester held its winter meeting on December 5 in the Noonan School Auditorium.
John F Collins, President of the Association introduced the guest speaker of the evening, Mrs.
Mary's coach, John Falla, returned his first unit to the ice, and some solid defensive work by Dennis Gritfiin and Jackie Kean, plus some brilliant back-checking by Jim Moran was able to contain the opposition until the final buzzer.
We are privileged to have two such Adjustment Counsellors to work in our Elementary Schools in Winchester to help any child who is not adjusting to school as he should.
Keville gave a most informative talk on children’s problems in School adjustment and the methods used in Winchester to solve them.
OLD SANTA WESTINGHOUSE 2-DOOR REFRIGERATOR with separate food freezer Falla expects that the addition of Dick Norberg at right wing will give his squad greater balance and depth for the games coming up.
Norberg, a former W H S. varsity player, was forced out of the Readville contest due to illness.
Pa pea-mate, Sheaffer’s, Parker, Ester brook, and Script o pens and fillers available at the Star office.
OSBORN ROMAGORA Established in 1930 SKI OUTFITTERS to the ENTIRE FAMILY We have been advisers to the leading skiers of the East for a generation — let us assist you in the selection of correct ski equipment and clothing.
MELROSE and Brookfield, Our policy is to sell only the latest quality equipment at reasonable prices.
Bowling League Since the first ball was rolled in the league, California has been in the driver’s seat, and only one week remains before the end of the first half.
Bowling 1 for this team are Frank DiMambro, Jim Faietta, Frank Dattilo, Mario Buzzotta, Angelo Amico, Rudy Fiore, and Richie Giacalone.
In the last outing the league leaders split 2-2 with runner-up Notre Dame, and the two remain in their respective positions.
The rest of the teams remain in the same positions in the standings as a week ago except that Army climbed up one notch from twelfth to eleventh while Bates is found one place lower to twelfth position.
Bates lost four points to Penn the last time out with the help of Gerry Cerulli and Louie Del Solio.
In the match between Holy Cross and Army, the former left the STOP FOR 1 PAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE ON ALL CHRYSLER BUILT CARS ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc.
LOEWIS WINCHESTER Theatre — PA 9-2500 ; scene of action with a 3-1 victory.
Old Man Ilokie Procopio is still in his prime although his team dropped four points to Yale.
Richie Bucci was a good man for Yale to have around too with his 9cores of 1 18108-102.
Important matches being rolled as you read this column are California vs Army, Holy cross vs Notre Dame, Yale vs Harvard and Alabama vs Boston College.
Two attendance prizes were drawn last week and the winners were Bill Maggio and Dan Gattineri.
Mat. at 1:30 TARZAN’S HIDDEN JUNGLE and the Bowery Boys in BOWERY BATTALION Starts WED., DEC. 20th [ PAUL NEWMAN hR( Tl am. t I ROBERT ROSSEN'S THE HUSTLER Jackie GLEASON ■OmmaScOPK ** "" » Wt*i* *»’»* feTrfg GkTift ji * P But, Doc, Charlie | said it was all right for me j£ to ice skate.
I I « I l i I t i I I I I I m i i § I i 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mast.
C.A. clubs, car pools and busses used to get them to Wakefield and Malden Y.M.C.A.’s.
Harry Mugford, a Winchester 14-year-old, swimming for the Malden Y.M.C.A., broke its pool record with a time of 36. sec. for the 60-yard Butterfly.
YOU NEED A MOTO-MOWER 20"" DELUXE POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3V4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and h&avily packed snow.
An adjustable slip clutch protect? . 1 against chain breakage or IL \ impeller damage.
O’Grady, 11-year-old, is a local girl on the Wakefield 160yard freestyle team which recently beat Newton.
Ellen Kirkpatrick, a local butterfly, placed second in her 40-yard event, and also tied second in diving.
Emily Mugford a Winchester 12-year-old, swam with the Wakefield Racerettes to defeat Newton.
She placed second in the 80-yard individual medley and swam breatstroke for the 160yard medley team which won.
Also training with Wakefield’s competitive groups are Russell Wild, Peter Wild, John O’Grady, Paul McLaughlin, Martha Rooney, Kathleen Sullivan and Marie Mainberger.
Working with instructional groups at Wakefield’s pool are “Frosty” Rivinius, “Geff” Rivinius, “Ted” Bannister, “Teddy” von Rosenvinge, to name a few.
No doubt, many others are seeking use of nearby pools to develop in this fine sport, but great numbers of children are denied this training by the absence of a heated pool in our town.
Let us hope the Youth Committee will have some solution in their report at the next Town Meeting.
Highlighting this dicus sion are statements by Mr Hilliard that the welfare case volume can be decreased by a sufficiency of jobs without discrimination; Mr Cohen that without a prevention of dependency approach his department will have to be discontinued; and Senator Hartke that work relief programs have no real purpose and serve no significant function.
S On December 15, 1961 the Winchester High School Musical Or ganizations and “Curtain and Cue” will present their annual program, Christmas at Winchester High School” The evening of holiday entertainment starts at 8:00m. in the Memorial Auditorium and admission is only fifty cents.
First performing will be the Mixed Glee Club, followed by “Christmas Story,” a play in one act.
The play features Jon Abbott, Diane Watson, Judy McKinley, Tom Bates, Maida Uhlig, and James Reid and is directed by Mr John McLaughlin and Mimi Barnes.
After intermission the Girls’ Glee Club, the Orchestra, the Double Sextet, the Brass Quartet, and the Mixed Glee Club will perform.
The program will be closed with familiar carols by the Glee Clubs and the audience.
I Bowling League The members of the Jades team were radiantly happy and quite relaxed in bowling last week.
Fine bowling, girls, namely, Captain Ann Caggiano, Gloria Monterisi, Mae Rotondi, Vi Bruno and Bette Cammarata.
Four team aimed for the secondplace position, but the Rubies continued their winning streak and now have a confident enough lead for second place.
Captain Rose DcTeso, Virginia Macinanti, Jennie Amico, Anita Dolloff and Mary Fiorelli.
Terry leads the league of 50 bowlers in individual averages and holds the record high-three string of 290.
The children of all departments of the Church School are invited to attend this annual event.
The main attraction of the evening will be a presentation by the Winchester Children’s Theatre under the direction of Mrs.
Sachems Looking Forward To A Good Season With nearly 65 boys out for basketball this season.
After making the final cut just last week, the Sachems are looking forward to next week’s opener vs Woburn.
After having scrimmages with Gloucester, Medford, Watertown, Malden Catholic, and Winthrop, things look to shape up pretty good.
It looks as though the starting five will be Len Tim pone and Jim Devnney at the forward positions; Richard Bond at center; and Mike Bellino and John Peckhain at the guard positions.
A strong bench backing up these boys will be composed of John Lane, Charlie Tofuri, Bob Donlon, and Bob Watson.
The Jayvees look like they are a strong bet to take the Middlesex title.
Their starting five will probably be Chuck Anderson and Bill Branley at the forward positions.
Bob Foley at center, and Roger Schipellite, Ron Keane and Mike O’Dair sharing the guard positions.
Backing them up will be some good looking sophomores such as Pete Fahey, Vic Papadinis, Dick Faieta, Bob Branley, Buddy Rotondi and many others.
The Sachems have looked good in their scrimmages, losing only to a good Medford team.
They are looking forward to winning the Middlesex title and they have a pretty good chance.
The Sachems are also looking forward to their opener next Tuesday with Woburn.
Although the Tanners have their starting team back, the Sachems are looking forward to opening the season with a win.
The Sachems, who have an open date December 26, are trying to get a game with Peabody who is in the Essex County League.
Team Standings Won Lost Pinfalls Jades 40 8 14,276 Rubies 29 19 13,869 Emeralds 26 22 14,116 Diamonds 26 22 14,056 Pearls 23 25 14,005 Sapphires 21 27 13,821 Cameos 20 28 13,894 Topazes 20 28 13, §82 Garnets 19 29 13,919 Opals 18 30 13,736 Belmont Opposes Sachems at Lynn Next Saturday, Winchester’s skaters return to the ice wars with a game against arch-foe Belmont in a Middlesex League encounter at three o’clock at the Lynn Sports Center.
Belmont re-bounded from a 7-0 loss to Melrose and is looking for the Sachem scalp this weekend.
The sophomore starter was injured in last Saturday’s debacle with Melrose.
Attendance at the games continues to increase with three hundred more fans attending last Saturday than the week before.
Fifteen hundred people were in the Arena last Saturday and more are expected this weekend.
Sachems ’61-’62 Hoop Roster Seniors Mike Bellino, John Peckham, Richard Bond, John Lane, Charlie Tofuri, Tom Callahan, George Neumann, Robert Donlon, Dave Money, Richard Casanova.
A CHANCE TO HELP Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Christmus if this holiday is to be a happy occasion in accordance with the American tradition.
TO— PHARMACY GIRL INC., LABS Fifth Avenue, Brookfield, Conn. ootffl -tf ""the winchester starCLUE® Parker Brothers Trademark for Its Detective Game Equipment Adults, teenagers — all want it.
First Congregational Senior Chior Jay Finn Plans New Insurance Office Here Mr Jay Finn, former manager of the Winchester Theatre, and active in many community affairs, will be opening up a new real estate and insurance broker shop at 8 Thompson Street on or about the first of the year.
Photo by Ryerson JAY FINN Mr Finn will do business chiefly through the Boyd, Dalton, and C hurch agency in Boston, which has been doing business since 18(15.
In his new office Mr Finn will write policies for all kinds of insurance, including life, casualty, fire and automotive.
He will be occupying the quarters to be vacated at the first of the year by J Arthur Deering.
Mr Deering will be moving into the office formerly occupied by the W Allan Wilde Agency, which has moved into Murray and Gillett’s old stand. .lay Finn is married to the former Sally Elizabeth Sherburne and has one boy, Bradford J who is 2 and one half years old.
The Star asked Jay whether his new business would have any “motto,” any special trade slogan.
Let’s just say I’ll try to give the best personal service I can, and that I will always be candid as to what 1 think would be the best policy for a customer to buy.
Cantata At the First Baptist Church The celebration of Christ’s birth always brings with it the renewal of man’s spirit, a renewal of joy and hope which is possible because of this supreme revelation of God.
The story of this revelation is old but ever new, for it is relieved each year by those who have faith in it and who, in the faith, look forward to Easter as the fulfillment of both time and life.
As their contribution to this commemoration and to the spiritual renewal of our own people, the members of the senior choir will present Healey Willan’s “The Mystery of Bethlehem,” a fresh interpretation of this ancient text through the medium of music.
This contemporary cantata, written for chorus and soloists, will be sung at morning worship, Sunday, December 17, at 10:45.
The soloists will be Hazel F O’Donnell, soprano; and David Ashton, bari tone.
In addition to the cantata, the offertory anthem will be “Behold, I Bring You Glad Tidings” by Maurice Greene.
The classic simplicity of this early anthem is emphasized by a soprano-alto duet which will be sung by Hazel O’Donnell and Nalora Steele.
The Introit for the service will be “Gloria In Excelsis” by Martin Shaw.
Christmas Vespers A Beautiful Service Photo by Ryerson a program of Christinas music Keep your typewriter in place with an Unda-Wunda typewriter pad.
Fortnightly Literature Group The Literature Group of the Fortnightly met on Wednesday, December (J at the home of Mrs.
Marion Littlefield extended a word of greeting to the members, especially the new guests and then turned the meeting over to Mrs.
Barnard presented a most interesting paper on the poetry of the Civil War Period, illustrating her talk with examples of old books published during this time and giving us a brief resume of many of the poets and their works.
Those who attended the Christmas Vespers at the First Congregational Church last Sunday afternoon found such a moment, and the combined Senior Choirs under the direction of Mr Robert A White provided the inspiration.
Dwight D Cart, D.D., read from the Scripture, and his closing words “Praise ye the Lord” from the 150th Psalm were the affirmation of the purpose of the service; the efforts of the musical forces assembled for the afternoon made it clear that they understood this fully.
Miss Yuko Hayashi, Church Organist, played the Prelude and Postlude and accompanied the choir with a mastery of the unique problems of the organ in this church and with a competence which the regular members of the church have come to expect.
Robert H Anderson of 8 Winslow Road, Winchester, guest harpist, played beautifully a selection of Christmas Carols and provided a lovely accompaniment for the choir's performance of excerpts from “A Ceremony of Carols” by Benjamin Britten.
Eschewing accompaniment for much of the service and singing in unison, that most difficult way of all, for considerable portions, the singers were most effective.
The phrasing quality and the voice control indicated that Mr White has carefully disciplined this choir.
His communication with members and through the members to the audience is articulate indeed.
While “A Ceremony of Carols,” contemporary in motive, was the musical high point of the service, “O Magnum Mysterium” and “Ye Watchers and Ye Holy Ones” were also lovely.
Miss Flora Mardigian, contralto, and Mr Robert Donaldson, tenor, as well as the entire ensemble indicated that Mr White is establishing a solid tradition as a most worthwhile contribution to ' the understanding of the spiritual 1 significance of the Christmas SeaFollowing the service all were invited to a social coffee hour in j Chidley Hall by the Friendship I Guild of the Women’s Association which sponsored the program.
Phil is a junior at Harvard College and because of his contacts with college thinking his talks at Forum always have special interest.
Larry Archibald and Charles Irwin will be chaplains with Bill Palmer and Peter Sewall as deacons and Neal Baker and Bruce Carpenter as ushers.
At 7:00m. in Chidley Hall f the Forum Dramatics Committee will present their Christmas play “Reindeer on the Roof” by Mildred Hark and Noel McQueen.
James Hollinshead as dramatics adviser the student directors of the play are Dianne Watson and May Mumma.
The cast includes Dick Starkweather, Margie Purvis, Reed Lowry, Sue Keppler, Nancy Hollinshead, Christine Cooper, Steve Emery, Roberta Kirkpatrick, Marcia Kimball and Bill Gaffney.
The play is being presented for Forum members, their parents and friends and will be followed by a social hour in Chidley Fireside arrangements for which are being made by Mrs.
Ruth Beckley and her decorations committee are at work to make the Mistletoe Dance on December 27 a colorful affair.
Unitarian Christmas Music The Winchester Unitarian Choir under the direction of Mary Ran ton Witham continues its series of pre-service programs this Sunday December 17.
The soloists are Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; Sidney C Blanchard, Jr. baritone.
This musical offering with special lighting ef | feels is an annual event in The Church of the Open Bible now located at the corner of Winn and Wyman Streets in Burlington.
Last year it attracted so many that late comers were unable to get into the old structure in Wob urn.
The program consists of ap propriate Bible readings inter spersed with musical numbers and illustrated with color slides.
This unique program portrays in Scripture, pictures and song the inspiring story of Jesus from, Man ger to Throne.
The special lighting effects also reflect the various mu sical moods and Gospel themes throughout the service.
In addition to the familiar Christmas carols the songsters will sing numbers which vividly portray the many events and teachings in the minis try of Jesus.
The Sa viour’s birth, boyhood, parables miracles, trial, crucifixion, resurrection and ascension are all in eluded in this stirring program with eighty voices participating The public is cordially invited A most pleasant and spiritually rewarding evening is in store for all who will take advantage of this annual presentation by the Music Committee to commemorate the birth of Jesus.
PA 9-1693 nov3-tf Antique Study Group The December meeting of the Antique Study Group will be held in the Rich Room of the library at 7:80 on December 19.
Real Estate — Mortgages Insurance PA rk view 9-1492 augl 2 -tf INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDEN1 LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNERS PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 1 THOMPSON STREET Ren.
The large rooms downstairs, including the deluxe kitchen and library, just radiate charm and are ideal for gracious entertaining.
Wolff, PA 9-0172 Mr Gilley, Manager James % Tvefref REALTOR 27 Waterlield Road, Winchester — PA 9-6100 JOHN B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED” HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage at Less Cost 1 Mt.
Y'crnon Street PA 9-3400 novl0-tf For Rent WEDCEWOOD APARTMENTS On l lie shore of \\ edge Pond in \\ im liester Center are the newly completed W edgewood Apartments, where you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living.
Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitehen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area.
One-and-a-half baths, garage, kitchen with countertop stove and many lniilt, ins not found in the average home.
Fireplaced living room, dining room, lavatory, good kitchen, and glassed-in porch.
Three bedrooms, ceramic-tile hath, basement play room, storage room, and one-car garage for just $21,500.
WINCHESTER CAPE Attractive pre-war Cape, offers large living room, dining room, modern electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor.
Unusual four-bedrqom-, 2 L* -bath home with den in secluded wooded area 'near Washington School.
PA 9-3268, PA 9-2790, PA 9-5550, PA 9-5005 $28,900 $24,000 $24,900 $28,900 $36,900 $48,900 ONE OF ROYAL BARRY WILLS’ FINEST Long, rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shingle English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline.
Large reception hall with graceful curved stairway, step-down 17x28 baywindowed fireplaced/ living room, panelled den, 20-foot fireplaced dining room, all-electric built-in kitchen, jalousied porch, powder room.
First-floor sun room, three nice bedrooms on second floor, garage, and pleasant lot, all add up to a very nice buy at this price.
Woburn auglO-tf CARPENTERS Home Repairs & Remodeling Carpentry, Complete Additions, Kitchens, Roofs, Gutters, Painting, Plastering & Masonry.
ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 FIREPLACE WOOD Firepl ace Wo6d Well-seasoned Oak & Maple.
HIGHEST CASH PRICES Metal Furnace* Removed, Iron, Rags, also Rubbish Removal.
LAUNDRY SERVICE LAUNDCY COl cm MMS Specia kits in fabric Cs re •ep29-tf Borgeson & Gustafson PAINTING & DECORATING Interior & Exterior FREE ESTIMATES WE 3-6069 BR 2-3437 augl2-tf WALTER J JOHNSON PAINTING Interior and Exterior PAPERING PA 9-6014 nov9-tf James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 augl2-tf PIANOS LOST AND FOUND LOST-Male tiger cut, whit** face and pawn.
Call 0 Liver 8-3298. nov30-4t * FOR SALK —Ahsoutely trouble-free. n Borg ward Station W Miron, aero blue, w. tiren, radio and heater, trailer hitch, well cared for.
Complete net World Rook EncycliJpcdin in now nearly unused condition at half price.
FOR SALE — A late 1961 Chevrolet Sports Impnlit.-door, jewel blue, white wall tires, immaculate condition.
Ex cep tionally low mileage. one owner, private party, ('ail MI 2*1642.
New 1961 famous make, equipped to zig-zug, buttonhole, darn and monogram, $2.1.
FOR SAI.E — Australian ski boots, aize ID, $30, worth $70; racing poles, $10 ; cross country racing boots, size 11.
Lionel engines, cars, trnck and equipment, chimp Come and take your pick.
EX 6-6970. feb5-tf FOR SALK —Large collection of HO scale trains, Varney.
VVill # sell in whole or part for half of original price, (’ail PA 93808.
Call WElls 3-2334. so P 21-tf FOR RENT — Five-room upurtmont in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments. $190 up.
WANTED— -Old coins and gold coins, private collector will pay 10* , over catalogue.
WANTED — Old coins, private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, ulso tup price for other coins.
Call PA 9-3340. nov30-3t HELP WANTED FEMALE HELP WANTED— Full-time position for a person with some bookkeeping and clerical experience to work on billings, collections, and student accounts.
Telephone for appointment PR 6-2100, Ext. or 216. decl4-2t WANTED — Woman for baby sitting and light housework.
RUBBISH REMOVAL REMOVAL OF RUBBISH PLOUGHING SNOW ALSO COW MANURE FOR SALE Call WE 3-0409 dec7-4t SCHOOLS PIANO CARE Tuning — Reconditioning Organa and Players Complete Rebuilding Clinton Jonas PArkview 9-0785 mugl2-tf PICTURE FRAMING _ Picture ’5 Framing % 1 at i 2 Winslow Press g » 2A Mt.
WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There ia a way out.
All makes including Japunese manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service.
All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rutes by calling your Authorized Travel Agent.
Let us know your travel pluns and we will be happy to work thorn out with you.
For the finest, most dependable TV • RADIO K-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMB0S TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing.
Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. pr27-tf WANTED WANTED Antiques — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc.
PA ‘>-0029 The Fortnightly The social hall of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church was the scene of a festive purty on j Monday afternoon, December 11, beginning at 1m.
It combined the celebration of the Eightieth Anniversary of the founding of the club and Presidents’ Day.
About thirty presidents and guests from other women’s clubs in the Eighth District were invited, as well as the guests of honor, Mrs.
Charles D Shepard, president of the Massachusetts State Federation of Women’s Clubs, and Mrs.
The walls of the hall were decorated and the club color, yellow, was noticeable on the long table where the pourers were Mrs.
Henry Hildreth of Westford, a past president of both the Fortnightly and the State Federation, and Mrs.
Edward R Grosvenor, a past president of Fortnightly, who now lives in New Hampshire.
A beautiful birthday cake of four tiers graced the center of the table.
After a reception for the guests, dainty ices were served followed by the ceremony of the cutting of the cake by Mrs.
A large vase of white carnations was on the piano in memory of past presidents who have passed away.
After the invocation by Miss Mary L Hodge und the usual preliminaries, each visitor responded to her name, stood, and spoke briefly.
Members were urged to join in singing carols Christmas eve at 7m. on the Common.
A highlight of the afternoon was the reading of a splendid paper on the history of the Fortnightly prepared by Mrs.
How this purpose has been carried out and fulfilled was told with the account of many different projects undertaken by the committess initiated over the years, a very worthy list of accomplishments for the betterment of the community, schools, and other causes.
Today this desire to promote good endeavors is still contributing generously to our town’s welfare.
Herbert D Thompson, program chairman, next introduced two musical artists for the afternoon’s entertainment, Miss Phyllis Howes, soprano, and Mr Bob Phillips, her accompanist at a small electric organ.
Looking very attractive in a holly red dress and equally so in a beaded gown of the 1920’s, Miss Howes delighted the audience with many current selections and a group of 1920 songs.
Legal Notices Christmas Around The World First Baptist Church The superintendents and teach ers have been planning with the children to take the church families on a Christmas tour around the world on December 17.
Christmas in Sweden — Kindergarten Department Christmas in the Philippines — Primary Department Christmas in India — Junior Department Christmas in Japan — Junior High Department Christmas in America — The Paul Butterworth Family In the Social Hall This is an opportunity for not only the adults but the children to experience the way in which the whole world celebrates the birth of Christ.
Apply at WOBURN SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL WE 3-2181 Mail Early For Christmas, 1961 With the peak of the big Christmas mail rush just over the horizon, Postmaster Thomas J Gilgun said today that every postal employee is digging in harder than ever to insure delivery of all Christmas cards and gift packages before Christmas Day.
The flood of outgoing Christmas cards and gifts is about equal to the torrents of incoming mail that are getting larger every day.
A delay of a few hours at this critical time may mean disappointing your friends and loved ones on Christmas Day.
Post Office windows will be open from 7:30m. to 6m., for your convenience.
Don’t forget to put your name and address on all Christmas card envelopes and package labels.
Tying in with the National Improved Mail Service program, the Postmaster urges that you divide your mailings into various groups, with those for most distant places going first, making it a point to mail early in the day.
The Postmaster especially requests that you get your out-ofstate packages into the Post Office immediately and to do everything possible to mail all of your Christmas gifts for local delivery by December 16 and your Christmas cards to nearby points by at least a week before Christmas.
He suggests that you use Air Mail for every Christmas card and gift package going to distant places.
Here’s a few of the Postmaster’s important reminders about Christmas mail.
Be sure to include full name and address, postal zone numbers, and your return address, written or printed clearly on every card and package.
Parcels containing delicate gifts must be marked “Fragile,” und food stuffs should be marked “Perishable” if they tue subject to spoilage.
To all person* interested in the estate of LKTITIA F HOPPER late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
The executor of the will of said LETITIA F HOPPER has presented to wu«l Court for allowance its first und .second accounts.
John V Harvey, Register. dec7 -8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Mitldlesox, ss.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of « certain instrument purporting to lie the last will of said deceased by GRACE NICKERSON BANGS of Providence in the State of Rhode Island praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
To all persons interested in the estate ot LILLIAN S ALICE late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of u certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARY LINNANE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex prnying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of December 1061.
THEN DIAL PA 9-0029 BUTTERWORTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Stre.-t PA 9-0342 Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry julyfi-tf COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, as.
To all persons interested in the estate of THOMAS F FALLON late of Winchester in suid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court, praying that MAE I FALLON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex, or some other suitable person, he appointed administratrix of .said entute.
John V Harvey, Register. decl4-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, sk.
To all persons interested in the estate of FRANK B SMITH late of Winchester in snid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by BEATRICE L SMITH of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving u surety on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on the twentyfirst day of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-aevonth day of November 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. nnvfl0-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES P HOPKINS late of Winchester in snid County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court, praying that THOMAS W HOPKINS of Boston in the County of Suffolk be appointed administrator of said estate, without giving u surety on his bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tlile n written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyeighth ilay of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, Find Judge of said Court, this fifth day of December 1961.
Boston Muss., upon payment of $&.. which entitles him to receive h set of plans upon presentation of proper receipt to Blue Print Room 740.
Payment shall be made with cash, bunk check, certified check or money order drawn to the order of Massachusetts Di*partment of Public Works, amount refundable to formal bidders.
Complete information at above address; plans on display at Department’s District office in Arlington.
Right reserved to waive any informality in or reject any or all proposals.
An uward will not be made to a Contractor who is not equipped to undertake and complete the work.
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1961 Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club When the duplicate bridge version of “The Untouchables” go into action, they do a thorough clean-up job on everyone in sight.
Darrell A “Eliot Ness” Root, who present their show with regularity along about 10:00 on Wednesday evening-, came through again on December 0th at the K of C Hall.
Both sections played 21 boards for a 03 point average, and Miggs and Darrell finished way out front more than five points ahead of the rest of the field.
Charles Watson, 03 EastWest Georgie Ganmge and Sandra Slone, 75% Kay McConnell and Barbara Sawyer, 70% Mr and Mrs.
Guy Mingolelli, 69% SECTION B North-South Nancy Atkinson and Edward Sullivan, 70% ' Geraldine Lawrence and Betty Yeomans, 74 Mr and Mrs.
George Kimball, 07% FJsther Davis and Eleanor Sweet, 00 % Blair Hawley and Ralph Atkinson, 04 East-West Mr and Mrs.
Darrell Hoot, 82 Ted Atkinson and Gerald Barrett, 74% Molly Fitzgerald and Gertrude Cox, 69% Mr and Mrs.
On today’s boani-of-the-week, Ed and Nancy got to a fine slam contract which was missed at a number of other tables.
Howard Clausen, of Norwich Glee Club, and Cynthia Knox, of Vermont College Chorus, cheek score of Handel's oratorio, “The Messiah, with Jon Borowicz, director of the Vermont Philharmonic.
Orchestra and 1 HI elioral voiees prepared for yesterday’s performance in the third annual rendition of Christmas music at the Norwich Armory.
You have little idea of the texture of South’s spade suit and no information as to the location of the king of clubs.
Thus he was confident of his counterpunch redouble, based on the inferences of the auction, and having no fear of East’s probable aceking of hearts.
Don’t forget the Club’s open house Christmas party on Wednesday, December 20th, at the K of C Hall, starting with a social our from 7:00 to 8:00m.
Legion Makes A Head Start For Year 1962 With a membership of two hundred and two signed up for 1962 as of December 10, 1961, Post 97 of the American Legion has made an excellent start for its Community Programs in the coming year.
Commander Appleton pointed out that the paid up members of the forty -two -year-old Post for ’62 represented an increase of 32 per cent over its advance enrollment of last year.
Since the Berlin crisis and South Asian troubles, Post 97 has received many new memberships and reinstatements, and the Commander and Executive Committee earnestly hope that those who have until now overlooked the patriotic imORIGINAL portance of joining a veterans organization will see fit to line up with the Legion, which for over forty years has never ceased to preach eternal preparedness for the United States.
So follows Winchester Post’s annual contributions to the Scholarship Fund, Boy Scout Annual Camp Fund, Boys State at Amherst, Junior Chamber of Commerce, Junior Legion Baseball, March of Dimes and many other community activities.
Alan Macdonald, James Reid, Richard Soucck, Elena Magno, I ’Anne Grant, and Judith Yore.
Winchester Toastmistress Club A dessert Christmas party wa the highlight of the Wincheste Toastmistress Club meeting which was held at the home of Mrs.
Mary Ann Quitnhy, of 30 Golden Avenue Medford, last Monday, Dec. at 8:00m.
Pat Pyne, Winchester, was Toastmistress and introduced the three .main speakers, Mrs.
Mrs Phyllis Thorensen, Malden, covered the subject of interest to all wo men, “Beauty is Self-Discipline Topics relating to Christmas from Bells, Angels, Trees, Orna ments to mistletoe, were passed out by Mrs.
The primary function of the Toastmistress Club throughout the United States and Canada, is to train its members to give extemporaneous and prepared speeches with poise and confidence.
An important phase of its w'ork is the job of the evaluator who must offer constructive criticism that will benefit the speakers and others who participate in the meeting.
Violet Bruno, Winchester who submitted her application to join the club.
Cub Scouts Visit Hanscomb Field nor C^uichcr — fearn WJinc to rj£)ino, % •ee a^etiverii s^nylimec A L L WE l Is 3-0932 The Woburn Package Store, Inc.
SP 4 6800 J >*%%***%*%**%%**V*%%%%%%%V$ CURRIER & IVES PRINTS AUDUBON BIRD PRINTS A representative selection of life-size bird prints of 19th-century origin.
Price . s from $30 to $35 0 tfn'r bird prints from $2 to $7.50 AUTOGRAPH LETTERS, DOCUMENTS, M VNUSCRIPTS of Presidents, Historical Eigures, Authors, including the will of Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany.
Famous winter scenes, clipper ships, river boats, mountain and country scene's, historical.
Prices front *10 to S 2000 W e also have a small hut choice selection oi oil paintings, bronze and marble statues and other works of art.
Cubmaster Sam Putnam and Pack Committee Co-Chairmen Paul Donahue and Joe Maspero were in charge of the field trip.
From comments and conversations there was no doubt that the hoys had a good time.
You don’t try to outwit the sergeant, particularly Sergeant John O’Malley, who conducted the tour.
Servicemen have their own church, recreation hall, theater, supermarket, base exchange, library, school, little league hallfield, and it looks like fun living there.
About 20 of the hoys were ready and willing to join the Air Force should finish school first.
It shows the keys to he played for each of the Major, Minor, Minor Harmonic and Minor Melodic Scales.
I he Scale Chart relates the key of wind instrument scores to the piano score key ior all E-flat, B-flat, F anti Bass-clef instruments. 1 he Seale Chart also shows the basic chords or triads (tonic, sub-dominant anti dominant) for Major, Minor and Minor Harmonic Scales.
It correlates tin* 88 piano keys with their equivalent musical notes and shows the frequency relationship between the tones of all of the piano keys related by equal temperament.
Clear instruction* for its use are printed on the front of the Scale Chart.
It i* 4 inches by 8 ,{ j inches; til a durable low-gloss material, making it easy to read, and conies in a protective envelope.
It's really unbe1 llevablo at $299.50 .*• & s I I Mi m Had he been however, a bit timid about tracking 1 big game through the woods, he need have had no qualms about being a member of this year's Safari.
As a matter of fact no one did any hunting at all, for either big or little game.
Even the fact that Charlie Murphy took along his rifle and ammunition for it couldn’t lure the nimrods out of doors.
The trackWeather Stymies Safari at Dade's Along about this time of year it has been the custom of a select group of sportsmen to embark on a hunting safari in New Hampshire, making their headquarters at “Blue Waters/’ the hospitable and attractive summer home of the Krnest B Dades in Guilford.
Among those who have participated in past safaris at Dade's are Nick Fitzgerald, A1 Elliott, the “Homespun boy,” his brother, Syd; Charlie Murphy and “Ab” Bradlee.
All with the exception of Mr Bradlee, took advantage of the Dade hospitality this year, leaving town for Guilford last week Tuesday.
For one reason or another Mr Bradlee decided against being a member of this year’s Safari.
The reason was not made public but the Star is loath to believe it was because of any fear of the big game likely to be encountered.
With hunting ruled out the party passed the time indoors in a variety of card games, crooked and not so crooked, and in banter of one sort or another.
The boys were all back in town for Rotary on Thursday, and all were speaking to each other.
The Choir and the Men’s Choir will present a varied program of Christmas music, including selections from “Christmas Oratorio” by St.
Open the flash compartment, and the “autoshift"" shutter is automatically set for flash— close it, and you’re ready for outdoor shots.
Weatherly by Lenox Place Setting $19.95 Chanson by Lenox Place Setting $23.95 Teaspoons from $4.75 Serving Pieces from $5.00 •I 1 i « i « i 1 I l I If you are giving her some of the missing pieces in her China, Silver or GIuhs to complete her set, you are sure to find it at Swanson’s.
STERLING SILVER Gorhuui, Heirloom, International, Heed uud Burton StiefL Towle, Wallace GLASS Fostoria, Tilliu, Bryee CHINA Lenox.
Just bring this ad to I I Page Fourteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14.
Out in the commercial world ol glitter, electronics, neon, anti plastic it The Christmas program to be might have become something less admirable, lint in any of the Town’s seven elementary schools its tine old traditions bold linn, presented on Friday, December 15 , ( dve yourself a lift and a bit of inspiration. \ i sit one of these schools.
You will hear the sound of young voices rehearsing carols, see a thousand varieties of excitement, smell the greens or the Public Library' will feature a color j film of The Littlest Angel.
This charming fantasy will he an enjoyable introduction to the holiday season.
In addition, a film on the writing of “Silent Night” will be shown on Friday night, and filmstrips from the Library collection will be shown at the Children’s program on Saturday.
The first one in the new year will be on January 5 and ft, pleasant scent of paste* for paper decorations of Santa and reindeer, and angel On the walls thei that >ing on high. are as many variations of the Christmas themes as there are children's minds, in crayon, construction paper, or paint.
The A.B.C/s gain new spirit in the presence of boy sopranos, paper wreaths, the child-made gift for mother or table favors for the Red Cross hospital services.
The elementary schools start almost every day at 8:45 with class or group carolling in the halls, sometimes and someplaces with the assistance of Ted Janner, music supervisor, on the viola.
Throughout all the schools there are special programs planned for the next week.
AT THE HIGH SCHOOL TOMORROW NIGHT “Christinas at WHS.” is tomorrow r night at 8m. for as many as the auditorium will accommodate.
The special aura of the 90 scarlet robed voices of the mixed Glee Clubs as they process singing into the softly lighted hall is unforgettable to those who have seen and heard it.
At this grade level excellence of performance has due emphasis; but there is still a feeling of the spontaneous spirit of the season about the program.
INC WHERE YOU’RE * ~3~lliucuj$ 'liJantecl . . . 'lAJefcomef | ^xxmix:^xxxzixxxxxxxxz<xxxuxxxxiixxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxuxxxxxM Visit our sales room before Christmas.
Add 4 ounces of Imported Ruin and 4 ounces of Five Star Brandy to each quart of prepared egg nog from your local dairy.
MODERATION IN THE ENJOYMENT.' -X mas Story,” presented by Curtain Sixth Grade has just finished a and Cue.
The program concludes with the mixed Glee Clubs again, joined by the audience in carol singing.
The music is all under the direction of Wendell S Withington, director of music; the play in charge of John F Mclin of the English Department.
Elementary Schools Washington School has the meaning of gift giving as its theme for Christmas presentation this year.
It opened the program season Tuesday when the first grades under the direction of teachers Barbara Hancock and Eleanor Wells performed the old favorite, “Why the Chimes Rang,” with the First Grade Choir accompanying.
Next Tuesday, the 19th, at 1 :00m. the Sixth Grades will enact through dialogue, tableaux and choral singing, “There Was One Who Gave a Lamb” to illustrate the spirit of giving from the heart.
A special memorial meaning will infuse the pageant at Mystic this year at 2:00 m. next Tuesday, when “The Story Beautiful,” performed by the late Lillian Salice’s class in 1950 will be repeated in honor of this much loved teacher who died early this month.
It will be presented for the school and parents by Ruby White's Third Grade with the Choir from Margaret Millican and Gladys Wood’s Sixth Grades in support.
Also Tuesday afternoon at the Wyman School, 2:15, there will be a Christmas Assembly.
At the Parkhurst School there is planned a simple, in-school emphasis, on Wednesday afternoon, December 20.
Grades I, II and III will present a short program to tti& upper grades and on Thursday afternoon, the upper grades will return the gesture.
Grade I will take part in “A Living Christmas Tree;” Grade II, the “Birth of Christ,” a tableau; Grade III a short play, “The Little Star” with four songs included.
On Thursday, Grade IV will give Christmas legends, “The First Christmas in Verse and Song;” Grade V the Legend of the Christmas Tree;” and Grade VI will close the program with a short version of Dick’s “Christmas Carol” with carols.
At Lincoln School, Wednesday evening, December 20 at 8m. all the grades together will present to families and friends a seies of Christmas scenes which will unfold in front of a huge set of a Cathedral Square which has been prepared by the children over the past weeks.
London’s Big Ben chimes on tape will play a small part in this sequence.
Dorothy M Hammond’s unit on Dickens and will present a version of the “Christmas Carol” to the other two Sixth Grades.
Margaret C Donovan’s Grade 5 is working on a special choral reading for the last week of school, and Mr Janner’s string group is expected to perform in the halls in addition to class carol Jers, including kindergarten.
The first three grades will depict Christmas as observed in Holland, Germany and Sweden.
Grade Two will give a Chinese Christmas celebration which it has prepured with the consultation of one of its China born parents.
The Fourth Grade will take the audience to England, the Fifth to Mexico for its festivities; and the Sixth will render an Italian observance of the day.
All of these will have appropriate musical accompaniment by the children.
BEHIND SCENES Behind the scones at all the schools is a largo extra effort by all the teachers.
Jeanne Loudon, music supervisor of elementary singing groups is omnipresent at this season and the guiding genius of many programs.
Ted Janner instructs the strings which often open the programs at the schools.
With Jeanne as accompanist, he himself contributes a special continuity at many programs with his beautiful viola playing in intermission.
Natalie Bellows has been giving to the first three grades through oTit the system a special musical meaning to Christmas in song.
Virginia Diegelman (formerly Miss French) and Gail Murray, her assistant. have advised, planned, and been down on their knees in paint helping with much of the individual and cooperative art work which permeates the schools and their programs this season.
Photo by RyorHon A SCENE FROM THE UNITARIAN PLAYERS' PRODUCTION of “The Pleasure of His Company” December 1 and 2 in Metcalf Hall.
Cecil Prest, Norma Wood, Cary Callahan, Tony Currigan, Harry Wood, John Sullivan.
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS McCall will combine the multiple talents of many of its depart ments to present its annual Christmas Assembly to parents and friends on Thursday morning, December 21.
The Dance Club, under teacher Judith Sadowski, will give interpretation to special Christmas music sung by the Girls’ Glee Club.
Costumes are being made by the Home Economics classes, Suzanne Duncome, teacher; and speaking parts will be under the direction of teachers Mary C Regan, Velma Thompson and Marie Dugan.
Frances Houghton’s art classes have been illustrating Christmas carols some of which will be made into background slides by the Photography Club, headed by John Limongiello.
These will be used as illustrations for music to be performed by the Boys’ Glee Club and the Ninth Grade Mixed Chorus.
All of the singing groups work under the direction of supervisor Eleanor Thistlethwaite.
The Brass Quartet, under Wendell Withington, will contribute to the program; and helping with the arangements which will make these many parts into one program are members of the Student Council.
Lynch Junior High will celebrate its first Christmas on next Thursday also.
The “Story of Christmas” will be presented at 1:30 that afternoon in many interpretations under the general direction visor there.
At Lynch too there will he a Ninth Grade Christmas Dance tomorrow evening to which McCall Ninth Grade is invited.
Helena Hatchell’s art students have done Christmas representations in many media including the simple and effective decorating of the trees put up in the court yards by Paul Goodwin’s Industrial Arts Department.
The Home Economics Classes under Elizabeth Lowry are gay with home preparations and have been preparing food packets for shut-ins.
Delta Kappa Gamma On Wednesday evening, December 6, the members of Mu Chapter of Delta Kappa Gamma met at the Winchester Country Club to enjoy a delicious dinner of tenderloin tips.
After a business meeting, there was a musical program conducted by Mrs.
Eleanor Thistlethwaite, supervisor of music in the Winchester Junior High Schools.
The following porgrani was rendered by the McCall Junior High ninth-grade vocal ensemble.
Sopranos — Lynn Keppler, Deborah Nelson, Jean Hutchings, Carol Nash, and Carla Hutzenlaub Altos — Rita Gramzow, Margery Hickey, Judith Carucci, Janis Carucci, and Diane Changaris Tenors — Barry Weeks, Hugh Fisher, and Peter Harvey Basses — Porter Mill ford, Walter Harwood, Lee Sullivan, Louis Briasco, and David Weaver.
Players Present ‘The Pleasure of His Company’"" Autobridge, the game that lets you play bridge any time by yourself and have world champions as partners.
Last week, Friday and Saturday evenings, an exceptionally talented and attractive cast presented this gay and sophisticated play by Samuel Taylor in Metcalf Hall.
From the opening moment, when U#e raised curtain revealed a beautiful living room set of a home in San Francisco, with a picture window at the back through which one was certain one could see the Golden Gate Bridge, to the final curtain call, the actors portrayed their roles with ease and real professional skill.
This play requires the deft touch of a competent director; the Players have such a person in Jacqueline Sibley, an accomplished actress in her own right, who guided her cast with a sure hand to a finished, polished production.
On-stage, as the curtain rose, was the Chinese house-boy, Toy, played by Harry Wood.
At the moment he was engaged in opening the wedding gifts which were arriving for the daughter of the house, this being a privilege accorded to him as a loyal family retainer.
Mr Wood was delightful in his role; at one moment suggesting the inscrutable Oriental mind with knowledge far beyond that of ordinary people, and at another time, looking completely blank and uncomprehending when the situation seemed to be more than he could cope with.
John Sullivan handled his role of the grandfather very well; on the surface a crusty old recluse from down the Peninsula who appears only as a matter of form for the wedding, but truly loving his family and wanting above all for his lovely granddaughter to be happy.
He it is who sides with her in the momentous decision she makes at the play’s end, and Mr Sullivan showed the two facets of the character skillfully and believably.
As Roger, the young man who is to marry the daughter of the family, Gary Callahan did a fine job.
His portrayal of the honest, somewhat unromantic, and bewildered fiance was sensitive, and one really suffered with him as he tried to keep his girl, and his integrity too.
The scene in which he “tells off” the play-boy father of the girl was especially well done.
He was relaxed and charming at all times, and a joy to watch as he manipulated people and situations to further his own cause.
Although one perhaps cannot approve such maneuvers, the character was made completely real and sympathetic by this very accomplished actor, and one hopes to see more of him in future productions.
His daughter in the play, the pretty Jessica, was also a pleasure to watch.
As done by Norma Wood, she was gay and happy in her marriage plans, and so pleased to have her long absent father return; beguiled and charmed by this man of the world, she seems to grow up in the process, and when she decides to go with him for a year’s cruise, it is well understood that she will return to marry her nice young man.
Norma has talent and a good stage presence; a young lady who should be seen more often on the stage.
The two other leading players were Billy Ann Maley as the mother, and Cecil Prest as the step-father.
This is a well-matched pair, both gifted with a sixth sense of the theatre.
They were fun to watch and to listen to, as they reacted to conversation or action from the other actors.
Maley is lovely to see, her costumes were beautiful, and she moves with grace and assurance.
She handled the difficult role of a happily marnervous apprehension as to what effect his presence will have upon her household.
Mr Prest offered another of his fine portrayals as Jim, kind, patient and understanding.
Fhe makes his characters so real and his acting seems so natural that it is a joy to see him.
Color coordination was especially noted; as in one scene where the candles in the wall sconces exactly matched the shade of blue in the dress worn by Miss Wood.
Remember When This week’s picture in the Star’s Remember When series is of the Marshall Symmes house at Symmes Corner, until recently the home of Mr and Mrs.
Originally the house that stood there was built in 1715 by Ebenezer Brooks.
John Brooks’ niece married a French Huguenot, John Le Bosque, who served with distinction as a captain in the revolutionary war, and the John Brooks house came down to them.
Marshall Symmes acquired the property from the Lc Bosques, including the house and land extending to what is now the South Reservoir, paying $10,000 for it.
Not having the money, he gave his note for the property and it was not until after the Civil War that he was able to pay off the obligation.
Meanwhile, his family dressed in homespun and lived on what they raised on the farm, buying only flour, salt and sugar.
Samuel Symmes, a later widely known and universally esteemed citizen, was horn in the old LeBosque house as were his brothers, Walter and Frederick, and his sister Anna.
In 1881 Marshall Symmes, finding the old dwelling in poor condition structurally, tore it down and built the house that stands near the location of the old house at a cost of $5,000.
A part of the old building was moved to the rear of the new dwelling and used as a farm house.
For many years a stone cap covered the well of the old Le Bosque house in the yard of the newer structure.
Marshall Symmes lived in the new house until he died, and at that time the property went to Samuel and Lawrence Symmes.
Samuel or “Sam” as he was known far and near, bought Lawrence’s interest, and the place then went to his son, Russell, who went there to live in the 40s, brought up his family there and only recently disposed of the place.
A lot of history stems from the old house and its predecessor, the Le Bosque house.
In Marshall Symmes’ time he used to graze his sheep in what is now Rangeley and during a terrific snow storm with the snow reaching a depth of 10 feet in spots, he had to go to the animals’ assistance on horseback.
For hospital patients, shut-ins, vacationists, or any one ried woman whose first husband rej w ^° ca rds.
I % Sk *. * i I | McLaughlin’s Shoe Store |j Open Every Evening until Christmas S5 Tel.
PA 9-2588 WINCHESTER * dcc7-3t mm mm mm mm mmm mm mm mm mm mm mm$ Regional Program for Education Of School Administrators A call for a pioneering regional program to improve the education of school administrators in New England was made last Friday by delegates attending the New England Conference on School Administration in Brookline, Mass.
Finis PL Engleman, former commissioner of education in Connecticut and present executive secretary of the American Association of School Administrators told the delegates that the plan offers New England an opportunity to lead the nation in the improvement of school administration and the strengthening of the schools.
The plan endorsed by the conference calls for the creation of a permanent regional council of representatives from colleges, state departments of education, school committees, and administrative associations to coordinate and strengthen their programs.
It will also sponsor additional workshops, institutes, and conferences to increase the “in-service” educational opportunities of practicing school superintendents and principals; and it will seek financial aid to recruit qualified young men from the region into school administration and provide them with the professional preparation they will require.
The regional council would operate under the auspices of the New England Board of Higher Education, an inter-state agency created by the six New states in 1955 to improve and coordinate higher education in the region.
At the conference, announcement was made that the education faculties of five New England univrsities which grant professional certificates and doctor’s degrees in school administration have agreed on means to assure the training of sufficient numbers of New England school administrators and to make more convenient the means by which administrators can obtain professional training.
Children’s Theatre School From the moment the curtain rose last Friday and Saturday Dec. 1 and 2 on the three plays presented by the Children’s Theatre School at the Winchester High School Auditorium, the audience, composed for the very most part of Winchester school children, were in for a treat.
The fact that the treat was appreciated was very much in evidence when the rising of the curtain brought a hush which remained as the capacity crowd of youngsters sat enthralled during the performance.
There was plenty of action for the boys, sweet fairies and elves for the girls, a real live black kitten and dazzling costumes and beautiful lighting effects to be enjoyed by all.
The scenery itself was enough to keep the attention of any imaginative child, painted as it was by the actors themselves.
In “Heidi,” for instance, the scenes in the hut of the Almuncle (Michael Fiori) were enjoyed for their authenticity.
Real hay was seen in the loft where Heidi (Mary Wadsworth) climbed each night to sleep.
Heidi’s playmate, Goat-Peter (Brian MacDonald) captured the hearts of the children in the audience as he expertly handled live goats wheih were imported to lend further atmosphere to the play.
The beautiful sweeping plumes on Dete’s hat as she swept in to the cozy little hut personified her battle colors as she brusquely prepared to drag Heidi off to a more ordered life in town.
The acting was perfectly natural and there never was a hint of tenseness as the performers enacted very accurately the well-loved classic.
Small boys and girls dressed in colorful Swiss peasant costumes danced and yodeled catchylittle tunes between the scenes and even asked the audience to join in, too.
A beautiful round paper moon shed its twinkling moonbeams across a stage alive with little elfin creatures as all the mischief in Shakespeare’s “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” was gleefully portrayed.
Queen Titania was lovely, graceful and unperturbed as the plots were conjured up around her and her breathtaking, colorfully-clad fairies.
First and Second Fairies (Rebecca Brackett and Kristen Beard) floated on wings of brightly-hued silk among the other little fairies.
Teasing, mischievous “Puck” (Geoffrey Brackett) was an imp personified as he darted from regal King Oberon to confer with his fun-bent fellow elves.
The lighting in this play was truly lovely and kept the mysterious illusion of moonlight and shadows throughout.
Left to right, Robinson Crusoe, Ron Marcy; Friday, Henry Dietrich; Capt.
Songstress CONNIE FRANCIS “Never on Sunday” and Other Themes MGM 3965 □ Connie’s Favorite F'olk Songs MGM 3969 □ Connie’s Greatest Hits, Vol.
Crusoe led them to safety and shelter in his cave (ingeniously converted from Heidi’s loft bed) and proceeded to handle the bad chaps with the none-too-gentle help of Friday, who was very obviously enjoying a personal revenge.
This action was just the thing the audience had been hoping to see and it is safe to guess that each youngster envied the actors their ability to portray the characters with such evident enjoyment.
Robinson Crusoe was a first-class beachcomber in his beard and ragged clothes and bare feet, with a cutlass at his side.
For realism this little play could not be beaten and the children loved it.
Excitement was at fever pitch as the cannibals and mutineers ran down the aisles to the stage, giving the little ones in the audience a really big thrill.
Veronica Sanderson played expertly the happy little tunes for Heidi, the lovely, haunting melody for Midsummer Night’s Dream and the bold music for Robinson Crusoe and also accompanied the singing.
The following McCall Junior High School Vocal Ensemble, under the direction of Mrs.
Marilyn Brown, Ja net Covino, Rita Gramzow, Linda Knight, Carole Nash, Elaine Sullivan, Janis Carucci, Judith Carucci, Janet Hogan, Virginia Williams, Hugh Fisher, Barry Weeks, Louis Briaco, Lee Sullivan, Walter Howard, David Weaver.
Mr Morse, of the Winchester High School, and his Stage and Lighting Crew, Stephen Memishian, Brian Hurd and Michael Kuhn did a really outstanding job in creating just the right effects for each play.
Maida Uhlig, Jacqueline Cartier, Elizabeth Bowes, Ruth Anno Hutchinson, Janice Yagjian, Elizabeth Thibeault, Kathleen Lopez, Marilyn Long, Joanne Hess, Nancy O’Neil, Kathleen Ganchi.
Samoiloff on Production for the past five years and who is well loved by all the children did an outstanding job as usual.
Gay little fairies and impish elves danced their way into the hearts of the excited capacity audience who watched the delightful program at the Winchester High School Auditorium on December 1.
The three plays presented by the Children’s Theatre School and directed by Mrs.
Robinson Crusoe and his cverfaithful “Friday” seemed to be enjoying themselves immensely as they planned revenge on the mutineers in the ageless Defoe classic.
Several volunteer ushers helped to keep the splendid order which prevailed at the performance.
Beth Dutting, Debbie Bassett, Mary Power, Joyce Kell, Nancy Bennink, Martha Broadhurst, Virginia Page, Ann Butler, Robin Byford and Kathy Dillon.
Charles Raffi, Theatre Chairman for the Winchester Community School Association wishes to take this opportunity to thank Mrs.
Wendell Irving, Ushers and Tickets, the Winchester Police Department for sending Police Officer Robert Elliott to be in attendance, all the local merchants who displayed posters in their windows and to all those countless others who helped to make the annual presentation so enjoyable.
Grace & Co., Cambridge, at the Division’s annual Quarter Century Club meeting.
Stowe, a past president of the Club received a 36 year pin from Bradley Dewey Sr., co-founder of the company.
Stephen B Neiley of 22 Fletcher Street was elected vice president of the Club for the coming year.
George W Blackwood of 29 Wedgemere Avenue, Dewey and Almy president, presented watches and club pins to 13 Boston area employees inducted into the club.
In the intervening 25 years, the company has grown tenfold, to the 4700 people now employed by the three Grace divisions stemming from the original Dewey and Almy Chemical Company.
Governor Volpc Guest Speaker At Army Luncheon The United States Army Recruiting Main Station at Boston Army Base announced recently that Governor John A Volpc will address the group attending its third annual “Operation Holiday” on December 18 at the Maridor Restaurant in Framingham.
The Governor will he the main speaker at a luncheon given in honor of a group of one hundred young men and women from Eastern Massachusetts enlisting that day in the Army.
The enlistees will he given the Oath of Enlistment at a special ceremony at one o’clock in the afternoon.
The luncheon will follow the enlistment ceremony and will conclude with the address by the Governor.
Beautiful, Fresh-Cut Christmas Trees From New Hampshire THE BEST — REASONABLE Peter Derby PA 9-2880 58 Vine Street Winchester Christmas Gift Sale LIVE MODERN FOR LESS WITH Pay as little as ’] MYSTIC VALUY CAS (0.
I case of Chicken Pox 4 cuses of Dog Hites l cast* of Strep Throat Michael D Saraco A gent.
In The Stoneworks, by John Ciardi The Lardner Report, by Rex Lardner The Life of Samuel Johnson, by John Hawkins Memo to JFK, by National Broadcasting Company, Inc.
Mexico, by William Weber Johnson The Patriot Chiefs, by Alvin M Josephy The Story of America’s Musical Theater, by David Ewen These Were The Sioux, by Mari Sandoz The Treasures of Time, by Leo Deuel, ed.
ITCH-AID is COOLING, COLORLESS, STAINLESS, IN STANT DRYING . . . oct2G-tf WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev.
Carlton Helgerson, Pastor THE CRAWFORD MEMORIAL METHODIST CHURCH Winchester, Mass.
Each Sunday at 4:00m “God Sent His Son” will again lie presented by the three choirs, sextet, quartet and soloists, with Scripture readings, pictures and lighting effects Sunday Evening, December 24, 7 o'clock in THE CHURCH OF THE OPEN BIBLE Winn and Wyman Streets, Burlington Everyone ^ invited to the annual portrayal by eighty voices of the story of Jesus from Manger to Throne.
Phone or come in 36 Church Street W inchcwld PArkview 9-3000 BMU-2-tf Rev.
The Senior M.Y.F. will have a Progressive Supper starting at the home of Judy Dirrfee, 48 Cnbot Street.
Our teams will play the first games of the season at Vinson-0 wen School Gym.
Important business including the Finance Committee's report on the Canvass.
SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH Washington Street at Kenwin Road “The Church in the Highlands” EVENTS OF THE WEEK Monday.
The Junior and Senior High Pilgrim Fellowship groups will go ""Christmas Caroling"" and have a party at the home of Mr and Mrs.
The Winchester Council.0, K of C., is holding its annual Christmas party, on Sunday, December 17, at 2m., at the K of C Hall.
All members with children under 12 years of age are cordially invited to attend.
Last but not least, Santa will give out candy and toys to all the children.
JUt.n JCimlaff #oUi C JJaJ/v 39 Church Street Winchester PArkview 94)200 t Page Eighteen THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1961 HOW BANKS HELP YOU TO Many parents who hope to see their children attend college some day are not fully aware of the financial problem ahead.
According to a recent survey of typical colleges and universities, average annual costs today total some .$1,500— and costs are rising.
The families in the most comfortable position are those who have carried out long-term savings programs.
Banks provide the savings account service that has been the key to college, and other education, for millions of Americans.
Correspondent for the Jewish Journal, “The Day,” suggests that the election of U Thant as UN Secretary General constitutes a revolution which may mark a very important turniing point in history, in that for the first time in modern history world hegemony has been removed from the Western Hemisphere and shifted to Asia.
This revolution, he says, is not only geographical and to a certain extent ethnic, hut also religious, in that world leadership has now for the first time been entrusted, not to a Christian, hut to a Buddhist.
New Eye Screening Test For School The final meeting of the Win— — — — Chester Visiting Nurses Associascreening testing machine for the tion for 1961 was held in the Rich schools in Winchester was discussRoom of the Winchester Public Li^ anf ^ wafl voted that money he brary on Friday December 8.
Thomas Purtlc proj Nursingfor W.V.N.A., demonstratsided. j ed the one now in use and she exit was announced that Mrs.
We, the iel McLaughlin of 1 Foxcroft Road hoard of the VV.V.N.A. are in hopes will open her lovely home for the that the School Committee will Annual meeting which is to be bnd money enough in their budget held at 2:00 p,m. on January 19, | to purchase one more, that is badly needed to properly take care of the children.
Anthony Marahella of \\ inehester; and his maternal greatgreat-grandmother.
The picture was snapped November 25 at the home of Fire Captain and Mrs.
FIRST WITH FM STEREO On ALL 1962 Consoles WGBH Receives Foundation Gift Of $125,000 Winchester boosters of W.G.B.H. educational television station will be delighted to know that the Twentieth Century Fund has given .$125,000 toward the construction of new studios for the firerazed station.
The new gift brings the total amount of money raised by W.G.B.H. to $550,000.
Spontaneous projects to aid the stricken station have been organized in just about every community within range of its signal.
Hartford N Gunn, Jr., General Manager of WGBH, said the gift “not only supplies much needed help in our Rebuilding Campaign, but it is also the first contribution of $100,000 or more.
We must find other sources individuals, corporations and foundations, to make contributions of comparable size if WGBH is to get through this period of emergency operation and into an adequate permanent home of its own.” iThe burned studios had been rented by WGBH from M.I.T., which will build for its own purposes on the old site.
Mr Heckseher ’s letter said the grant would be paid by the Twentieth Century Fund after hearing from WGBH that work on the new studio was ready to begin.
United Nations speeches, Presidential press conferences, latest Khrushchev pronouncements, all are there in their entirety.
In three days’ time he invested 32 hours at it; finally got bogged down in the advertising section and eventually gave up the ghost.
Through some difficulty in transportation it frequently fails to arrive, usually on stormy days.
The yelp of an addict at not finding his cherished publication can be heard around the Square, nor is his day normal until he huo jumped in his car and raided some nearby — and more fortunate — community.
The printers' strike of several years ago brought out Times addicts en masse at 7:30 Sunday mornings, all lined up and raring to go.
But now, with the Times in the morning and our esteemed Monitor in the afternoon, that gap is more than neatly filled.
SQUIBS Most of us are willing to face the music if we can only call the tune.
SHORT CUTS Acquire every diamond in the United States, and your collection could fill a bin eight feet square.
The National Hot Dog and Sausage Institute reports that 11,000,000,000 frankfurters were consumed in 1960, an average of 62 for each American.
The political leader known as “Mr Democrat” , and the one known as “Mr Republican” were both victims of cancer.
A permanent set of teeth consists of -8 canines, 8 cuspids, 2 molars and 2 cuspidors.
The favorite instrument of the ancient Arabians was known as the eunuch.
Citizens of the United States may be either male or female upon reaching the age of twenty-one, if of good moral character.
An I-G inspection (InspectionGeneral) is conducted with all reserve units in the United States once every year.
It comprises an active duty army officer, usually a major or above, inspecting reserve companies.
Not only are the men thoroughly inspected on their military knowledge, but also the facilities and equipment are carefully scrutinzied.
This year with the tension arising from the Berlin flare-up, and the Communist agitation in South-East Asia, the inspection was especially exhaustive.
It has been located in Winchester for six years with headqaarters now in the new Sons of Italy Hall building on Swanton Street.
The unit meets every Wednesday night for two hours and the offic ers meet Monday nights also for administrative drills.
The men who make up the unit come from Winchester, Woburn Lexington, Arlington, Stoneham Medford, Wilmington, and Reading Winchester men in the unit are Lt.
James J Doherty; Sp-5 Francis W Lovertere; Sp-4 Daniel F Blanchard; Sp-4 Alan D Burt Sp-4 Michael S Cantella; Sp-4 Ernest E Reardon, Jr.
Mahoney The State Advisory Council of the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination today wired Governor Volpe and Lt.
Governor McLaughlin expressing their approval on the reappointment and confirmation of Mrs.
All members have served for several years and have been deeply concerned and actively involved in good group relationship within the Commonwealth.
FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
W45 m ft ft. ft , ft. 'ft 1 ft % ft W % ft Sk i & i Sk i f m 3* s m ""Convertible” Fountain Pen with 14-K Gold Point A brand new kind of fountain pen.
THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1961 Page A verything for for boys Mighty Mac” Jackets As usual... the unusual for those important gifts for your feminine favorites.
Indian Madras and | i * Batik Sport Coats | % Regulars, Longs , Extra Longs jf l * >s & i»« mm mm mm mm mm mm& * Slacks Skirts Sweaters Suits Coats Blouses Handbags Sport Dresses FREE GIFT WRAPPING « We have Gift Certificates * i * •J that will solve any j* i shopping problem * 6 Mt.
VERNON STREET — PA 9-0685 ridtmas uitomerS Kitchenware — Gifts Small Appliances COMPLETE STOCK OF ELECTRIC LIGHT BULBS Daily from 8m. to 5:30m.
Joan F Benson Bernard H Bloom Sidney J Bromander Ray K Brown Charles F Buckingham John P Burke Mrs.
George F Pneetti Francis B Parsons Yirgilio Pereira Arthur PL Rand Royce H Rnndlett George D Riehburg Ronald IL Rfchhuig Mrs.
Dana M Cotton for putting on the supper for our volunteer and the Boston staff.
Ralph Putney Our Red Cross volunteers again kept everything running smoothly.
Robert E Fay Motor Service GenHd Y Hills Sherman Russell Canteen and Supper Committee Mrs.
John B Wills High School Red Cross Ginny Seaturro Margo Harmon Diane Brown for Tots” campaign second week of toy lay.
S Ma rim* Corps Reserve, and the Shell Oil Company, opened the drive on November 25 and hope to achieve the completion of distribution by December 24.
The Shell Oil Company allows the use of its service stations as collection points for the toys, the tl.
S Marine Corps Reserve picks up the toys from the service stations and takes them to The Salvation Army Men’s (’enter, where they are sorted and distributed by personnel of th’e center.
The three agencies, which seem widely separated in their purposes, work closely and harmoniously in an effort to make a merry Christmas for all children who would otherwise he forgotten.
New and good used toys are urgently wanted for distribution to needy children.
The general public is urged to take such toys to thennearest Shell service station in order to make some child happy at Christmas.
Jjib.vm Christmas I Cards We have a large variety from which to make your selection.
Even though they cannot pro home for Christmas, they are not forgotten.
Through these visits, music and gifts take some of the joy of the season into the most cheerless of hospital wards and prison cells.
Major Norman E Sampson, leader of the League of Mercy in Massachusetts, is one of those away from home for whom the season will be merrier through the discovery that the Salvation Army really cares.
Congregators’ Evergreen Dance I he annual Christmas dance of the Congregators of the First Congregational Church will be held in Chidley Ilall Friday, December 15 ^ ro *J 1 ^m. 1m.
A State Uexiglatnr for M year and a member of the House Transportation Committee, Chadwick has proposed that a five member ^ law enforcement commission 1>«Vft formed to investigate crime in this state.
Northeastern’s Young Repuhli1 can Club is a member of the Na tional Federation of Young Repubvit lican Clubs and the Massachusetts Council of Young Republican Clubs.
OVER 25.000 TREES JAMES H MUMMA They were part of the 51 employees chosen from among Raytheon’s 43,000 for the course.
The 38week course was planned by the company’s Industrial Relations Division in conjunction with Harbridge House, Inc. of Boston, management consultants.
The curriculum included the most advanced techniques of management taught by specialists in the field.
WEIIs 3-9781 Every Day AROUND THE WORLD WITH THE CHIPMUNKS Alvin, Simon & Theodore with David Seville 3170/7170 The Brave Chipmunks; Japanese Banana; Stuck in Arabia ; Rudolph the Rednosed Reindeer and 8 others.
FROM GIFT IDEAS McLaughlins & INSULATED 9.95 to 14.95 For Dad, Mom, Big Sister, Brother or the Small Fry Skating is Fun.
M I I 3 •» 34 g 34 g 14 •ri THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY DECEMBER 14, 1961 High School Honor Roll SFOR CHRISTMAS GIVING FIRST QUARTER Ending November 10.
Knight Thomas Kuhn Carolyn Leaf Jane Littleton Susan McClennan Peter Moulton Lois Mozzicato Harold Mugford Richard Penner Janice Rae Florence Reardon Gregory Rinehart Jennifer Rochow Jeffrey Russell Robert Ryder Judith Sheppard Mamie Shepperd Karen Smith Elaine Spear Virginia Steams Jane Van Dyke Jean Wiener Claire Wilson Richard Wyman John Yagjian William Zovickian Af/rj.
PA 9Open Every Nite ’Til Christmas THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14.
Gaily wrapped gifts for the Sisters Pantry Shelf will be put under the Christmas tree; carols will be sung and refresh £ ments served.
CANDIES . . . because you want the finest i St I I 1 * I * a * The final meeting in the “Mornings” series sponsored by the Win Chester Wellesley Club was held in Hadley Hail, Church of the Epiphany, on Thursday, November 80, when a capacity group of subscribers and guests met to hear Mr Saville R Davis, managing editor of the Christian Science Monitor The coffee hour which preceded the lecture was in charge of Mrs.
It was a tribute to Mr Davis that immediately upon his appearance, the shouting and the tumult of the coffee hour died and the entire audience became hushed in eager anticipation.
Charles T Main, 2nd, president of the Wellesley Club, who remarked upon the enormous following which Mr Davis has in this community.
In his speech Mr Davis emphasized especially the importance of attitudes in these critical times.
He urged us to examine our own attitudes and search diligently for wisdom in our thinking and in our doing.
The determining factor in the present struggle depends upon what we do and we must be ever mindful that the Russians profit by our mistakes.
Mr Davis said that we as Americans, find ourselves in an unprecedented state of uncertainty and insecurity which is causing an emotional stir among our people.
There is a great deal of doubt among civilians as to what should be done.
There are extremists on both sides and perhaps they cannot be too greatly blamed because the pressures are so strong.
It is Mr Davis's belief that w< cannot afford to take a soft stand at the present time.
He urges that we listen more to the smaller countries and find out what they are thinking and then act in such a way that they will want to come with us rather than with the communists.
We cannot force them, and here again our attitudes will play so important a part.
There was an interesting question period following the lecture and many people remained afterward to talk with Mr Davis.
This series of morning lectures has been under the chairmanship of Mrs.
Christmas is just around the corner and children are going to sleep dreaming of the jeweled lights and sparkling ornaments.
Maybe they are the people who lost their homes from fires started in Christmas trees.
Let’s be sure, though, warns your Middlesex TB Association that it’s a safe tree.
J0SEPHS0N REAL ESTATE WALTER Y J0SEPHS0N INSURANCE dec7-3t > * wn xnm 7 Buy new and safer equipment if you need it.
Wait until nearly Christmas before buying your tree, especially if outside temperatures are above freezing.
Shake the tree before you buy it; if needles fall off, better check twice on how fresh it is.
Store the tree outside; don’t set it up until just before Christmas Eve.
When you set up the tree, make sure it won’t fall over, possibly causing a short circuit.
Check the bulbs when you’re finished, and move any that touch the needles.
I m 1 m Season’s Greetings If* time again to call your attention to our wide variety of quulity liquors and fine wines, also to the fact that we are located in an area handy to most people in this community.
It is a short drive down Cambridge Street past the Star Murket to the section of Woburn known at the West Side’s Four Corners.
Pierce Julius Kayer Cambas Mogen David Parma Duff Gordon Miraffore Widmer’i Christian Bros.
Harray’s and others Cl Wines From France Germany Portugal Spain Greece • Denmark Italy • etc.
PRE-MIXED COCKTAILS KEPT CftlLLED FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE AMPLE PARKING % M Colonial Package Store.
Keenan’s Ernest E Auto Service Service Station Reardon MOBIL Tires Batteries Tirea Tubes Light Repairs Accessories Your TEXACO Dealer BO-DELL AUTO TOPS Seat Covers Auto Upholstering ROAD SERVICE Road Service Convertible Tops WHEEL BALANCING ROBERT ROLLINS Cor.
PArkview 9-9886 feTift ** T* W * Turner’s Neil’s Gulf Kiley’s Sunoco Service Service Station Esso Station ROAD SERVICE ROAD SERVICE HAROLD TURNER, Prop.
PA 9-9870 PArkview 9-9873 m m Re {Hi its to Foreign and Domestic Cars Snap-On Front End Alignment Generator Ignition Work tOL fetter Gullotti’s Shell Station 31 TOW SERVICE PA 9-9802 3k m i i j Page F THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1961 Army Operation Holiday Aid In Eye Research AMPEX Stereophonic Sound Signature of Perfection in Sou ml Tlie United States Army Recruiting Main Station at the Roston Army Base announced recently that its third annual “Operation Holiday” will he held at The Madder Restaurant in Framingham on the afternoon of December 18th.
Robert A Mitchell, commanding officer, explaining the operation. said, “It’s just a little something special for the boys who want to enlist but would like to spend the holidays at home.
He said that the Army has made arrangements for those who qualify for enlistment to attend a luncheon as guests of the people and merchants of Eastern Massachusetts, and to he sworn in at a special mass enlistment ceremony.
He concluded, “The men, instead of proceeding directly to basic training, as is normal, will immediLIMITED QUANTITY TRADITION U CONCERTO Finished in Mahogany Stereo Dual Channel Amplifier 12” Speakers and 2 Tweeters ipe Dork AM-FM Radio $1495 NOW $1270 Exquisite Nylon Stockings by IR-Callum Exquisitely sheer in perf e c t proportions fora trim fit.
Anyone interested in more information regarding this unique opportunity may receive it by contacting Sgt.
Ski Club Seeks Charter Members “Clipit,” the new, better way to clip newspapers and magazines.
May this be the merriest of HAIR DESIGNER 13 Church Street Yuletides for you and yours.
Mau tins Holiday Tine lie one oJ^rcatjoij and Happiness.. oody Motor AUTO BODY and RADIATOR REPAIRING Parker T-Balt Joltcr-Parker 4§ Write fine ** Pencil Everyone needs this practical ballpen-pencil writing combination.
DECEMBER It, 1061 Girl Scouts From Troop 9 f Presented Program | assar in CHRISTMAS GREETINGS Pamvlrt Jt*an Smith daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Stanton B Smith of 42 Thorn bo rry Road has been accepted by Vassar College for admission in September, 1962, under the early decision plan.
Under this plan, students are accepted on the basis of six, rather than the customary eight, semesters of secondary school work, and on Scholastic Aptitude and on J Joodauicw ( are happy to extend to their On Tuesday November 29, Girl Scout Troop 9 presented the evening program for the monthly meeting of the Friendship Guild in Chid ley Hall, First Congregational Church.
Two years ago, the Guild sponsored Troop 9 in order that the girls might enjoy the privilege of holding their weekly meetings in Chidley Hall.
Since that time, they h*»ve wished to show their appreciation to the Guild in some special way.
Tuesday evening’s program was the result of many weeks of planning, with each of the troop’s three patrols taking the responsibility for some part of the evening.
Mothers of the scouts were invited as special guests, as was Mrs. lames Stewart, president of the Winchester Council of Girl Scouts.
Following the business meeting of the Guild, the program opened with a flag ceremony, followed by the investiture of a new Girl Scout, a candle lighting ceremony and a court of awards.
Members and guests were then invited to join in Fireside, at which time the fire was lighted, refreshments were served, and all enjoyed the girls* singing of many favorite Girl Scout songs.
Much interest was also shown in a fine table display which included several examples of campcraft skills.
Color Sgt: Mary Power, Flag bearei*s: Reth Dotting and Martha Broadhilrst, Color Guards: Joyce Kell, Virginia Page, Ann Butler, Barbara Gibson.
Debbie Bassett; for the ten laws: Kathy Lucey, Jill Horton, Nancy Bonrtink, Kathy Dillon, Cathy Harvey, Susan Duntona, Barbara Gibson, Loranne Gray, Paula Lanigan and Julie Shiang.
Nancy Bennink, PVayer Badge: Martha Broadhurst, Campcraft badge; Ann Butler, Cook and Campcraft badges; Nancy Colony, Campcraft badge; Susan Dantona, Campcraft badge; Beth Dutting, Cook and Child Care badges; Barbara Gibson, Horsewoman and Campcraft badges; Loranne Gray, Campcraft badge; Jill Horton, Campcraft badge; Joyce Kell, Player and Campcraft badges; Maureen O’Toole, Invested as a Girl Scout; Martha Williams, Campcraft badge.
Nancy Bennink, Ann Butler, Roberta Byford, Kathy Dillon, Beth Dutting, Barbara Gibson, Patricia Lanigan and Paulit Lanigan.
Pharmacy PA 9-1981 Annual Meeting The Annual Meeting of the Winchester National Bank will be held in its banking rooms at 7 Church Street, Winchester, Massachusetts at 4:00m. on Tuesday, January 1G, 1962.
William D Sullivan, Cashier SEASON'S GREETINGS Herbert T Wadsworth Realtor dec7-3t Holiday Greetings TO YOU and YOURS JOHN B MERCURIO INSURANCE and REAL ESTATE Tel.
PArkview 9-3400 To seek a choice aift // ""Convertible"" f T Fountain Pen with 14K Gold Point founded on inspired thought Just slip in giant size cartridge of Super Quink ink or insert converter in place of cartridge and it fills from an ink bottle.
See our big selection of PERFUMES, TOILET WATERS, BATH POWDERS, SETS, CHOCOLATES, WALLETS FOR MEN AND WOMEN, ELECTRIC SHAVERS, BRUSH AND COMB SETS, MEN’S SETS and many types of CHILDREN’S GIFTS which we will he happy to gift wrap for you.
Harry V Gilson, superintendent, participated in a New England Regional Conference on School Administration held in Brookline.
High School Principal W Howard Nibloek spoke in Boston last Saturday and journeyed to Minneapolis this week in his capacity as chairman of the Committee on Extension and Improvement of Educational TV in New England, a committee which functions under the New England A sociation of Colleges and Secondary Schools.
In Boston he spoke for the Committee at the annual meeting of the parent association held at the Statler Hotel.
On December 14th he will go to Minnesota to represent New England at a National conference on Educational TV sponsored by the United States Office of Education.
That selection of teachers is more important than selection of astronauts was pne of the things heard in Philadelphia by Henry K Fitts, head of the English Department, when he was there Thanksgiving week end for the National Convention of Teachers of English.
Mr Fitts is this year initiating at the High School the first course there on Advanced Placement English.
On November 24 and 25 assistant principal Thomas A Morse who is also the instructor in Speech was at the Eastern Slopes Inn.
North Conway, where he attended the twenty-first New England Speech Association along with more than one hundred other college and school representatives.
Marthe Genicot, head of the Foreign Language Department, attended a meeting at the Medford High School sponsored by the Massachusetts Department of Education on the questions involved in the current extension, expansion and improvement of modern language programs in the schools.
A follow-up program in the form of a Teachers’ Workshop has been planned for an after school time this week at which Mme.
Genicot will be joined by as many of the eleven modern language teachers in the Winchester system who are free to go.
From left are Sev George L Croft At Pearl Harbor Memorial Service Among the returning veterans for the Pearl Harbor attack memorial services was George L Croft of Johnson Road.
Croft was on the platform of the Arizona for the flag raising and memorial exercises as the guest of Admiral John H Sides, Command er-Chief of the Pacific Fleet.
During his visit Mr Croft was a guest of the Hilton Hotel and enjoyed the many tours of Oahu and the other islands in this group.
Sales have increased tremendously over the five years the game has been on the market.
More than 50 ways of singlepack solitaire have been played on this board.
There are games designed for children, which help de velop skill in addition as well as developing patience and character.
One out of three persons play solitaire, the one most played and the most accepted card game today.
Cards won’t slide or shift and interrupted games can be resumed without loss of the original layout.
Measuring only 12 x 14 in., it takes up little space when not in use, is completely portable and very durable, being made for lasting service.
It is a really wonderful gift for hospital patients, invalids, travelers, persons on vacation or for those who like games at home.
A representative of “Solo-Play” Productions, Andrew Hewitt, will be at the Star Office Thursday, Dec., from 1 to 5m., to demonstrate this fascinating game and to answer any questions.
COMPLETELY IMMERSIBLE Water sealed heating unit plus new integrated automatic heat control in handle permits quick, easy ""under water"" washing.
CONTROLLED EVEN HEAT FRYPAN Look for the Frypan with the ""Cloverleaf Design” heating element that guarantees perfect h‘eat distribution on entire cooking surface ... for finest resultsl ® SUNBEAM Winchester Appliance Co.
CARE'S Annual Food Crusade Underway Christmas mails are gay with parcel post packages.
More precious than china or glass, too fragile to withstand daily despair, are the lives and hopes f people facing heartbreak across the world.
These, too, are protected in packages, care packages bringing food and tools to nourish the hungry, give them the vigor and means to help themselves.
For its feeding programs, care's annual Food Crusade appeal is now underway.
It seeks to deliver 5,000,000 packages, in the names of Americans who donate $1 per package.
The gifts will reach distressed families and groups in 17 countries of Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Middle East.
Every dollar package you send means that hungry people will eat their fill knowing that people far away in the United States responded to their need, as friend to friend.
Anchors machine firmly, reduces noise, lesI sens fatigue and increases speed your holiday contrjand accuracy.
Magnavox Spectacular J+00 sq. in. screen Only from Magnavox, the biggest, clearest pictures automatically — pictures half again as large as 23-inch screens — more than twice as large as 19-inch sets . . . with fully automatic operation.
Magnavox triie stereophonic-high-fidelity Only Magnavox attains the spectacular dimension of stereophonies and tonal beauty of high fidelity through its advanced acoustical system that projects sound from sides as well as cabinet front to surround you with the beauty of music.
American Contemporary.-inch big-picture TV with front-mounted 8-inch oval speaker.
Screen sizes diagonal measure* v in mahogany Now your records can last a lifetime With the new Magnavox Micromatic record player, there is no wear on either record or Diamond Stylus . . . the stylus . s guaranteed for 10 years.
American Contemporary with MU cromatic record player, four speakers and powerful stereo amplifiers.
PA 9-2990 $ jtf^ nf Open Every Nite ‘Til Christmas Magnavox is the finest . . . yet costs no more than others . . . sold directly to us , saving you the cost of middleman distribution.
Harrison Chadwick of Winchester called this week for an end to “sensational handwringing” in regard to his allegations on a nationally televised Ixjokie film that Bay State ganibJers maintain connections with certain Massachusetts legislators.
Mr Chadwick made his comments in a visit to the Star on Tuesday morning of this week.
Mr Chadwick took sharp issue with House Speaker John F Thompson that his charges that some legislators had contacts with bookies had “cast a cloud of suspicion” over all members of the Legislature.
At the same time, Mr Chad said that he considered it a “fiftyfifty chance” that he would be asked to tell his story to the entire House of Representatives when that body convenes on Wednesday, January 3.
He said this by way of comment on a recent article in the Boston Herald by political commentator David Farrell to the effect that Mr Chadwick might be summoned before the entire House to explain his charges concerning organized gambling in Massachusetts.
In his article Mr Farrell said that “reports are circulating on Beacon Hill that the Democratic leadership of the House may invite Rep.
Help Town C ivic pride came alive at Winchester High School last Thursday when two of the town’s most respected citizens and two of the state’s most dedicated servants appeared side by side at a student assembly.
Each, in turn, demonstrated a deep respect for the other, which gave an added dimension of drama to their hometown appearances in the midst of the present state crisis.
John A Farrell have started a benefit fund for the former Winchester High School basketball star who was able to return to his home last Sunday after being hospitalized as the result of an accident which occurred last October 25.
OFFICER JOHN Photo by Uyeruon A FARRELL Officer Farrell entered the hospital at that time and during the nearly two months that he was a patient there he was under constant surgical, medical and nursing cafe.
His hills are staggering, and they will continue to increase since he will be for some time in need of constant medical care.
FARRELL, continued page 4 “I am proud to serve with Harrison Chpdwick” said the Governor in return.
Later, again in reference to the bookie scandals, the Governor said it is high time to take things out into the open and examine them rather than let them get worse.
DANGER OF TYRANNY Mr Volpe pointed up to the students their own future responsibility in voting, and told them that tyranny can come to us if we do not stay informed and act upon this information.
He told the students to read find listen more and he outlined action they could take in political contests passing out leaflets, baby sitting imd driving, all of which he urged them to start doing on their own town level of politics.
They couldn’t do any worse job than the men have done,” said the Governor to markedly female applause.
The Governor emphasized the importance in politics of a strong religious commitment.
On the dais with the Governor and Mr Chadwick were Superintendent Harry V Gilson, who introduced the visitors, and Assistant Principal Thomas V Morse for the High School, as well as the Governor’s military aide, Col.
Governor Volpe arrived at the Senior High School in the big black S-l limousine now so familiar to townspeople.
He received a rousing welcome in the hall from the more than nine hundred students, many of whom bunched at the classroom windows after his talk to watch his departure from Manchester Field for a Governor’s Council meeting in Springfield in a big Navy helicopter.
On Saturday, December 1(1, Chief Derro, as a member of the Safety Police Chiefs Association, attended the Massachusetts Rally for Highway Safety, held in the Chamber of the House of Representatives at the State House in Boston.
The rally was jointly sponsored by Governor John A Volpe, who was present and spoke, and by the Massachusetts Highway Safety Committee.
Located on the northeast corner of Swanton Street and Loring Avenue, the land is owned by Abraham Lerner and comprises 67,000 square feet.
Building Commissioner William B MacDonald refused to grant the original request for a building permit because of Zoning restrictions, arising from the fact that the Lerner land is located in three zones, general residence, light industrial and heavy industrial zones.
The propriety of granting a permit for a nursing home on the land stemmed from the Zoning Law’s forbidding the location of a nursing home in either the general residence or light industrial districts.
A public hearing was held by the Board of Appeal on Tuesday, Nov. 14, at which arguments were heard for and against the proposed erection of the nursing home.
Attorney John S Morgan, Jr. of Winchester represented Mr Carver, and also speaking in favor of granting the petition was Frank Sibyle, administrative head of the organization which will conduct the nursing home as one of a chain of such establishments in the state.
Residents of the affected district recorded at the hearing were Mr William Duran of 17 Loring Avenue, whose home adjoins the proposed site of the nursing home, and Miss Anne O’Melia of 18 Loring Avenue.
Mr Duran stated he was not opposed to the proposed home, provided there was to he sufficient parking space provided.
Miss O’Melia favored the proposed nursing home and stated that the other neighbors were in favor of it.
HOME, continued on page 2 Fireman Gets Pension State Board Rules Disability Service Induced The Massachusetts Contributory Retirement Appeal Board on December 12 handed down a ruling awarding a pension to Fireman Henry C Heitz, Jr., for permanent disability incurred in line of duty during April of 1960.
The case had been under consideration following Firelighter Ileitz’s request for a pension at that time.
Firelighter Heitz contended that h^ became ill while engaged in painting his room at the Central Fire Station on order of his superior officer.
He was taken to the Winchester Hospital where his disability was diagnosed as a cerebral hemorrhage.
There was at no time any question of his complete disability or his inability to further perform his duties as a firefighter.
The Winchester Retirement Board questioned that Firefighter Heitz’s disability was service in duced, and a medical panel, comprising a physician named by the town, another by the state, and a third by Firefighter Heitz, supported this opinion.
FIREMAN, continued on page 8 2nd-Gra«lers Write; A much beloved \\ inehester tradition will be observed on Sunday, Christmas Eve at \ o’clock on Winchester Common, when residents, young and old, gather to sing carols in honor of the birth >f Christ.
This public testimonial to the supreme event of the Christian calendar will be sponsored this season by the Fortnightly Club for the With year.
The Fortnightly is hopeful that this year’s turnout will he the greatest ever, for this is a fine old tradition which has proved inspiring and uplifting to anyone who has observed it.
Have the children bring their hells as the program always ends with a Christmas song especially for them.
Frank McCullough, Chairman of Music for the Fortnightly, will supply everyone with carol books so come and add your voice to those of your fellowtownspeople.
It is urged that families come together and sing as one, beginning their Christmas Eve with what all carol singers know to be a genuine sense of good neighborliness.
P^verybody. rr What Christmas Means To Me ” “This is bow Christmas was started.
This was Christmas in the eves of two public school secondgraders this week, a sacred historic event and a time of good cheer.
And through their still unclouded eves one can look at Christmas again as it was meant to be.
Christmas night my mother plays the piano and we sing the Christmas carols.
The initiation coincided with the Lodge, 14 15, B.lbO.E., Sunday, December 10, .owcll. d’he degree was conferred by the officers official home-coming of District Deputy Francis A Lappan, Governor Volpe’s personal secretary, and was held in Lowell because of this.
Besides the Governor, four Winchester men were initiated in Lodge 1445.
They were John Masterson, Warren Bolivar, Domenic Capone and Joseph Bonasera.
A large delegation of Winchester Elks attended the initiation headed by Exalted Ruler Nicholas Di Zio.
Past Exalted Ruler John Fenton of Lawrence, with a suite of 50 past district deputies, headed a large group of distinguished Elks at the ceremonial, and the total attendance approached 1200.
Also initiated into the Elks at Lowell was Congressman Bradford Morse and State Senator John Harrington, both of Lowell and both entering Lowell Lodge.
After the initiation the Elks adjourned to the Lowell Elks Home where a collation was served and a social* hour enjoyed.
Vice President Gertrude Horn presented President Nellie Bolivar with a money gift from the members of the auxiliary.
After singing Christmas carols the party returned to the Post Home PAUL F AMICO Son of Mr and Mrs.
After graduation from Boston College Law School in I960 attorney Amico was admitted to the Massachusetts Bar in November of that year.
Marshall W Symrues was hostess for the meeting of the Committee of Safety Chapter D.A.R. at her home 48 Yale Street.
D.A.R., continued on page 8 Roderick L Bullen Agency Is First To Occupy New Waterfield Building The Roderick L Bullen real estate agency moved into its spanking new colonial quarters in the new Waterfield building this week, the first business establishment to occupy the handsome new structure.
The office, decorated in the colonial mode, measures approximately fifteen by forty feet.
Its walls are decorated in Williamsburg blue, while the chair rail and baseboard are done in light pine.
Maple furniture predominates, nicely accenting a neutral broadloom rug.
Hand-turned colonial signs inform the public that this is the Bullen Agency, which occupies the highly desirable first-floor building corner of the building near the ailroad depot.
In the old Waterfield Building, which was razed by fire last May, the Bulleujoffice area was occupied by the Winslow less, now doing business on Mt.
In terms of professional experience and breadth of service, the Bullen Agency is admirably equipped to serve Winchester and surrounding towns.
In addition, the agency provides appraisals, and is prepared not only to help people buy and sell real estate but to assist in the arrangement of finance and the placement of mortgages.
The agency is owned by Mr Roderick L Bullen of Yale Street, who has had considerable experience in real estate.
Assisting Mr Bullen are Horace H Ford of 8 Pocahontas Drive, who is also a director of the Winchester Trust Co.
Kathryn Sullivan Davis, former owner of the agency which Mr Bullen purchased last May; Mrs.
The Bullen agency is receiving the congratulations of the community on its smart new quarters and its best wishes for continued success in the new year.
President William J Speers, Jr., Vice-President Trustees Paul F Avery Shailer Avery Clinton W Bennett James W Blackham Austin Broadhurst Dr.
Hatch, Treasurer Nellie L Ralph, Assistant Treasurer Edward V French Ralph W Hatch Waldon B Horsey Charles T Main, 2nd Charles L Moore Herman F Pike William J Speers, Jr.
W Donald Maxwell Priscilla Morse Heard in opposition were former Selectman James A Cullen, who * told the meeting he owns 12 acres Sk adjoining the lot in question, and ^ Mr Michael D Saraco, who opcrates a salvage company on this * land.
Museum of Science Completes Ten Years at Science Park The most important thing about a museum is people — young and old who find in it stimulation, challenge, and enjoyment.
Buildings aren’t half as important as people — but they have to come first.
These two sentences, taken from a just-published review of the first ten years at Science Dark, sum up the policy and the problem of Boston’s Museum of Science.
Ever since the revolutionary Museum opened its doors a decade ago it has been attracting people... more people than any other science museum its size anywhere in the world.
These two factors, plus a greater and more general thirst for knowledge than in any other period of history, gave Boston’s Museum of Science a total of close to 3,000,000 visitors in its first 10 years. .. swelling its halls far beyond their planned capacity, and forcing the building of its major central unit far ahead of the original development plan for the Science Park project.
In one short decade Boston has seen the Museum achieve more than half of its overall plant goal.
Already finished and in business are its East Wing, Planetarium (New England’s first major theatre of the skies), and Auditorium.
Well on the way to completion is the seven-story Central Building which will double present exhibit and program space, as well as provide a visitors’ restaurant, enlarged library, and offices.
By herculean effort, the Museum’s dedicated leaders have raised close $9,000,000 to date.
Their immediate need, to wind up the Central Building Campaign and open up this much-needed area to a wait ing public, is $700,000.
But it will send thousands of curious, knowledge-seeking youngsters out into the world better able to understand and appreciate its wonders, achievements, and future hopes and needs.
Send your contribution to the Museum of Science, Science Park, Boston 14.
Sachems Play Alumni Friday Schedule conflicts have made it impossible for Arlington and Winchester to play their basketball game scheduled for Friday night at the high school gym, and the Sachems will meet an alumni group on that date with the second team game called for 7m.
Rod Gay is getting together the alumni group, members of which will be chosen from the squads of the past two seasons.
Alumni games are always interesting, as they give the fans an opportunity to see the stars of former years in action.
Winchester plays Lexington here Friday night, December 29, and is at Concord Tuesday, January 2. to Both are Middlesex League games.
I parking facilities and also objected I to erection of a nursing home at the proposed site because a part of the land affected is located in the general residence and light industrial districts, such use being forbidden by the Zoning By-Laws.
The objectors stated that the use of land in the light industrial district could seriously affect the use of adjacent land in the same district, and that the operation of Mr Saraco’s salvage business would create noise and smoke which would result in complaints by the nursing home against the operation of the salvage company.
They also contended that heavy traffic and trucking on Swanton Street rendered the proposed site undesirable for purposes of a nursing home.
The Board of Appeal recognized €* the problem posed hv the location of the proposed lot in three zones with the necessity of getting permission to erect the nursing home under the provisions of the Zoning By-law applicable to each.
A small portion of the land on Loring Avenue some 5,000 sq. ft., behind the part of the lot in the industrial district, is located in the general residence district.
Under the Zoning By-law the Board of Appeal may authorize the use of land in general residence for any purpose permitted in a single residence district.
With the permission of the Board land in the single residence district can be used for a convalescent or nursing home.
The Zoning By-laws permit the use of land in the industrial district for any purpose which may be permitted in single residence, general residence and business districts.
As a consequence the Board of Appeal found that if the use of land for a nursing home is permitted in either a general residence or single residence district, such use is permitted also in an industrial district.
This reduced the Board to consideration of the land in the light industrial district.
The Board therefor felt that if the Board permits the proposed use for a nursing home of a portion of the land in question located in the general residence district, the proposed use of the portion of the land in the light industrial district would be permitted by the law, unless the exception as to residential use is applicable to the proposed nursing home.
This brought the Board to consideration of the question of whether a nursing home is a residence or a business establishment.
DAILY ing its decision, was guided by the Town Building Laws, Section 14 of Division 4, which classifies buildings according to occupance as residence buildings, public buildings and business buildings.
The only buildings at all comparable to the proposed nursing home, in the opinion of the Board of Appeal, which are classified as residency buildings are apartment houses, dormitories and hotels.
It is therefor the Board’s feeling that though nursing homes are not specifically classified, the proposed nursing home falls more logically into the classification which includes hospitals rather than residence buildings.
This differs from the definition of a rest home where j the purpose is “providing care inj cident to old age to persons over j B0 years of age who are not acute1 Y8 ly ill or in need of medical or nursj jj ing care.
As a consequence the Board unanimously voted to grant the appeal from the Building Commissioner’s decision and recommended that the permit requested by the petitioner be granted subject to the provision that construction be commenced within three years from the date of issue.
The nursing home will be two and one half stories high, of attractive design, fronting on Swanton Street, of first class construction, faced in brick, with an estimated cost of $300,000.
It will contain 82 beds and have a staff of 14 or 15 people, in addition to the kitchen and housekeeping personnel.
There will be a parking area for about 14 cars at the front of the building on Swanton Street with a large area at the back and on the easterly side with estimated space for 40 to 50 additional cars.
The nursing home will include such features as a solarium, two recreation rooms, basement chapel and dining room, occupational therapy and physiotherapy rooms, a ***** **lv# ***** ***& * * If e also hare for your Sk « . * pleasure ^ FRESH KILLED I ft I ft' • — I ft I ft • I ft I ft •* WHITE HOLLAND TURKEYS STUFFED TURKEYS CAPONS ROASTING CHICKENS DUCKLINGS GEESE ROCK CORNISH HENS LOBSTERS LOBSTER MEAT SHRIMP OYSTERS ft Morrell Pride Sausage Meat, * 35c lb.
Howard Elton Clark of Carmel, Calif., was united in marriage with John Philipp Becker, son of Mr and Mrs.
Standing, Fdward White, commander of Malden F’ost, 639; Marie DeLcna, president of the Medford Auxiliary.12; Maty Giovc, president of the Fverett Auxiliary.4; Ruth Gorman, Dept, chief of staff; Madeline Dery, president, Wakefield Vuxiliary, 2106; Rose Reardon, president of Malden Auxiliary, 639; Nellie Bolivar, president of the Abcrjona Auxiliary, Winchester, 3719; and Walter O'Brien.
JOHN I\ BECKER 1 amnion Karel V Vit, pastor of the Fellowship, o’clock doublering ceremony.
Given in marriage hy her father, the bride wore a formal gown of white brocade with a sweeping chapel train.
The fitted bodice had a sweetheart neckline and her fingertip veil was arranged with a self cap edged with pearls.
She carried a cascade bouquet of white roses and carnations centered with white moth orchids.
H Elton Clark, Jr., of Los Angeles, sister-in-law of the bride, was the matron of honor, and the bridesmaids were Mrs.
Burton R Pike of Modesto, Calif., and Miss Eleanor A Becker of Winchester, The chapel at the First Congretional Church in Winchester, was the setting, Wednesday evening, December 20, for the marriage of Miss Linda Ann Monterey Unitarian performed the 3 Mr and Mrs.
John A Maynard and daughters Cary and Becky of Cabot Street are moving December 26 to Minnesota.
Mr Maynard has been transferred to the aeronautical division of MinneapolisHoneywell Company.
As the Maynards have lived in Winchester nil of their lives, this is quite a drastic change for them.
A very successful membership social meeting was held at the Malden Post of the Veterans of Foreign Wars at 32 Union Street recently.
The V.F.W. says that “anyone interested in joining the Veterans of Foreign Wars or its auxiliary was admitted free and enjoyed an evening of dancing and a delicious collation served by the auxiliaries of District 18.
DEMETRIUS P LOOMIS In order to conserve our time and energy and keep our blood pressure within the limit of safety the Star is announcing that in the future stories with which pictures are requested must come to this office, complete with the pictures if they are to be published.
We find we are wasting too much time trying to match pictures with stories when each comes to us separately.
We feel that it is the obligation of the organization or person who wants the picture and story in the paper to get them together and bring them together to us, not to expect us to keep track of each and get them properly matched.
It would also be helpful and possibly ensure the desired publication of pictures and stories if those interested in them give us advance notice that they are to come.
Have the picture deMiss Sandra Margaret Eshbach, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Franklin Eshbach of 44 Brookside Avenue, and Francis Robert Dodge, son of Mr and Mrs.
Francis Gerbick of 66 Sylvester Avenue, were married Saturday morning, December 2, at St.
Edmund L Parker performed the 11 o’clock ceremony and was also celebrant of the nuptial mass which followed.
Given in marriage by her father Miss Fentross a gown wore white peau de soie with a full cape attached at the shoulders and falling to form a short train.
Her veil of French silk illusion was caught of hamTimely advice on the care of animals during the winter months was issued yesterday by Dr.
Schnelle said, “Both dogs and cats, whether they live in the city or in the country deserve special thought and care because of the hazards created by winter.
Following a heavy snowstorm, it is dangerous to allow dogs to run free, since they are likely to stay within the confines of plowed thoroughfares and thus risk being struck by cars.
Special attention should also be given to the feet of dogs and cats when they contact sanded sidewalks or streets.
The sand is usually treated with calcium chloride to prevent its freezing and this is irritating to the tender webbing between the toes.
The pet’s feet should be wiped dry and if very hairy, like that of a cocker spaniel or poodle, washing is advisable.
Rock salt or other defrosting agents used on sidewalks are also very irritating.
Both dogs and cats can be -allowed outdoors even in extremely cold weather if they are active to a 3ix-pointed Chester, maid of honor, and the three bridesmaids, Miss Anne T Fentross, Miss Maureen L Fentross, sisters of the bride; and Miss Katherine P Loomis, sister of the bridegroom, wore similar gowns of champagne peau de soie with matching wide bow head bands.
The bridesmaids carried bouquets of dyed-to-match carnations, and Miss Donahue carried rust carnations.
Miss Patti Lippa, niece of the bridegroom, dressed like the bridesmaids, was the flower girl A dictionary built right into your three-ring notebook, plus five subject dividers all in one neat package for back-to-school.
A real boost to study efficiency, at the Star office. velvet in a deeper blue.
Becker wore a beige sheath embroidered with seed pearls and she had matching accessories.
Dwight L Cart officiated at the seven o’clock candlelight ' ceremony, which was followed by a reception at the Winchester Country Club.
She wore a gown of silk satin peau de soie fashioned with long sleeves and a bateau neckline, which was trimmed with seed pearls and crystals.
Her floor length skirt was accented in the back by a flat bow and ended in a chapel length train.
Mr Loomis attended the Rochester schools and served with the Air Force.
We put in an expensive machine so that we can publish many more pictures than we used to, but there still is a limit to the amount of space we have for cuts and the time we have to make them.
We simply can not continue to play musical chairs with pictures and stories as we have been lately.
FRANCIS R DODGE WE EXTEND Given in marriage by her father iss Eshbach wore a gown ol TO ALL OF OUR FRIENDS valley lilies.
She wore an emerald green velvet dress with matching headdress and carried yellow baby chrysanthemums.
Eshbach, mother of the bride, was gowned in orchid peau de soie and wore matching orchids.
The bridegroom’s mother, SEASON'S GREETINGS Eaton’s personalized stationery for men and women.
Ian Gibson, another sister of the bride, and Miss Marilyn Snelling, all of Winchester.
They were identically gowned in Cerisean red satin sheaths styled with square necklines short sleeves and bellshaped skirts.
They carried cascades of holly and babies breath which matched their gowns.
The ushers were Mr Tobias B Pope of Pine Orchard, Conn., and Mr JoKirsten Travel Agency orcaro ^ 29 Thompson Street, Winchester — PA 9-5410 |SSF best man, and ushering were Frank Comita and Robert Perry.
Both the bride and bridegroom are graduates of Winchester High School, class of 1959.
David B Porcaro of 15 South Gateway, announce the engagement of their daughter, Ann Marie, to Mr Anthony G Mucera, son of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Porcaro LONG’S AUTO SCHOOL ON INSURANCE RATES era 15 years and 9 Month; GRADUATES SAVE 50 graduate of Winchester High School and Lasell Junior College.
Degree from Tufts he is a member ersons a; Jt V an old-fashioned custom, r tis true.
To sing out our good wishes to you l 7 or a simply perfect happy holiday timet f)0^< f A Mr and Mrs.
He is now associated with the William S Merrell Company of Cincinnati, Ohio.
An Octobe With all the warmth in our hearts, we wish joy to our many friends.
It’s a good game, and you can get it, and other new games at tile Winchester Star. o tup son Street Christmastide Page Four THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 21, 1961 (^trituama Geartronics Corporation Starts New Plant Mrs.
Nichols, a former widely known resident of Winchester died Sunday, December 17, at a nursing home in South Natick after several months of failing health.
She was in her 94th year and until she entered the nursing home last spring had been a resident of Winchester for more than 60 years.
She was horn June 29, 1808, in Dover, N.H., and spent much of her childhood there, in famed “Hamilton House,” then her grandparents' home, now the property of the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities.
In 1892 she married Nathaniel Marsh Nichols and they lived for a time in Haverhill before coming to Winchester in 1900.
Her late husband, who died Dec., 1947, was for a time custodian of schools in Winchester, later serving on the Board of Public Welfare and for 30 years until his death, as Collector of Taxes.
The Nichols' first home after coming to Winchester was on Mystic Avenue.
Nichols was honored by Governor Samuel W McCall of Massachusetts with a citation for her work in preparing Winchester for bombing during World War I, and she was also the first honorary life member of the Winchester Red Cross Chapter for her years of service as a member of that organization.
An honorary life member of the Oval Club in recognition of her many hours of work in behalf of the disabled veterans at the Veterans Hospital in Bedford, she was at one time on the grounds committee and an active worker in other ways for the Winchester Hospital in the early days of the institution.
She was one of the charter members of the Winchester Historical Society.
Nichols was vice president of the President’s Club, comprising past presidents of the State Federation of Women’s Clubs; and vice-president of the New England Women’s Club, one of the oldest clubs in the state She was an active member of the First Congregational Church having been superintendent of the Junior Sunday School and organiz er and choir mother of the Children’s Choir.
She and her husband were active for many years in the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Compton Allyn of Cincinnati, Ohio, and John W Pierce of Sherburne; also a greatgranddaughter, Sarah Nichols Allyn.
Memorial services were held on Tuesday afternoon at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister, Dr Dwight L Cart, officiating.
William H Foley William H Foley, 84, of 15 Hill * treet, died Sunday evening, December 17, at the Winchester Hospital after a short illness.
He was born in Winchester and grew up in town, attending the Winchester schools.
For 62 years he was associated with the Heywood Company in Wakefield as a supervisor, retiring two years ago.
When the Heywood Company moved to Gardner he made his home for a time in that city.
The funeral was held Wednesday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with requiem high mass celebrated at the Immaculate Conception Church.
Joshua J Vernaglia Joshua J Vernaglia of 2 Robinson Park, a Boston attorney, died suddenly at his home Wednesday evening, December 13. after a brief illness following a heart attack.
He had not been troubled previously and his death, entirely unexpected, came ns a severe shock to his family and friends, Mr Vernaglia was the son of Louis, and Henrietta Vernaglia.
He was born September 22, 1906, in East Boston, and commenced his schooling there.
As a boy he moved with his parents to Medford, but he continued in school in Boston and was graduated from Boston English High School.
He was admitted to the bar the next year and first practiced with Samuel L Bailen at 73 Tremont Street in Boston.
Later he was associated in practice at the same location with Melvin Breath, former mayor of Chelsea, and his brother, Frank Breath.
At the time of his death he had his own offices at 73 Tremont Street, Boston.
Associated with him were William J Foley of Boston and James F Cassidy of Dorchester.
He was a member of the Massachusetts Bar Association, a member and former director of the Winchester Boat Club; a membef of the Sons of Italy in Medford and of the Eastern Association of Lawyers.
He came to Winchester eight years ago from Medford, building the house in which he lived at the corner of Cambridge Street and Robinson Park.
On November 11, 1940, Mr Vernaglia married Hazel E Mulkerin of Medford, principal of the Center and Wait Schools in Medford.
She survives, with a son, Joshua J Vernaglia, Jr., of Winchester; two brothers, Dr.
Paul A Vernaglia, both of Medford; and four sisters, Miss Anne Vernaglia, Mrs.
Harry T Baker Mr Harry T Baker of 34 Shawsheen Road, Bedford, who died suddenly at the Emerson Hospital in Concord on December 13, made his home on Forest Street of this town until fourteen months ago.
Mr Baker is survived by five sisters, Irene, Edith, and Grace Baker of Bedford, Mrs.
Funeral services were held at the Douglass Memorial Chapel in Lexington Friday, December 15 at 11:00m. with the Rev.
James S Whittaker of Saint Paul’s Mission Church of Bedford officiating.
Gear & Tool Company, founded in Woburn in 1922, and Technical Products Company, founded in Concord in 1946.
Its principal products are gears, gear assemblies, actuators, flexible shaft equipment, tachometers, and the ICE CAP refrigerator for meat grinding machines.
The consolidation of its present plants in Concord and Woburn under one roof with carefully planned and streamlined production systems will effect great savings and efficiency, it i3 expected, according to John H Lyman, President of the Corpoartion.
The public is cordially invited to visit the new Geartronics Plant following its opening next April and view its operation.
Arthur A Curry, chairman, Billerica Industrial Commission: Albert Clifford, vice president.
The ceremonies and luncheon were attended by state and local officials who congratulated the corporation on its longview planning and consistent growth.
The plant, expected to be completed in April, 1962, is a onestoried, pre-engineered steel beam and panel construction that will cover 27,000 square feet and allows for continual expansion.
Geartronics Corporation is a con George E Mitchell Miss Martha Lee Wood, of 63 Church Street is spending a short vacation in Bradenton, Florida, visiting her grandparents, Mr and Mrs.
Harry L Pilkington, formerly j Lynn Mitchell of Hightstown, N.J of Winchester.
She is making the Also surviving are two sisters round trip by jet plane.
Mr Mitchell was born October 10, 1886, in Dorchester, the son of Henry L., and Ida S Mitchell.
He attended the schools of Dorchester and Malden and after his marriage to Helen C Caldwell of Worcester he and his wife made their home in Lynn, and later in Swampscott.
From his branch manager’s position in Lynn Mr Mitchell was promoted to manager of the New England district with headquarters in Boston.
His first wife died December 31, 1950, and on February 6, 1954 he married Charlotte S Brawn of Melrose.
She survives with two sons, Edwin C Mitchell of Williamsport, Pa., and George E Mitchell, Jr., of Columbus, Ohio; two grandsons, Larry Mitchell of Hightstown, N J* and Gibson Mitchell of Detroit, Mich., twin sons of Edwin Mitchell; and a great-granddaughter, Debbie Mrs.
Frank Carbee of Watertown; and a brother, C Harold Mitchell of Lewiston, Me.
Funeral services will he held Friday afternoon at 2 o'clock at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with the Rev.
Newton Clay, pastor of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, officiating.
Farrell It is believed that worry over his financial obligations and the care of his family, with no remuneration coming to him since the time of the accident, can prevent Officer Farrell from making the satisfactory' recovery his friends wish for him.
As a consequence the John P Farrell Fund is being raised so that all who may care to assist the young officer can have the opportunity to do so.
Containers have been distributed about town, and individual letters are being sent to many residents, asking for contributions.
Those who may wish to contribute to the fund can make checks payable to the Officer John P Farrell Fund and send them to William D Sullvian, cashier of the Winchester National Bank, who is serving as treasurer of the fund.
Any who may care to assist the committee in the raising of the fund can communicate with the fund chairman, Michael A Penta, whose number is PA 9-3011.
Newsy Paragraphs Eleven-year-old Arthur L Hayford of 54 Richardson Street was treated for a hip bruise and hip cuts Saturday morning when Ik* ran into a car driven by Dr.
Kaufmann told police that lie saw the youngster run out of a house onto the sidewalk and pause at the gutter before the accident occurred.
On Sunday shortly after 6:00 m. -year-old Robert A Fitzgerald of 28 Rangeley Road, Arlington, while driving a panel truck* west on Johnson Road near Cox Road lost control of his car, smashing into three cement guards owned by the Town of Winchester.
The collision disabled the truck which was then parked on the side of the road, with no personal injuries reported by Fitzgerald.
Later on Ernest P Mayer, 41, of 7 Russell Road, Lexington, hit the rear end of the truck as he was proceeding along in his Dodge, again with no personal injuries reported to police, but with some damage to the Dodge.
Superintendent of Parks Stanley Mullen reported the license plate missing from the Rotary Chuck Wagon parked in the town yard on Tuesday morning at 9:30.
A hydrant on the corner of Main Street and Town Way was found broken off at the base on Saturday and a truck parked nearby, which was damaged on the right front side.
The driver came to the station, reported the accident and filled out the proper forms.
Besides her husband, she leaves two sons, Winthrop A Palmer and Lawrence R Palmer, both of Winchester.
Family services were held Tuesday afternoon at the Kimball Chapel with Dr.
Winchester's combination play fell apart toward the end of the game and the Sachems were not covering effectively.
Coach Phillips altered his defenses in an effort to contain the Tanners, but the Orange gradually pulled ahead to win by 11 points.
Donovan was high man for Woburn with 24 points while Bellino’s 16 was high for Winchester.
Jim Devuney *inh> one in tin* Such fins’ losing game with Woburn Tuesday at Winchester. \o. 14 at right is Woburn's all-around athletic star, Ld Foley.
FRESH FINAST Also Available a Complete Selection of Genuine Capons, Ducklings, Geese and Fresh Turkeys.
F Playmobile — only $11.88 Like real car — ignition key, window wiper, sionals, horn, shift, antenna, etc.
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 21, 1961 The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr.
There have been other great men and women ; soldiers, statesmen, scientists, educators and philanthropists. all of whom have left their marks on the times in which they lived.
None, however, has so changed the direction of the world as the C hrist Child, whose lift 1 began in a stable under the most humble circumstances and the meanest surroundings.
Christ did not come of an exalted family. 1 is parents were unable to get a room at the Inn.
Mis very life, and in that humble manger of Bethlehem began a way of life that has altered the world as no other philosophy or credo has succeeded in doing through the centuries.
Followers of the Christ are commanded to love their God and their neighbor as themselves.
Christ was ever the man of peace, preaching peace and the brotherhood of man.
The Magi, or wise men, brought costly gifts to the infant Jesus, and yet the adoration of the poor shepherds who knelt at the manger was much more in the spirit of the Parked Cars A Problem This week has reminded us all that winter has arrived, and that any time now we may have a blizzard with heavy snow that will require the plowing of streets.
W hether the plowing crews will do a good job of clearing the snow will depend upon the cooperation they get from carowners.
I f the men on the plows are able to get through the streets without having to drive around cars left in tlie roadway, they will do a good job of making our streets passable for all of us.
If, however, the plows have to be maneuvered around parked cars, the job of the men driving them, and it’s a hard job, becomes much more (lit* ficult.
Even it"" the plows can get through, the cars on the street are walled in with snow, and the householder living beside the careless parker finds a wall of snow in the middle of the street in front of his property that may well remain there until the next snow fall.
Police Chief Derro asked the Star to request its readers to be doubly careful to keep their cars off the street during the season when snow is expected.
It should be remembered also that all night parking on the street is not permitted in Winchester at any time.
The town has voted to the Superintendent of Streets the authority to remove cars interfering with his crews' attempts to clear the streets of snow.
It just may be that he will get riled enough to do it during some storm this winter.
And it might cost you a lot more to get it out of hock than the trouble it would have taken to get it off the street in the first place.
The Chief assures us he will have no sympathy for the on-street parker who gets into trouble with the snow-plowcrs.
Why not avoid any unpleasantness, and help those on the plows to do a good job by keeping the family chariot oft the street this winter.
There will, however, come a time when the rules catch up with you, when you would have missed a lot of trouble if you had played or acted according to the code.
Late in die game, with the Eagles leading, the Giants were forced to kick deep in their own territory , to give up the football at a time when possession was of the utmost importance.
The kick was gotten off and the Eagles got the ball not too far from midfield.
They might very well have gone on and scored a touchdown that would have clinched the game for them, because they had stopped the Giants offense and seemed the more spirited team of the two at that i>oint.
Mowcver, after the Giants' kicker got his punt away he was bumped by an Eagles player trying to block the kick, and regardless of whether the hump was intentional, or indeed severe enough to even discommode the kicker, the hump was an infraction of the rules and was immediately called by the official nearest to the play.
The end result was that instead of the Giants losing the hall and some mure of their waning morale, they got the hall hack, a lo-vard advance on the penalty and an all-important first down.
From this unexpected good fortune, the rejuvenated Giants proceeded to move steadily down field for the game-winning touchdown.
Such bumps occur fairly often in football and pretty generally result in penalties of either five, or fifteen yards, according to the official’s judgment of the damage done the kicker. rdinarily such a penalty' doesnot have a really vital hearing on the result of a game, but it very well may, and in the case of the GiantsEagles professional game a championship rode on the infraction.
The player who has schooled himself to play the game according to the rules is less liable to get his team in trouble than the one who contravenes the code if lie thinks he can get away with it.
The coach who forbids his boys to break the rules, regardless of the provocation, is less likely to see a ]H>lential championship washed down the drajn by an illegal play.
The motorist w*ho habitually fails to stop at a stop street, because there is usually no other car coming and no law enforcement officer around, finally is whistled down by an unlooked for policemen as lie is driving out of the stop street while taking his mother-in-law to the train.
The individual who thinks it is foolish to pay an v attention to the I 'ire Department’s burning ban during a long dry spell, takes a chance and the resulting lire does several hundred dollars worth of damage to his neighbor’s garage and shrubs.
The householder who sees no necessity for having the requisite inspection of new wiring in his house, because lie knows it is all right, feels terribly abused when the insurance company refuses to pay after a fire at his home Iiecause the wiring was not according to regulation. in none of the three cases we have mentioned did the individual breaking the law think harm would come of it.
The football player who humped the kicker in the big professional game did not count the possible cost of his infraction of the rules.
The habit of playing according to code, whether it he on the athletic field, in the gym, on the gulf course or in every day life is a good one to cultivate, la the lung run it pays oil J Christmas Music Program In W inchester Churches CRAWFORD MEMORIAL METHODIST CHURCH true Christmas than the most lavish of gifts.
What a wonderful thing it would he if the world could capture the true spirit of Christmas; peace, brotherhood, tolerance, self sacrifice, this of all years when the world is rapidly becoming an armed camp and suspicion and violence are rife.
Peace is in every one’s thoughts this Christinas, as it has been many times in many places throughout the years, even in Christ’s time when the hope of “Peace On Earth” meant the lifting of a burden for the many who were poor and oppressed.
The desire for peace is world wide, and especially with those who would follow in the lootsteps of Him who gave us Christmas.
Everywhere churches are preparing special services for Christmas and are asking our prayers for peace, both within and without their portals.
Never has there been a greater need for Christians to gather together to pray for peace that is so vital to us all if civilization is to endure.
We can all help bring peace by thinking peace, by talking peace and hv working for peace.
Let 11s then this Christmas remember among the pleasures, which after all are good for us too, what we arc celebrating on Christ’s Birthday.
There will he two identical services of worship at. the Crawford Memorial Methodist.
In addition there will he the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism for Children following the second morning service, or at about, 12:15 o’clock.
At 7:00 o’clock in the evening the members of the Methodist Youth Fellowship will go about the community singing Christmas carols for the sick, aged and shut-ins.
Later in the evening, after the carolling, they will he served hot chocolate.
At 11:30m. the Traditional Christmas Eve Candle-Lighting Service will he held in the sanctuary of the church.
Prelude “Swiss Noel” Daquin Introit by the Choir The Carol “Adeste Fidelis” Traditional Gloria in Excelsis Deo Old French Carol Prayer Response Brahms by Youth Choir Anthem “O Children, Come Quickly” Austrian Carol The Youth Choir Anthem “Noel” Jitcomb The Sanctuary Choir Solo “O Holy Night” Adam Mrs.
Gloria Maifeld, soprano The Carol “There’s a Song in the Air” Harrington The Carol “Joy to the World” Handel The Organ Postlude “The Heavens Declare” Marcello The Rev.
H Newton Clay, pastor, will preach at both the 9:30 and 11:00 o’clock services on the subject.
At the 11:30 o’clock Christmas Eve Service several of the familiar carols will be sung and the pastor will conduct the beautiful symbolic ceremony of the Lighting of the Candles.
Roland Nadeau, organist The Anthem “There’s A Song in the Air” Speaks The Anthem “Never Was a Child So Lovely” Niles The Solo “Ave Maria” Schubert Organ Postlude Improvisation by Prof.
Pastor Mr Raymond Shannon, Organist and Choir Director Sunday, December 21 at 10:15m.
Handel Duet “O, Divine Redeemer” Charles Gounod Soprano, Hazel F O’Donnell Contralto, Nalora Steele The congregation will sing Christmas carols by the light from the manger seene and depart from the service with a carol on their lips.
The manger scene will be the focal point of the service when the Junior High BYF will present “Holiday House,” a one act drama.
Organist, M Daschbach Choir Director, George Dillon Christmas Day 7:45 Mass Christmas Selections before Mass “In A Manger” Introit “Holiest Night” Offertory “Silent Night, Holy Night” “O Jesus I Believe in Thee” Communion “Dearest Lord I Love Thee” Communion “Angels We Have Heard on High” Recessional Music by the Boys’ Schola Directed by Sister M St.
Patricia Miss Kay Roache, Organist CHURCH OF THE EPIPHANY The Midnight Choral Communion Choral Service at Epiphany Church will he presented by a program of Carols and Christmas Anthems beginning at 11:00 o’clock.
Preludes: “Jesu Bambino” Yon “Away in a Manger” Kirkpatrick Postlude: “Toccata in D Minor” Bach Anthems by the Choir: “How Far is it’ to Bethlehem” Shaw Familiar Christmas Hymns and Carols SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHUIfCH Christmas Music for Sunday, December 21 Prelude 10:50m.
Dwight Moore Cello, Mr George Bragdon Cherub Choir Special “Away In A Manger” Directed by Mrs.
The Herald Angels Sing Recessional Music by the Senior Choir Members Miss Kay Roache, Organist FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH Christmas Music Sunday Morning, December 24 “Singe Y’e Noel” French Carol Junior Choir “To Us Is Born Emanuel” Practorius Senior Choir “Alleluia” Mozart Senior Choir Special Organ Music will be played by Miss Yuko Hayashi, organist.
K Davis by Waas Senior Forum Choir Special music will be played by Miss Y’uko Hayashi, organist.
All (Of llrni ss A jHiifit JiarptJ Unliiiag S’paamt if a i I' I I l -• a jPiM JPPK jPiM Iftfe mm.
Wm mm mm mm m& notebook HIS NAME SHALL BE CALLED THE PRINCE OF PEACE By WILSON SULLIVAN In the New Testament and in scholarly commentaries on Christ’s life and teachings, the human portrait of Jesus emerges as one of an uncompromising fighter for social justice, liberty, and religious sincerity.
Harry Emerson Fosdick says in “The Man from Nazareth,” is simply npt accurate.
Because He taught new truths “as one having authority” and because He appealed splendidly to the imagination of His people, Dr.
For here was no Pharisee concerned more with the letter than with the spirit of religion; here was a Man who cared that people were poor and oppressed, and needed food and love.
Jesus scandalized the self-righteous by making apostles of humble fishermen, eating with hated tax-cMlectors, mixing with lepers, forgiving a harlot, and, perhaps most shocking, by respecting women as human beings in their own right.
Moving among Assyrians, Greeks, and Romans in cosmopolitan Galilee, Jesus defied provincial prejudices of race and nation.
He rejected the concept of an ethnically chosen people by hailing the faith of a Roman soldier as the greatest in Israel and by citing a Samaritan as an exemplar of charity.
His Truth, He said, was for all men in all times. -Always, Jesus’ primary concern was for the humble and poor.
He knew that the conquest of enmity lay not in the use of physical force, but in removing enmity at its psychological source.
To repay evil with evil, He taught, is only to increase evil. / i 1 In the Sermon, too, Jesus concerns himself less with the symptoms of moral illness than with the sources.
Accordingly, He reminds man that murder begins in anger and that we should be as concerned with preventing murder by dealing with anger as with punishing murder after the fact.
And before you come to church to pray, make peace with your brother and neighbor, for “tithing” without love is without value.
And even when you are at peace with your neighbors and come to church, avoid self-righteousness and ostentation.
In the Sermon, Jesus also urges the standard of perfection as a guide to conduct, for only such a standard precludes self-satisfaction and permits us to realize that human growth is limitless.
He also reminds us that a good example is morally more effective than mere preaching.
He teaches that it is what we are and not what we possess that matters, for even the finest possessions are subject to moth and rust.
Like the Prophets whose insights He sought to fulfill, Jesus eared less for the good opinion of His contemporaries than for the judgment of history.
And because He spoke the truth with uncompromising force He paid truth’s high price.
Rebuked by religious leaders as a “heretic” and by Caesar as a “subversive,” he was executed as a common felon.
But the empires of His murderers are in ruins now and the Pilates suffer the inexorable judgment of history, while the message of Jesus remains supremely alive.
Richard A Hakanson, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 1954 The Winchester Star, left at your Kesldenca for one year, $4.00 in Advanca Single Copies, Ten Cents The Winchester Stax assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpiral errors in advertisements but will publish without charge a correction in the next issue, or republish that portion oi the advertisement which is incorrect.
Snooz Alarm Clocks Revlon Travel Kits Brush and Comb Sets Pen and Pencil Sets Little Lady Sets Yogi Bear Bath Salts MEN’S SETS Revlon • Max Factor Faberge English Leather Old Spice Yardley We also have complete lines of Marcelle and Arex Hypoallergenic Cosmetics.
Russell Stover Candies Whitman Chocolates Candy Cupboard Chocolates We carry a complete line of fine Domestic and Imported Cigars.
A proproa of the discussion reln-j tive to shelters, 1 thought the enj closed Item, which was reprinted in a recent Christian Science MonI itor (in “Mirror of World Opinj ion”) would be of interest to your | readers.
At the risk of being labeled unrealistic, unpatriotic, or worse, here is one voice that joins his majesty’s loyal opposition by voting an emphatic negative.
When our neighbors came knocking at our steel door, we as Christians could do nothing but let them in too.
What “stormy blast” are we thinking of if not the mushroom cloud of sin over our world.
Your paper deserves a heartfelt “Thank You” from the volunteers and staff of the Greater Boston United Fund for your part in publicizing the 1961 campaign.
Your help by bringing to your readers the events and progress of this year’s drive, cannot be too highly appreciated.
This can be attested' by the fact that a record sum of money for United Fund agencies was raised this year.
T read with deep appreciation the article in your December 7 edition, regarding Miss Lillian Sa1 ice’s teaching career and what she meant to the Winchester community.
I know so well what she did as a teacher since I was her principal at the Lincoln School for three years.
Someone has described a great teacher as one who has enthusiasm, simplicity, dedication, purpose and humility.
This is no time to take a furtive attitude toward what can and all too frequently does happen to a far too high proportion of young drivers.
Should there he a chance to vote on the location that this wrecked car might be moved to, my first choice would he the front lawn of the High School or at the furthest that area of lawn that belongs to the former McMangs property.
There must he lots of “West Side” people that have not had this shock also.
Let’s face up to the fact that the more people that see this, the better.
I am well aware that many of our junior drivers have great competence, this is not aimed solely at them, they have my great respect, hut if a new location will impress the horror of these accidents on one more person, particularly a younger person, any effort that has to be spent in moving this wrecked car would he more than compensated for.
Recently my husband underwent serious surgery at a Boston hospital, and a crisis in his condition made it imperative to reach me one morning at three o’clock.
For some reason my telephone did not arouse me, and the hospital called the police, a cruiser and two officers being sent to my house at once.
It was the night of the Policema’s Ball, and State Troopers were covering the town with the Auxiliaries.
Two of them came to me The trooper who came into the house was John Riordan, who I am told was a fine football player at Winchester High School.
J can not stress too much his kindness, courtesy and knowledge of his job.
Seeing that I was badly upset he phoned the hospital for me got the latest report from my husband, and then announced that he and his associate would stand by in the event it became necessary for me to go to Boston.
I did not have to go, but Officer Riordan and his brother officer stayed until everything had quieted down before driving away.
They left a very grateful woman who wants the town to know* how much she appreciates what they did for her at a very critical time.
It is nice to know there are men like Officer Riordan ready to help us in our hour of need.
R Darrell Harvey 23 Lloyd Street BEARING Oil* TS OF DOG FOOL) AND llOLLARS for needy animals at Sudbury V Buddy Dog farm are. left to right, Mrs.
The non-profit Buddy Dog Club strives to find homes for lost or unwanted hut friendly animals.
A wonderful opportunity to acquire a fine family pet is offered by this warm-hearted “shelter” where the homeless are housed.
Winchester residents have become interested in helping such a deserving cause.
Our New Teachers A Tribute To Miss Bancroft In the death of Louise J Bancroft, The Fortnightly has lost a valued member, loved and esteemed by all.
From the year 1928 when she joined the club, she served continuously on nearly all the committees, often as chairman, Antiques.
American Home, Conservation (in which she >vas particularly interested and was five times on the State Conservation Committee), Literature, Nominating, and others.
She was also several times chairman of Pilgrimages, for she was very fond of adventuring and visiting historical places.
Always willing and tireless in many activities, she was one of The Fortnightly’s most loyal and faithful workers.
In recognition of all she contributed over the many years of her membership, it has been suggested that a tree be planted in her memory at t Sudbury in the Memorial Forest of the Massachusetts State Federation of Womens’ Clubs.
Photo by Ryoraon MISS ELAINE CORCORAN Miss Elaine Corcoran, who is teaching the second grade at the William G Noonan School this year, is filling her first position as a regular teacher.
Last year she practice taught at the elementary level in the Framingham schools.
Miss Corcoran was horn in CamI bridge but now makes her home in Belmont with her parents, Mr and Mrs.
A graduate of Belmont High ’ School in the class of 1957, Miss Corcoran was graduated from Framingham State Teachers College in the class of 1961.
Mill St., near Arlington C «Mtr rlilf it or Critic L> er — (J Beer fjearA bUine to cBine, L y^eec ^y^nutirne — L WElls 3-0932 The Woburn Package Store, Inc.
Vour club** fumls will earn a nice profit, be fully insured and readily available.
PA 9-0900. feb20-tf George Elwell won his cross country letter recently at Maine Central Institute in Pittsfield, Maine, at the school’s fall sports assembly.
When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 or at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf During Christmas vacation En Ka Exchange will be open Wednesday and Thursday, December 27 and 28 only.
Ben Newlands of North Wood Center, N.H., a former well known resident of Winchester, is spending the cold weather at West Palm Beach, Fla.
On Saturday a Washington Street resident reported that children were out on the ice on Mystic Lake, which was definitely not in a condition that could be considered safe.
Chief Derro again urged parents to advise their children not to get out on the ice until it was thick enough.
The chorus appears often at university concerts during the college year and also makes occasional off-campus appearances.
Tel EXport 6-3349 after Newsy Paragraphs Give A SAVINGS ACCOUNT for Christmas.
During this term he has been on the varsity soccer team, staff of the school newspaper, and social committee.
The Star got a Christmas Card this week from Herb and Marion Ross from Moulins, France, where they report seeing a Winchester Rotary Flag on the wall of the Hotel de Paris, placed there during an International Convention of Rotary three years ago.
The Rosses, who live on Lakeview Road, are in Europe while Mr Ross sets up a European office for the Uni ted Shoe Machinery Company.
Sunday William J Sullivan of 2 Frank Street, Woburn, lost control of his Ford sedan on the ice-slicked surface of Washington Street near Tufts Road and skidded into an Edison pole.
No personal injuries were reported to police but the car was damaged on the right rear fender, the trunk and the rear window.
PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf Firemen responded to a report of a car fire at the home of Dr.
Using asbestos gloves, the firemen sprayed the motor fire with a cylinder of CO-2 and disconnected the car battery.
Firemen answered a number of calls reporting wires down on Monday during the nasty storm.
Edison Light explained that the entire East Side circuit was out pending repairs to the line.
This ruling by the Supreme Court had its affect upon the Heitz case, and had it been made sooner, might have removed the original opposition of the Winchester Re tirement Board to Firefighter Heitz’s request for a pension.
Firefighter Heitz’s appeal from the ruling of the local board was heard by the State Contributory Retirement Appeal Board on November 10 at the State House.
After hearing testimony the board ruled his disability was service induced and that he is entitled to a pension of two-thirds of his base pay with a substantial allowance for his wife and children under 18.
House Speaker Thompson had not I issued a statement in response to I the Star’s request for information on what he intended to do in January with regard to Mr Chadwick’s allegations.
If is expected that Speaker Thompson will have sent a statement to the Star by next edition.
His Excellency Governor John A Volpc, warned against | witchhunting in the current gamb| ling crisis.
The Governor made hisstatement in a speech before the Boston Commercial Club.
Substantially the same comments were made here two weeks ago by Attorney General Edward J McCormack, Jr., in an address to the Winchester Rotary Club.
Both public officials urged that fair legal practices be observed at the same time that organized gambling and political “bad apples” were exposed.
R Harry S Parsons poured at the brightly lighted Christmas decorated table.
Everett F Kidder reported on the Christmas gifts sent to Hillside School in Marlborough and thanked the Chapter members for their most generous support.
Paul F Stoneman Chapter Chairman of National Defense reported that the National Defense Chairman’s speech has been inforporated in the Congressional Region by Senator Strom Thurman of South Carolina.
Carlton M Strong, Registrar reported one new member and five candidates.
Harold M Twombly, Program Chairman, introduced the Speaker of the afternoon, Katherine Blaney whose talk on “Christmas Comes to America” was most interesting.
She illustrated her story with table settings of Antiques of long ago and their use today.
Vernon Street near Highland Avenue Monday at 10:50m. in which a Woburn man was reported injured, and a water hydrant was broken off at the base.
He said that apparently the car skidded on the icy road, veered across the road, hit the Horton car in the rear and forced it to ram into a tree.
Mr Horton said that the other car hit the hydrant, breaking it off at the base.
Complaining of chest pains, Mr Horton said he would consult his doctor about possible injuries.
Donor Peter Marchesi, first-prize-winner Jimmy II first-prize winner Cathy Blanchard of the Parkhurst School and Sam Bonasera, past president of the Winchester Lions.
Carl Thomas of the Parkhurst School and sixth of Oxford Street, Mr Roland A grader James Hession of St.
Nault of Washington Street and School were each awarded a Rali Mr Robert A Nyere of Squanto eigh bicycle, first prizes in the j Road are all to be congratulated boys’ and girls’ division of the J on their selections.
The presentation was made by donor Peter Marchesi and Lions past president on behalf of the Winchester Lions, after which the Lions put on a gala party for sixty children, complete with Santa Claus.
Sam Bonasera tells the Star that these little surprises have been ordered and are on their way.
William Cusack of “My eyes play an important role in life,” young Jim Hession wrote.
WINNER— (.iris “What My Eyesight Means To Me” hy Cathy Blanchard Grade 4, Parkhurst School With my eyes I see the wonders of God.
I have seen the coming of spring and the beauties of nature and the earth.
I love to see the rain making rivers down the street and the snow falling silently.
Most of all the good feelings I have when I see my mother and father, brothers and friends.
WINNER— Boys “What Mv Eyesight Moans To Me” by James Hession Grade 6, St.
Mary’s School I treasure my eyesight dearly, it is God’s greatest gift to me.
I realize how fortunate I am to he able to see all the works of God’s creation.
Newsy Paragraphs On Friday Cambridge police reported the recovery of a Studebaker sedan reported stolen here in Winchester on December 13.
The owner of the stolen vehicle, Mr Edward W Machnic of 92 Hume Avenue, Medford, was notified that his car was found.
Mail a jigsaw puzzle postcard of Winchester to your friends, 25 cents each at the Winchester Star.
LONGS AUTO SCHOOL WEIIs 3-3339 Res. july27-tf Oil Christmas Bay in the morning . . . afternoon . . . and evening , The Boston Globe again brings you a program of some of the most beautif ul Christmas music in the world on Station IVCRB — IJJO AM, 702.
IT ashington — 94-9One of the high points of the program will be the playing of the original version of Handel’s Messiah with an outstanding cast headed by Joan Sutherland.
There will be no commercial announcements during the entire broadcast day ... no interruptions . . . nothing but beautiful Christmas music in thrilling stereo.
Enjoy a Merry Christmas with music from Qh osron THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 21.
Bowling League Although the first three trams dropped the majority of their nmtrhf . they retained the arm* places in the standings.
Eleventh-place Army stopped California 3-1 The big guns for Army wore Hob Fiore 10»l1 0.1-109.
Frank DiMambro and Angie Amico tried hard for Cal. with 82106-1 28 and 96*90-95 respectively.
I Bowling League wishes uli the readers of this column a Very Merry Christmas anil a Happy New Year.
SNOW tOBLEIl YOU NEED A M0T0-M0WER 20"" DELUXE POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3V4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and hfcavily packed snow.
Mon., Wed., Fri. evenings 5:30 to 8:30 Saturdays All Day Badminton Cancelled There will be no badminton the week between Christmas and New Years December 26 and 28.
On Monday afternoon, December 18, Troop 59 presented the Christmas play “The Broth of Christkindli” to the mothers of the group at the home of Mrs.
On Tuesday afternoon the troop presented the same play with a second cast at the Winchester Home for the Aged.
The girls also made the ornaments by hand to decorate the little tree used as part of the scenery and assisted in serving refreshments after both performances.
Travelers — Donal Murphy, Helen Manning, Eileen Gill Carolers — Cathleen Gill, Jane McBain, Mary Wadsworth, Marjorie Cunningham, Junice Russell, Jennie Caudill Play directed by Mrs.
P CH1ARENZA WElls 5-2697 nov9-8t Town Bowlin^ League Duo to certain circumstances which could not he helped, the standings of the league were not published in last week’s Stur.
In doing this, A L. also broke two team season’s records by posting a team single of 5(54 and a team triple of 1668.
The only important change last Tuesday was Atlantic Gelatin’s pulling up to a tie for third place with Strike Lanes.
Gelatin 78 34 19,701 Post Office 68 44 19,555 K of C 63 49 19,067 49’ers 60 52 19,604 St.
PA 9-1981 nov8-tf A CHANCE TO HELP Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Christmas if this holiduy is to be a happy occasion in accordance with the American tradition.
To help our less fortunate Winchester friends during the holiday season, gifts of money, food ancj clothing are ournestly solicited.
Springfield College Frosh 7:30 Jan. at Newton 3:30 Jan. at Needham 7 :30 Feb.
TO— PHARMACY GIRL INC, LABS Fifth Avenue, Brookfield, Conn. oct26-tf College Students The National Society of the Colonial Dames of America is announcing a competition open to all juniors and seniors at accredited Colleges on the 170th anniversary of the enactment of the Bill of Rights.
The subject is “Patriotism Reappriased,” a study of the individual American's duty to his country.
The first prize will be $2,000, the second $1,000, and five honorable mentions at $100. each.
In this day of increasing world tensions and the emergencies of the new African Nations, it is important that young people, the leaders of the future, should state their ideas and beliefs about their country and reappraise the fundamental truths in the Bill of Rights.
CHURCH * ANT) HOSPITAL BONDS j In Units of $500 or More t KEENAN & CLAREY, Inc.
City { I HOLIDAY GREETINGS TO ALL £ H from Winchester Taxi Service jg I Bill's Taxi) PA 9-0023 •BILL jfALZAM) ft* ; \ l 1 i Best wishes for the happiest of holiday seasons.
May all the joys of the season remain with you throughout the year ahead.
In presenting the award Postmaster Ephraim Martin, right, commended Air.
B C. merged into a large single section of play on Wednesday, December 13.
Robert Blackler 94 V& Peg Sullivan and Dolly Pasquale 93 Since this is the special season for thankfulness, we’d like to voice our appreciation to all who have helped make the WDBC a success.
A particular tip of the hat goes to the Winchester Star, Draper Sears, Anderson’s Jewelers, and the Knights of Columbus.
We owe a big debt of gratitude to Ann Dean and her fine entertainment committee, to Dick Herlihy for his unstinting contribution of coffee, to the Roots for their efficient handling of reception, and to Jim Wharf for his patience and hard work.
Here are some presents we’d like to slip secretly under the Christmas tree.
To Gloria Butterfield, a booming ticket sale for the ACBL Charity Tournament on January 19.
To Chet Davis, a tool ed leather traveling case fitted to carry master-point certificates.
To Ruby White and Polly Dallin, a green door to have interesting things going on behind.
To Trudy Mainberger, a large supply of duplicate bridge boards as prizes for her coming series of raffles.
To your bridge editor, a long white beard, so he can continue being Santa Claus at the bridge table in 19G2.
You’ll find our wide selection of modern formals perfect for the occasion . . * they’re designed for comfort as well as elegance* GREGORY’S Formal Wear Rental Service I <>2 Mass.
Douglas Wickwire, Douglas Carlson, Paula Ward, Steve and Paul Sanborn, Martin Garnis, Frederick Josephson, Stephen New, Joan Sheppard, and Judy Dunn.
Come and hear what it has to say to the “Holiday Houses* in Winchester.
Through the reading of Scripture, ministry of music, and carol singing, we will be led in a deep and meaningful way in preparation for thfe Christmas morn and the new Birth which has come to the earth.
Mary’s Romps As Norberg Nets Seven Goals | GIFTS I In The Traditional m I Good Taste Of The Making Of The Christmas Creche the figures of the Holy Family, the shepherds with their sheep and the three kings with their gifts are reverently placed in position in the cattle shed by members of the upper classes of the Sunday School.
All are most cordially welcome to this non-liturgical service. promptly fired it into the St.
Mary’s goal, thus closing With 1:45 remaining to be played, Jim Moran took a centering pass from Frank Hession and split the pads of the Norwood goal tender.
Fifty-eight seconds later, Dick Norberg grabbed another feeder from Moran and rifled goal number seven into the upper-left-hand corner of the St.
Mary’s takes on Saint Anne’s of Peabody in a game which could give the Winchester team undisputed claim to the top berth in the league.
Jos* Farrar says, 'The Roberts leaves nothing to be dasired In terms of recording and playback quality.
It's really unbelievable at $209.50."" game was three minutes ola wnen Dick Norberg slapped in Frank Manzie’s centering pass.
Midway through the initial frame Jim Moran sent Norberg in with a perfect lead pass and Dick put it away to give Saint Mary’s a 2-0 lead.
The seven o cluck service on Christmas Eve, at the Church of the Epiphany is a family, non-sacramental service consisting of the singing of familiar Christmas carols and the reading of the nativity stories from the Gospels while id loose puck at center ice, alone on the Norwood goalie and had little trouble in rounding off his first hat trick of the day.
Mary’s went into the second stanza with a 3-0 lead which was quickly boosted to 4-0 when Norberg took a drop pass from Jim Moran and blasted a forty footer off the cross bar and into the Saint Catherine’s cage.
Norwood retaliated seconds later when their right wing beat the Winchester defense and fired the puck into the lower left-hand corner of the net.
Their joy was short lived however as Norberg collected another Moran pass to the right of the Norwood goalie and got a shot that deflected off the goaltender’s pads and dribbled into the goal.
Catherine’s goalie to the right of goal and then slid a pass over to Norberg, who flipped it into the empty net, thus completing his second hat trick of the day.
YOUNG, PLUMP SQUANTO TURKEYS FOR THF, COMING HOLIDAYS SQUANTO TURKEY FARM Tel.4-2367 60 Haverhill Street, Reading — Route 12B, Exit 24-2.
Open the flash compartment, and the ""auto•hlft"" shutter is automatically set for flash— close it, and you’re ready for outdoor shots.
Weatherly by Lenox Place Setting $19.95 WINCHESTER CAMERA SHOP trying to take good :;fi photographs OR ARE YOU AFRAID *3 to even try.
Place Settings from $24.50 * Chanson by Lenox Teaspoons from $4.76 £ Place Setting $23.y5 Serving Pieces from $5.00 'jf If you are giving her some of the missing pieces in her ft China, Silver or Glass to complete her set, you are sure to find it at Swanson’s.
STERLING SILVER Gorham, Heirloom, International, Reed and Burton ^ Stielf, Towle, Wallace jg GLASS 4 Fostoriu, Tiffin.
Bryce a CHINA g Lenox, Royal Doultou, Flint ridge, and others flk <tn>7-st ff Our 16 th Year In Winchester “PHOTOGRAPHY WITHOUT FEAR"" the funniest and most in* structive booklet onautomatio photography.
Just bring this ad to Call PArkview 9-3636 single Magic Key operation ■ easy flash system ■ shutter speeds up to J/800 "" fast f/9. precision Agfa Color Agnar lens ■ four easy dietanoe settings ■ single stroke lever advance for MIRRORS SHELMAR Inc.
She is making a satisfactory recovery and will be glad to hear from her old friends in Winchester.
Ill, by Shirley Thomas Miracle Gardening Encyclopedia by Samm Sinclair Baker Schools, by Lawrence Bradford Perkins Shanghaiing Days, by Richard H Dillon Tomorrow’s Illiterates, by Char les Child Walcutt, ed.
The birth of Christ Jesus, and other highlights from his history as recorded in the four Gospela, will form the background of the I yesson -Sermon at Christian Science church services Sunday.
Miss Mary A Skruta, M.A., Director of Christian Education, Mr William R Sorenson, Church School Superintendent.
Carol music; readings from the Scripture; drama, ""Holiday House"" by the Junior High Baptist Youth Fellowship.
Open House at the ParRonage for College and Preparatory School students, working young people, and mil tnry servicemen.
A pageant by the Primary Department. the Junior Choir und the Motion Choir.
Nonagon, and Forum members may attend Christmas Sunday at church with their families.
Care will be provided for Nursery 1 through Kindergarten 4 in the Vestry area.
There will be two Worship Services U*lay one at 9:30 and one at 11:00 o’clock.
Following the second service, there will be the administration of the Sacrament f Baptism for children.
This midnight service on' Christmas Kve is one of our beautiful truditions.
The Wildwood Group of the W.S.C.S. will be entertained at the home of Miss Beatrice Blake.
Members of the group who cannot attend please cull PA 9-2639 or MI 8-6042.
Collector’s postuge stamps and albums now oil sale at the Star office on all price levels.
In “Heidi,” on fifteen minutes notice, Kathy Dale substituted as Klara.
In “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” the part of Oberon, King of the Fairies, was ;taken by Edward Marcy, substituting on 36 hours notice when Ronald Marcy, his brother, was stricken with ap pendicitis.
The Eighth, Ninth and Tenth fairies were absent during the December 15 performance.
Henry Dietrich, as Bottom, improvised the wood scene without his usual acting companions, Quince, Snug, Flute, Starveling, and Snout.
Heidi, Mary Wadsworth; Grandfather, Michael Fiori; GoatPeter, Brian MacDonald; Barbel, Adena Krasnow; Dete, Cornelia Taggert; The Grandmother, Barbara Light; Brigette, Leslie Buchanaan; Sebastian, Stephen Edgell; Mrs.
Seseman, Donal Murphy; Miss Rottenmeier, Judy Morrill; The Professor, Richard Grandfield; Klara, Jane McBain; Doctor Classen, Henry Dietrich; Tinette the Maid, Mary Balliston.
Puck, Geoffrey Brackett; First Fairy, Rebecca Brackett; Second Fairy, Kristen Beard; King Oberon, Ronald Marcy; Queen Titania, Kathy Dale; Third Fairy (Peaseblossom) Cara McCarthy; Fourth Fairy Marla Johnis; Fifth Fairy , Wendy Sullivan; Sixth Fairy , Lee Sullivan; Seventh Fairy, Noreen Murphy; Eighth Fairy, Leslie Baerenwald; Ninth Fairy, Pamela Meyer; Tenth Fairy, Janet Meyer.
The Elves were Perry McCarthy Stephen Johnis, Stuart Johnis, Chucky Birehall, Tip MacDonald.
Pyramus Henry Dietrich; Quince, Richard Grandfield; Snug Stephen Edgell; Flute Bill Chase; Starveling Geoffrey Brackett or Brian MacDonald; Snout , John Newton.
Arthur Warner, nee A dele Jonah, formerly of Edgehill Road but now living with her husband in Stebbing, England, is producing and directing the Christmas pageant for 1500 young people of the American Youth Association, of which she is a director.
Parker, Esterbrook, and Scripto pens and fillers available at the Star office, 3 Church Street.
Members of the Church School staff, and parents of Second Congregational Church School children remarked that while they had expected merely to be amused, they found themselves responding deeply to the moods created by sensitive boy and girl actors.
Those who had seen the young players in “Heidi,” “A Midsummer Nigth’s Dream” and “Robinson Crusoe” at the High School matinee performances on December 1 and December 2 remarked upon the amount of growth that had taken place between the first and the third presentations.
In the Children’s Theatre School, spontaniety is valued as one of the special attributes of childhood.
Under Carlene Samoiloff’s guidance, the complicated art of transiting children’s spirited interpretation of stories into unforgettable performance was amazingly achieved.
ANNE R WILD 45 Church Street PA 9-3268 nov3-tf to present items for Worship Services, to offer prayers which spring forth in a natural way, to implement their devotion through programs for the benefit of those who need help, at home and abroad.
During the carol service which preceded the plays, Mr Ronald H Richburg, Church School Superintendent, presided and Rev.
Members of the Junior and Senior Youth Fellowship Groups assisted in serving refreshments.
The lighted creche and the Christmas tree were set up by Miss Carol Richburg. set up by Miss Carol Richburg, and the Christmas tree, by Miss Carol Richburg.
Mr William McClintock was in charge of stage lighting, assisted by Mr Charles Saunders, Mr Roy Carlson, and Mr Richard Brownell.
The Winchester Red Cross loaned the wheel-chair which was used in one of the scenes in “Heidi,” and Mr Ronald Richburg, Sr. transported it.
Mr Ronald Richburg transported the live pure-bred goat and its owner, Mrs.
The scenery was painted by the children themselves, under the direction of Mrs.
Animals’ Christmas At Farm School The traditional Animals Christmas was held at Forest Crest Farms School on Tuesday, December 19, at 10:30m.
The small pupils of the school sing and dramatize their songs with a background of ponies and small animals creating a delightful and unusual atmosphere.
Prior to the program, the children bring money donations with which to buy grain for the work horses of Boston at Christmas time.
Three ponies ‘and a little donkey ridden by Wendy Jane Capobianco , Jane Rivinius, Billy Kuhn and Chip Raffi as the Christmas court of honor followed.
Then came a long line of small children bearing their gifts of carrots and apples for the horses’ Christmas and sheets and blankets for the Animal Hospital on Longwood Avenue, Boston.
WRC Has ' Christmas Program The Women’s Republican Club of Winchester was treated to an unusually beautiful Christmas program on December 13 when they met at the home of Mrs.
Coffee, tea and Christmas cakes were served in festive holiday fashion by the Social Committee under the co-chairmanship of Mrs.
The business meeting was omitted and after the social hour club members sang carols with Mrs.
Witham, consisted of the reading of beautiful poetic selections by Mrs.
Constance Morrill interspersed with carols sung by a talented group of High School singers who, with charming simplicity and really lovely voices, sang some well loved Christmas music.
The group of singers consisted of Betsy Aiken, Christine Harrison, Jennifer Rochow, Virginia Stearns, Jane Littleton, Judith Morrill, Allison Morrill and Patricia Morrill.
She and the young singers combined to make an inspiring program which touched the hearts of their audience.
FOLEY Realtors Real Estate — Mortgages Insurance PArkview 9-1492 autrl2-tf INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH & ACCIDENT LIFE — POLIO HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICIES PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 1 THOMPSON STREET R«h.
Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf DEWICK & FLANDERS, Inc.
LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE OF EVERY DESCRIPTION Season’s Greetings TO ALL J 4 W Dinn £ Co.
Call PA 9-58t>0 Monday through Friday. ootb-tf % % I m % 1 new home, five bedrooms, dining room, lurch kitchen, living room with fireplace, double plumbing, sparkling hardwood floors.
One-and-a-half baths, garage, kitchen with countertop stove and many builtins not found in the average home.
Three bedrooms, ceramic-tile bath, basement play room, storage room, and one-car garage for just $21,500.
WINCHESTER CAPE Attractive pre-war Cape, offers large living room, dining room, modem electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor.
Dingwell ONE OF ROYAL BARRY WILLS’ FINEST Long, rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shingle English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline.
This is not a huge house, but it boasts five rooms on the first floor , plus four bedrooms and two full baths on the second floor.
PArkview 9-4572 j janl9tf CLEANING WINCHESTER CLEANING SERVICE Storm Windows.
Bulldozer — Shoveldozer Cellar Excavating — Grading PArkview 9-5067 — 9-1531 augl2-tf ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AM1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
STOCKWOOD Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 decl5-tf FIREPLACE WOOD Fireplace Wood Well-seasoned Oak & Maple.
Specialist* in U a brie Ca ric •ep29-tf Borgeson & Gustafson PAINTING & DECORATING Interior & Exterior FREE ESTIMATES WE 3-6069 BR 2-3437 augl2-tf WALTER J JOHNSON PAINTING Interior and Exterior PAPERING PA 9-6014 nov9-tf James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 augl2-tf PIANOS PIANO CARE Tuning — Reconditioning Organs and Players Complete Rebuilding Clinton Jonas PArkview 9-0785 *ugl2-tf LOST AND FOUND FOR RENT LOST -Vnl liable Scarab brno elet in Winchester ( >nter on Monday evenii Decerner 18.
Reward LOST •Qnc > smnll round gold watch in Wlnohest. r ( 'enter on Monday.
FOR RENT — Professional office spare 1 with parking on ground*, central location.
Call O Liver 8-3293. no v 30-4 1 * FOR SALE Economy Wild Bird S»*ed, 5 lbs.c; 10 lb*. 95c; 26 lbs.
FOR SALE — *1 pair of Kntdsael Hki two year* old, but in excellen condition.
WANTED WANTED — In Winchester, west side location. or Arlington, Mystic Lakeoi Country Club an*a, large house with 6 or 6 bedrooms.
FOR SALE — Genuine Afghanistan Per slan lamb full length coat, gray, size 18.
FOR SALE — Austrian ski boots, size 10, $30. worth $70 ; meing poles, $10 erost* country rncing boots, size 11.
Call NO 6-4172 FOR SALE — -Electric Clothes Washer Spindry, workable condition, but needs overhaul, $14.
FOR SALE— Two pair women’s professional figure ice skates, size 5 and $10 each.
EX 6-6970. feb6-tf RUBBISH REMOVAL PICTURE FRAMING Picture j| | Framing % I »t i — Winslow Press *5 2A Mt.
PArkview 9-3516 Weekly Pick-Up If Desired janU-tf calls aasMted promptly.
Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. •pr27-tf FEMALE HELP WANTED— Full-time position for a ponton with some bookkeeping and clerical experience to work on billing*, collection*, and student accounts.
HOUSEWIFE ... if you have spare time, if you need extra money, you can earn an excellent income .selling Avon Cosmetics.
WANTED —Live-in housekeeper for two adults in fully-equipped Winchester home.
Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them oat with you.
That the warrant for the Annual Representative Town Meeting to be held on Monday, March 5, 1962, be closed at seven thirty o’clock P.M. on Monday, January 8, 1962, and that public notice thereof be given by publication of this order in the three consecutive issues of the “Winchester Star” preceding said date.
John F Sexton Selectmen of the Town of Winchester duc21-St WANTED WANTED Antiques — Brie-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc.
No fancy formula is necessary or any particular pill, or even a dramatic rearrangement of customary meals.
All that is needed is a little thought, and some understanding of facts that can be lifesaving, of facts that cun guide a whole family to better health.
We know, for example, that every day every generation needs body-building protein, vitamins minerals.
Bones, teeth, muscles skin, eyes, blood vessels, every part of the body at every age can flourish only if properly nourished.
To be sure, growing youngsters must have more of the essential nutri ents than oldsters, but this should present no problem.
A child’s normally big appetite guarantees him enough of his requirements, so long as the daily meals guarantee him and all the family a good variety of wholesome foods.
By the mid-twenties it’s time to stop, look, and listen, to count the calories and cut the size of servings.
This decade may mark the height of youth, but nevertheless calorie needs are decreasing, and they continue to diminish with the passing years.
Grandparents in the middle years may appear as spry and vigorous as ever, but their energy requirements are 10 to 30 per cent less than those of their 40 year old children.
Perhaps restaurants should cooperate by serving grandparent portions as well as children’s meals.
Of all the hazards contributing to heart disease one of the most serious is overweight, as the Massachusetts Heart Association has pointed out.
Weight watching is one of the best possible ways to build health and guard against heart disease.
Parents and grandparents who set a meal-time example of pru dence are helping themselves to health and bequeathing a priceless gift to their children.
Good food habits firmly established in childhood and wisely followed throughout adulthood pay big dividents.
Stuffing may be fine for poultry, but its poison for people, young and old alike.
Fats, too, may need special attention, particularly the “saturated” fats that are found in some dairy products and in meats.
Although all of the facts aren’t in yet, it may be that diets rich in saturated fats may not be desirable for all (especially if the total calorie intake is high), particularly for those who may he prone to heart disease.
Even the arteries of teenagers can show changes, and these have been attributed to unhealthy food habits.
By some substitution of skim milk for whole, of fish and chicken for meat, and more use of vegetable oils and margarines.
By inclusion of a variety of fruits and vegetables, and enough whole grain or enriched bread and cereals to satisfy everyone’s needs.
Finally, by discriminating resistance to desserts and other delectables.
Eating should be Legal Notices COMMONWEALTH OF MASHAUHJSKTTS Middlesex. ks.
To all person* inbfiMted in the ••state of MAHELLK ROSA LIE NICKERSON late of Winchester in said County, d«»ceased.
A petition ha* been prmented to said Court for probate of n certain Instrument purporting to lw» the last will of said deceased by GRACE NICKERSON BANGS of Providence in the State of Rhode Island praying that she ho appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of Deoembor 1961.
Probate Court To nil persons interested in the trust estate under the will of JOHN H JOY late of Winchester in said County, deceased. for the benefit of EDNA O JOY and others.
The trustees of Haiti estate have presented to salil Court for allowance theyr first to fourth accounts, inclusive.
Witness, John C Leggpt, Esquire, hirst Judge of said Court, this fourteenth day of December 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. dec 2 1 -3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
Probate Court To all persons interested in the estate of LOUISE J BANCROFT late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition bus been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARY LIN NAN E of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying thnt she he appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
Witness, John C Loggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this fifteenth day if December 1961.
Register. dec21-3t fun ami some extras are fine, but not the excesses that pile on the pounds anti burden the blood vessels.
It’s a lucky child whose parents •ind grandparents lead him out of the paths of temptation.
To all persons interested in the estate of LKTITIA F HOPPER late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
Tile executor of the will of said LETITlA F HOPPER has presented to aaid Court for allowance Ita first and second accounts.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in said Court nt Cambridge l»efore ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyseventh day of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
John V Harvey, Register. dec7-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ns.
A petition lias been presented to said Court. praying that MARGARET F ('HICK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex be appointed administratrix of said estate, without giving a surety on hor bond.
Register. dec21-3t BUTTERW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry july6-tf COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
Probate Court, To all persons interested in the estate of THOMAS F FALLON late of Winchester in said County, deceased A petition hns been present ed to said Court, praying that MAE I FALLON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex, or some other suitable person, he appointed administratrix of said estate.
Witness, Johrt C I^-ggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this seventh day of December 1961.
John V Harvey, Register. deni 4 -3 1 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all pei-sons interested in the estate of LILLIAN SAUCE Into or Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition I ms been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to he the last will of said deceased by MARY LINNANE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond.
First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of December 1961, John V Harvey, Register, decl4-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES P HOPKINS late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court, praying that THOMAS W HOPKINS of Boston in the County of Suffolk he appointed administrator of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your nttorney should ttile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock In the forenoon on the twentyeighth duy of December 1961, the return day of this citation.
PA 9-2990 Open Every Nite ’Til Christmas 3k g 3k g 3k g 3k m Plioto by Jlyeruon STAMP EXHIBIT ... in St.
Left to right, Sally Campbell, Elizabeth Moran, Marlene Velebny, Rebecca Boylan, Peter Farrell, Joseph Fitzgerald.
BANKING HOURS — 8 A.M. to 2 P.M. 2k Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Star Market Co.
Names Langer At their annual meeting Monday, December 18, stockholders of the Star Market Co., New England supermarket chain, elected Leonard C R Langer treasurer.
Stephen P Mugar, president, stated that Mr Langer will also serve as chief financial officer of the company.
During his teaching career Mr Langer acted as consultant to numerous government and industrial organizations, including General Electric, I.B.M., and Bell Telephone Co.
In the fall of 1961 he returned from a 15-month tour as Visiting Professor of Finance at IMEDE in Lausanne, Switzerland, where he also conducted studies of European corporate financial management and the organization of the Euro pean capital markets.
Star Market Co. operates 30 super markets and two home center stores in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Maine and New Hampshire.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, the Company reported record sales of $86,000,000, an increase of 11 per cent over the previous period.
Star recently announced plans to acquire Brigham’s-Dorothy Muriel’s, Inc., a chain of 74 ice cream, confectionery and bakery stores in the Greater Boston area.
Here, for a season, oc curs a sort of human miracle when peace and goodwill, love and friendship prevail.
Curt nods give way to friendly greetings; selfish pursuits yield to friendly thoughts and remembrances; churches throng with both the just and the unjust; Christmas carols fill the air (even crowding out an occasional commercial), and waning friendships reach for renewed contacts.
Result — this most human and kindly of seasons, as full of the feelings of human brotherhoodwhich is the essential spirit of Christianity — as the month of June is of sunshine and the balmy breath of roses.
The universal joy of Christmas is indeed wonderful And — praise be! — perennial.
You cannot cut Christmas out of the calendar, nor out of the heart of mankind.
Peace, joy, faith, love, home, hope and cheer are words we all can understand.
The answer is, of course it could, but to accomplish it human antennae must be permanently attuned, as they briefly are at Christmas, to things of the spirit, as opposed to things selfish and material.
It may even be that, little by little, the world moves in that direction.
Certainly, since Pearl Harbor and World War II, the whole of mankind — its thinking released almost as explosively as atomic energy was released — has burst forth with a revolution of rising expectations among the under-developed, and with a deeper concern for the underprivileged, wherever they may be.
Let church bells ring, carols roll over the wide earth, Christmas trees be lighted and Christmas stockings hung, children chortle over presents, friends renew old contacts, and families gather together in loyalty and love.
And, last but not least, let this uneasy world find its faltering way, slowly but surely, toward Peace.
From our wanderings through Boston’s shopping center, we gather Santa is a victim of mass jiroduction.
You can, for instance, call a v/oman a kitten but not a cat; a mouse, but not a rat; a chicken, but not a hen; a duck, but not a goose; a vision, but not a sight.
Tidbits The pnly trouble with doing your Christmas shopping early is to get your wherewithal on the same schedule.
FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE IN WINCHESTER We Cafry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines.
The excellent reception of Multiplex and standard FM programs with the FISHER Wide-hand Tuner and the superb reproduction of your stereo and mbnophonic records are but a few of the dividends of musical enjoyment it will bring to your home in die years ahead* Plan to see and hear the FISHER Futura soon.
VERNON STREET — PA 9-0685 ristmas PERMANENT ARRANGEMENTS OF ITALIAN FLOWERS ^driends us to me ri Kitchenware — Gifts Small Appliances ovuan ctaAionA PLEASE ORDER EARLY FOR OHRISTMAS DELIVERY COMPLETE STOCK OF ELECTRIC LIGHT BULBS FORESTER'S FLOWER SHOP PArkview 9-1077 Daily from 8m. to 5:30m.
He also at present is ALL ALIKE TWO EXTRA ENVELOPES PER BOX We have a large variety from which to make your selection.
WINCHESTER NEWS CO It’s a mystifying toy and a fascinating competitive game.
LEATHER RUBBER DRESSY OREVERYDAY BOOTS * GIVE A GIFT CERTIFICATE 5 Thompson Sired PA 9-0350 CANADIAN CHRISTMAS TR GORDON'S HEAVY BOOT OR SKATING SOCKS, SLUTER SOCKS * ft S BASKETS WREATHS LAUREL HOLLY MISTLETOE BALSAM BRANCHES * '#■ COZY WOOL FAUSTS BEADED MOCCASINS SCRUMPTIOUS OPEN FLATS For Him VARIETY IN SHEARLING-LINED FAUSTS, MOCCASINS SOFT OR HARD SOLE AROUND THE WORLD WITH THE CHIPMUNKS Alvin, Simon & Theodora with David Seville 3170/7170 The Brave Chipmunks; Japanese Banana ; Stuck in Arabia; Rudolph the Rednosed Reindeer and 8 others.
PA 9-299C OPEN EVERY NITE ’TIL CHRISTMAS 30 Wyman Street WEIIs OPEN 9m. to Woburn, Mass.
Every Day % RELIGIOUS Christmas Cards The true spirit of the first Christmas Is * reverently expressed in tjf^dignity and quality of thege . ♦; fine cards.
U F The action was authorized by * IOIIIC I I Ulll MDC Commissioner Robert Murxm» j phy upon recommendation of Met1VI|« lUct ropolitan District Police Supt.
Miss Deborah and Miss Janet DoUnder the plan, the Harvard stunovan, both of 12 Dartmouth dy unit hurries to the scene as Street and Miss Deborah Wadssoon as it is notified by the Regisworth of 16 Norwood Street came try of Motor Vehicles that a fahomp terd to enjoy their tahty has occurred.
The group im/ * J * mediately launches an exhaustive Christmas vacation from Mt.
Ida investigation into all factors which Junior College in Newton Center, contributed to the highway death All four girls are graduates of and it installs equipment designed Winchester High School.
Miss Deto determine the traffic flow and Vries is majoring in retailing, the average vehicular speeds at that Misses Donovan are enrolled in point. the airline stewardess course and At the end of the current fiveMiss Wadsworth is studying to be year study, the Harvard team is a medical secretary.
Police Station M The Social Security Contact Station located at the Woburn Public Library will not be open to the public on Monday, December 25 or on Monday, January 1st.
However, the Contact Station will he open Tuesday, January 2, 1962 from 9:30m. to 12:30m.
Mr Rynne, Manager of the Cambridge District Office, advised that the regular Monday schedule will be resumed January 8, 1962 on a continuing basis and a representative from the Cambridge District office will be present at the Library each week.
Burlington, Bedford, or Lexington may avail themselves of the above service.
Song sheet lyrics come with every record Here are some other SING ALONG favorites ; Once more the Christmas messagep is renewed in our hearts.
PA 9Open Every Nite ’Til Christmas IwtiWiSlMlIWifWilWIIIM f ) THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 21.
Embassv EXTENDS HOLIDAY GREETINGS to its Patrons and Friends 1 I Ford Announces Contest Winners \l the I labile Dr.
Robert Lamaon, son of Mr Rosalie Lamaon of 33 Kenwin Road, and the late Professor If.
Lamaon, has returned to his work as assistant to Senator Bartlett of Alaska, in Washington after a Fall vacation in Europe.
CANDIES . . . because you want the finest 1/VjcC^ormach's s^pothecarij.
Five grade school boys from California, Michigan, Oklahoma and Wisconsin were announced today as winners of national championships in the “Punt, Pass and Kick"" youngsters throughout the United States.
P & K."" contest launched this year by the Ford Division of Ford Motor Company and its dealers, in cooperation with the National Football League.
The winners, their fathers and the Ford dealers who sponsored them will embark late this month on an expense-paid “Tour of Champions,” including an official reception at the White House in Washington, D C., and a trip to the National Football League’s championship game in Green Bay, Wis.
The five champions also will reeevie trophies and autographed footballs und will be introduced to a nationwide television audience during half-time ceremonies at the NFL title game.
The young champions posted the best total scores for punting, passing and place-kicking distance and accuracy in final competition with 85 other boys who qualified for the championship round.
The 70 finalists were regional winners, ontseoring thousands <>f | boys in local contests for the right to vie for national honors in half t ime competition at a selected NoI VTinber game of each of the NFL’s 14 teams.
Contest scoring was based on distance and accuracy, with one point for each foot the hall traveled in the air, minus one point for each foot the ball landed to the right or left of a center line.
The 56 pound, 50 inch tall youngster won by a comfortable margin in the final competition with 13 other six-year-old boys who performed at the half-time of selected NFL games throughout the country during November.
Parents, participants and sponsors alike endorsed the program strongly.
Stamps Forty-one years ago, four members of the executive committee of the National Tuberculosis Association put their hands in their respective pockets and brought out $100 each.
The NTA added $100 to the pot and the sum of $500 was turned over to Dr.
He was then able to complete his lifelong study of lung anatomy and to write the book which is still the standard reference text.
That was the first grant to aid research made under TB Christmas Seal sponsorship.
The next year, 1921, the NTA’S research program had a budget of $20,000 and made four grants.
In the forty years since, the organization has appropriated about $3,700,000 for research grants.
Scientific research is man’s puny but valiant attempt to find what makes the world of nature tick.
J0SEPHS0N REAL ESTATE i* WALTER Y J0SEPHS0N INSURANCE J i dec""-3t ^ e*i«w ;■* trim m\.m t*im mim xnm ttetm **4** mm mm mm I . yijv/ Each apparent advance leads into a new maze.
For instance, TB doctors know that TB germs can be knocked out very handily by some drugs, in a test tube.
But theirs is only one problem among thousands that must be solved if TB is ever to be finally licked.
In most diseases, these antibodies prevent a I second attack if the person be1 comes infected again.
Pierce Julius Kayer Cambaa Mogen David Parma Duff Gordon Mira flora Widmer’s Chriitiaa Br*a, Marv^y’a and others m Wines From France Germany Portugal Spain Greece Denmark Italy etc.
Four Corners • West Side of Woburn • Cambridge Road WE 5-2322 dec7-tt K I I m 1 1 0.
Keenan’s Ernest E Auto Service Service Station Reardon MOBIL Tires Batteries Tires Tubes Light Repairs Accessories Your TEXACO Dealer BO-DELL AUTO TOPS Seat Covers Auto Upholstering ROAD SERVICE Road Service Convertible Tops WHEEL BALANCING ROBERT ROLLINS Cor.
PArkview 9-9886 mit* mit * mtm mitt mit*. m mit* m it* mim mum mim mi Turner’s Neil’s Gulf Kiley’s Sunoco Service Service Station Esso Station ROAD SERVICE ROAD SERVICE HAROLD TURNER, Prop.
THURSDAY Coward Shoe Christmas Bonu For Employees At Eagle Scout Award AMPEX Stereophonic Soi “Employees of our Coward Shoe ston> will reeeive an annual profitsharing bonus from a company which totals $180,000 this year,*’ it was announced recently by Irving Brown, president of the company.
The distribution is made solely on the basis of length of service with the company.
Each employee with more than one year of service is tfiven one unit and an additional ten per cent for each successive full year of service.
Carl Fontnr H.S.A., Arthur Bonnev, Bov Scout district and accident insurance a sions for total disability, l Eagle Awards To [ Fontneau Brothers WINCHESTER APPLIANCE CO obligated military service attending drill with the Second Infantry Battalion, Marine Corps Reserve here in Boston.
Marines Want Six-Month Trainees Boston’s Own’’ Second Infar Again we have the Solo-Play games.
The highlight of the evening was the presentation of the Eagle awards to Carl and Peter Fontneau, sons of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles T Burke, president of the Minute Man Council, Inc.0, of the Boy Scouts of America made the official presentation of the highest achievement award in Scouting to these boys who are now members of Explorer Post 503.
DAVID KLEIN Season’s Greetings time wc rc To My Customers and Friends sending your way, warmest wishes for I I * i t 1 X Holiday i j I j J \ | I I s { 4 \ \ pleasure and % . , joy.
Since its charter was issued in Columbus, Ohio, in May, more than 15,000 have joined, and most of these members are buttonholing their friends to join and support it.
Outside of half a dozen test advertisements in widely scattered weeklies, and an advertisement in the Toledo Blade, no effort has been made to put a major public relations push behind the program.
Growth has derived largely from volunteer speakers at meetings of unions and civic organizations.
Goal of SIXTY NOW is to amend Social Security to permit retirement at 60, with benefits of $200 a month, plus $100 for each dependent of any age.
Advertisements, speakers and advocates argue that at surh a benefit level, at least five million working Americans would promptly retire, «nd that much or all of this retirement would result in immediate job openings for the six or seven millions who are unemployed or only partially employed.
Much is made by the sponsors of SIXTY NOW of the fact that the average benefit under Social Security is less than $80.00, and th$t the majority of those who retire under the law actually draw much less.
They see in their plan a “shot in the arm” for the economy, with millions retired on a spendable income, millions employed at full wages to replace them, and the market enlarged as u consequence.
Most of the 15,000 members have conn* from the Toledo area, but the daily mail brings new applicants from all over the country, with 20 states now represented, according to Mr Rediger.
PROP. g"", Miss Jeanne Chase has been j elected as a representative to the jjjr Executive Council of the College ^ Government at Lasell Junior Coljgf j lege.
Charged with maintaining ^ the high standards in the oonimungjf ity life of the campus, the College Government is made up of representatives from the student body, X who take an active part in exercisJJJj ing the various powers that have S heen committed to it.
Miss Chase, a 1961 graduate of Winchester High School, is the W daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Miss Robbins, a freshman at the Pittsburgh women’s college, is a member of Chatham’s 40-voice touring choir.
In recent weeks she has sung at concerts on the Chatham campus, at the campus of Franklin and Marshall College in Lancaster, Pa., and on special television broadcasts in Pittsburgh.
SEASON'S GREETINGS i Herbert T Wadsworth Holiday Greetings TO YOU and YOURS JOHN B MERCURIC INSURANCE and REAL ESTATE Tel.
PArkview 9-8400 To seek a choice gift PP ""Convertible"" r Fountain Pen with 14K Gold Point founded on inspired thought Just slip in giant size cartridge of Super Quink ink or insert converter in place of cartridge and it fills from an ink bottle.
See our big selection of PERFUMES, TOII.ET WATERS, BATH POWDERS, SETS, CHOCOLATES, WALLETS FOR MEN AND WOMEN, ELECTRIC SHAVERS, BRUSH AND COMB SETS, MEN’S SETS and many types of CHILDREN’S GIFTS which we will be happy to gift wrap for you.
THERESA A MACK RONALD C MacKENZIE EMMA E AITCHISON ICE CREAM FOR CHRISTMAS PARTIES Available in 1 -2 '/£ or 5-gallon quantities Tel.
JK 0 5 1 % n 6 58 0 m 0 M* m f December Most Dangerous Traffic Month With a genuine of association you our Cii ristmas during our pleasant extend to appreciation the past years, w< best wishes for an old-fashioned Merry and a New Year of Happiness and Prosperity.
V , , , } j shrieking police and ambulance sirtnln can he dangerous to motorists ens because of the carelessness of and pedestrians who relax their a motor vehicle driver or a pedes“December is our most dangerj must consider the possibility of , order.
Auxiliary Activities On Saturday December 2 a Variety Show was held in the New England Mutual Hall on Clarendon Street Boston by the Department of Mass.
Margaret Eikrem was called upon and spoke briefly on what the success of the Shpw meant to the Veteran.
Hospital Chairman thanked all those who helped in any way to have such a successful show.
All the patients in our Veterans Hospitals in Massachusetts will benefit and Christmas will he a lot brighter for many of the patients, as gifts will be distributed to them by the Dept, of Mass.
Many veterans attended the Variety Show as many of the local Posts and their auxiliaries including Woburn and Wincheste purchased tickets and forwarded them to the Veterans Hospitals which enabled them to enjoy the show.
Money donations are also sent to these hospitals which enables the directors of the hospi tals to take the patients out to local Bowling Alleys for an afternoon of Bowling.
On December 18 the Middlesex County Council Auxiliary are holding a Square Dance at the Bedford Hospital.
School Program at Sturbridge Village Old Sturbridge Village is offering a special winter tour schedule for elementary and high school groups, it has been announced by Miss Elizabeth Hitz, director of the School Admissions office at the center of living history.
Starting January 15, 19G2, two hour tours will be conducted Monday through Friday with visits to Village homes, shops and craft areas.
The program will include demonstrations of fireplace cooking, candlemaking, spinning, weaving and printing.
Students will actually participate in these tivities under this learn-by-doing program.
During the past year more than 35,000 school pupils visited the Village in organized class groups.
Reservations are necessary for the tours and may be made through the School Admissions Office, Old Sturbridge Village, ac1 Sturbridge, Mass.
Now you c enjoy more than 50 different kinds of solitaire card games to intrigue you.
M\ completely IMMERSIBLE Water sealed heating unit plus new integrated automatic heat control in handle permits quick, easy ""under water'* washing.
CONTROLLED EVEN HEAT FRYPAN Look for the Frypan with the ""Cloverleaf Design"" heating element that guarantees perfect heat distribution on entire cooking surface ... for finest resultsl (&SUNBLAM Winchester Appliance Co.
Only from Magnavox, the biggest, clearest pictures automatically — pictures half again as large as 23-inch screens — more than twice as large as 19-inch sets . . . with fully automatic operation.
Model 1-SC265*14950 in mahogany Now your records can last a lifetime With the new Magnavox Micromatic rec* ord player, there is no wear on either record or Diamond Stylus . . . the stylus s guaranteed for 10 years.
There is a Magnavox to suit your style taste and budget* Come in and see our vast selection of TV and high fidelity models in every style and finish.
There was no debate on the subject, only the original motion by Rotarian Charlie Murphy and a suggestion by Rotarian A1 Elliott that the gift be publicized so that other organizations will join in the light to rebuild the fire-razed station.
It was a session of Rotary marked by the customary display of wit and banter, and then some.
Gilson didn’t literally bring down the house, the carpenters working on the Hevey Block renovation on the floor below almost did.
With guest speaker Harrison Chadwick about to begin (see story on Mr Chadwick elsewhere on this page) Police Chief Joseph J Derro betook himself down to urge a cessation of pounding until the distinguished speaker had finished his remarks.
The Rotary luncheon took due cognizance of the Christmas season, with the Rev.
Mr H Newton Clay of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church leading one contingent in carolling and Aram Mouradian leading another.
Nelson Fontneau, who seemed all primed to play “O, Holy Night,” only to he forced into more simple carolsby popular insistence.
Name Chisholm Chairman Of Fund Drive 80 Carollcrs Turn Out On Christmas Eve ‘‘Despite the storm on Christmas Eve, when the snow that had been falling turned to sleet, eighty adults and children gathered around the lighted tree on the common to sing carols.
Their voices rang out as clearly and reverently as though it were a perfect winter’s night and the sky bright with stars.
It was a rewarding experience for all who were present,” Fortnightly reports to the Star.
Alfred Bonney, Fred Cardin, James and Terry Cron burg, Robert Eddy and Richard Hanson.
A r mm lip i } mm im m wmfm gpSf '/• ^ P Photo by llyoraon SIXTEEN-INCH SNOW STORM, first of year, hit Winchester in time to provide White Christmas.
Ronald Chisholm of Win Chester recently appointed General Campaign Chairman by Herbert L Connolly, President of Herb Connolly Buick Co. and State Campaign for United Cerebral Palsy announced today 'that the “53 Minute March” will be conducted in Winchester on Sunday, January 14.
Car Hits Tree, And Pole, And No One Is Hurt On December 23 at 2:40m.year-old Daniel F Callahan of 3 Bates Road, Burlington, while driving his Buick east on Wildwood Street, near Curtis Street, failed to make the curve, left the road, smashed into a tree in front of 9 Wildwood Street with his left front fender, and went 30 feet further to hit an Edison utility pole.
Holly Cotillion A “Holly Cotillion” a semi-formal dance and social sponsored by the Archdiocesan Young Adult Council of Chi Rho Clubs, will be held on Friday, December 29 at the Imperial Ballroom of the Statler Hilton Hotel in Boston.
There will be dancing from 8:00 to 12:00m. with music furnished by Tom McSharry’s orchestra.
The fifteen Car Hits Parked Car On Christmas Day, about 9:41 m. an automobile driven by Richard E Conrad of 10 Jason Street, Arlington, went out of control and hit a car parked on Highland Avenue.
Conrad was proceeding south on Highland Avenue returning to Arlington, he told police, when he hit a patch of ice or snow and lost control of his car.
Before it actually stopped snowing some time through Sunday night snow estimated by the street clearing crews as about 16 inches deep had blanketed the town.
Town Engineer Wakefield told the Star he and his workers bad estimated the storm as good for about eight or nine inches and anticipated no real trouble.
The storm commenced during Saturday night, but by 1:00 o’clock Sunday morning the storm did not seem too bad and by noontime Sunday the worst of the storm seemed over.
During the afternoon the snow increased, but by late afternoon the storm seemed definitely over, and there was nothing in the weather reports available to the town that warned of what impended.
Town workers were eager to get home for Christmas Eve, and there seemed no reason for further snow removal at that time.
The storm, however, was far from over, and by late evening it was snowing hard.
Tired plowing crews were called back to work at 3 o’clock Monday morning.
The snow was wet in the middle and hard to handle where it had drifted, though the wind was not as bad as Winchester has often experienced in the past.
Concentrating on the main streets the crews had them open by 7 o’clock Monday morning, but it was much later in the day before some of the side streets were plowed.
Cars left on the street all night made the work of men doubly difficult.
In some places cars were left in the middle of the road, making it impossible for the plows to get into the streets.
STORM, continued on page 2 Winchester Mother on Way Home For Holidays Fatally Injured As Truck Rams Car Mrs.
Mary Virginia Laurenti of letzell Road, Williamsville, N Y., was fatally injured Wednesday night, December 2<>, when the automobile in which she was on her way to Winchester for Christmas with her husband and their two young children was rammed by a heavy truck on the Massachusetts Turnpike in Hopkinton.
News of the accident during the pre-Christmas season came as a deep shock to the entire community.
Laurenti, the former Virginia Loftus, accompanied by her husband, Jeremiah E., their son Eugene Arthur, 6; and daughter Marguerite Ann, 3; were driving from their home in Williamsville, a suburb of Buffalo, to spend Christmas with Mrs.
Laurenti, who was driving, stopped her car in the safety lane of the highway so that her husband could clear the windshield of ice.
Mr Laurenti had just finished and had re-entered the car when it was rammed by a heavy truck, operated by Gaspare Drago, 27, of Faulkner Street, Malden.
After the impact the car rolled down an embankment, followed by the truck.
Police arrested the driver on charges of manslaughter and driving to endanger.
Laurenti was pronounced dead when she arrived at the Framingham Union Hospital and it is believed that her death was instantaneous.
Both children were critically injured and their names were placed upon the hospital danger list.
Mr Laurenti was unconscious for about two hours after the accident but his injuries were not diagnosed as serious.
The Laurentis lived in Winchester until last September when Mr Laurenti was transferred from Boston to the Buffalo office of the firm with which he is associated, Brody Industrial Trucks, Inc.
Mr Chadwick repeated his statement reported in last week’s Star that the time for finger-pointing and hand-wringing had passed, and that the sensational nature of the T.V. film linking Boston police to known bookie joints had accomplished its primary objective of alerting the public to the general condition of gambling crimes in the state.
Mr Chadwick made his remarks at the regular Thursday meeting of the Winchester Rotary Club in what was generally considered as one of the most forceful speeches he has made.
CHADWICK, continued page 12 in Holiday Appeal Town Lakes Frozen Over Wedge and Winter Ponds have frozen over and according to Mr Symmes, are safe enough to skate on.
Collision On Highland Avenue A Woburn and Medford man were involved in a collision on Highland Avenue Thursday night at 7:20m. about 30 feet north of Fells Road.
A Morris sedan operated by Warren D Bingham, Jr. of 42 Irving Street, West Medford was in collision with an Oldsmobilc operated by Anthony Derro of 72 North Border Road.
Winchester police officer Roland Roy found Mr Derro lying in the street.
Both men were taken in the ambulance to Winchester Hospital, where Mr Derro was treated by Dr.
Winchester firefighters washed down the Highland Avenue Englewood Road area of gas spilled in the accident. iVinehester Takes Stork Firemen On Standby Duty For Malden Fire Winchester firemen were called in on a stand-by basis by the Melrose Fire Department in Thursday morning’s 6:45 o’clock fire in the Commonwealth Lumber Co. in Malden.
Year Of Honor And Controversy All things considered, 1961 was an extraordinary year in Winchester, with more than the Town’s customary share of controversy, sorrow, high honors, politics, and community activity.
No doubt the most heart-breaking event of the year was the death in an airline crash on February 15 of Maribcl Vinson Owen and her two figure-skating daughters Maribcl and Laurence.
It was a shock from which not one of us has yet fully recovered and one that will always be with us.
Police Chief Joseph J Derro urged this week that everyone driving over the New 5 ear s week end observe the most absolute caution, lest through careless driving, they take their own life or that of another.
The Chief’s warning came in the wake of the tragic Thanksgiving Day accident at Symmes Corner in which two teenagers were killed when they lost control of their car and rammed into a wall.
Since that time, the Chief has placed the tangled wreckage of the car on the lawn in front of the abandoned Wadleigh School as a dramatic reminder to young people, and old, not to speed while driving a car.
Deaneries in the Archdiocese will from the Star Market yard on he represented at this dance by j Cambridge Street reporting a hullparish Chi Rho units within each dozer afire.
Army Engineer Division, New England has awarded a contract to the architect-engineer firm of Alonzo B Reed, Inc. of Boston to carry out the first phase of the National Public Fallout Shelter Survey in many Massachusetts communities.
Surveys by the Alonzo B Reed concern under this contract are to be curried on in Arlington, Bedford, Lexington, Medford, Somerville and Winchester.
Those communities which are not included in this first phase will he included in later phases.
It is anticipated that ail communities will he surveyed and acceptable shelters marked by June 1962.
In accord with instructions from the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civil Defense these surveys call for the locating of public shelters which will accommodate a minimum of 50 persona.
The old Waterfield Building burned down in May, driving many local business people into temporary locations offered to them, in many cases, by their competitors.
And the old wooden Chapin School on Swanton Street, in which so many Winchester people first learned their ABC’S, was also badly damaged by fire.
In the area of controversy, the Johnson Road School over expenditure, which resulted in a special State House hearing, vied with Winchester Representative Harrison Chadwick’s sensational charges on a nationally televised film that organized gambling maintained contacts with Beacon Hill.
The subject of fallout shelters, publicized in the Star, put more Winchester pens to paper in a single response to an editorial in the Star’s history.
By the close of this month, the renovation of the Hevey Building had begun, while the new Waterfield Building was virtually completed.
Business had begun at the new Parkview Electronics Co. on Lowell Street and work was coming along nicely on the extension to the Winchester Hospital. 1961, continued on page 2 Collision At Lockeland Road And Mayflower Automobiles driven by a Winchester woman and a Stoneham man were in collision Saturday, December. at the intersection of Lockeland and Mayflower Roads it 4:46m.
John L Murphy of 91 Summer Street, Stoneham, was proceeding east on Lockeland Road in his Ford station wagon and Jean M Smith of 27 Mayflower Road was proceeding west on Lockeland Road about to make a turn into Mayflower Road when the collision occurred.
The project was initiated by the American Institute of Approval, a national non-profit organization of American women interested in manufacturing excellence.
The Cape designed by the Wills’ firm is truly an American house, comprised of the basic form and practical interiors of the early American houses combined with a plan which allows the flexibility and yet the privacy of modern day living.
Above all, it has the warmth and charm so necessary to make a house a living expression of our way of life.
The plan is arranged with the living, dining and multiuse rooms grouped around the kitchen, all opening directly onto a living terrace and swimming pool area through sliding glass panels.
The bedroom wing is separated from the remainder of the house, yet is accessible without passing through any other room.
All three houses, although emphasizing charm, graciousness, livability and economy, will incorpoate the latest scientific and industrial developments in heating, airconditioning, insulation, roofing, flooring, furnishings of every kind, kitchen and bathroom equipment and household appliances, all displayed in the full settings of their use.
WILLS, continued on page 8 Photo by Hy croon REPRESENTATIVE CHADWICK appears before Joint Coiniuiltee on Mtiuicipal Finance at State House iu Joluicou Koatl School cun trove ray* 1901 a leading uewa story.
Over $1,000 in Cash Reported Stolen In Housebreak on Cleveland Road % Over in cash was reported stolen in a housebreak at the ,S Cleveland Road home of Joseph and Marie Gagliormella on Christmas Day at 10:30m.
Entrance was reported made bv a housebreaker believed hy police to have been responsible as well for a number of other housebreaks in Stoneham and Woburn, possibh a $50,000 rheft in a North Woburn home on C hristinas Day.
Police found a 1x8 inch pane of glass broken in a door at the rear of the house, in addition to a 12x5 inch window on an inner door that leads out to the breezeway.
The break is believed to have occurred shortly after noon when the Gagliormella’s daughter, Linda, left the house to join her parents at a relative’s home in Woburn.
Working neatly and methodically. the housebreaker moved from room to room and dresser to dresser until he had amassed $1,090.
A neighbor who had reported seeing a blue and cream car parked nearby did not see the man leave.
She told police she Police believe that the housebreaker is the same man responsible for an earlier break at a Stoneham Street, Woburn home.
A neighbor of the home robbed in Woburn reported seeing a strange man of about 5 feet eight inches acting strangely in the neighbor., hood, lie was described as being of heavy build, and having closecropped hair, possibly bald.
The Winchester investigation, is still in process, was conducted by Sgt.
Year Of Honor And Controversy El Citl El Cid, a $10,000,000 film production portraying the life of the famous Spanish warrior lord, is now playing at the Astor Theatre in Boston.
To appreciate and enjoy this movie it is essential to understand the historical events which were taking place in Spain in the eleventh century.
During the same period in history, independently ruled Spanish kingdoms were emerging and this led to civil war due to jealousies, greed and suspicion of one another.
For this reason, not only were the Christian kingdoms attempting to wrest their counLiy from the Moslem caliphs, but they joined with various Moslem kingdom against one another.
It was into this confusing and conflicting period of history that the Cid was born.
Cid, a word coming from the Arabic Seid meaning leader-a warrior with the wisdom to be just and merciful, was a title bestowed on Rodrigo Diaz of the town of Viva r, north of Burgos, Spain.
He was destined to be Spain’s epic hero and his deeds, factual and legendary alike, were first to be heralded throughout Spain by troubadours and later to be recorded in Spain’s first important literary work Poema del Cid.
Rodrigo’s life story, portrayed by Charles Heston with Sophia Loren as his wife, Chimene, recreates, in the greater part of the film, those events which have taken place prior to those preserved for literary history in the Poema.
Essential to most Hollywood pro ductions today is the love element, and thus the central theme, so un like the epic, is the dedication of Rodrigo Diaz to his responsibilities for all others around him, for his family, his country and his king at the risk of losing Chimene by his own death or by Chimene’s vengeance.
The movie is authentic in every aspect once w'e realize it is not a portrayal of the epic Poema del Cid.
For a realistic and veridical vista of Spain in the Middle Ages, its moral code, customs, dress and architecture the three hour-plus saga can be considered well worthwhile.
Child feeds pony at tin* annual Christmas party for animals lust week at Forest Crest Farm School in the Highlands.
Queen Of The Parade Photo by Kyeruuu QUEEN OF THE PARADE at the Forest Crest farm School’s annual Christmas party for animals, little four-year-old Wendy June Capobianco on “Apache,** the* farm pony.
Politically, the Town took a careful look at its referendum and vot'd four fundamental reforms, still awaiting approval by the Legislature.
A Winchester man, His Excellency John A Volpe was sworn into office as Governor.
And following ;» summer study by un expert on municipal government promt u res there was more talk than •ver of someone at Town Hall, possibly a “comptroller,” to supervise Town office procedures.
January His Excellency, Governor John A Volpe of 10 Everett Avenue ,vas sworn in as chief executive of lie Commonwealth in State House inauguration ceremonies.
Mr Andrew Cordier, First As.istant to the late United Nations Secretary General Dag Hamniarskjold, visits Winchester to address First Congregational Church Men’s Club.
Johnson Road-Ridge Street School Building Committee asks for approximately $33,000 to cover excess expenditures.
The Winchester Star wins first prize in New England for its editorial page in its weekly circula tion class and second prize for General Excellence.
February Town mourns news that Maribel Vinson Owen and her daughters Maribel and Laurence, all internationally known figure skaters, are killed in airline crash in Belgium .vith other United States skating stars.
March By a vote of 83 to 73, the Regular Town Meeting vetoed the post of Administrative Assistant to the Selectmen by rescinding salary appropriation.
Shailer Avery and John F Sexton are elected Selectmen; Sherman W Saltmarsh, Jr. is nam ed to head the Board.
In the general election, the Town denies equal pay to women teach 2 i*s following a highly spirited exchange of ideas in letters to the editor of the Star.
A pril Crawford Memorial Methodist Church celebrates its 90th anni versa ry.
Town Meeting votes encumbrance accounting system and a re creation study group.
Also votes to exempt present heavy industries from light industrial zoning estrictions.
May Town Meeting votes three-to-one to approve basic reforms of referendum, including the requirements that 3 per cent of the Town’s re gistered voters must sign a referendum petition, and 20 per cent of ill registered voters to rescind an action of Town Meeting. $75,000 two-alarm blaze razes old Waterfield Building leaving several local business people without a business home.
C i v i cminded Wincheste rites pitch in to perk up a bedraggled Common, complete with rose bushes, Chinese crab apple trees and new fir trees.
July David Moore of <58 High Street is named to the Peace Corps by President Kennedy.
Ground is broken toward the construction of the Parkview Electronics Co. on Lowell Street, another in series of campus-type light industrial buildings in Winchester.
August Old Chapin School on Swanton Street is razed in roaring $25,000 fire.
Winning Farm, perennially favored among Winchester charities, observes its 00th anniversary as a fresh-air camp for underpriviledgod city children in Boston slums.
September Wave of vandalism in which cinder block pump house is destroyed and Rotary Chuck Wagon is du^ muged shocks Winchester, precipitates sterner police measures.
Boodakian’s oriental rug showroom, formerly burned out in costly fire, reopens at new Main Street quarters.
Milton Quinn, beloved town physician, retires, is feted by friends* Former F.B.L counterspy Herbert Philbrick appears in Winchester, predicts the victory of communism in twelve years.
Camelot Ball delights capacity crowd. \<>i ember Town Meeting votes $27,334 to Lynch Junior High School Building Committee for additional expenses.
Congressman Morse here, calls for end to John Birch-type panic, urges all Americans to get into politics, clean it up, realize that heir revolution is still the world’s greatest one.
Rose Kennedy, mother of the President, and Mr Edward Kennedy in Winchester to air views on travel, Latin America.
Town Comptroller to coordinate jffice procedures at Town Hall is urged in report by consultant studying Town government here.
Winchester Star editorial opposing fallout shelters as unrealistic, inadequate precipitates unprecedented response in letters to the editor.
December Winchester Representative Harrison Chadwick, charging on nationally televised film that bookies maintained contacts with legislators, precipitates raging controversy over $1 billion-a-year illegal gambling in Bay State.
Board of Appeal grants petitioner light to build two-and-one-half gory nursing home at Swanton Street and Loring Avenue.
The Roderick L Bullen Agency is first Winchester firm to occupy Almost-completed new Waterfield Building.
Chadwick files bill to sustain service on the B & M under a Man whereby several communities might share the cost of operating a commuter line.
Governor Volpe speaks at Winchester High School assembly, urges greater participation by youth in community and political activities.
Community-minded local citizens >pen drive to end litter in Winchester.
Attorney General McCormack speaks at Rotary, hits bookie film as unfair to majority of Boston policemen.
Winchester has cold, ' swirling, snowy white Christmas as icy winds usher in the winter season and usher out 19(51.
Highlights Of 1961 In Sports World Nineteen Sixty-one was a significant one for the sports arena in Winchester, marking as it did the playing of international matches here, one in field hockey and the other in rugby, both on Manchester Field.
So far as any can recall the rugby match, in which the Westmount Canadians beat the Boston Rugby Association, 10-0, was the p irst formal playing of this popular English and Canadian game in Winchester.
The international field hockey match, also the first of its kind here, brought together the All English Touring Team and the United States Field Hockey squad on Manchester Field.
A Winchester girl, Alison Hersey, played on the United States team with Eleanor Keady, who is well known here through her former physical education teaching at Winchester High School.
Also in the field hockey bracket Alison Hersey has been selected to play for 'the United States Field Hockey and Touring Team that will go to England and the continent next year.
J Churchill Hindes, retired dentist and long time supporter of Winchester High School athletic teams, the trophy goes to the member of the football team who by his loyality and team spirt is adjudged to have done most for the team.
Tom Mooney, center on this year’s team at high school, was the first winner.
Still talking football Winchester’s veteran coach and director of athletics, Henry T KnowltOn, was chosen schoolboy footbull coach of the yeur by the Association of New England Football Officials.
He was presented with a handsome trophy and fine wrist watch at u testimonial banquet at the New Hotel Brunswick in Boston.
In addition to his coaching and teaching duties in Winchester Coach KnoWlton was chosen to serve on the President's Committee I in charge of the Health and PhyI sical Fitness Fair held in Boston j last spring.
School girl sports stars, Helen Carroll Pratt, now living in Cohasset, Marilyn Chase and Jan Collins, the latter new' physical education supervisor for girls at Winchester High, pioneered a tennis camp in Newton last spring along the lines of the hockey and swimming camps for girls that have been so popular.
The Winchester Sachems didn’t have such a good football season last fall though they did finish with a record of four wins, four losses and a tie.
A Winchester cadet, Joe Bellino, All American football star at Navy, received the Naval Academy Sword and the Thompson Award ut his graduation from Navy, the first cadet in 42 years to win this double honor.
For the first time this year Winchester had junior high school football teams at McCall and Lynch Junior High Schools.
Last fall’s cross country team at Winchester High enjoyed a successful season and finished third in the Middlesex Cross Country League championship meet.
Speaking of cross country Tom Morse, veteran coach of the Sachem harriers, retired this year after 13 successful seasons.
His teams won 78 dual meets while losing eight, and his Jay Vees won 74 out of 75.
His teams won seven divisional championships, two Middlesex League championships, seven State championships and two New England championships.
Gathering up a few sports odds and ends, the Hawks beat the Pistons in the playoff for the senior Police Athletic League basketball championship.
The Sons of Italy won the championship of the Park Department Softball League, beating the Shamrocks in the playoff for the title.
In Little League baseball the Dodgers won the National League, .and the Athletics, the American League championships.
The PnnI thers were the American Minor i League champions and the GreyI hounds, the Minor League titlists in the National League.
The Winchester Junior Legion baseball team won the Zone 5 playoffs but lost to Needham in the regional competition.
The Cubs defeated the White Sox to win the Babe Ruth League crown, hut the Babe Ruth All Stars were eliminated from the district playoffs by Peabody.
Carling Intercity League baseball series last summer with the Town Team finishing in third place in the league.
Only a few local skippers made the trip to Marblehead for Race Week last summer and John Borggaard’s finishing in the top ten in the snipe competition was the best WBC showing.
Rod Long and his crew, John Berger, won the Governor’s Cup in the Quassapaug Regatta, and Tom Legere won the Massachusetts Bay Snipe Regatta.
Both Long and Legere were finalists in the snipe class National Championship Regatta at Old Saybrook, Conn., with Long finally finishing sixth in the championship bracket.
Perhaps the big noise for the Winchester Boat Club came when Legere won the Snipe Invitation Regatta Trophy in the big competition held last summer at Mystic Lake, beating the defending champion, Tom St.
Winchester Swim Trophies for 19(51 went to Rhonda Marotta, (Gladys Putting Memorial Trophy); Julie and Barbara Devaney, (joint winners of the Red Cross girls trophy); Fred Marotta, (Thomas P McGowan Memorial boys trophy); and Barbara Bund.
Over at The Winchester Country Club bowling on the green was instituted by a group of enthusiasts for this age-old sport.
The club also had its fourth International Bonspiol and its seventh annual i invitational men’s bonspiel, A [Country Club team also won the coveted Mahopac Medal in the (5th j Cuthbertson Bonspiel at Westchester County.
The lute Laurence and Maribel Owen won skating championships I at both the United States oham| pjonships at Colorado Springs and I at the North American championI ships just before their ill-fated trip to the International championships iq Europe.
Laurence won the women’s singles at both meets while her sister was second with Dudley Richards in the North American senior pairs and first with Mr Richards in the United States senior pairs.
A 12-year-old schoolgirl, Tena Noyes of Marycliff Academy, youngest entry in the National Skating Championships, won the novice skating crown at Colorado Springs.
Storm Complaints were coming in constantly from these streets, and on the whole there were more complaints than usual during and after the storm.
In spite of the complaints, and among the loudest were those from occupants of Lyceum Building, several with whom the Star talked on Tuesday felt Winchester’s handling of the storm, by comparison with other communities, was good.
The town’s equipment held up well through the storm with only minor breakdowns through Sunday.
By late afternoon Monday, however, several pieces of equipment went by the board, handicapping the work of mopping up since it was practically • impossible to hire replacements.
OLD WATERF1ELD BUILDING, GUTTED IN LIKE, i, deuwiKluM io make room tor new.
I Photo by Ryeraon NIK DEATH OF I \\ O TEEN-AGERS iu Thanksgiving Day accident al Syinnics Corner stunned tlie town.
Photo by Ryerwon THE DEATH OF MARIBty VINSON OWEN, LAURENCE, AND MARI BEL iu an air .rabh shocked Winchester.
I Page Four THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 28, 1961 (Ptntuarirs Mrs.
Virginia Loftus Laurenti of 36 Hetzell Road, Williamsville, N.Y., wife of Jeremiah Eugene Laurenti and daughter of Mrs.
Arthur W Loftus of Ginn Road, was fatally injured Wednesday night, December 20, when her automobile was rammed by a heavy truck on the Massachusetts Turnpike in Hopkinton.
She and her husband and their two children, Eugene Arthur, 0; and Marguerite Ann, 3; were on their way to Winchester to spend the holidays with Mrs.
Laurenti, who was driving, had stoppe'd her car in the safety lane of the highway so that her husband could clear the windshield of ice.
The Laurenti car rolled down an embankment after the crash followed by the truck.
The operator of the truck was arrested on charges of manslaughter and driving to endanger.
Laurenti was pronounced dead upon her arrival afT the Framingham Union Hospital.
The children were critically injured their names being placed on the danger list.
Mr Laurenti was not believed to be seriously injured though he was unconscious for two hours after the accident.
She grew up in Winchester, attending the Winchester schools and graduating from Win Chester High School in the class of 1940.
Laurenti en tered the Boston City Hospital training school for nurses, from which she was graduated with her R.N. in 1944.
She later served on the staff of the Winchester Hos pital, for the most part as a nurse in the operating room.
In addition to her professional interest, she worked actively in aid of the hospital as a member of the W inton Club and the Friends of the Winchester Hospital.
Her entire life aside from her care of her home and family was devoted to the bet terment of the hospital.
She and her husband were married September 6, 1952, and lived in Winchester until they moved to Williamsville, N Y., last September.
Besides her husband and children, and her mother, who is a retired remedial speech teacher in the Boston public schools, Mrs.
Frank H Knight of 55 Mystic Valley Parkway, died suddenly in her sleep Friday morning, Dec., at her daughter’s home at the age of 97.
She had been in her usual health the day previous and had been looking forward to the arrival of family guests for Christmas.
She was born Apr., 1864, in Port Elgin, N.B., where she grew up and was married to John Lamb who was for many years principal of the high school there.
Mr Lamb died in 1941, but his widow continued to keep her home in Port Elgin even though she had made her home with her daughter in Winchester for several years.
She was a staunch member and very active in the work of the Trinity United Church of Port Elgin and its church organizations, her hospitable home being always open for church, civic and social affairs.
In complete possession of her faculties to the end she was fond of TV and kept informed on current events.
William Kenneth MacLeod of Thetford Mines, P.Q.; a great-grandson, William Kenneth MacLeod, Jr., and two great-grandchildren, William Kenneth MacLeod, 3rd, and Robert Douglas MacLeod, all of Thetford Mines.
Leslie Settle, pastor of Trinity United Church in Port Elgin, officiated.
Dean Wheatley Former Winchester Athlete Died in Sherborn Dean Wheatley, 67, of Linden Lane.
Sherborn, general manager of the International Purchasing Company of Wellesley and a former football star at Winchester High School, died suddenly, at his home Friday, December 22, following a heart attack.
Wheatley had spent November abroad and upon his return he had been bothered with a heart ailment, which it is believed had been with him for some time.
Mr Wheatley was bom in Halifax, N S. f coming to Winchester as a boy and living with his family at 22 Park Avenue.
He entered Winchester High School with the class of 1913, and as a freshman made the school football team as fullback, his sturdy physique and great speed making him an effective line plunger in the old days when fullbacks were used exclusively to buck the line.
A severe knee injury, which later prevented military service, forced him out of the backfield in his sophomore year and he finished his football career as a tackle.
He was also a member of the school track and relay teams, and of the old Phi Delta Society.
The death of his father caused Mr Wheatley to leave high school in the middle of his junior year, and at that time the family moved to a farm in Ashland.
Mr Wheatley was associated with the International Purchasing Co. of Wellesley for 40 years, and at the time of his death he was a director and general manager of the firm.
A noted horseman and a former New England field hunting champion, he was former secretary and whip of the Millwood Hunt.
He was also a member of the Norfolk Hunt and rode with both the Myopia Hunt and the Quonset Hunt in Rhode Island, where he was field master.
Mr Wheatley leaves his wife, Charlotte, a granddaughter of the late war-time Governor Samuel Walker McCall, and Mrs.
Leone McCrillis; and a brother, Harold Geoffrey Wheatley, both of Day tona Beach, Fla.
Family services were held last Saturday at the late residence with Rev.
Royalty Visits The North Shore Christmas Pageant Photo by Ryerson CHRISTMAS PAGEANT AT IMMACULATE CONCEPTION SCHOOL for military or civil defense personnel to go in for rescue operations and the degree of radioactivity of casualties.
The information which they will gather will be sent immediately to the First Army Chemical Section and to the immediate area commander to provide facts upon which to base decisions.
The First Army Chemical Section is on the job and ready to meert the challenge of a nuclear fallout in northeastern United States and as First Army’s “eye on the sky” is an important cog in the overall defense of the nation, the First Army concluded.
See the book of j day j n Middleboro, Ky., with burial samples at the Winchester Star. in Knoxville, Tenn.
Wright and a resident of Winchester for nearly sixty years, died Tuesday morning, December 26, at the West Medford Nursing Home after a long illness at the age of 86.
She was born August 16, 1875, in Lowell, was graduated from Lowell High School and from Smith College, in the class of 1900.
She and her husband were married December 24, 1904, coming to Winchester soon after their marriage.
She was a member of the First Congregational Church, Society of Mayflower Descendants, Founders and Patriots of America, Daughters of Colonial Wars, Descendants of the Colonial Clergy of America, Committee of Safety Chapter, D.A.R.; the Historical Societies of both Winchester and Lowell, the Winchester Garden Club and the Fortnightly Woman’s Club.
Wright’s husband, retired secretary of the Massachusetts Hospital Life Insurance Company, died January 11, 1947.
Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at 1:30 at Ripley Memorial Chapel of the First Congregational Church.
Burial will be in the Wright family lot in West Parish Cemetery, Andover.
Horace C Martin Horace C Martin, president of the Martin Manufacturing Corp. of Middleboro, Ky., who died Wednesday, December 20, was a former resident of Winchester.
He lived as a boy in Winchester, attended Culver Military Academy and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
R McKin Browning of Barrington, R I.; a son, Bert T., of Marblehead; a sister, Mrs.
Services were held last SaturKING SAUD, reigning monarch of Saudi Arabia, leaves the famous Towne Lyne House, Lvnn field, after a luiieheoii with lii» two sons and the ambassadors to three countries.
The ladies in the entourage of King SaucL his four wives, and their attendants were served in the afternoon Dressed in western clothes and without veils they dined on lamb pilaf with grape leaves a la Towne Lyne House.
No wines or cocktails were served as this is forbidden by the Islamic religious tenets.
Left to right, Ambassador to West Germany, to U.S.A., son of King Snud.
Army Chemical Section stands ready to give fallout predictions should it ever become necessary, the First United States Army Information Headquarters announced this week.
A quiet and little known, but most important activity within the First Army Headquarters is the Radiological Center located in Radiological Division of the Chemical Section.
When notified of the explosion of a nuclear weapon at any point within the northeastern United States, First Army’s Radiological Center personnel will take one look at the wind patterns plotted on their Fallout Prediction Map and be able to tell accurately which area will receive the weapon’s fallout.
Notified For example, if a detonation of megaton size should occur in Albany, N Y., on a given day with the winds from the west, fallout in the next fight he will have to could be expected over the Fort I meet an even more deadly enemy devens-Boston complex in eastern j and he takes great care in making Massachusetts.
Immediately the j sure which way the winds blow in Rad Center would notify Civil Defense and post commanders throughout the area.
At the same time all posts within First Army area would bring their fallout maps up to date.
Private First Class Marilyn J Brown, 19, of Brazil, Indiana; Master Sergeant Albert Pough, Jr., 34, of Detroit, Michigan, and Sergeant First Class Clarence Hungerford, 38, of Bridgeport, Conn.
Pough, a paratrooper and veteran of ten battles in Korea, makes the overlays for the Fallout Prediction Map.
Wellversed in the art of fighting as holder of the First Don Black Belt for karate, Pough understands that order to provide accurate warning to all citizens in the affected area.
Assisting him is Sergeant Hungerford, a veteran of the invasion at Anzio, Italy, and four other campaigns before being wounded near Mount Belvedere, Italy.
Radiation Sealer Another of their daily tasks is the operation of a radiation sealer.
This information is then indicated on the Radiological Background Count Chart located above the machine.
In addition to the Prediction Map, there is a Fallout Situation Map of the whole northeastern area of the United States.
Here, in the event of a nuclear explosion, the progress of the actual fallout will be indicated as reports come in so that Colonel Evan H Lewis, 49, of Seymour, Indiana, First United States Army Chemical Officer, will be in position to keep the Army Commander, the Army Air Defense Commander, and the Civil Defense authorities accurately informed of the danger area.
Under Colonel Lewis’s direction are eight biological and radiological teams located at various points within First Army area.
Radiological Surveys They are being trained to be dispatched by local installation commanders to fallout areas to make radiological surveys, assist the Medics and help with decontamination.
Every pedestrian and driver should walk and drive carefully during the holidays.
The Massachusetts Highway safety committee is doing everything possible to regulate and control traffic and will carry out Governor Volpe’s order to remove drinking drivers from behind the wheel.
We need the active support and cooperation of responsible members of each family in the commonj wealth to guarantee that unreasj jpg onable and drinking drivers will not appear on our highways durj ing the holiday season.
School Children Present Pageant On Thursday, December 21, at 1:30m. the children of the Immaculate Conception School, presented to families and friends their annual Christmas entertainment.
The following program included a number from each grade from one through eight.
Bernard Foley, John Griffin, Francis O’Keefe Mary Joseph Angels Kings: George Brough, Francis Gonsalves, Edward Murphy Carols: Seventh, Eighth Grade Girls Address: Father Driscoll The spirit of joy, so appropriate to the season, permeated the entire performance.
John S Andrews John S Andrews of 78 Cleveland Street, Malden, a former resident of Winchester, died suddenly Wednesday evening, Dec., at his home.
After his marriage to Abbie D O’Toole of Winchester, he made his home in this town until he went to Malden 25 years ago.
Until his retirement he was for many years an employee of the Glendale Coal Company in Charlestown.
Besides his wife, he leaves a son, A-lst class Oscar LeRoy Andrews of Warner Robbins, Ga., and five grandchildren.
The funerai was held last Saturday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with requiem high mass celebrated at St.
Pierce Imports Burton and Guestier Julius Kayer Duff Gordon Harvey’s Cockburn Cossart Carnbus Mirafiore and others Wines From France • Germany Portugal Spain Greece Denmark Italy etc.
It has been recognized for some time that the sealing 1 of food, meat in particular, in impermeable flexible plastic containers from which air has been exhausted produces a j superior product and package.
The mechanism is power driven and automatic in action, and it includes a track by which the clips are fed into position for the crimping operation.
According to Mr Richardson, the prior mechanisms of the foregoing type have had the disadvantage that a different crimping head and crimp feeding track have been necessary when substituting one size clip for another.
The changing of the crimping head and feed track is time consuming, increases labor j costs, and involves added expense for equipment.
This is accomplished by j adjusting a special cam, preferably with four faces, that is mounted rutatably in a dot in the plunger which, by its motions, causes the ( limping jaws to move into or away from their crimping position.
As another feature of the invention, provision is made for a clip feeding track that is capable of accomodating up to four or more different sizes of clips without the j necessity of changing the track when the clip size is changed.
New at the Star office, three-hole Aecropress genuine ring binders, assorted colors, excellent for theme or thesis, 80 cents each.
More and more families are greeting the New Year at gay home parties, with friends and neighbors.
Stamp, fre *h ba^ed FINAST Pineapple Pie Extra Z""H"" Stamps FINAST English Muffins Extra &M ' Stamps FINAST English Muffins EXTRA frX; STAMPS * ith ° pkg of 75 VANITY FAIR DINNER NAPKINS Extra Large — Extra Soft FINAST with a pkg of 6 with o pkg of 12 i Ginger Ale OR SPARKLING WATER 1 PT 12 OZ BOTS Home On hn-loudi & > Army Pfc.
Gaudioso, who has recently completed the 25-week Hawk continuous-wave radar maintenance* course at the Air Defence School, Fort Bliss, Texas, is in Winchester enjoying a furlough with his parents, Mr and Mrs.
Gaudioso was trained to install, test, adjust and perform organizational maintenance on the continuous-wave radar equipment used in the Hawk guided missile system.
The Air Defense School, the largest military school in the nation, trains personnel to man and maintain the guided missile systems employed in the air defense of the U.S., by our armies overseas and by our allies of the NATO and SEATO nations.
The 20-year-old soldier is a 1900 graduate of Winchester High School and was employed by High Voltage Engineering Corporation, Burlington, before entering the Army.
Ill’ RI) late of Sanford in the County of York and State of Maine, deceased.
Witness, John C I.eggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-sixth day of December 19U1.
John V Harvey, Register. dec28-3t In an amazing first-half ftinsh in | which each of tho first eight places i were decided by the difference of one game, and which in one instance was decided on pinfalls, California, on top until the final match, was knocked into second place after dropping four | points to Jeff t Gaudioso’s Penn i team, which moved from seventh • to fifth place.
California’s Mario Buzzotta had 315, Frank DiMambro 405, and Woozy Giacalone 289.
Tony Saraco *s Notre Dame team climbed from second to first by taking Bates 4-0.
Tony was high scorer in this match with 294, and Tony Bavuso was close behind with 291.
Babe Tofuri, achieved third place as the result of its 4-0 victory over last-place St.
The second half starts tonight, and with so many bowlers finding the range, it should be an exciting half.
Attendance-prize winners were Emile Doucette and Tony Lucci, who won turkeys which definitely found themselves on their Christmas tables.
Elizabeth A Ilecht is a new teacher this year in the fourth giade of the Mystic School.
Won Lost Pin falls Notre Dame 35 17 21,626 California 34 18 21,652 Maryland 33 19 21,231 Harvard 32 20 21,380 Penn 31 21 21,076 Holy Cross 30 22 21,370 Yale 30 22 21,138 Alabama 29 23 21,536 Navy 26 26 21,034 Boston College 26 27 21,156 Army 19 33 21,154 Bates 15 37 20,146 Georgetown 14 38 20,627 St.
Surely every one is fervently hoping that the coming year will he a happy one, tor us individually, and for the strife ridden world.
We can start toward making the world happier by genuinely trying to be happier ourselves in our relations with each other.
When we say “Happy New Year” we can mean it, and we can try to live through the year in the spirit that prompted the greeting.
Among our friends are many whose new year isn’t likely to he happy unless we do something to help make it so.
Wishing these friends a “Happy New Year” can be just a mockery, if that is as far as our effort goes in their behalf.
Most of us must depend on our relationships with others for our happiness anyhow.
Few of us are so all sufficient as to find satisfaction wholly within ourselves.
We can all help to make the world happier and better by actually living our New Years greeting through the entire year, by doing what we can to make those with whom we come in contact happier and by striving to do to others as we would have those others do to us.
Life is a cooperative venture and it is our observation that those who arc most cooperative, who are most tolerant, friendly and who give most of themselves to others arc the happiest.
The Star through the year has tried to he helpful, to fulfill its obligations as a responsible weekly newspaper.
We have tried to print the sort of paper to which we feel \\ inchestcr is entitled.
If we have succeeded, it is in large measure because of the friendliness and support of our readers, advertisers and friends.
We arc grateful for this hacking as 19(51 draws to a close and we await the coming of another year.
H educational radio and T.V. station is good news to that station’s many admirers.
This brings the rebuilding account to a more hopeful $550,000, aj/proximately one-third of the money needed to rebuild.
And on the local scene we have the the equally good news that the Winchester Rotary Club has voted unanimously to donate $200 to the rebuilding fund.
Rotary is hopeful that other service organizations both in Winchester and in other towns will follow suit.
B.I L get a new home, hut also that generous grants from other foundations will push the fundraising drive way over the top.
Here, indeed, is an educational cause that is the proper concern of all public and private organizations, and it would seem to us that no organization could contribute to a cause more worthy.
Certainly if we can spend over a million dollars on a single missile without hatting an eyelash, we should be able to raise a million and one half dollars for education, which remains our final defense and the soundest basis for peace.
W.G.B.H., a non-commercial station entirely dependent on the generosity of civic-minded people, should not have to go a-begging for assistance in Massachusetts which has a goodly share of wealthy towns inhabited by educated people.
C hannel 2 and F.M. radio, Winchester’s cultural life would he immeasurably poorer.
We would suppose, too. that Winchester shared our admiration for the Robert Herridge Theatre and for the utterly wonderful Open Knd.
We would also say that our day i> enriched by newscaster Louis Lyons’ I larvardized twang reporting on world affairs, by William Fierce’s sophisticated comments on the symphony, and by Bill Cavness’ polished reading of such classics as “Dr.
Its programming of music, although decidedly “symphohic ” in emphasis, satisfies a sophisticated interest in the classical jazz idiom, as well.
II. is a source of enlightenment and pride to everyone who respects culture.
The Star again urges everyone who believes in education to give as much as he can to help the station rebuild.
Office parties where liquor is served freely are becoming a serious problem, especially where many who have over-indulged themselves seek to make their way home hy automobile.
The Governor showed good judgment in asking those on Beacon Hill not to subject themselves to the risks that over-indulgence presents.
The Governor’s request for no drinking at the State I louse parties is good advice for all gatherings. from which guests will he driving.
Whatever may he one’s feeling about liquor and the desirability of serving it at social functions no sensible person can deny that any one who is going to drive a motor ear should not dull his reflexes and judgment with intoxicants.
In the good old days such indulgence was pretty much an individual matter and any adverse affect of the indulgence was limited to the iudulgcr.
It lie was unable to get home under his own power a horse-drawn cab got him there safely without endangering any one else who happened to be on the highway.
An automobile with a drunken driver and possibly several passengers in a state of intoxication, is a fearful menace on the road, capable of bringing death or serious injury to those riding in it and to others, perhaps completely sober, who chance to he in the path of the drunken driver’s car.
What an awful experience it would he lor any one to have his automobile kill or maim some one because, through over-indulgence, he was unable to drive safely.
That is why the Star says pass up the “flowing howl” if you are going to drive afterward, or if you can not make arrangements for some one who has eschewed the cup that cheers to drive you home.
New Year’s is coining up and New Year’s rs synonymous with gay parties where abstemiousness is not the rule.
The Honeymoon Is Over We talked to a rather unhappy Police Chief Derro over the Christmas week end and found he was upset because the motorists in that time had taken advantage of his department’s attempt to he nice to them over the holidays.
During the holiday season instead ot tagging ears or summonsing law violating drivers into court, the police affixed to off ending ears cards extending the season’s greetings with the reminder that the ear was parked in violation of the law.
The owner of the offending ear was asked to cooperate with the Police by parking properly in the future and the cards wore signed by C hief Derro.
The idea was a friendly one and Chief Derro hoped that its response from offending motorists would he equally friendly.
Many uioluri*>te took advantage ui polio leniency to break the law with impunity, especially in the center some merchants were again parking their ears in front of their establishments, tints keeping prospective customers from easy access to t’he stores.
Chief Derro has asked the Star to warn its readers that the honeymoon is definitely over, and that after January 2 registration numbers <>l illegally parked cars will he taken for court action.
This goes especially for the all night parkers, whose ears in the event of a big snowstorm prevent the proper plowing of the town’s highways.
Chief Derro and his men tried to exemplify the Christmas spirit by making a friendly gesture to local motorists.
Commencing after New Year’s all bets are oil and we can all tell it to the judge.
Sees Congressman Visits Capital COYIYIITTEEYIAN AND CONGRESSMAN— Winchester Republican National Committeeman.
Ralph Bonnell. visited W ashington in 1961 to talk with Congressman Brad Morse, who visited W inches ter in November.
This week’s picture in the Star’s Remember When series is of the old Brown and Stanton Block at the corner of Main and Mt.
C Stanton, two Winchester business men, who moved their businesses into it when it was completed.
Brown’s drug store was established in the Lyceum Building by David Youngman, at one time town clerk of Winchester. .losiah llovey succeeded Mr Youngman in running the business and it was from Mr Hovey that Dr.
Brown’s drug store was the tirst drug store in the new Brown and Stanton block and he ran it there in the eighties.
Later his clerk, Frank Covtdl, took over the business and it was known as Coveil’s Pharmacy when the picture in this week’s Star was taken.
Abair, and Allen’s Pharmacy were among the successors to Co veil, to be followed by William H Hevey William F Sheehan and the present proprietors, Jack Collins and Tom Purtle.
Stanton grocery store was in the Brown and Stanton block on Main Street substantially where the Winchester Provision has been located.
It had what few groceries could boast of, a completely covered drive-in beside the store where delivery teams could Ih* loaded off the street.
Thompson succeeded Mr Stanton and there were others before the Winchester Provision, including Carter & Young.
On the second floor of the old block, about where the Masonic flail is now located was what was then known as Harmony Hall, a popular gathering place.
At the street level in the old days were the Winchester Post Office, then a very small operation, the Winchester News Company, distributor of UuoLou papers and publisher for a short time of the old “Winchester News”; and Fred Scales, watchmaker and jeweler.
Adjoining the Brown and Stanton block on the Mount Vernon Street side, (it was Pleasant Street then), was the White Block, a part of which shows in the picture.
Bowser Dry (foods Store, later G Raymond Bancroft; and Jimmy Gargas’ fruit store and peanut roasting stand.
On the second floor of the block, now occupied by the Studio Guild was the old YMCA headquarters with its band-box gymnasium where some of the best basketball players hereabouts got their grounding in the game.
It is interesting to sec the old overhead incandescent street lights in use at the time the picture was taken, and also the oil-burning lamps , one of which is shown in front of the White Block.
The tree limbs in the picture are from the big tree that stood in the middle of the center in the old days with a watering trough for llOl'kiCo* A MEMO ON STATISTICS By WILSON SULLIVAN People who insist that you can prove ANYTHING with statistics are usually disturbed about something statistics HAVE proved.
Admittedly, a statistic torn out of context or unrelated to certain variables can be deceptive.
For instance, if 1 were to tell you that the United States spends one-third of a billion dollars on dog food every year, this statistic hy itself would be only mildly alarming.
If 1 were to add the fact that this figure is in excess of Haiti’s total national income, and that there are 10,000 homeless children in Hong Kong, the dog food statistic assumes greater significance.
It is in contrast with the second and third facts that the first becomes important.
If I tell you without elaboration that the United States spends more on liquor than on either education or churches you have a fairly reliable indication of where the national heart lies.
If I tell you that while Venezuelans leaders try to persuade the world that they arc running a democracy, 2 per cent of their rural population owns 74 per cent of the land while 500,000 farmers remain landless, you have a rather good idea of why Communism may take over the Latin economy.
Similarly, if I report that Haiti’s per capita income is a paltry $85 per year, you understand better why Haiti is not always enchanted with our dollar diplomacy, in which we finance the people who keep Haiti poor.
Nor does the world look kindly on the fact that while we spend $10 billion per year to create needs for such vital things as mechanical martini-mixers and nine-shade toasters, two thirds of the world is hungry, ill clothed and ill housed; or on the fact that with only one-sixth of the world’s people the United States grinds up one-half of the world’s processed natural resources. i 1 i Statistics provide dramatic contrasts between America and the world beyond, contrasts which we ignore at great peril to our future.
Similarly, in all of Latin America there are only 3,719,99G telephones as opposed to 4.541.000 in Illinois.
This is not to argue the intrinsic value of either autos or telephones; it is to say that both are reliable indices of relative wealth and technological progress which give rise to growing anger among less favored people, and a growing sense of rebellion against the system which permits such inequities.
But these statistics do indicate that our foreign policy should work in the direction of encouraging political and economic reform before the tyranny of the right bows to that of the left.
For the world’s poor people no longer accept the shamanistic nonsense that hunger and tyranny are “divinely” decreed.
They know they can he fed and free if given the proper government and economy.
At the end of 1961, with Mr Castro’s passage into Marxism before us, it should be plain to all that we either help these people in the ways of evolutionary democracy or they will help themselves to revolution. / / i It is suggested frequently that “if only” America could go it alone, if only we could build a “Fortress America” sealed off from alien impurities, all would be well.
Besides the fact that we are utterly dependent on the rest of the world for our natural resources, this pleasant concept ignores unpleasant realities that exist within America itself.
This free land of the fast buck and the ""everybody’s doing it” ethic now leads the world in alcoholism arid homicide.
We spend $300 million per year on tranquillizers to make life more bearable.
We send 400,000 of our one million juvenile delinquents to court every year.
Despite the heavy claims of “public service” over T.V. it is known that we spend four times as much on advertising to create consumer needs than we do on basic research.
In •the drug industry, for example, merchandise is marked up 7,000 per cent to absorb the high cost of national advertising.
Richard A Hakim son, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan.
Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 • 1954 The Winchester Star, left at your Residence for one year, $4.00 in Advance Single Copies, Ten Cents The Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements but will publish without charge a correction in the next issue, or republish that portion oi the advertisement which is incorrect.
Telephone PArkview 9-0029 OLDEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN WINCHESTER Serving the Community 81 Years Largest Sworn Circulation REPRESENTING WINCHESTER Senators in Congress Leverett Saltonstall Benjamin Smith Congressman 5th District F Bradford Morse Senator 6th Middlesex District C Eugene Farnam Representative in General Court Hurrison Chadwick County Commissioners Edward L Buckley, chuirmaji William G Andrew Thomas B Brennan 4 Letter To The Editor Wonderful to Be Remembered (Fd.
Dear ""Winchester Hotliefronters,” Once again Christmas time has rolled around and once again a delightful “box from home"" has been received by all of Winchesters’ servicemen.
It is a wonderful thing to be remembered by people and even more gratifying to be remembered by a whole town.
Every year when I receive my Christmas package from you my shipmates are amazed that a town can be so thoughtful.
Perhaps other towns are just as thoughtful, but I have never met another serviceman who's hometown sent him a Christmas package.
Mary’s School >ing for Shir Photographer Bill Hycrson, his wife, Beverly, and their small daughter, Karen, having her first Christman.
Peter Hurley, 12; Janice O’Neil, 11; Bobby O'Neil, 10; and Cynthia Kenney.
Would anyone interested drop them off at my home, 39 Ridge Street, or call PA 9-1130 and I will pick them up.
Goodwin Traffic Deaths Higher In preparation for the New Year’s holiday weekend the office of Registrar Clement A Riley is reminding the public that the record indicates fifty-two were killed in traffic accidents as of December 25 compared with fortyeight last year.
Every pedestrian ami driver should walk and drive carefully during the New Year’s holidays.
If your car is not registered for 1952 it must be off the road by midnight Sunday, December 31.
Registry inspectors will be looking for unregistered and uninsured cars.
The Christmas spirit was well in evidence at last week’s session of Winchester’s Duplicate Bridge Club.
Our hats oft* to Walter and Trudy Mainberger and all those who worked on the refreshments.
Eggnog was the order of the evening and the excellent food that accompanied it was not only tastetempting but w'a.s eye-appealing as well.
The consensus of opinion was <me of extreme appreciation for this attractive, well-served, and delicious snack, provided by the entertainment committee and its chairwoman, Ann Dean.
The turnout was excellent as 11 tables in Section A and 10 tables in Section B participated, producing average scores of 11U and 03 respectively.
Members Neiv York , atul Boston Stork Exchanges, American Exchange INVESTMENT SERVICE FOB MORE THAN 00 YEARS RONELS AFTER-CHRISTMAS SALE of Toys Games Hobbies Vs Markdowns V2 and more on H0 TRAIN SETS GUN AND HOLSTER SETS TOOL SETS • RACING CARS WOOD-BURNING SETS CUSTOMIZING KITS WEAVING SETS DOLLS AND MANY OTHERS Ronel’s 23 • 25 Thompson Street PA 0-1708 Janie Gantt and Ernest Pinson, | Geprge Collin and Alexander Oszy, tJ5 Mr and Mrs.
Nancy Atkinson and Greta Hawley, 03 East-West Clarence Woodward and Herbert Wood, 70 Ann Walansky and Sue Josephs, 75 Peg Sullivan and Doliy Pasquale, 71V* Barbara Sawyer and Blair Hawley, 08 While there were many interesting hands that developed during the evening’s play, we have decided to use one that was dealt in a recent rubber bridge game.
The bidding was of minor importance and the final contract was 0 spades by south.
The opening lead is the heart king — before reading further, see if you can spot the correct line of play.
North A K Q x V None ♦ 10 xx A A K xxxxx West East A J 10 x Ax V A K xxx V xxxxx ♦ K J x ♦ xxxx A xx A Q J 10 South A A xxxxx V Q J 10 ♦ A Q x A x I believe there is only one line of play that will bring this home, but for some reason it seems difficult to see.
The opening heart lead is ruffed in dummy, the club ace is cashed and the club king is cashed — declarer discarding a heart.
A small club is led, ruffed by the declarer and a spade is led to the dummy.
This, of course, leaves the west hand with 2 spades, the dummy with one and the east hand with none.
Now, an established club is played and declarer’s last heart is discarded.
The west hand can ruff if he cares to, but no return he makes can hurt the declarer — all of his diamonds are thrown on the established clubs.
Goal Named For Cerebral Palsy j Drive Herbert Connolly, general campaign Chairman for the United Cerebral Palsy of Greater Boston has announced the sum of $175,000 as the goal for the annual ‘*53 Minute March” in aid of the fight against the crippling disease on January 14.
This figure represents the realistic sum that must be reached if United Cerebral Palsy of Greater Boston is to provide the necessary habilitation services for the more than 15,000 cerebral palsied in the community during the coming year and to support the national research program of United Cerebral Palsy which seeks the ultimate prevention of this vicious multi-crippler.
John H Harris, President-Producer of Ice Capades, opening Boston Garden December 27 through January 7, announced that Charles L Haggerty, Inc. of Winchester will be the local sponsor for this area.
Youngsters that are accepted will be trained by three of the greatest coaches in the world, Rosemarie Stewart and Bob Dench, former Olympic Pair Champions.
In addition, Nate Walley, former star skater with Ice Capades and for many years a skating instructor of high repute.
Mr Harris stated, ""Auditions will be held each Friday the show is in Boston, the auditions are open to any youngster that knows how to ice skate.
Regardless of present ability or a youngster’s personal opinion, any young men or women who have ice skating ability and a strong interest in skating should audition.
The accepted youngster is exposed to the example and help of such skating greats as Ronnie Robertson . . who Olympic Champion Avery Brundage called, ""The greatest skater who ever lived"" and World Champion Kathy Machado, both of whom hold the highest award in skating, the Gold Medal.
After completing the training, at the Ice Capades Skating School graduates may have the opportunity of going on in amateur competitions leading to possible Olympic participation, or have the chance of joining Ice Capades.
As a direct result of the auditions, there is also the possibility of joining Ice Capades, touring the United States, Canada and world tours.
Senior Forum The Senior Forum of the First Congregational Church will have its December Forum at Church service this Sunday at the 11:00 m. worship.
All Forum alumni are especially invited to attend this i Homecoming service.
Preceding the Forum at Church I service, there will be an informal I professional skills in the treatment | coffee hour in Chidley Hall at of cerebral palsy hus resulted not; 10:00 o’clock.
Forum alumni an only in the upgrading of services I invited to meet members of their and professional skills but also in classes there and also to greet 1 an increased need for funds to supi Forum’s present officers and mem port these services und skills. burs.
PKG 39 'm wr SAVE CONVERSE REGISTER TAPES $2.00,h Page Eight THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 28, 1961 T— Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION S FUNDS SAFEGUARD the nest egg of your social, fraternal or church organization hy opening an Account in the Winchester Cooperative Bank.
Your club's funds will earn a nice profit, be fully insured and readily available.
Eugene Bishop Hotchkiss of New Canaan, Connecticut, was married Saturday, Dec., to Richard James Clark, Jr., son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marital Ties Stronger Locally According to Census Study In Winchester, marriage is a more permanent institution than it is in most sections of the United States.
Data gathered by the Census Bureau shows that the ratio of divorced men and women in the local population is below average.
It has not increased the way it has done nationally, where the ratio has more than doubled in the last ten years.
The importance of an examination of our divorce vate was brought out last month at the 50th anniversary meeting here of the Family Service Association of America.
The association called family breakdown the number-one social problem in the United States.
At the present time, it pointed out, there is one divorce for every four new marriages.
And, along with it, we now have a delinquency rate that is triple what it was in 1040.
In Winchester, the Census Bureau figures reveal, 14 out of every 1,000 people over the age of 14 are divorced or separated.
The rate compares favorably with that in the rest of the United States, where it amounts to 43 per 1,000.
The actual count shows, for Winchester, a total of 01 divorced women and 41 divorced men.
In addition, the Census Bureau lists 40 women and 17 men who are separated from their spouses, legally or otherwise, because of marital discord.
Just such a program will be undertaken shortly by the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, with a fund of .$350,000 at its disposal.
Richard M Clifton of 4 Summit Avenue is undergoing nine weeks of recruit training at the Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois.
David A Bates, a freshman at Nichols College of Business Admi nistration in Dudley, Mass., has been awarded his cross-country letter by coach Hal Chalmers.
Bates formerly attended Maine Central Inst., Pittsfield, Maine, and is the son of Mr and Mrs.
Thursday evening about 7 :40 m., Barbara Chaulk of 12 Park Avenue reported to police that the glove compartment in her Chevro let was ransacked on Converse Place.
Police say that the locked glove compartment was ransacked by way of a hole slit in the cardboard back of the compartment.
Paul W Goddu who is at guided Missiles school at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, flew east to spend the holidays with his parents, Mr and Mrs.
John Elliott of 35 Water Street assumed her duties as a clerk in the Town Clerk’s office on Tuesday morning.
Firemen cleared the Pulli residence at 27 Florence Street of smoke on Sunday afternoon about 3:15 o’clock when a pot of stew set to burning.
Silfskin January Special Save 20 per cent on Girdles, Panty Girdles, Extra-long-leg Panty Girdle.
Fred Doyle of Madison Avenue West has returned home from a Boston hospital where he recently underwent surgery.
When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car Dlease call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. decl5-tf David Mitchell, a student at Thompson Academy, was at home over Christmas to spend the holidays with his parents, Mr and Mrs.
A burning stuffed chair required the services of Winchester’s firefighters at 10 Skillings Road on Monday night about 9:15 o’clock.
The burning chair resulted in a goodly measure of smoke in the house, damaging the rug near the chair as well.
Rhona M French of 11 Sawmill Brook Road, former clerk in the Town Clerk’s office, assumed her duties as secretary of the First Baptist Church on Tuesday, December 26.
Allan Buros, Jr., a junior at New Hampton School, New Hampton, N.H., is at home for the Christmas vacation.
At the annual Fall Sports Banquet held recently at the school Buros was awarded a tie clip as he has been a member of the winning intra-mural Club Soccer team.
Treo’s Anniversary Sale Substantial Savings on Stvles Number 9-10-410-411.
One of the most interesting cards the Star received through the holiday season was the one from its former employee, Geoff Johnson, who is now in the Marine Corps at Okinawa.
Colver Payson Dyer, of 11 Grove Street, announces the* engagement of her daughter.
Card of Thanks We wish to sincerely thank our many friends, relatives, neighbors, for their many acts of kindness, and messages of sympathy, spiritual bouquets, religious articles, and flowers, received at the death of our beloved mother.
RICHARD J CLARK, JR The ceremony was performed in the Congregational Church of New Canaan by the Reverend Loring Chase.
Given in marriage by her father, Miss Hotchkiss wore a gown of light ivory satin with Alencon lace bodice, scoop neckline and bracelet sleeves, and a full skirt ending in a chapel train.
Leonard Wheeler, Jr., of Denver, Col., sister of the bride, was matron of honor.
Ernst Knobil of Pitts burgh, Penn., another sister of the bride; the Misses Susan, Charlotte and Anne Clark of Winchester, sisters of the bridegroom; Miss Jane Roberts of Englewood, N.J.; and Miss Margaret Hobbs of Newton.
They wore red velvet dresses with matching headpieces and carried bouquets of white camellias and holly.
Clark graduated from Low Heywood School in Stamford, Conn, in 1956, and from Wheaton College in Norton in 1960.
Frederick Denton of Portland, Me. the late Mr Denton and of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Mr Clark prepared at Belmont Hill School and is a graduate of Amherst College, class of 1960.
Clark will make their home in Arlington. tSS W, Curran Continued KcLrm on ro At a four-o’clock candlelight servin' on December 16 at. the First Congregational Church, Miss Ann Monro, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
John Usher Monro of Cambridge, formerly of Winchester, was united in marriage with Robert Addison Becker, son of Mr and Mrs.
MISS MARTHA DYER Miss Dyer graduated from Winchester High School in 1960 and will graduate next June from Ca zenovia College, where she is a medical secretarial major.
Mr Hooper graduated from Win Chester High School in 1957 and Dartmouth College in 1961.
He will receive the M.B.A. degree from the Amos Tuck School of Business Ad ministration in 1962.
La ura nee D Sibley of 15 Cambridge Street, announced on Christmas eve the 4 engagement of their daughter, Jill Elaine, to Mr Sidney Rodgers Bixler, son of Mr and Mrs.
Arthur E Sibley of Braintree, she is apprentice teaching in music at Shady Hill School in Cambridge. 9 a 9 ed Mr and Mrs.
Thomas E Curran of 77 Pickering Street, Danvers, and the late Mr Curran.
He is now a member of the class of 1963 at Cornell Law School, is a member of the legal fraternity Phi Delta Phi and of Delta Kappa Epsilon.
Winchester’s Roger DeMinieo, OD.-lin., 18.“>-ll» physical education major in tin* da** of 1964.
Roger is highly respected hy the Kedmen coaching staff for Ins rugged, determined play.
Parkview Taxi PA 9-0666 LONG'S AUTO SCHOOL WEIIs 3-3339 Res. july27-tf MISS JILL ELAINE SIBLEY Mr Bixler is the grandson of Mrs.
John CL Rodgers of Buffalo, N.Y., and the late Mr Rodgers, and of the late Dr. and Mrs.
He prepared at Phillips Exeter Academy and graduated in the class of 1961 from Amherst College where he was a member of Theta Delta Chi.
Given in marriage by her father, the bride wore a gown of white dulcette satin on princess lines, with a high scoop neckline and the traditional long sleeves.
A scalloped edge at the neck was effected with reembroidered Alencon lace and the same lace was used in a Vshaped pattern to add detail to the full skirt.
Her waist-length veil of silk illusion fell from a matching headpiece and she carried a crescent cascade of phalaenopsis orchids, white carnations, and sprays of silvered holly.
Miss Janet Monro of Cambridge was maid of honor for her sister and wore a ballerina-length gown of emerald velveteen fashioned with a fitted bodice and a slim skirt featuring flat pleats which gave extra fullness at the back.
She carried a cascade of white carnations, garnet sweetheart roses, and silvered holly.
The bridemaids, Miss Ellen Becker, sister of the bridegroom, and Miss Marguerite LeVro of Waltham, wore dresses identical to that of the maid of honor and carried cascades of white carnations and silvered holly.
Monro chose a cerise peau-de-soie sheath with matching accessories and wore a corsage of green cypripedium orchids.
Becker wore a beige sheath embroidered with seed pearls and had matching accessories.
Both the bride and bridegroom are 1956 graduates of Winchester High School.
Becker graduat(1 from Colby College in I960 and the Katharine Gibbs School in 1961.
The bridegroom graduated from Dartmouth College in I960 and the Amos Tuck School of Business Administration in 1961.
Dino E Viarcngo of New Canaan, Conn., announce the engagement of their daughter, Miss Linda Joan Viarengo, to Mr Timothy M Hennessey, son of Mr attd Mrs.
An instructor in history at Wilbraham Academy, he is a member of Theta Delta Chi and the Sphynx.
Wa l am ag e intentions Arthur Crossley Smith, III, of Elkins Park, Pa. and Catherine Elizabeth Tonon of 53 Lawson Road.
Jack Everett Moore of Vermilion, Ohio and Martha Louise Fish of 20 Myrtle Street.
Eaton’s Ko-Rec-Type lets you correct mistakes in typing without erasing.
Alexander J Fay of 18 Winslow Road are the parents of a seventh child, third son, Paul Gerard.
Joseph A Knight Jr. of Watertown announce the birth of their first child, a daughter, Laurie Anne on December 22.
Rudolph E Castelli, Jr., of Avon, Connecticut, announce the birth of their fourth child, third son, Daniel Jennings Castelli, on December 15 at the Hartford Hospital.
Irving E Jennings of New Durham, New Hampshire, formerly of Winchester.
Wills Each home will include a 2-car garage and a terrace or patio to emphasize outdoor living, with especially designed swimming pools, gardens and landscaping throughout the grounds.
The price range of the homes is from $25,000 to $40,000 and adaptations may be made to conform with the individual budget.
As we approach the end ofanother year and the heejinninej of 1962 ; we at Benton J wish to express our sincere thanhs to our mam nj. customers and friends for the patronage of the past gear, an d to extent l to aid our hest wishes for a happij and prosperous liew fjear.
This “dime board” project will be a part of the local Legion Post’s participation in and will coincide with the 1962 Annual March of Dimes.
A specially designed “dime board,” picturing the 1962 National Postor Child, Debbie Sue Brown, will be set up at the Post during all of January, to receive special dime contributions, Commander Appleton explained.
Across the top of the “score board” will be a banner, carrying the message, “Her Battle Is Ours,” so that all Legionnaires will see it.
The local drive for funds is in cooperation with a nation-wide “dime board” campaign in assistance to the National Foundation, announced at th6 first public appearance of little Debbie Sue Brown after her selection as 1962 National Poster Child.
The American Legion, its auxiliary and the Fight and Forty spent a total of $7,778,715.61 on child welfare during the year 1960, as evidenced by reports turned in to national headquarters by the more than seventeen thousand Legion Posts in this country and abroad.
Heads Stevens Class of '65 WE WISH YOU ALL A MOST HAPPY HEALTHY, and PROSPEROUS New Year Men's, Boys' and Ladies' Shops 6 Mt.
Vernon Street, Winchester PArkview 9-3070 Open Daily 9 to 5 :30 Friday Evenings Until 9 :00 At Opening Session STEVEN M COCHRAN Steven M Cochran, son of Mr and Mrs.
He is also a member of the student council, honor board representative, and the class captain of the Interclass Swimming Team.
It is expected that several hundred supervisory and managerial state employees will* take the course, conducted by Northeastern in cooperation with the state.
Asa S Knowles, 25 Arlington Street; standing, Charles Gibbons, chairman, Commission on Administration and Finance; Leonard A Kelley of Scituate, director, Division of Personnel and Standardization ; and Dr.
Flaherty Named As a Deputy Tax Collector Winchester Collector and Treasurer E Abbott Bradlee announced this week the appointment of Mr Joseph E Flaherty of 38 Lebanon Street as a deputy collector of taxes.
The plants produce cotton, rayon and nylon fabric for use in Firestone tire manufacturing and for sale to outside consumers.
A member of Firestone’s 1929 college class, Mr Sawyer was assigned to the company’s textile mill in New Bedford, Mass.
In 1935 he was named comptroller of the Gastonia plant and remained there until 1943 when he transferred to a textile plant in Fort Worth, Tex., which Firestone then owned.
From 1945 to 1957 he served as plant manager of the textile plant in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Mr Sawyer was born in Salem and was graduated from Lowell Textile Institute with a bachelor of textile engineering degree.
Ho earned his master’s degree in textile research from Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
PA 9-1981 nov3-tf 'wnrwwwww PLEASE SEND ME A ONEYEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THE WINCHESTER STAR NAME ADDRESS 1 TOWN Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
Then* are a couple of teams that are close and, with two weeks left of the half, the standings could still change a little.
B Kelley almost broke the high triple with a 3511, Detire II almost did the same to the high single with a 142.
Gelatin 80 40 21,106 Post Office 72 48 20,840 K of C 69 51 20,499 49’er.s 66 54 21,070 Bros. -inLaw 47 73 20,227 St.
STATE OF THE UNION MESSAGE By PRESIDENT KOCH We stand on the threshold of a new age.
And 1 want you all to know that whatever joy the new year brings to you, it shall remain niv purpose to give you that financial security that can come only when your money is safe with me.
Blit my message today is non-political, which is to say your dollars are all green and equally welcome as they swell the newly organized 1962 Koch Vacation Fund, (rive generously to this fund; help stamp out my bills.
Willi the winter snow upon us, let East and West have one big snowball light.
This will not only relieve “cold” war tensions hut clean up the streets as well.
In this spirit, I, therefore, decree the beginning of a new year of prosperity for Maggie and me, with the hope that you will rise to the occasion and do your hit toward making our world a belter place in which both of us can live.
Given on Church Street on this 2Blh day of December, 1961, Charles Koch, President WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass.
PArkview 9-1931 "" Quality Js Our Wost Preciouj Teaching first grade at the Noonan School this year is Mrs.
Laila Voung, who has had previous teaching experience in the elementary schools of Newport, U I., and Philadelphia.
J Photo l»y Ryerson Doll loll hi I leva Sachems lie On Ice Winchester and Watertown finished in a 2-2 stalemate in a Middlesex League hockey game last Saturday afternoon at the North Shore Sports Center.
By defeating Wakefield, 6-2, Melrose went iptu first place in the league standing.
Winchester is in fifth place with a win, two losses and a tie for three points.
Watertown had a 2-1 lead in last Saturday’s game with only 26 seconds remaining.
In an effort to pull the game out of the fire Coach Frank Finigan took out his goaler, Bob Joyce, and sent in an extra forward for. a power drive at the Watertown net.
The strategy paid ofF as Barry Johnson scored the equalizer with a 10-foot screen shot.
Watertown — G, Ernst; Id, Kattlemoir; r<J, McCarthy : c, Morahan : Iw, Dennis Williams; rw, Dick Williams.
Score by periods 1 2 J Total Watertown l l 0 Winchester 0 1 1 Goals — Morahan, Reardon, Dick liarns.
Mary’s in an awesome as they rolled Winchester turned display of power to a 13-0 victory WilWilHoop Dates Winchester High School’s basketball team has two dates listed for New Year’s week.
Tuesday afternoon, January 2, the Sachems journey to Concord for a Middlesex game with Concord High.
Friiay night, January 5, Winchester plays at Wakefield in another league game.
CHIAKENZA WEIIs 5-2697 nov9-8t SNOW YOU NEED A MOTO-MOWER 20"" DELUXE 1 POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3 Va HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and h6avily packed snow.
Remote control chute handle directs the itream of snow 25 feet in the direction you want.
Hockey j strength with Jim Devaney, sharp League. j shooting forward back in action Jim Moran opened the scoring | after being shelved with a groin at the six second mark of the first pull, period and the St.
Mary’s skaters Lexington is bringing a big club were in complete control of the to Winchester with two of the M incontest from then on as seven different players put themselves on the score sheet.
Following Hession on the scoring parade was Jim Moran, hat trick; Dennis Griffin, two goals; and Pepper Cunningham.
George Nowell, John Moran, and Jackie Cullen who collected a goal apiece.
This was the Winchester club’s best defensive game of the year as they allowed the opposition only one shot on goal.
This singular effort came in the first frame when, a thirty foot shot from the right wing boards deflected off of goalie Jack Falla’s glove and was picked up by Dennis Griffin who went the length of the ice and fired a forty footer into the upper left hand corner of the Peabody cage.
Altogether the Saint Mary’s blueline corps accounted for three of the Winchester goals.
The Saint Mary’s third and fourth units saw considerable action in the last two periods and probably would have finished the game were it not for the slashing tactics employed by the Peabody goaltender which resulted in a three stitch cut to left winger Frank Hession and several minor injuries to other Saint Mary’s players.
This prompted coach Falla to close the proverbial gates of mercy and return his power play unit to the ice.
The strategy produced a pair of goals and boosted the Saint Mary’s score into the teens.
This victory set the stage for next Sunday’s encounter with second place Charlestown in a game which will decide first place. uteboys at the 6ft 5in mark.
Lexington is supposed to be a league powerhouse this year and the Sachems will have to play their best bull of the year to pull out a win Winchester’s combination play and covering left a lot to be desired against Woburn and Coach Phillips has been working his boys with the idea of strengthening these two apparent weaknesses.
A win over Lexington would establish the Sachems as one of the teams to beat for league honors.
The Sachem JayveeS, perennial winners of the Middlesex Jayvee crown will he out to continue their winning ways at the expense of the Lexington seconds.
A dictionary built right into your three-ring notebook, plus five subject dividers all in one neat package for back-to-school.
Adult Glasses Winter term classes begin next Wednesday, January 3, at the Cambridge Center for Adult Education.
This busy adult center, at 42 Brattle Street, Cambridge, near Harvard Square, offers a wide variety of daytime and evening cours es in. current national anti international affairs, philosophy, literature, music, practical skills and languages.
Openings still remain in many of the discussion groups, art workshops and craft courses.
Featured in the winter program at the Adult Center is “A History of Science” a survey of the factors, including religion, economics, warfare, and the arts, which influence scientific development.
A course in “Minority Problems” will examine the social psychology of prejudice, discrimination and exploitation.
Young was born in Grosso Pointo, Mich., and was graduated from high # school there in 1954.
Mr Young, a native of East Lansing, Mich., is in his first year at Harvard Law School.
After his graduation from Michigan Mr Young was a supply officer in the Navy for three years with the rank of lieutenant, , serving both in Newport, R.I., and Philadelphia.
Previous to coming to Winchester she practice taught elementary classes in the Belmont and Brookline Schools and at the Buckingham School.
Curling Nr ws Perhaps the first Eight End scored in major competition this Curling season occurred on November 30 at the Seigniory Club in Montebello, Quebec, during the 22nd International Invitational Friendly Bonspiel.
The skipper was Stan Neill, mate Dave Shean, sec-, ond, Tom Downes, lead Rod Bullen.
The Eight End occurred on the Six End while playing the Toronto Granites.
The victorious team was skippered by Keith Fulton, with mate Walter Wilcox, second stone, Stanley Neill, and lead, James Wilcox.
Winchester triumphed over a field which included The Country Club, Weston Country Club, Brae Burn Country Club, and Petersham Curling Club.
Charles Tinkham skippered, mate John O’Day, second, J Pietz, and lead, H Chilton.
The third place resulted in a tie with Petersham Curling Club of Athol, Mass., and the Highlands Curling Club of Harrisburg, Rhode Island.
In the fourth quarter the Sachems fought buck as the Alumni were tiring, but their surge oajne I too late.
The Sachems high scorer was Boh Watson with 18 followed by Charlie Tofuri with 15.
The Alumni were led by Phil Nichols with 10 and Vandy French and George Neville with eight and seven, respectively.
The Sachems were without the services of their good shooting forward, Jim Devaney who was on the injured list.
The whites were led by Chuck Anderson, while Vie Papadinis and Ron Eriksen were high scorer for the blacks.
If 2 2 e, Devaney. rf 0 I i (lay. rf 1 0 2 Mac Kay. r 2 0 4 White, r 2 2 0 Cnlluban, lr 1 1 :s DeMiniro, ljr 1 0 2 Neville. r K 1 7 French, r»r 2 4 K Brenner, r 0 4 1 Nichols J 4 1ft Totals IK 19 56 SACIIEMS Bond, If Anderson, If Timpone, rf Watson. rf Foley.
Valence is the wife of Philp Valence and she and her husband are making their home at 17 Linden Street in Winchester.
Both were born in Needham and graduated from Needham High School, he in 1956, and she a year later.
Mr Valence graduated from Tufts Engineering School in 1960, nd is an electrical engineer with the New England Power Co.
Donald S Abbott of 1 Forest Circle; Miss Jean Caldwell, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Lindsay H Caldwell of 16 Brooks Street; Miss Susan Nanry, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Robert M Mulford of 29 | Pierrepont Road, are members of the Orphean Club, choral society of Lasell Junior College who participated in the Christmas candlelighting vesper service on December 17 and took part in an outdoor enactment of the Christmas story on the college campus.
TO— PHARMACY GIRL INC., LABS Fifth Avenue, Brookfield, Conn. oct26-ti ""THE WINCHESTER STARMONOPOLY w Parker Bros.
Splendid fun for every family I Some players rook© fortunes, some go bankrupt, in the course of play.
PARKVIEW 9-0029 THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 28, 1961 Page Eleven FORESTER’S FLOWER SHOP * CUT FLOWERS ★ WEDDING FLOWERS ★ FLORAL DESIGNS PA 9-1077 Eves.
PArkview 9-4363 after 6m. augl 2 -tt PHOTOGRAPHY by RYERSON PArkview 9-3311 feb2-tf SteA VERY’S For T V Radio Sales and Service 1203 Mass.
The Story of the Tactical Air Command, by Leverett A Richards The United States Air Force in Korea, 1950-1953, by Robert Frank Futrell This Sunday In The Churches THE CRAWFORD MEMORIAL METHODIST CHURCH Winchester, Mass.
The Senior High Department will not meet today ivnd the Youth Program in the Morning Worship Service will take the place of the evening M.Y.F. meeting. 11:00m.
The service will he very simple Saturday, Jnnunry 6. and devotional in nature, with emphasis on the Ritual and Sacrament.
Senior Choir in the Tucker Autobridge, the game that lets you play bridge any time by yourself and have world champions as partners.
See this fascinating game at the Winchester Star, also the official aluminum duplicate bridge boards and the advanced coursb in contract bridge.
This service will ul.su be of the same devotional nature as the one on New Year’s F.ve.
Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-3000 mar 2 -tf Tuesday, January 2. 3:30m.
Freedom from sin, sickness, and limitation is available to all through the power of Spirit, God.
This i* the encouraging message to he emphasized at Christian Science services Sunday.
These proofs consist solely in the destruction of sin, sickness, and death by the power of Spirit, as Jesus destroyed them.
PA 9-2220 Roy W Horn, Prop. july'JOtf NEW HOPE BAPTIST CHURCH Cross Street near Washington Street Rev.
William M Jackson, 6 Sunny sidt* Avenue, Everett Tel.4-3408 Senior Deacon, Mr Hizkiah Griffin Ch.
Tho spocinl Christmas musir which was to have been sung Inst Sunday was postponed because of the inclement weather, ami will be sung this Sunday, December 31.
Torrielli, who resides at 30 Plymouth Avenue, Belmont, is President and General Manager of the Eaton Press in Watertown.
He is a graduate of Harvard College with high honors, he received his Ph.D from the Harvard Graduate School.
One of the leading attorneys of Middlesex County, Mr Hall is a partner in the Lowell law firm of Qua, Hall, Harvey, and Walsh.
The Academy Advisory Board will make final recommendations to the Congressman for appointment to the service military academies.
Those young men who have successfully completed the preliminary aptitude examination, and have met the stringent physical standards, will be interviewed by the Board in the Congressman’s Lowell office on Friday and Saturday of this week.
Rico DeFeo of Revere; Miss Consary of Paul and John DeFeo, twin nie DeFeo, Miss Gilda DeFeo of Wakefield; and the twins’ sister, Carol Ann.
The twins received gifts and refreshments including a decorated birthday cake.
Mr Chadwick told Rotary that this was not simply a matter of partisan politics.
James H Kelly’s letter of January 7, 1959 in which Mr Kelly, Democrat, urged the election of Democrat Rep.
You were the witness to the destruction of tradition for the sake of propulsion and expedience.
NOT WORRIED With reference to Mr Thompson’s rumors that he might be censured or expelled for his charge that certain members of the Legislature were lawyers who had bookies* among their clients, Mr Chadwick said that he did not view this possibility with alarm.
He said that when the Crime Commission issued its famed report, it was unahle to obtain reprints of it, in spite of the fact that the publication of reprints of such documents is common practice.
Mr Chadwick repeated his earlier statement that no innocent person need feel sensitive in connection with the investigation of gambling.
He also repeated his statement that although their contributions were not recorded officially, bookies did contribute to political campaigns and thus could exert pressure for or against a candidate in terms of his stand on illegal gambling.
Mr Chadwick said that more than one legislator who served as an attorney had told him that he had bookies as clients.
Mr Chadwick said that in fact one such legislator had opposed the establishment of a ( rime commission on these very grounds.
MI ST SPEAK OUT The Winchester Representative at the same time said that it had never been his intention to hurt anyone, that he was by nature a man who liked peace and harmony but that he did not feel he could remain silent when such wrongdoing existed and he could do something about stopping it.
Mr Chadwick said he had a stack of mail about one foot high expressing the ""anguished frustration"" of the citizens of the state in this matter.
Mr Chadwick dealt once again with gambling in its moral, economic and political dimensions, as reported earlier in the Star.
Morally, he said, he did not presume to usurp a function properly exercised by the churches.
He said he did consider gambling foolhardy, however, when it required participants to go into debt to make ends meet, work a hardship on their dependents, or mortgage their homes.
Economically, he said that with over one billion dollars passing under the table every year in organized gambling the state was losing millions of dollars worth of taxes that could be collected if the money were being passed in legitimate enterprises.
He said that normal taxes on $1 billion worth of business would net the state $100 million when all taxes and surtaxes were taken into consideration.
Mr Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., pastor of the First Baptist Church will be assisted by Miss Carol Ann Chute of Baldwin Wallace College, Miss Judith Donovan of the Connecticut College for Women, Pvt.
David M Rush, Jr. of Fort Devens, and Mr Robert W Carlson, Jr. of the Citadel, as part of a student recognition Sunday.
Special music is prepared for this service by the Music Director, Mr Raymond Shannon.
Student Recognition Sunday The annual Student Recognition Sunday at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church will he oh served this Sunday at the Morning Worship Service at 11:00 o’clock.
All of the young people of he church who are home from college, preparatory school, nurses’ training, or tip* armed forces have been invited especially and several jf them will participate in the conducting of the service.
The sermon, ""The Remnant Today"" will be delivered by Mr Calvin Keeler who holds a Local Preacher’s License and who has completed two years at Harvard Divinity School.
Secretary of Student Work and her Committee will serve coffee for all the students and armed forces personnel who are at home for the holidays, at 10:15 o’clock, preceding the Morning Worship Service.
Left to right, standing, Susan Douglas, Geoffrey Rivinius, Rose Mary Wolf, Thomas James, Jean Fay, Jacqueline Pcrotti, David Craven, (rail Evans, Louise Mears, Bruce Merenda, Susan Hillman.
In front, Janies Rich, Joseph Mozzicato, Richard Clark, Sarah Bates, John Butterfield, Michael Dello Russo, Ronald Wilkinson.
Crawford Memorial Couples’ Club The Couples’ Club of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church will hold their regular January event on Tuesday evening, starting at 6:30 o’clock with the first course of supper and a gab-fest.
The Couples’ Club at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church is not an ""age group"" but is open for all who enjoy its informal fellowship.
Couples of every age in the church are invited and any of the young people who are still at home for the holidays will be welcome to come and join in the fun.
Robert W MacArthur of 42 Cabot Street, is serving aboard the icebreaker, USS Burton Island, which smashed a path through Antarctic ice four to eight feet thick to open McMurdo Sound to sea traffic a full month earlier than had ever been done before.
Arriving at the McMurdo station on November 28, the Burton Island led a special group of ships consisting of two other icebreakers, a cargo ship and a tanker to deliver vitally needed aviation gasoline, supplies and equipment for Operation Deepfreeze ’62.
Dwight E Bellows, 2 Lantern Lane; Herbert Black, 7 Seneca Road; Richard F Clark, 3 Old Lyme Road; Frederick L Hicks, Jr., 21 Ginn Road; Albert A Kajander, 4 Alden Lane; Franklin J Lane, 4 Drexel Avenue; Richard H Murphy, 22 Oxford Street; Seymour M Niles, 50 Jefferson Road, and David Wardwell, 39 Lorena Road, all of Winchester.
AlsoAmbrose Burton, 18 Sheffield Road, Wakefield; Phillips C Davis, 2 Pine Ridge Road, Greenwood; Kenneth Currie, 26 Chestnut Street, and John M Devlin, Jr. of 5 Hill Street, both of Stoneham; John J Heneghan of 40 Greenwood Road, Burlington ; and William N Lanigan, Jr.
PA 9-1693 novS-tf JOHN B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED ” HOMEOWNER’S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage at Less Cost 1 Mt.
Vernon Street PA 9-3,400 novlO-tf December Traffic Deaths Higher Registrar Clement A Riley warns the motoring public that our record indicates thirty-eight killed in traffic, accidents as of December 17 compared with thirtysix last year.
T h e Massachusetts Highway safety committee is doing everything possible to regulate and control traffic and will carry out Governor Volpe’s order to remoye drinking drivers from behind the wheel.
Wc need the active support and cooperation of responsible members of each family in the commonwealth to guarantee that unreasonable and drinking drivers will not appear on our highways during the holiday season.
Harry Gilson and representatives from the School Department, attended the Christmas Pageant given as a memorial tribute to Miso Salice, late member of the Mystic teaching staff.
Ganson Taggart, president of the Mystic School Mothers Association, read a trihute to Miss Salice written by a Mystic School mother, Mrs.
Traditional music was under the direction of Miss Jean Loudon and Mr Theodore Janner.
Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf Season’s Greetings TO ALL W Dinn & Co.
Located on a one-half-acre lot of exceptional privacy and beauty, the house boasts a modern kitchen, four bedrooms, two baths, two living rooms with fireplaces, and a den, one-car garage and is convenient to schools and transportation.
PA 9-32B8 2790 5550 5005 WINCHESTER Here is your opportunity to purchase a tine home on Kverett Avenue near the Mystic Lakes.
One-and-a-half baths, garage, kitchen with countertop stove and many huiltI ins not found in the average home.
RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers Gertrude H Murphy, PA 9-1310 Richard H Murphy, PA 9-6213 Marion R Ferrimon, PA 9-4136 Charles T McCarthy, PA 9-5972 Florence M Salyer, PA 9-1966 James F Quine, PA 9-3355 Two attractive Capes in the mid-20’s.
For appointment call exclusive broker, BIXBY & NORTHRUP 24 Thompson Street REALTORS PArkview 9-4240 A REAL ANTIQUE . . . . . . and just loaded with colonial charm, sums up this new listing.
W HITTEMORESe Doris Johnson Peg Elwell • Teresa Heath Margaret Fitzgerald Iva Orion Ginuy Rideout Betty Vallee For Rent WEDGEWOOD APARTMENTS On the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center are the. newly completed Wedgewood Apartments where you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living.
Call PA 9-580U Monday through Friday. octfi-tf WINCHESTER Split-entrance Ranch with three bedrooms, living room, dining room, kitchen, fireplaced family room plus den or fourth bedroom.
Woburn au*10-tf FLOORS CARPENTERS Home Repairs & Remodeling Carpentry, Complete Additions, Kitchens, Roofs, Gutters, Painting, Plastering & Masonry.
Call PA 9-0323. septl4-tf CARPENTRY Weatherstrip Outside Doors, $5 Windows Ueff lazed Ceilings Installed Reasonable Rates ( all PA 9-5042.
WElls 5-0169 augl2-tf CONTRACTORS FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTORS Established 1914 Bulldozing — Excavating j Driveways — Roads | Landscaping — Trucking Loam, sand, gravel, crushed stone, shrubs Tel.
Bulldozer — Shoveldozer Cellar Excavating — Grading PArkview 9-5067 — 9-J531 augl2-tf ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AM1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass.
ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 decl 6-tf FIREPLACE WOOD Fireplace Wood Well-seasoned Oak & Maple.
Two pairs girl’s professional ice skates, siv.es 6 and b x ->, new lost year. $25 for a pair, excellent condition, will sell $10 each pair, Gall PA 9-3827.
EX 6-6970. feb6-tf JUNK DEALERS Winchester and Woburn JUNK DEALER HIGHEST PRICES PAID For Rags.
PLUMBING AND HEATING FAY’S PLUMBING HEATING PA 9-3193 — EX 6-7300 Est.21 DON’T BE A LITTER BUG KEEP OUR TOWN CLEAN nov2-tf RUBBISH REMOVAL Edward P Lynch RUBBISH REMOVAL 48 White Street, Winchester Tel.
PArkview 9-3516 Weekly Pick-Up If Desired janl2-tf RUBBISH REMOVAL mar2-tf LAUNDRY SERVICE Spociakits in fabric Car. aep29-tf PAINTING — PAPERING Borgeson & Gustafson PAINTING & DECORATING Interior & Exterior FREE ESTIMATES WE 3-6069 BR 2-3437 augL 2 -tf WALTER J JOHNSON PAINTING Interior and Exterior PAPERING PA 9-6014 nov9-tf James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 aagl2-tf REMOVAL OF RUBBISH PLOUGHING SNOW ALSO COW MANURE FOR SALE Call WE 3-0409 dec7-4t FOR RKNT In Woburn. early A erienn I’oloninl duplex. r»r»«., gitra Adult* preferred, '$116.
WF.ll* 1 3-2834 *ep21-tf FOR RKNT — FI voroom apartmeht in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments. $190 up Call PA 9-5860. uct5-tf WANTED WANTED 6 or . room house from owner. bedrooms minimum.
Call WA 0359. dec28-4t HELP WANTED HELP WANTED Willing worker for fountain and luncheonette.
HELP WANTED — Woman with nursing experience to live in and care for elderly woman who is convalescing.
JV sos. afls auwrul promptlyFor Oh fiaost, most defwndsbto n-MDIO-HFI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 | A GALAMB 0 S TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing.
Ail plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made ut tariff rates by calling your Authorized Travel Agent.
Combined Jewish Philanthropies Norman Buchbinder of Newton Centre has been appointed a vice chairman of the Metropolitan Division of the 1962 Campaign of the Combined Jewish Philanthropies of Greater Boston.
He will have personal responsibility for the CJP fund-raising efforts in Winchester as well as several other communities.
The announcement was made today by Sumner Redstone, Chairman of the 1962 Metropolitan Division, which has responsibility for raising funds in this appeal in close to 40 suburban communities in the metropolitan area.
In making the announcement, Mr Redstone said “we are delighted to have Mr Buchbinder head this important area of our 1062 campaign.
His past record of dynamic leadership in many civic causes lends a great deal of stature to the significance of these Divisions.
Mr Buchbinder is a vice-president and a member of the Board of Trustees of Allied Research Laboratories, Ine., a scientific company engaged in research for government and industry.
In I960 he served as Advance Gifts Co-Chairman for Newton in the Districts Division.
He is treasurer of the Brotherhood of Temple Mishkan Tefila and has served as its financial secretary.
Mr Buchbinder is also a member of the Board of Directors of Hebrew Teachers College Associates.
He has been active in the Newton-East Little League, having served as treasurer and president.
TYPIST Immediate permanent position includes clerical duties, five-day week.
One is the driver’s view, as he grips the steering wheel, hits the brakes, and experiences that helpless, hopeless feeling of riding a vehicle out of control, skidding relentlessly toward the inevitable crash.
The other is the scientist’s view, characterized by years of research and analysis of the type carried on by the Committee on Winter Driving Hazards of the National Safety Council.
Although Chief Derro appreciates the human side of the prob lem, today he chose to discuss what the scientists have learned, and what we in turn can learn from them.
He pointed out that extensive skid tests under all types of winter driving conditions have confirmed that braking distances on winter surfaces are from three to 12 times as great as on dry pavement.
The most slippery surface of all is moist ice, at or near the melting point.
So he careful on glare ice when temperatures are around 30 degrees above zero.
Contrary to a popularly held belief, traction on winter surfaces is not improved by letting air out of the tires.
Light, compact cars tend to slightly outperform heavier vehicles in braking on ice; however, the larger cars display belter “cornering” ability.
In stopping ability, which might also be called “accident preventability,” reinforced tire chains were again proved superior.
On loosely packed snow braking distances for regular tires averaged 60 feet, for snow tires 52 feet, and for reinforced tire chains 38 feet.
Smooth tires (should not be used), regular tires, winterized tires, mud-snow tires, tires with embedded metail coils with serpentine ribs, sunders, regular tire chains, reinforced tire chains.
They advise against traveling unnecessarily during very severe snow or ice conditions, and declare it vital for those who elect to go to he equipped with adequate traction.
They have several tips for handling a car skillfully on slippery pavement — such as pumping the brakes lightly instead of tramping down heavily, and steering in the direction of a skid to recover from it.
Probate Court Tw all person* Interested in the *-Uate «,f WILLIAM E CIIICK late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition hat* been presented to said Court. prayingr that MARGARET F CHICK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex be appointed administratrix of Hitiri estate, without ftivinff a surety on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto j/ou or 3 'our attorney should tile u written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on the twelfth du> of January 1982, the return day of l |ti.s citation.
To all persons interested in the estate of LILLIAN SAUCE late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to .said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the lust will of said deceased by MARY LINNANE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix therixtf without giving u surety on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should n written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon, on the fourth day of January 1962. the return day of this citation.
Witness, John C Leggnt, First Judge of suiil Court, this eighth day of December 1961.
To all persons interested in the estate of THOMAS F FALLON late of Winchester in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court, praying that MAE I FA I LON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex or some other suitable person, be appointed administratrix of said estate.
The Powers Finishing Schools were established more than 35 years ago by John Robert Powers.
A Woman in a Man’s World” was the title of the Graduation Address by Miss Margaret Divver, Vice President of the John Hancock Life Insurance Company.
Women should not use feminine wiles unless they want an invitation to dinner rather than to make a sale.
Women must accept the same responsibilities as men men want opportunity more than security.
Women should conform to the rules and work their way up according to the pattern of the organization.
Women must he punctual They are in a limelight position and cannot lose themselves in a owd.
Be smart, but not as smart as the‘ man; a man who loses his ego will never forgive you.
Never make men uncomfortable with teams, moodiness, bad temper, etc. which are a man’s prerogatives.
Probate Court To all person* interested in the trust . *tal. under the will of HERBERT 11.
NICKERSON late of Winchester in .said County, decmseil, for the benefit of BKTSKY FLORENCE NICKERSON 1 now GOOI II) and others.
The trust#*** of an lit estate has presented to said Court for allowance it* twentyeighth tr> thirty-first accounts inclusive.
Witness, John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of anid Court, this eight**enth day of December 1961.
John V Harvey, Roister. dec2«-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss Probate Court To ail persons interested in the trust estate under the will of JOHN H JOY’ late of Winchester in said County, deceased. for the benefit of EDNA O JOY and others.
To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES P HOPKINS late of Wincheater in said County, deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court, praying that THOMAS W HOPKINS of Boston in the County of Suffolk be appointed administrator of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tiile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on the twentyeighth day of December 1961, the return dnv of this citation Witness, John C Leggat.
Probate Court To ull persons interested in the estate of DOROTHY D GORDON of Winchester in said County, mentally ill person.
The guardian of said ward has presented to said Court his sixth account for allowance.
John V Harvey, Register. dec2S-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS LAND COURT PETITION TO FORECLOSE TAX LIEN BUTTERW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Strict • PA 9-0342 Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry july6-tf Nos.530-38631 To all whom it may concern, and to Nos. 38530 and 38531.
SWEETSER. deceased, JOSEPHINE ROBINSON, deceased, ANGEL1NE JACKSON. deceased, CAROLINE L SWEETSER. deceased, LEANDER E LYNDK, deceased, EFFIE C SWEETSER, deceased, ALICE S EMERY, deceased.
Unless an appearance is so filed by or for you, your -default will be recorded, the said petition will he taken us confessed and you will be forever burred from contesting said petition or nny decree entered thereon.
And in addition to the usual service of this notice as required by law, it is ordered that the foregoing citution be published forthwith once inch week for three successive weeks in the Winchester Star, a newspaper published in said Wlnhester.
Witness, JOHN E FENTON, Esquire, Judge of said Court, this twentieth day of December in the year nineteen hundred an sixty-one.
Probate Court To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES C McCORMlCK late of Winchester in Hiiid County, deceased.
A petition ha* been presented to said Court for prohate of u certain instrument purporting to be the Inst will of *aid deceased by ANNA M McCORMlCK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying tluit she be appointed ,*utrix thereof without giving a aunty on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney ..should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the nim*teenth day of Junuury 1962, the return day of this citation.
Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-second day of December 1961.
John V Harv’oy, Register. dec28-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss.
Probate Court To all persons interested in u petition for adoption of LINDA ANN FRAGA of Winchester in said County.
To all persons interested in the estate of MABELLE ROSALIE NICKERSON late of Winchester in said Corunty. deceased.
A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by GRACE NICKERSON BANGS of Providence in the State of Rhode Island praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving u surety on her bond.
If you desire to object thereto you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the fourth day of January 1962. the return day of this citation.
That the warrant for the Annual Representative Town Meeting to be held on Monday, March 5, 1962, be closed at seven thirty o’clock P.M. on Monthly, January 8, 1962, and that public notice thereof be given by publication of this order in the three consecutive issues of the “Winchester Star” preceding said date.
Safety; ready availablity of one’s funds; varied financial services under one roof; experienced counsel on money matters; and earnings without the depositor’s investing.
Bank savers have a total of more than $100 billion set aside — the average balance being over $1,000.
Now is the best time to build up your backlog of moneyin-the-bank with us— or, if you haven’t on account here, to start one.
Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Finger In The Pie Governor At High School Assembly Each day is a fresh beginning.
Listen, niy sOul, to the glad refrain, And spite of old sorrow, and older sinning, 9 And troubles forecasted, and possible pain Take heart with tho day, and begin again. — Susan Coolidge Internationally Speaking We can’t get it out of our head that this whole business of shelters is a sort of national blow-up of the old ostrich idea — if only you stick your head in the sand, nothing can hurt you.
Emperor Hirohito lust his godhead over night, while very much alive; Stalin lost his posthumously, and less painfully.
At Execution of Mata Hari To the Editor — Your recent article on Mata Hari was most interesting.
It was just coming light that October morning in 1917 when there came a volley from the fortress of Vincennes.
The firing squad consisted of 12 men from the French army, and one of these was armed with a rifle with a blank shell.
After the volley, Mata Hari was found to have 11 bullet holes in her body so they all did their duty.
My wife and I visited the fortress of Vincennes not long ago and we walked out to the execution scene.
It all looked so green and peaceful that it hardly seemed possible that spies and traitors paid their last debts with their lives here.
Fortress Vincennes is now the headquarters of the French Foreign Legion.
Marshall W Symmes Winchester We were thrilled by William E Shirer’s “Rise and Fall of the Third Reich,” a tremendous piece of reporting.
The Soviet debt of $41,000,000 to the United Nations constitutes a financial veto on future operations more effective than a handful of “Nyets” in the Security Council.
We understand how Mr Minow must have felt after a dose like that, but after all, even a good thing might prove nauseating subject to such intemperance.
When we visit a big department store we don’t try to buy everything, but carefully select our purchases from the mass of goods on display.
Just give that new TV set a little time, and it will find its proper niche in fam ily life.
If, as we are so often told, 75% of our public are morons, then presumably 75% of us are satisfied with present fare.
The other 25% can enjoy the newscasts, which are on the whole superb, and when ov ercome by nausea can always clip into Channel 2, which, thank Heaven, is still available.
To us the supreme benefit of television is the fact that we come to know famous and distinguished people in all fields of endeavor almost as well as if we had sat and talked with them in our own living rooms — surely a cultural boon of inestimable value.
We do not deny that a large percentage of current TV fare is vapid, some of it definitely objectionable, and much of the remain der a sheer waste of time.
But people do have time to waste, and with the ever-shortening work week, a great many people are presently going to have a lot more of it.
And to say the least, while sitting in front of Photo by Ryerson GOVERNOR VOLPE at Winchester High School Assembly, where he spoke on value of citizenship and participation in community life.
Greeting the Governor on behalf of the school was Assistant Principal Thomas Morse.
Next in line, left to right, His Excellency, the Governor; Superintendent of Schools Harry Gilson; Colonel Paul Mozicato, military aide to the Governor; and State Representative Harrison Chadwick, who introduced the Governor to the assembly.
EX 5-1317 O BRIEN S LIQUOR MART 2153 Myjtu Valley Parkway Medford, Mass. thoir sets they won’t be getting into mischief.
Fairy tales are unbelievable, yet add their quota of beauty to life And, unbelievable or not, we rate Father Knows Best,” a delightful comedy that penetrates deeply into the roots of human nature.
We do deplore — and deeply — the growing tendency towards violence on both TV and screen.
But it’s a violent world in which we live, and these may well be reper cussions.
In the next few years it is due to revolutionize the fields of both education and entertainment.
Our Precocious Youth A six-year-old was taken to church for the first time.
A four-year-old had received a severe sunburn, and it had reached the peeling-off stage.
The preacher was visiting a home and wanted to read a chapter of the Bible.
Johnny had been trying to raise his marks in spelling with the teacher’s help, and she suggested that he might remember the words if he knew their meaning when he learned to spell them.
The Winchester Garden Club The Winchester Garden Club on December 21 dispensed with its regular business meeting for the month of December.
Instead a Christmas Tour of homes was initiated at which members invited guests.
Chandler Symmes on Main Street, the Club enjoyed a delightful dessert and coffee.
Dwight Cart, a member of the Garden Club, to give a Christmas message before starling the tour.
Each hostess had her home gaily decorated for Christmas with special touches of her own talents.
It was a delightful afternoon and the Club felt a lovely way to start the Christinas Holidays.
All of the girls receiving invitations to the tea have made application to next year’s freshman class.
Also on hand for the tea will be local girls home from Mount Holyoke for the holidays who will act as hostesses for the tea.
Arthur Pratt of 1 Salisbury Street, a member of the Douglass College rlass of 1929, has been Appointed class fund agent in the current fund drive of the Ofillege’s Associate Alumni.
Sewing Meeting The January 9 sewing meeting of the Guild of the Infant Saviour has been postponed because of the Guild Tea into the Boston Chapter.
The child emphatically refused to pronounce the first letter of the alphabet, and after many vain efforts the father retired from the fight discouraged.
But you who need VITAMINS and WHO doesn’t? — send to— PHARMACY GIRL, lnc„ Labs.
Vi-DE-FABS-tabletn 100, $4.25 — 300, $11.90 oct2G-tf Company C’s Last Meeting Of the Year Company “C” of the 319th Engineer Battalion held their last meeting of the year last Wednesday night at the Sons of Italy Hall on Swanton Street.
The regular meeting consists of two hours of drill on military procedure.
At the start of last week’s meeting, Captain Donald V Gearan, Commander of the Company, announced that he and his staff were holding a Christmas party for the men after the scheduled drill.
Captain Gearan also thanked the entire company, officers and men for the splendid record the company had achieved.
At the same time, he expressed his thanks to the Sons of Italy for their cooperation throughout the year.
Vernon Street Collector’s postage stamps and albums now on sale at the Star office on all price levels.
East Arlington MI 3-6464 OPEN EVENINGS .locl4-3t IF you are a music instructor, IF you are a student of music, IF you are an arranger of music, IF music is your hobby or you are a brusher-upper, YOU will find the SCALE CHART a fascinating educational tool.
Scale Chart musica shows the keys to be played for and Minor Melodic Scales. of the Major, Minor, It also shows the number of sharps or fiats for each musical key and presents them on the treble and bass clef stalls.
The Seale Chart relates the key of wind instrument scores to the piano score key lor all E-fiat, B-ilat, F and Bass-clef instruments. 1 he Seale Chart also shows the basic and dominant) for Major, Minor and chords Minor or tna (tonic, sub-dominant Scales.
It correlates tin; 88 piano keys with their equivalent musical notes and >howa the Ire.queney relationship between the tones of all of the piano keys related by equal temperament.
Clear instructions for its use are printed on the front of the Scale I inches by 8 ; j inches; ol a durable low-gloss material, making read, and comes in a protective envelope.
