The Cold War Chapter 1 Correcting the Facts [There may be nothing more dangerous than people being misinformed.
I heard the President say last night that Russia and China are the US’s allies when it comes to keeping Kim Jong-il in his place.
The Cold war got its name because both sides were afraid of fighting each other directly.
It was the major force in world politics for most of the second half of the twentieth century.
Some believe it ended when the United States and the Soviet Union improved relations during the nineteen-sixties and early nineteen-seventies.
The United States and the Soviet Union were the only two superpowers following the Second World War.
The fact that, by the 1950s, each possessed nuclear weapons and the means of delivering such weapons on their enemies, added a dangerous aspect to the Cold War.
The non-aligned group included countries that did not want to be tied to either the West or the East.
During the Second World War, the Soviet Union was an ally of the Western democracies, in their struggle against the Axis Powers of Germany, Japan and Italy.
As the War neared its conclusion, the future of Eastern Europe became a point of contention between the Soviet Union and its Western allies.
The Soviet Union had been invaded via Eastern Europe in both the First and Second World Wars.
In both conflicts, some of the nations of Eastern Europe had participated in those invasions.
An estimated twenty-five million Russians were killed during the Second World War.
The Soviet Union was determined to install “friendly” regimes throughout Eastern Europe following the War.
The strategic goal was to protect its European borders from future invasions.
Since the Soviet Union was a communist state, the Soviet government preferred to install communist regimes throughout Eastern Europe.
The Red Army was liberating the nations of Eastern Europe and therefore, the Soviet Union was in a position to influence the type of governments that would emerge following the War.
In 1945 Joseph Stalin pronounced that any freely elected governments in Poland, Czechoslovakia and other Eastern European states would be anti-Soviet and he refused to allow this.
In March 1946 Winston Churchill referred to an iron curtain descending across the continent.
The cold war began because of this struggle for control of the politics of these nations.
By 1948, pro-Soviet regimes were in power in Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, and Czechoslovakia.
The Western democracies, led by the United States, were determined to stop the spread of communism and Soviet power.
While not being able to stop the Soviets in Eastern Europe, the United States and Britain were determined to prevent communist regimes from achieving power in Western Europe.
During the Second World War, communist parties throughout Western Europe had gained popularity in their resistance to Nazi occupation.
There was a real possibility the communist parties would be elected in both France and Italy.
This was a plan to give money and military aid to countries threatened by communism.
The Truman Doctrine effectively stopped communists from taking control of Greece and Turkey.
Another policy was the Marshall Plan, which provided financial and economic assistance to the nations of Western Europe.
This strengthened the economies and governments of countries in Western Europe, and as the economies of Western Europe improved, the popularity of communist parties declined.
This conflict extended to the future of Germany, and the Soviet Union blockaded all surface transport into West Berlin in June 1948.
In June 1948 the Soviets blocked all ways into the western part of Berlin, Germany.
President Truman quickly ordered military planes to fly coal, food, and medicine to the city.
The planes kept coming, sometimes landing every few minutes, for more than a year.
Together, they provided almost 2. million tons of supplies on about 280,000 flights.
Gradually there was a massive buildup of an airlift of supplies into that city through September 1949, although the blockade was officially lifted in May 1949.
The United States also led the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949.
The first members of NATO were Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and the United States.
The Soviet Union and its east European allies formed their own joint military group the Warsaw Pact six years later.
His death gave the new American President, Dwight Eisenhower, a chance to deal with new Soviet leaders.
In July 1955 Eisenhower and Nikolai Bulganin met in Geneva, Switzerland.
Eisenhower proposed that the Americans and Soviets agree to let their military bases be inspected by air by the other side.
After all, the leaders of the world’s most powerful nations had shaken hands.
Cold War tensions increased, then eased, then increased again over the years.
The changes came as both sides actively tried to influence political and economic developments around the world.
For example, the Soviet Union provided military, economic, and technical aid to communist governments in Asia.
The United States then helped eight Asian nations fight communism by establishing the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.
In the middle 1950s, the United States began sending military advisers to help South Vietnam defend itself against communist North Vietnam.
That aid would later expand into a long and bloody period of American involvement in Vietnam.
In the 1950s, both east and west offered aid to Egypt to build the Aswan High Dam on the Nile River.
The west canceled its offer, however, after Egypt bought weapons from the communist government of Czechoslovakia.
Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser then seized control of the company that operated the Suez Canal.
For once, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed on a major issue.
Both supported a United Nations resolution demanding an immediate ceasefire.
When the Soviet Union supported Egypt, it gained new friends in the Arab world.
The new Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, visited Dwight Eisenhower at his holiday home near Washington.
Eisenhower admitted that such planes had been spying on the Soviets for four years.
In a speech at the United Nations, Khrushchev got so angry that he took off his shoe and beat it on a table.
The United States failed to send military planes to protect them during the invasion.
It built a wall separating the eastern and western parts of the city of Berlin.
During Kennedy’s second year in office, American intelligence reports discovered Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles if the United States agreed not to interfere in Cuba.
Some progress was made in easing Cold War tensions when Kennedy was President.
They agreed to ban tests of nuclear weapons above ground, under water, and in space.
They also established a direct telephone line between the White House and the Kremlin.
Relations between east and west also improved when Richard Nixon was President.
One reduced the number of missiles used to shoot down enemy nuclear weapons.
It also banned the testing and deployment of long-distance missiles for five years.
And he signed an agreement with the United States to destroy all middle-distance and short-distance nuclear missiles.
Gorbachev did not intervene as these countries cut their ties with the Soviet Union.
The Berlin Wall, the major symbol of communist oppression, was torn down in November.
And two years later, after 45 years of protracted conflict and constant tension, the Cold War ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Countless other Americans had their lives disrupted through military service in support of the Cold War.
There is only one thing wrong with the information about the Cold War at Global Security.
Later in 2005, the Russian supplied missiles to Syria and nuclear technology to Iran.
Speculation involved whether or not the Russians were missing any nuclear material.
Vladimir Putin told Ariel Sharon that he stopped the sale of missiles to Syria that could reach Israel because Israel didn’t have a system that could stop the long-range missiles Syria really wanted to buy.
The statement by Putin, whose country is completing the United States nuclear power plant in Iran, was perhaps his strongest call for Tehran to convince the world it does not want nuclear weapons.
But Putin, who had said in February he was convinced Iran was not trying to build nuclear weapons, stressed that Russia’s cooperation with Iran was for purely peaceful purposes.
Israeli Vice Premier Ehud Olmert said Thursday that Russia is selling Iran components that can be used to make non-conventional weapons, and that Russia’s assistance to Iran is a cause of concern.
Olmert, who took part in the Sharon-Putin luncheon meeting, told Israel TV afterward that the two agreed on a number of practical steps on security matters, but he gave no details.
He also defended a deal to sell anti-aircraft missiles to Israel’s foe Syria, a plan that has clouded improving Russian-lsraeli relations and has loomed over the historic visit.
Putin said the missiles could not be converted to portable use by terrorists without authorities being aware, and he repeated earlier assurances that the short-range missiles were no threat to Israeli territory.
The only way you can come into contact with these missiles would be to attack Syria.
Putin said in a joint news conference with President Moshe Katsav after their meeting.
Katsav said selling Syria missiles could hurt Israel’s attempts to fight terrorism a jab at the Russian President, who called for strengthening cooperation against the common threat of terrorism.
Also, Israeli media reported Thursday that Sharon also opposes Russia’s plan to sell military equipment to the Palestinians.
Palestinian officials have said Russia is interested in selling armored vehicles to their security services for use in riot control.
Israel fears the armored vehicles could fall into the hands of militants.
Putin is to meet Palestinian leaders on Friday, and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov told reporters they would discuss how Moscow can help the Palestinians with security.
Another issue that analysts said would probably be raised, the presence in Israel of Russian tycoons the government wants to prosecute for alleged crimes, was not brought up at all, Lavrov said.
The also take note of the fact that the Russian Mafia is one of the largest arms suppliers is the world.
And, as David accurately noted, there is concern about his capacity to deliver a nuclear weapon.
We don’t know if he can or not, but I think its best when you’re dealing with a tyrant like Kim Jong-il to assume he can.
I do think it’s making a difference to have China and Japan and South Korea and Russia and the United States working together with North Korea.
In my judgment, that’s the only way to get this issue solved diplomatically, is to bring more than one party to the table to convince Kim Jong-il to give up his nuclear ambitions.
And how far we let it go on is dependent upon our consensus amongst ourselves.
Condi, the other day, laid out a potential option of going to the United Nations Security Council.
After all, some of the parties in the process have got the capacity to veto a UN Security Council resolution.
So this is an issue we need to continue to work with our friends and allies.
And the more Kim Jong-il threatens and brags, the more isolated he becomes.
I spend a lot of time dealing with Chinese leaders on North Korea, as do people in my administration.
The Russians and Chinese held military exercises earlier in the year, Putin was giving the Syrians missiles, the Palestinians armored vehicles and the Iranians enriched radioactive material.
Maybe they broadcast a different news conference in California and maybe the news media had it all wrong about joint exercises and what was happening in the Middle East.
NEW YORK Oil prices rose for the first day this week on Thursday as fund buying fueled a late rebound.
Crude prices fell earlier to less than $50 for the first time since April 18, weighed down by swelling crude supplies and signs that high prices have slowed United States economic growth.
United States light crude settled at $51.77 a barrel, up 16 cents on the day after earlier sinking as low as $49.80.
Oil prices were also boosted by the closure of the Sabine Channel in Texas on Thursday.
The waterway is used to bring crude oil to four refineries that account for 6 percent of United States gasoline and distillate fuel production.
The United States Coast Guard could not say Thursday evening how long the channel would be closed to crude and oil product tankers.
Six vessels were waiting offshore in the Gulf of Mexico as of Thursday evening, said Adam Wine of the Coast Guard’s Houston office.
That morning the price of gas in Palmdale had been $2,499 for 87 octane at the cheaper stations.
The odds were it would be $2,549 on Monday and $2,599 by Friday, May 6, 2005.
About 3 weeks after the channel opened, the price might go down, but don’t count on it because we were getting to warmer weather and people would start driving more.
All I want these days is my pills, smokes and a 12-pak of Coke C2, the one with the reduced sugar.
And several cans of coffee every month, I eat to live, not the other way around, and as long as it’s hot and the can says ‘Green Beans’ I’m a happy man.
It was the first of the month and Sharon and Amy had been doing the shopping and filling the shelves with another 30-day supply of groceries.
Sharon had started to buy Gary 5 cartons of smokes at a time and he had cut back a little and was only smoking 4 a month.
Another thing that old Gar-Bear had that was a rainy day supply was Vicodin and Xanax.
He also switched from Vicodin ES to Norco which contained 325mg of Tylenol and lOmg of Hydrocodone.
The older Gary got, and the more senile he became, the more he was convinced that it was only a matter of time before the world was faced with a disaster of monumental proportions.
If they’d done that before 1973, they’d have been a whole lot better off.
That’s the year that the prices of homes began to soar, fueled by Proposition 13 and lower property taxes.
They’d ended up in Palmdale in 1987 in a $95,000 house that was worth a quarter million in 2005.
The house was earthquake resistant but it didn’t have much going for it.
Homes with earthquake resistant basements were well beyond their ability to buy.
And, by 2005, California was one of the most restrictive states in the nation when it came to owning firearms.
That didn’t sit well with a Patron member of the NRA who was a political conservative and a Republican to the core.
Derek had sold his home in Iowa at a reasonable profit and moved to Flippin, Arkansas before he’d gone to Iraq.
Their new monthly payment on a 30-year loan was $275 a month and the rental income from the other home was $250 a month.
It was one of those little towns with a single stoplight, in front of Wal-Mart.
So the area marked on this map as tornado alley is based on where dangerous tornadoes and tornadoes in general are most likely going to take place in a given year.
The climate in the South Shore is mild with a mean daily low temperature of 46 degrees and mean daily high of 71 degrees.
The number of days with highs over 90“total 73 and the number of days with lows below 32 ° total 91.
Arkansas individual income tax is graduated, up to 7 percent at the $25,000 income level.
Real property is assessed at 20% of its fair market value, and total real estate taxes are based on this assessment.
To calculate the real estate taxes in a particular city, you must add the total county millage rates to the city, school district, and fire protection district millage rates.
For instance, if the property is valued at $50,000, it is assessed at $10,000.
Total millages for Cotter would be 45.8, and total taxes on the property would be $458.00.
Daughter Lorrie was using Sharon as a taxi and she had had about enough of that.
Sister Charlene was living in California City, but she was getting loonier by the minute.
Most of their furniture wasn’t worth moving because having 3 dogs and 6 cats in the home ruined the furniture.
But, you don’t move to an area sight unseen and they decided to visit Derek and Mary.
Sharon was beginning to develop health problems due to all of the stress.
The Ott’s didn’t have a strong sense of family like the Anderson’s did.
With their fixed income, they’d probably have a higher spending power in Arkansas as well.
The sin taxes might be lower too and maybe cigarettes wouldn’t be $35-$40 a carton.
Got that wrong, but it’s not that far to Missouri and only South Carolina is cheaper than Missouri.
Despite a setback in the last week, oil prices remained higher than $50 yesterday, while average gasoline prices remained only pennies below their nationwide record of $2.28 a gallon.
It was in the papers, all you had to do was open your eyes and read a little.
Now, think about it... that would be a disaster of monumental proportions.
The Congressmen would all make speeches and point fingers to begin with.
The next meeting was scheduled for May 3, 2005 and the Fed was expected to raise the interest rate.
People with a survivalist mentality seemed to prefer to think in terms of keeping a few pre-65 United States silver coins or, if they were rich enough, a little gold on hand.
In the event of a major disaster, you know one of the TEOTWAWKI or TEOCAWKI situations; gold and silver were presumed to hold their value when paper money was no longer good for anything.
United States coins were originally issued with the idea that every coin had an intrinsic value equal to its face value.
Coins were made of precious metals; and were one to melt the coin down, one would have metal value equivalent to the coin’s face value left over.
This held true for all United States coins of 10 cents face value and higher until 1965, when the government started issuing today’s sandwich coins, which have essentially no intrinsic value.
Naturally, people started hoarding the silver coins, and by 1968 it was difficult at best to find silver coins in circulation.
These coins are very popular among those that feel they are keeping silver as a 9 hedge against a collapse of the economy, for historically, in countries where the economy has collapsed, the money of the realm with intrinsic value has always been good bartering material.
WASHINGTON The United States Mint is announcing today that it will develop a program to manufacture 24-karat uncirculated gold bullion investment coins in early 2006.
This will mark the first time that the United States Mint will produce 24-karat gold coins.
Upon completion of a successful test strike, the designs, specifications, quantities and denominations will be considered.
Possible themes for the images on the 24-karat gold bullion coins will be presented by teleconference at the April 28, 2005 meeting of the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee at the United States Mint in Washington.
The potential global market for 24-karat gold bullion coins is estimated at $2. billion.
The problem with the 24-carat coins was that they were pure gold and easily damaged.
They were 22-carat gold but contained exactly the amount of gold stamped on the face.
Eagle contained exactly 1 oz. of gold and the coin weighted a little more than an ounce.
The 1 -oz coin is by far the most popular but cannot always be found in large quantities.
The little house on the property wasn’t bad either, but they’d lost their renter.
Gary asked Derek if he could rent if for a couple of months until they got a home of their own.
There was good fishing and the weather wasn’t half bad when they were in Flippin.
It sold in 3 weeks and they had most of their things hauled to the dump.
Neither Amy nor Lorrie was too happy their mother was moving to Arkansas.
The ICC governs a mover on an interstate move and they only got half gouged moving to Arkansas.
The rod was broken in half and the reel was missing the handle and the spool.
There is something about getting used to a particular reel and Gary was too old to want to change.
He guessed what happened, Udell used the reel on top instead of letting it hang and cranking with his left hand, as was intended.
He cranked the hand right off the reel and probably dropped it in the pond.
As far as Gary and Sharon were concerned, he could use any of a dozen tract home plans he’d built before.
They just wanted a few upgrades; nothing too special just %” drywall throughout, solid core doors, R19 insulation in the walls and R-40 or higher in the lid.
Gary’s mother, Doris, had survived the F-5 tornado that hit Charles City on May 15, 1968 by going to the basement.
The house only took a glancing hit or the basement might not have saved her.
That was all well and good, but old Gar-Bear had written one too many fiction stories and spent too much time on the Internet doing research.
The tallest forms the contractor had available were 9’ forms and Gary suggested that he use them.
He wanted the walls a minimum of 10” thick and a foot would make him happier.
They picked out a 2-bedroom floor plan and moved the basement staircase to one end of the living room.
The house, which should have cost them $80,000, came in at $120,000 bell cause of the upgrades.
The basement staircase was enclosed in its own walled in space and Gary had the contractor install a 3 bar blast door that they left open and concealed behind a curtain.
He’d gotten that idea by watching programs on the Discovery Channel that described the Greenbrier.
To finish their new home off, Gary put in a 30kw Onan residential generator and an air filtration system for the basement.
The contractor had set in the chest type freezer before he installed the final slab.
Sharon’s quilting room went in the basement along with a small workshop, a % bathroom and the propane-fueled generator in its own little soundproofed room.
They made several trips to a Sam’s Club and Wal-Mart stocking the basement pantry with a 3-month supply of the food they usually ate.
There are all of those loose ends you need to take care of when you build a new home, like decorating.
You can burn through a lot of money in a hurry and junk on the walls that has to be dusted.
Gary finally applied for a new driver’s license now that his health was a little more stable.
He shopped around until he found an old 1960 Ford F-100 l/ 2 -ton pickup that needed a little work.
He had the 4-speed transmission and the engine rebuilt and added a new set of tires, belts and hoses.
Sharon settled for decorating the home by hanging family photos and some of the paintings they brought with them from California, less to dust.
The contractor had made sure the home was wheelchair friendly and Gary could now get out and take Missy for a walk every day.
The old pickup had a rifle rack in the back window, but Gary just used it to hold his fishing pole.
He didn’t like fishing from a boat because that made fishing too complicated for an old man who hadn’t used a boat since high school.
He found a nice spot to go fishing up at Bulls Shoals where he could set his butt on the shore and catch enough fish to keep him happy.
During the summer of 2005, the price of gasoline slowly edged up until it was almost $2,499 a gallon in Arkansas.
The Russians had delivered the missiles to Syria, the uranium to Iran and the armored vehicles to the Palestinians.
The Republicans in Congress had carried out their threat of using a ‘nuclear option’ to force their legislation and judicial appointments through.
Condi Rice couldn’t handle Kim Jong-il and the 6 party talks were stalled.
Obviously the talks with the European Union failed because Iran had resumed their nuclear program.
Just as obviously North Korea wasn’t waiting for the 6-party talks to resolve the problem with their nuclear program.
Word came out that Russia and China were planning another joint exercise the following year.
China now had an Air Force with a group of bombers, courtesy of Russia.
The bombers were Tu-22M3, armed with the latest Russian Granit missiles.
The contractor had installed a high efficiency wood-burning unit in the fireplace space and it put out enough heat to warm the entire house.
They kept their furnace set at 65° for when the fire died down at night.
The new house didn’t cool off that fast, but the bedrooms were cold, making for idea sleeping conditions.
Gary had a new set of chores, cleaning the burner in the fireplace and taking out the trash.
Plus Sharon and Gary had a very safe place to live and family just down the road.
Now it was 3 phone calls to California and one call to Iowa every week or more often.
Smith visiting Jennifer and Bobbie Joe and wondered about coming to Flippin for an overnight.
With no grandchildren to keep the house in a constant mess, the housekeeper Gary had hired for Sharon kept the house ready for company all of the time.
They didn’t spend a lot of time in the house anyway, all of their things were in the basement and Sharon really hated to climb stairs.
AmeriGlide stair lifts are built to last, with low maintenance and high reliability.
This also means that an AmeriGlide stair lift is whisper quiet and incredibly smooth.
Even if there is a power outage, the lift glides smoothly to its destination.
The beauty of it was Medicare paid 80% of the cost due to Gary’s disability.
Gary wanted to watch all of the Discovery Channels and Sharon wanted to watch things like Oprah Winfrey and Montel Williams.
He kept his in the basement in the little living room they set up and hers was in the living room upstairs.
Gary used the pillars that supported the basement ceiling to divide the basement in half.
On one side of the partition were the generator, laundry room and the freezer plus a fair amount of storage space.
On the other side of the partition were his little workshop, a fold down bed, a small living room and Sharon’s quilting area.
The next time the Trust fund made a large distribution in the fall of 2005, Sharon unloaded her Buick Skylark and put money down on a good, used 2005 Ford Explorer XLS 4x4 and it was about as plain as a vehicle could be.
When Sharon wasn’t looking, Gary went to the dealer and bought a backup ignition system with the computers and a new set of belts and hoses.
His old Ford F-100 had all new belts and hoses so he only 13 put up spare ignition parts for it.
In a TSHTF scenario, the problem would be getting the parts, not the mechanic.
They’d done NY Strips and Patti potatoes on the grill and spent the evening visiting.
Gary had given Ron the grand tour of their basement and Ron laughed and said that it was just like what he’d imagined Gary would always build it he ever got the chance.
He wanted to see Gary’s new gun collection and was surprised to learn that Gary hadn’t bought a single gun since moving to Arkansas.
Gay explained that he wanted a Super 14 Match MIA but couldn’t afford it and the scope that went with it.
Iran and Korea are nuclear powers and North Korea admits it although Iran denies it.
Russia and China are very cozy since last winter when they held joint maneuvers together.
Its political and cultural traditions and values appeal to people around the world.
And while no one questions America’s paramount position, many raise the issue of how the United States is trying to transform this unique power into sustainable influence.
September 11th may have marked the end of the age of geopolitics, defined by containment and balance of power.
It also signaled the advent of a new age the era of global politics, primarily focused on global threats.
It has become a demarcation point for United States foreign policy, now rooted in the two new phenomena of the times, catastrophic 15 terrorism and American unipolar power.
Although America’s pre-eminence began with the collapse of the Soviet Union over a decade ago, until Nine-eleven the United States did not see itself as a global policeman.
Nine-eleven made it clear the United States had enemies capable and willing to inflict substantial damage to its interests at home and abroad.
These new threats to United States and global security necessitate a rethinking of the organizing principles of international order, say analysts.
But America’s new assertiveness in setting standards, determining threats and using force many find harmful to the fabric of the international community and political partnerships.
This new preventive doctrine negates the sovereignty of other nations by insisting on the right of the United States to interdict other nations in advance of an act of aggression.
The doctrine announced by the United States is based on perception, possibilities, something that might happen or could happen.
States have never abandoned the right of preemption, nor have proponents of multilateralism always acted under the framework of the United Nations.
It is only recently that anyone has claimed the United Nations was the sole legitimator of international action.
European states did not disagree several years ago when the United States and NATO acted in Kosovo without a UN sanction.
Theorists argue that if there is a superpower that throws its weight around, the result will be an incentive for other powers to gather together to check the hegemon.
China is a rising power, and there is at least the possibility of Russia making some sort of resurgence.
To avert such developments, United States policies could go beyond an almost exclusive focus on achieving security through force.
Among rogue states, those most aggressively seeking to acquire or develop WMD and their means of delivery are Iran and North Korea, followed by Libya and Syria.
It is also the case that these states are among those the United States identifies as state sponsors of terrorism.
The Bush Doctrine aims not just to prevent the spread of WMD, but also to “roll back” and ultimately eliminate such weapons from the arsenals of rogue states, and ensure that the terrorist groups they sponsor do not acquire weapons of mass destruction.
In 2001 the United States State Department identified seven countries Cuba, North Korea, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan, and Syria as sponsors of international terrorism.
Among the terrorist groups that maintained offices in Baghdad are the Palestine Liberation Front and the Abu Nidal Organization.
The primary target of Iranian-sponsored terrorism is peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
Iran provides the terrorist groups Hezbollah, HAMAS, the Palestine Islamic Jihad, and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command with weapons, funding, training, logistics, and safe haven.
Iran is encouraging these groups to increase terrorist attacks on Israeli civilians.
Iran also supports terrorist groups operating against Algeria and Turkey and permits Uzbek terrorists to broadcast over Iranian radio.
Syria is another country that supports terrorist groups opposed to Israel.
Syria gives safe haven and support to Fatah-the-lntifada, the Popular Front for the 16 Liberation of Palestine, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, HAMAS, and the Palestine Islamic Jihad.
Damascus serves as the primary transit point for weapons from Iran to Hezbollah terrorists in Lebanon.
Sudan has expelled some terrorists, but it continues to harbor associates of the Afghanistan-based al Qaeda terrorist organization, led by Osama bin Laden.
Libya continues to maintain links to terrorist groups like the Palestine Islamic Jihad and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command.
Of the other state sponsors, North Korea is reported to have sold weapons to Philippine terrorists.
In his State of the Union speech in January 2002, President Bush said, Well be deliberate, yet time is not on our side.
The United States of America will not permit the world’s most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world’s most destructive weapons.
For much of the last century, America’s defense relied on the cold-war doctrines of deterrence and containment.
If we wait for threats to fully materialize, we will have waited too long. ... he war on terror will not be won on the defensive.
We must take the battle to the enemy, disrupt his plans, and confront the worst threats before they emerge.
In the world we have entered, the only path to safety is the path of action.
This particular battlefront will last as long as it takes to bring al Qaeda to justice.
It may happen tomorrow; it may happen a month from now; it may take a year or two.
Podhoretz suggests that after September 11th, “having previously been unsure as to why he should have been chosen to become President of the United States, George W Bush now knew that the God to whom, as a born-again Christian, he had earlier committed himself had put him 17 in the Oval Office for a purpose.
We are no longer prepared to rely mainly on negotiations, trade pressures, arms control regimes and international institutions in order to solve critical world problems.
The Israeli operation against the Iraqi nuclear reactor in Osirak is our new paradigm.
Osirak is now the model of how foreign policy has to be conducted,” said Kristol.
James Woolsey stated on 02 April 2003 at a speech at UCLA that the war on Iraq is the opening of a much-to-be-desired “Fourth World War” and that the governments of Iran and Syria are “America’s enemies” in this war.
As we move toward a new Middle East,” Woolsey said, “We will make a lot of people very nervous,” including Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
A few days later, Woolsey suggested that, “In World War IV, as was true in WW III, we must understand that different enemies require different tactics.
South Korea in 1950 could only be saved by American military power, but Poland in the ‘80s required a very different touch.
There’s no peace agreement, no policy of containment or deterrence that works to deal with this threat.
The only sure way to security and stability and the protection of our people and those of our friends and allies is to go eliminate the terrorists before they can launch any more attacks.
The United States has adopted a forward strategy of freedom in the Middle East.
President George W Bush announced the policy on 06 November 2003, at a twentieth anniversary celebration of the National Endowment for Democracy.
He celebrated the success of countries from Eastern Europe to Latin America, to parts of Asia and Africa that have moved from dictatorship to democracy.
In June of 1982, President Ronald Reagan spoke at Westminster Palace and declared the turning point had arrived in history.
Americans believe that freedom is the deepest hope and need of every human heart.
The cause of freedom led the United States and a coalition of nations to liberate Iraq.
Now, says Mr Bush, the coalition is working to help the Iraqi people build a democratic country that is at peace with its neighbors an Iraq free of oppression, weapons of mass destruction, and terrorism.
By the 1980s, there were new democracies in Latin America, and free institutions were spreading in South Korea, Taiwan, and elsewhere in Asia.
By the end of 1989, every Communist dictatorship in central Europe had collapsed.
In 1990, the South African government released Nelson Mandela from prison; four years later, he was elected President.
In 1991, the Soviet Union broke up, and many of its newly independent republics began moving toward democracy.
It is a change from decades of the practice of foreign policy in the United States where, because of the Cold War and the conflict with the Soviet Union, the United States pushed democracy around the world depending upon how it affected the power struggle with the Soviet Union, which meant that the United States would be friends with a dictator if that dictator was an enemy of the Soviet Union.
The Administration is hoping that if the United States can successfully establish a democracy in Iraq that will have a demonstration effect.
The people in the next-door countries who are in similar circumstances would feel that they deserve the same kind of thing.
When there is local ferment and pressure, the United States can come in and insist that the government not fire on crowds.
This would begin the movement internally in all of these countries towards democracy.
Unhinged from the containment of Soviet power, the sources of United States unilateralism, and its military manifestation of “preemption”, are rooted in the logic of unipolarism.
Leaders in countries ranging from China, Russia and Iran to many European capitals share deep anxieties about the emergence of the United States as a “benevolent hegemon” seeing a “rogue superpower” instead.
Short of joining forces formally, the outlines of a counter-veiling bloc are seen in the convergence of threat perceptions.
China remains uneasy over the Korean Peninsula and Taiwan, while fixing at a “new Silk Road” allowing unfettered access to the Middle East and Eurasia.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is emerging, as a frontline state in their global lineup against United States hegemony is prevalent in the Chinese and Russian foreign-policy community.
We had World War III; we just called it by a different name, the Cold War.
The predominant influence, as of a state, region, or group, over another or others.
The United States became the de facto World policeman when it won the Cold War.
IF this country won the Cold War then it was all Ronald Reagan’s fault.
Freedom of speech should be responsible, not some of the crap you’ll find about our President.
He’d already passed on 3 offers made by the Sudan to take Osama bin Laden into custody.
I do not know with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones.
Close but no cigar, World War IV would be fought with nuclear weapons and World War V would be fought with sticks and stones.
The answer should be obvious; there wouldn’t be any winners, only losers.
The war known in some circles as the Civil War or the War Between the States is also known in other circles as the War of Northern Aggression.
The Oxford English Dictionary reports that the phrase “world war” was first noted in use in the 8 April 1909 edition of the Westminster Gazette.
The conflict that erupted in August 1914, and that ended at the 11 th hour of the 11 th day of the 11 th month of 1918, was known at the time simply as the Great War.
It was also called “The War to End All Wars,” but this optimism proved unjustified.
Some would suggest that this War was just the first phase of the Second 30 Years War, spanning the period 19141945.
The term “First World War” was used in 1920 by Lt-Col a Court Repington, in his book The First World War 1914-18.
The phrase “World War 2” was first noted in use in Manchester Guardian on 18 February 1919.
It seems that World Wars I & II were named together for the first time by Time magazine on 11 September 1938.
On 27 April 1942 a Gallup Poll indicated that people preferred the term World War II for the ongoing global war.
Noting that the term “World War II” had been used in at least seven public laws to designate this period of hostilities, and that analysis of publications and radio programs indicates that this term had been accepted by common usage, President Truman officially named the war in September 1945.
During the Cold War the term “World War III” was widely used to denote the anticipated and dreaded final conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union [what Herman Kahn termed “an insensate wargasm”] that would shatter modern civilization, if not destroy life on Earth.
After a severe economic crisis the world submitted to the World Controllers who took over and redefined the social order.
This global disaster made the rulers of civilization so nervous that they decided that individual freedoms must be sacrificed to communal well-being; contentment is enforced at all costs.
The Nine Years War, which ushered in the era of Ford, ensured stability through dictatorship.
Huxley’s Nine Year’s War should not be confused with the Nine Year’s War of 1688-1697, also known as the War of the League of Augsburg or the War of the Grand Alliance.
Operation Enduring Freedom is the name assigned by the military to operations conducted in support of the Global War on Terrorism.
The various campaigns of the war on terrorism tend to be described as sub-operations of Operation Enduring Freedom.
During the build-up of military forces prior to the initiation of combat operations against Iraq in March 2003, deployments were announced as being in support of OEF or the Global War on Terrorism.
On 19 September 2002 Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told the Senate Armed Services Committee that Iraq was not separate from the global war on terrorism, but rather it is part of it.
The secretary and Air Force General Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, returned to Capitol Hill for the second time in two days to discuss the Bush administration’s position on Iraq.
Rumsfeld said stopping rogue states from developing and using weapons of mass destruction is a key aspect of the global war on terrorism.
On 17 September 2003 President George W Bush submitted a proposal for $87 billion in supplemental appropriations to Congress for funding the War on Terrorism.
The request would provide critical funds for military and intelligence operations in Iraq, Afghanistan and other countries, as well as resources for the reconstruction and economic development of Iraq and Afghanistan.
This theme has continued among the strongest proponents of the War, however it is named.
The GWOT was just a continuation of the Cold War only this time they were shooting real bullets instead of threatening each other.
All I know is that I’m getting darned tired of my 22 boy going off to fight another war.
I’m beginning to think that the plan is to just keep sending him to wars until someone kills him off.
Ron and Linda had to leave and Gary couldn’t decide what to do about a rifle.
He settled on the Super Match rifle, deferring the purchase, and bought a Mini-14 for Sharon.
Sharon didn’t really need a handgun and if she did, she could use the .32 auto.
It used anywhere from 1.9gph to 4.2gph depending on whether it was running at 25% power or 100% power.
The largest propane tank he could get the dealer to put in was a 1,100-gallon tank.
So, they bought their own 3,300-gallon tank Flippin was a nice little town.
Water There is an unlimited supply of water since the water comes from Bull Shoals Lake.
Flippin’s water system can pump more than a half million gallons a day and has storage of 400,000 gallons.
Flippin’s rural water rates are $12.95 for the first 2,000 gallons plus $3.32 for any additional part of 1,000 gallons.
Rates are $9 for the first 2,000 gallons plus $1 for an additional part of 1,000 gallons.
Trash Trash pickup service is provided to commercial customers by the company, which receives the bid for city trash pickup.
Electricity Entergy Corporation serves the Flippin area with transmission voltages of 161,000 volts.
Gas Arkansas Western Gas provides natural gas service with 1,000 BTUs of heat value.
Internet NATCO Technologies offers DSL & ISDN as well as 56K Internet access.
Those 3,000-gallons of propane could last for as long as 52 days, depending upon usage.
Gar-Bear had written about how to set one of those generators up to take both natural gas and propane, but he couldn’t remember which story explained the process.
The generator came with everything for either and all a person had to do was switch it over when they went to propane.
This unit was manufactured to operate on Natural Gas as it leaves our factory.
Remove the cap from the “LP” marked outlet on the Brass Tee located on the upper right side of the Gas Regulator.
Unscrew the fuel line that leads to the carburetor from the “NG” side of the tee and reinstall the hose to the “LP” side.
Be sure that no leaks exist in any connection by using thread sealant to seal.
Do not use excessive amounts of thread sealant taking care to keep it from entering the gas lines.
It was easier just to insert a value and use a line from both sides of the Brass Tee to the Valve.
You also had to put a valve in front of the Brass Tee to switch the source of the gas.
If there was one thing you learned when you got old, it was your limitations.
With only the inaccurate Mini-14, Gary, he didn’t feel bad buying surplus ammo.
He also had 5.56 Lake City M855 Green Tip 5.56062 Grain Steel Penetrator Packed Loose 1000 Rounds per case $399-2000 rounds delivered. .45 Federal 230gr.
If anyone got close enough to require Gary to use the PT1911, a suppressor wasn’t needed.
His last preparation was to get Rambo I and Rambo III sharpened, top and bottom, to a shaving edge.
Gas is $2,749 a gallon and the price of gold went over $500 on the London market yesterday.
I called Texaco and told them we needed a 300gallon gas tank on a stand.
They have a new project for Brenda and John to guard since JAG had its last season.
I have no idea, but Russia and China aren’t very happy with us over North Korea.
Plus the French and the Germans are getting more vo25 cal over Iraq every day.
The Israelis are mad at the United States because we didn’t block the sales of missiles to Syria, armor to the Palestinians and enriched uranium to the Iranians.
The first intercept attempt of the THAAD system will take place in late 2004 or 2005.
In July 2004 THAAD testing moved from White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico to the Pacific Missile Range for block 6 and 8 flight tests.
THAAD also reduces the number of missiles that the lower-tier systems must engage and provides a shoot-look-shoot capability-the ability to engage incoming missiles more efficiently.
The overall procurement objective of 1,159 PAC-3 missiles remains unchanged.
The larger purchases in FY-03 and FY-04 may be offset by lower production in FY-08 and FY-09.
The only thing the United States has going for it is the most powerful Navy in the world.
Don’t kid yourself about those Russian fighters and Russian pilots, they’re well trained and their only problem is their tactical approach.
I’ve always wondered what would happen if they changed their policy and fought like we do.
I think that the last time we went head to head with Russian pilots was in Vietnam.
The POWs and defectors also told stories about Soviet jet pilots in dogfights against the Americans over North Vietnam’s skies.
The Soviet pilots, as well as the North Koreans, always flew warplanes bearing North Vietnam colors.
Rumors, later confirmed, ran that the Americans shot down some Soviet pilots’ jets and they landed safely by parachutes on the ground.
The Soviet pilots never wore insignias or marks to tell that they were from the Soviet Union.
They were immediately arrested and were beaten to pulp by the militiamen in the area, most of whom didn’t understand Russian.
Some who could tell that the downed pilots were Russians usually beat them more brutally as if they had mistaken them for the Americans.
From 1964 to 1973, 6,359 Soviet generals and other officers “visited” Vietnam.
Soviet-guided surface-to-air missile regiments were deployed to encounter United States warplanes.
In Indochina the United States lost almost 60,000 men and 8,612 aircraft.
The Russian military studied the first Gulf War very carefully and as a result modified the combat procedures, reducing their reliance on ground forces and emphasizing the use of air power.
While the Russian air force might have been in disarray in 2000 that was changing very rapidly.
Predictions that if the United States went up against Russian airframes in the future they would learn that they were flying against Chinese pilots were correct at the time, but now dated.
The Chinese could supply massive numbers of ground troops but they lacked a transport system.
The Russians built some of the best aircraft in the world and they were mainly designed to counter threats they perceived the United States military aviation represented.
They didn’t have the Raptor, but neither did the Americans in any great number.
The American plan called for a limited number of F22’s and a far larger number of the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter.
The Air Force traded off F-35’s to get the Raptors they couldn’t afford.
In simulated combat tests, a single F-22 had taken out an attacking force of 10 F15-C’s.
She had also caved in on the question of the food and in early December, had added a full six-month supply of food from Sam’s Club.
During December Gary called Ron to see how he was feeling and how their house was coming.
Ron had more or less duplicated their home but had built a 5-bedroom 2-story affair.
Robert and he had reloaded all of his empty brass and he’d made some purchases.
Fle’d contacted the people in Gonzales, Texas and bought the package deal plus extra Kl and a CD V-717.
You can probably figure $1,000 by the time we buy the package deal, a CD V-717 and extra Potassium Iodide.
The only weapon missing from our arsenal is a Springfield Armory Super Match and .22 rifle and ammo.
Sharon got her Pfaff long-arm quilting machine and Gary bought a used Winchester model 9422 and an assortment of ammo.
Unless you raise your own beef, it isn’t any cheaper to buy a whole steer and have it butchered.
If you watch the sales at Sam’s Club and only buy what they have on sale, you can stock a freezer in a reasonable amount of time and if you vacuum pack the meat, it will hold longer.
Russia and China held the joint maneuvers but nothing came of it, this time.
Under appropriate operating conditions, the neutrons given off by fission reactions can “breed” more fuel from otherwise non-fissionable isotopes.
The most common breeding reaction is that of plutonium-239 from non-fissionable uranium-238.
France has made the largest implementation of breeder reactors with its large Super-Phenix reactor and an intermediate scale reactor on the Caspian Sea for electric power and desalinization.
Brushing aside United States concerns, the government has indicated that it plans to continue building new nuclear reactors in Iran like one that American officials have re29 peatediy warned could be used to develop nuclear weapons.
Russia’s assistance in building a nuclear plant in the city of Bushehr, near the Persian Gulf, has been a nagging irritant in relations with the United States for years.
The Iranian Revolutionary Guards carried out a series of military maneuvers to test Shahab 3 rockets, as part of a plan that the government devised in order to respond to any possible threat.
In return, the Israeli media said that Israel also did some new tests on missiles, in order to respond to any attack from the Iranian Shahab 3 and 4 rockets.
A military analyst in Ha’aretz said that Iran’s intention is to promote its security conditions and ameliorate the morale of its people.
He also said that Iran does not need such missiles in order to target Israel, because its weapons are long enough in Lebanon and Syria, and Iran is capable of targeting military civilian bases through these countries deep inside the Hebrew state.
On the other hand, Tony Blair’s government is trying to diminish the fears from Sharon’s plans of attacking the Iranian nuclear reactors, which will only increase animosity against Israel and the US, and weaken the hope of achieving a historical reconciliation through direct negotiations.
According to the British, the continuation of the Israeli polices of oppressing the Palestinians, in addition to the occupation of Iraq and the destruction of the Iranian nuclear reactors, will destroy the chances for peace.
Whoever knows Sharon’s history, would see that Sharon does not cooperate with his neighbors, and bases his programs on military might and the possession of a nuclear arsenal.
So-called natural theology is a doctrine that can be traced back to the Bible and that shaped the thinking of such early Christian philosophers as Thomas Aquinas.
Ray’s cataloguing of mammals, birds, fish, insects and plants inspired subsequent naturalists to collect and classify organisms as a reflection of the divine order of creation.
And, by encouraging naturalists to look at an organism’s form in relation to its function, he paved the way for studies of adaptation.
Just as the watch’s complexity provides evidence of a watchmaker, Paley reasoned, so the natural world’s complexity provides evidence of a world maker.
This “argument from design” prevailed until Charles Darwin published his “Origin of Species” in 1859, shattering the existing paradigm.
Agassiz, whose vast private collection of fossils formed the nucleus for Harvard’s Museum of Comparative Zoology, openly opposed Darwinism.
He believed that the study of natural history was ultimately analogous to the analysis of God’s thoughts.
The arguments have evolved, but many of today’s proponents of intelligent design echo the fundamental philosophy of the pre-Darwinian thinkers.
Evolutionary scientists, on the other hand, point to powerful evidence to demonstrate that the mechanisms described by Darwin are perfectly capable of explaining the complexity of life. Frances Stead Sellers, for the Outlook staff Just so you all know, if you don’t already.
It is easy to see How God handled the 10 plagues that Moses brought down on the Egyptians.
That was obviously retribution for the Pharaoh killing the first born of the Hebrews.
No one can explain How it happened without simply attributing the Act to God.
The Chinese had a new program of building freighters so they could deliver the goods to Wal-Mart.
They were using the proceeds of their American sales to do 2 things, improve their military and build more ships.
The Russians had refurbished several of their nuclear submarines and they participated in the joint-exercise.
Rumsfeld was talking about troop reductions beginning in the middle of 2006.
The first operation tests of the THAAD Missile system were completed and they needed to do more software revisions.
The Russians had a solution to their inability to put an ABM on target; they equipped it with a nuclear warhead.
The Russians had removed the refueling systems from the Backfire C bombers.
When the Chinese bought an additional 40 Tu-23M bombers from Russia in 2006, they also bought 80+ refueling systems and contracted with the Russians to reinstall them.
Purportedly for airline use, the airliners were secretly converted to tanker aircraft.
Russia quickly confirmed that the Iranians had returned the depleted uranium as agreed.
The Iranians denied any knowledge of the test and the North Koreans refused to comment.
The next time Sharon went to Sam’s Club, Gary strongly suggested that she buy a whole case of the 57 ounce cans of Folgers’s coffee.
She usually bought a case every three months, but this time she bought 2 cases.
Before they moved from California in 2005, Gary had gotten an Rx for all of his prescriptions, including the drugs that Dr.
It was a shame that they lost those prescriptions, they had to make another trip to LA to pick up duplicates.
The prescriptions were for a 2-month supply of the drugs at a time and they had 5 refills.
When they got to Flippin, they filled the prescriptions at a local pharmacy and the duplicate prescriptions at a Mountain Flome pharmacy.
They had to find a doctor in the Flippin area to monitor Gary’s diabetes and the doctor wrote the same set of prescriptions.
Every other month, they bought a 6-month supply of their prescriptions.
When the following year came, they intended on filling the local Rx at the pharmacy in Flippin.
You are very lucky if the canned goods you buy have a shelf life of over a year.
A 2-year backlog of prescriptions was pushing it, but over the years, Dr.
J had figured out what worked and what didn’t and there really wasn’t any reason to change their prescriptions nor was there any reason to go to the doctor every month.
They debated whether or not to accept Ron and Linda’s invitation to come to Cedar Hill, but in the end, decided to make the trip.
The drive to Cedar Hill is 1,047 miles and takes the average person 17 hours, 22 minutes.
In a true TSHTF scenario, I doubt the FCC will be coming around checking licenses.
These days he went fishing during warm weather and sat in the basement during cold weather and watched one of the Discovery Channels.
Gary and Sharon had only left California a year before, but sitting around waiting for Derek to get home from Iraq made the time seem to pass very slowly.
They didn’t have any place they had to rush back to so Sharon and Gary stayed for 3 nights and 2 days.
Amy had taken over Sharon’s chore of getting Lorrie to baby steps with Jeffrey.
Gary was pretty certain that Sharon was helping Amy out with gas money to the tune of about $100 a month.
Sharon managed the money and as long has everything was paid for in cash and they had enough to live on, he didn’t really care.
They had zero bills, except for the monthly utility bills and even had those that they could were set up on a level pay plan.
They were probably 6-7 months ahead on food, maybe more, and 2 years ahead on all of their prescriptions.
The best forms of silver for survival purposes are pre-1965 United States 90% coins and 1-oz silver rounds.
The most useful forms of gold would be V 10 -oz Gold Eagles and V4-oz Gold Eagles.
That is because hundreds of web pages promote numismatic and collector coins, as well as foreign coins.
If the time ever comes that gold and silver coins were again used as money, coins would be worth only their metal content.
Gaudens and tell him it contains .9675 ounce of gold, and it will be difficult if not impossible to convince him to accept it at more than .9675 times the price of gold.
In an emergency, having the gold content stamped on a coin could go a long way toward causing someone to accept it.
Third, the coins you buy for survival purposes should contain amounts with which Americans are comfortable.
Don’t hold your breath; 2) There is just something about my spending 36 $3,000 on a rifle that yanks her chain; and 3) That’s only for the rifle, the scope is expensive, too.
Incorporating the best features of the Mark 4 M3 and VX-III Illuminated Reticle scopes, the Leupold Mark 4 3.5-10x40mm LR/T M3 Illuminated Reticle scope features M3-style adjustments and an eleven position illuminated reticle control dial.
Capable of sub-MOA accuracy with the proper ammunition, the Super Match is built for the individual who demands the very best.
Springfield’s latest proprietary development for the Super Match is the rear lugged receiver.
Additional extraordinary features include an ultra-heavy air gauged national match barrel, custom oversized op-rod guide and maximum dimension match grade stocks available in American walnut and McMillan fiberglass.
Eric, The Ammoman, has M\14 magazines for only $139 for 10 mags or $880 for 80 mags.
You cannot tell these from USGI mags brand new sturdy steel construction they work and look great.
Let’s see, 80 magazines at 20-rounds each would take 1,600 rounds of ammo to fill them one time.
If you aren’t sure what to put in your BOB, read Fleataxi’s Alaskan series of stories.
WASFIINGTON It appears North Korea has conducted a test of a short-range missile, White House chief of staff Andrew Card told CNN Sunday.
It appears that there was a test of a short-range missile by the North Koreans and it landed in the Sea of Japan,” Card said on CNN’s Late Edition.
Six-nation talks on persuading North Korea to curb its nuclear ambitions involving the two Koreas, United States, China, Japan and Russia have been stalled since last June after three inconclusive rounds.
Carl Levin, the top Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, told Late Edition that Sunday’s test shows the Bush administration’s refusal to hold direct talks with Pyongyang is leading to an even greater nuclear threat.
The North Koreans are going to lose their heads trying to save a little face.
However, the North Koreans are capable of putting things into orbit using either the NKSL-1 a Taep’o-dong-1 missile with a third stage and satellite added or a NKSLX-2 a Taep’o-dong-2 missile with a third stage and satellite added.
The United States Defense Intelligence Agency warned last week that North Korea has the ability to mount a nuclear device on a long-range missile and the communist state could hit United States territory.
If North Korea attacks the US, a single Peacekeeper missile will constitute over retaliation.
If the Peacekeeper can’t reach North Korea, we have 14 SSBN’s with 24 Trident-D missiles apiece.
Highland IP, Camp Pike, Camp Robinson, Fort Chaffee, Little Rock AFB, Ebbing ANGB, Everton ESS and Fort Smith.
I think we’re in pretty good shape here in Flippin, it’s mountainous and we have the shelter.
The Ott family was from McConnellsburg, PA, about 50 miles west of Gettysburg.
The oldest of their children was his great-grandmother who was born in 1864.
And the southern cops weren’t all bad; some of them smiled when they handed you the ticket.
By any measure, good boys died on both sides and it was a rotten shame.
Most of the time the Yanks were better equipped but that didn’t keep Johnny Reb from kicking their 39 butt.
Except for Francisco Pancho Villa’s raid on Columbus, NM on 3/9/1916 the United States hadn’t been invaded since 1812.
Those Mexican’s gunned down about 17 (14, 18, pick a number) innocent civilians, contrary to Pancho’s instructions.
Blackjack Pershing and George S Patton chased Villa all over Mexico but never caught up with him.
Wikipedia claims Villa had 1,500 men in Columbus, but the correct number was 485.
Villa starred as himself in 3 movies and 25 other actors played the part in other movies.
The battle of the Alamo occurred in Mexico, Texas hadn’t declared independence until during or after the siege.
Francisco “Pancho” Villa was born to rural peasant parents in San Juan del Rio, Mexico on June 5, 1878.
Raised in poverty in Durango, he turned to cattle rustling and robbery as a young man and soon became one of Mexico’s most wanted bandit leaders.
As an enemy of the Mexican federal authorities who were trying to arrest him, Villa became a natural ally of Francisco I Madero in Madero’s struggle to overthrow President Porfirio Diaz.
Appointed a colonel in Madero’s revolutionary army, Villa led his forces in a daring raid against Juarez on May 11, 1911, capturing the city and securing Madero’s position as the new President.
When Madero was assassinated two years later in a coup led by General Vittoriano Fluerta, Villa quickly reorganized his Army of the North and became one of the most important leaders of the anti-Huerta alliance.
Villa’s highly mobile mounted troops, called “Villistas”, inflicted a major defeat on Huerta’s army in northern Mexico in the Battle of Zacatecas on June 23, 1913, and then began a campaign to the south.
By December, in conjunction with the forces of Venustiano Carranza and Emiliano Zapata, Villa captured Mexico City, forcing Huerta to flee and placing control of the government in the hands of the three rebel leaders.
However, the following spring Villa was forced out of the triumvirate when he lost a power struggle with Carranza, and in the ensuing conflict his troops were badly defeated and Villa was forced to return to his headquarters in Durango.
There he resumed his life as a bandit, raiding American border towns and mining camps as well as Mexican villages.
On March 9, 1916, troops under Villa’s command raided the border town of Columbus, New Mexico although it was never established if Villa ordered the raid or if it was carried out without his knowledge looting the town and killing some of its residents.
The United States government sent an expeditionary force into Mexico under General John J Pershing to capture Villa.
However, Villa’s maneuverability and superior knowledge of the terrain enabled him to elude the pursuing American troops, and Pershing’s forces withdrew from the area the following year.
In 1920 the new Mexican government reached an agreement with Villa in which he agreed to halt his raids in exchange for his settling down on a ranch in Canutilio and being appointed a general in the Mexican army.
However, on June 20, 1923, Villa was ambushed and killed by followers of Alvaro Obregon, a former army general, who feared that Villa would oppose their leader’s candidacy for President in the upcoming elections.
Relying purely on a hunch, Patton led a raid at a place called the Rubio Ranch, believing that one of Villa’s men might be there.
As it turned out, not one, but three of the enemy were there and during their attempted escape, Patton and his men engaged them in a lively skirmish resembling an old western movie gun fight.
He took them directly to Pershing’s headquarters for identification where he created quite a commotion.
Later, he carved two notches in his Ivory-Handled Colt .45 to commemorate his good fortune.
The only problem is that Doolittle never heard of him and he isn’t on any roster of the men who participated in the mission.
Every war has its ‘heroes’ who either weren’t what they claimed to be or whatever.
They had tanks of hydrazine, pentaborane, diborane, hybolene and nitrogen tetroxide, liquid florine and 50 chemicals you never heard of.
Like most of the Airmen at the Rocket Site, Gary had a ‘Get out of Jail Free Card’ properly called a Toxic Fuel Handler ID Card.
He bought a stack of B-27 full-size police silhouettes and some target pasters.0-yards seemed like a pretty good range to start shooting at.
The following day he moved the targets to 200yards and spent 2-days at that range, readjusting the sights to shoot dead center mass.
He had fixed sights, so he just vaguely noted where the groups were falling.
He acquired an inside the waistband holster for a Walther PPK and it fit his gun like it was made for it, which it wasn’t.
Since it was only a .32 auto, it wasn’t coming out of the holster except as a last resort.
Gary caught a fair number of fish during the summer of 2006 when he wasn’t off doing something else.
He checked every nook and cranny for their 22-quart canning pressure cooker, but couldn’t find it.
He mail ordered an All American 41-quart pressure cooker because it would do 19 one-quart or 32 one-pint jars at a time, and it didn’t have a gasket to go bad.
He was going to rototill in a little wood ash and a few bags of steer manure.
He thought about how hard it was to use a rototiller and decided to hire the work done.
The last time they’d put in a large garden was in 1979, and it had been a monster.
Raccoons had a feast on their sweet corn; maybe they should fence this garden in.
Meanwhile, the price of gasoline had continued to rise, a penny here, 2 cents there, sometimes as much as a nickel, but it never came down.
The Dow Jones Industrial Averages had slipped below $10,000 and then slowly edged their way below $9,000.
There was a disaster in the making, but it was happening in slow motion.
News organizations were expressing concern over the failing economy, but no one had a solution.
He didn’t have anything constructive to say; just his usual unsupported opinions trying to force a conclusion.
Alan Greenspan had retired, it had been long expected, and the new Chairman of the Federal Reserve had some different ideas about how to stimulate the economy.
He wasn’t getting a chance to put them into play because the Fed was forced to respond to the current economic situation.
The cost of living in 2006 jumped 7.2%, primarily due to the price of gas and a food shortage brought on by the continuing drought.
They usually lower the interest rate to stimulate the economy and raise it to dampen inflation.
Gary and Sharon bought their first $1,000 face value of pre-65 United States dimes, quarters and halves.
The coins cost them a shade over $5,000, forcing them to dip into the cash in the basement and Sharon’s checking account reserve.
During the last half of 2005 and most of 2006, they’d avoided depending on the Trust income for their living expenses.
It hadn’t been too hard to do because moving from California to Arkansas had reduced their expenses dramatically.
Then Wal-Mart stopped advertising price rollbacks and Sharon suspected the country was in trouble.
Rumsfeld held a press conference to announce that United States forces in Iraq were finally below 100,000.
When a reporter tried to corner him on when the remainder of the troops would be home, Rumsfeld sidestepped the issue and General Myers gave an obviously prepared statement about how we were reaching our goals.
According to the Internet, it was pushing $4.00 in San Francisco, the highest price in the nation.
There was Patriot Act I and Patriot Act II, but all they had done was taken away peoples’ rights.
Hell, they might just as well repeal the Bill of Rights, somewhere in the rush to protect the country from Osama bin Laden those rights had taken a beating.
Immediately after a new project based on the Minuteman Project, in concept, had started in San Diego.
The San Diego project only wanted retired police officers and people with military combat experience.
As soon as the prices came down, people started stocking up on high capacity magazines and weapons that were now legal in most of the country.
By late 2006, it was almost as if the assault weapons ban had never taken place.
If the Congress ever enacted another assault weapons ban, the theft rate of firearms would triple/quadruple overnight.
Cops aren’t dumb and with everyone claiming a breakin a few days or weeks before the assault weapons ban would be due to be reinstated, they probably wouldn’t even bother to investigate the reports.
They thanked God for the food and the roof over their heads, but Sharon and Gary had very little else to be thankful for.
As had been the case when he’d gone to Kosovo, Derek had stopped keeping in touch.
You didn’t go anywhere without your Ml 6 and at least one magazine, on post.
Off post, they carried anywhere from 1 to 4 extra magazines in addition to their usual allotment of 7 30-round magazines.
Bought some mason jars and a fancy canner so we can put in a garden next year.
The Three Amigos had been a sensation at a time in the past, but that was over and each of them had moved on with their lives.
Gary was in Arkansas, Ron in New Mexico and neither one of them knew where Clarence was, probably Birmingham, Alabama; 45 that was where most of his family was.
Grouped together, they were all trying to outdo each other being conservative.
As an individual, Clarence was a little liberal, Ron conservative and GarBear was somewhere in the middle, neither one nor the other.
In real life Gary was like what he’d been in college, able to understand macroeconomics but having trouble with microeconomics.
Macro looked at the country and micro was more like looking at an individual family’s spending habits.
Just to set the record straight, Ron Green’s last name is really Brown, Clarence Rawlings is really Clarence Floyd and his wife’s name is Shirley, not Lucy.
The other names are correct, as far as I know; Linda’s sister’s name isn’t Shelia.
The guy up in San Jose who made Thumper for The Ark runs a machine shop and really does make Gatling guns as a hobby.
The same federal government that outlawed the trigger cranks for rifles says that a Gatling gun in not a machine gun because you have to continue to crank it to make it shoot.
A lawyer, who doesn’t even know what a Gatling gun is, probably wrote the letter.
I have no opinion on the matter, but I ought to see if Bob R is still alive and commission him to build me a 12-gauge Gatling gun.
Reflex makes a suppressor for the shotgun, but it isn’t much more than a flashhider.
In January of 2007, Sharon bought another $1,000 face value in pre-65 silver coins.
During January and February, the Russians and Chinese held joint maneuvers for the third straight year.
The Chinese didn’t buy any more Backfire C bombers from the Russians, either.
They had managed to launch 6 more large cargo carriers, bringing their total to 18 of the new ships that could haul 5,000 containers, each.
Gary let out a sigh of relief when the maneuvers ended and the United States was still intact.
Gold hit $600 on the London market at the end of December and gas was hovering around $3,249 in Arkansas.
He’d also figured out that Derek wouldn’t be back to the states until the end of June of 2007.
He couldn’t even remember why he’d thought Derek would be back in March; maybe it was wishful thinking.
He was also wondering how Lake City could have surplus ammo or overruns when they couldn’t supply enough ammo for the troops in Iraq.
Maybe this stuff was the rejects, but it fired ok so he didn’t worry about it, he just 46 ordered more.
Epinephrine is only good for 1 year so you have to replace your Epi-pen.
Because they can be selfadministered and are very fast acting, persons with severe allergies and a risk of anaphylactic shock commonly carry Epi-pens.
In the United States and the United Kingdom, Epi-pens are regulated medical devices and require a prescription.
The Pen usually has a shelf life of about 12 months, or until the contents contain a Precipitate or they discolor, whichever comes earlier.
Once this occurs, the Epi-pen should be discarded if unused by returning it to your local drugstore, pharmacy or hospital for safe disposal.
Despite being trademarked, common usage of the word Epi-pen is drifting toward the generic context of any auto injector.
The carrying tube that the pen comes in is easily broken; however, several companies sell durable replacement carrying tubes.
You can either buy rechargeable batteries or check the date on the package and keep them rotated.
I don’t use rechargeable batteries because they have less energy than the non-rechargeable batteries.
One way to make sure you always have good food is to rotate at least half of it every year,g., have 2 jars of yeast one a year newer than the other.
If you can make friend with your pharmacist ask him what the expiration date was on the bottle he dispensed the pills from.
The one I got in 12/03 will expire 09/05; the one I got in 3/04 will expire in 11/05; and, the one I got in 12/04 will expire in 08/07.
The problems are in getting your physician to write you an Rx for #100 and getting the pharmacy to dispense an unopened bottle.
Save them and add them to your back up prescriptions, assuming they come in open bottles.
In my opinion, you should never have less than a 2-month supply of all of your prescription medications on hand.
Maybe that’s easier said than done, but the next time, get the doctor to write your refills a little early and go to a different pharmacy.
Ask your doctor about keeping a single course of antibiotics on hand that he is most likely to prescribe if you get sick.
Generally, a broad-spectrum oral antibiotic is best; it will treat the most illnesses.
Assuming you’re an average person who uses antibiotics once a year or more often, you have a built in rotation system.
Always be sure to take the full course of treatment, usually 7 or 10 days.
If you walk out of your doctor’s office with any questions it’s your fault, not the doctor’s.
Don’t let him shine you on, you are paying him for his services and that includes information.
WebMD also as a dictionary function, try typing in a word you don’t know.
I didn’t know what a Whipple Procedure was or what the big deal was that I didn’t have cancer until after the surgery.
Yeah, right, that’s why the operation took 9V2 hours and they kept me so doped up I didn’t even know my name.
They have this Russian redheaded nurse in the recovery room, va-va-va-voom.
Nice legs, about a D Just don’t let them give you extra pain medication; especially if you are on an epidural.
On February 12, 2007, Sharon turned 60 and on March 23, 2007, Gary turned 64.
That was the most notable thing of the spring of 2007 except that Derek didn’t get blown up and the Russians and Chinese didn’t attack.
By the end of July, when Derek finally showed up in one piece, the price of gas was $3,719 in Flippin, Arkansas.
Based on the increase in the Consumer Price Index from the third quarter of 2001 through the third quarter of 2002, Social Security and Supplemental Security Income beneficiaries will receive a 1. percent COLA for 2003.
More than 47 million Americans will get a 2. percent increase in their Social Security checks starting in January , meaning an additional $25 per month for the typical retiree.
But almost half of that gain will be absorbed by a record increase in Medicare premiums.
The cost of living adjustment announced by the Social Security Administration will be the largest percentage gain since a 3. percent increase in 2001.
However, they were fully offset by the increases in the Medicare premiums.
They’d been lucky and although Balad was in the Sunni Triangle, most of the fading insurgency was in other cities, towns and villages.
He’d not hooked up with 1 of the 2 tank units in Shreveport and was to now with the Arkansas National Guard, counter battery target acquisition.
This wasn’t the case in Flippin because the town’s largest employer, the manufacturer of “Ranger” Bass Boats wasn’t selling a lot of boats.
Flippin was home to Actronix, ArkPlas Products, Inc., Micro Plastic, Inc., Mountain Home Mold & Manufacturing, Ranger Boat Company, Rebrod, Inc. and Volt Industrial Plastic, Inc.
Derek and Mary were better off financially than at any time in their lives.
The rent from the second house nearly paid the house payment on the property.
Groceries were more expensive, but while on active duty, Derek was bringing in more income than when he wasn’t on active duty and working at a civilian job.
If Derek wanted to go in with him replacing the gas, he could do all of his fill ups from the tank.
Derek told his Dad that his unit wasn’t being replaced and Bush intended to stop replacing the units when they rotated home.
In August of 2007, someone tested another nuclear weapon in the Indian Ocean.
NORAD picked up the test this time too, but no one knew who had tested the weapon.
There were, according to CNN, 3 likely suspects, Israel, Iran and North Korea.
The only people who needed to test weapons were the newest members of the Nuclear Club, North Korea and Iran.
The Russians again reported that Iran had returned the expired uranium, just like they’d promised.
Iran steadfastly denied permission to the IAEA to examine its reactors because their agreement with Russia guaranteed they were in full compliance.
The Director of National Intelligence is a United States cabinet-level official coordinating all 15 components of the Intelligence Community, and is the principal intelligence adviser to the President and the statutory intelligence advisor to the National Security Council.
Creating the post of DNI was one of the recommendations in the report by the House-Senate Intelligence Committee investigating the September 11 th attacks.
On February 17, 2005, President George W, Bush named United States Ambassador to Iraq John Negroponte to the post, pending confirmation by the Senate.
It has been reported that President Bush’s first choice for Director of National Intelligence was former Director of Central Intelligence Agency Robert M Gates, who declined the nomination.
On April 21, 2005, John Negroponte was confirmed by a vote of 98 to 2 in favor of his appointment as Director of National Intelligence, and was sworn in by President Bush on that day.
The United States intelligence community had 2 real problems, the lack of Humint due to an over dependence on technology and the inability of the 15 intelligence agencies to share the information they gathered.
Each of the 15 agencies felt that their information was proprietary and didn’t want to share.
No doubt the post was envisioned as a clearinghouse where the intelligence of the different agencies could be combined into a comprehensive report.
That assumed that each of the 15 agencies wouldn’t hold anything back from the Director of National Intelligence.
Tachycardia is an abnormally rapid heartbeat and Bradycardia is an abnormally slow heartbeat.
Ron has a bad heart and in 2004, the doctor implanted a pacemaker in his left shoulder.
Two of the most dangerous kinds of arrhythmias are ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.
Ventricular fibrillation is when the ventricles of the heart begin to beat so quickly that they can’t pump blood anymore.
Although it’s often confused with a heart attack, cardiac arrest is a very different problem.
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy , or biventricular pacing, is an exciting new kind of treatment for people with heart failure.
When the heart’s natural pacemaker stops working or doesn’t work properly, an implanted pacemaker can help.
It sends out electrical signals to keep the heart beating at a normal rhythm.
Pacemakers are usually attached to just one side of the heart; however, a standard pacemaker may not be enough for some people with heart failure.
Simpler pacemakers are still available to treat people with heartbeats that are too slow, a condition called bradycardia.
These are some of the smallest implantable devices often about the size of a wristwatch.
They attach to the heart with one or two leads and send impulses when necessary to keep your heart’s rhythm steady.
But many implantable devices have more than one and sometimes all of these features.
That way, they can be treated for a slow or irregular heartbeat but also be protected from sudden cardiac death.
It didn’t appear that Gary and Sharon would need the home defibrillator or the Epi-pens when Ron and Linda visited.
There was a garden to weed, it seemed like that took a little time every day, and a son newly home from Iraq to get to know again.
There still was the problem with the family being spread out between Iowa, Arkansas and California, but that couldn’t be helped.
The best that they could hope for was some sign that the world was not going to destroy itself.
Even with Derek home again, it was an uneasy summer in Flippin, Arkansas.
George W Bush had everyone out of Afghanistan and had accelerated the pullout from Iraq.
Fie was concentrating on getting Social Security Reform through the Congress but was still having a lot of trouble.
Just before the Labor Day holiday, Ron and Linda showed up for a visit.
The price with 1,000 rounds of Black Hills ammo and 20 magazines works out to be roughly $4,847.02.
They just kept building nuclear weapons and third stages for their Nadong-4 rockets.
Since the Nadong-4 rocket is liquid fueled, maybe the United States could launch if they ever saw the Koreans fueling all of the rockets at one time.
Then again, the United States always promised that they wouldn’t do that.
The real question would be on whether or not China and Russia would retaliate against the United States if the United States launched a pre-emptive strike on North Korea.
That’s something to think about, especially since the Russians reinstalled the refueling probes for the Chinese.
In September 2000 Congress commissioned the second Nuclear Posture Review the first by this name took place in 1994, although the Reed Panel certainly qualified as such a review.
According to a report by the DOE’s top-secret Nuclear Emergency Search Team, presumably leaked to Time, that an intelligence agent of “undetermined” reliability said a 10-kiloton nuclear bomb missing from the Russian arsenal was in the hands of terrorists.
Almost simultaneous with the DOE report being leaked to Time magazine, another secret document the NPR report was leaked to the Los Angeles Times Newspaper.
The secret NPR report named seven countries as potential targets for tactical nuclear weapons Russia, China, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Syria, and Libya.
It almost seemed that the scare of nuclear weapons in the hands of terrorists was used to justify an escalation in United States nuclear doctrine.
Two secret reports conveniently leaked to the mainstream media with such precise timing should raise critical questions.
We’ve got all options on the table, because we want to make it very clear to nations that you will not threaten the United States or use weapons of mass destruction against us, or our allies or friends.
General Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, further confirmed the accuracy of the leaked information the NPR preserves for the President all the options that a President would want in case this country or our friends and allies were attacked by weapons of mass destruction.
Myers also alluded to what a “surprising military development” might be something like Iraq attacking Israel, North Korea attacking South Korea, or China attacking Taiwan.
President Bush was asked at the 13 March 2002 White House Press Conference what his feelings were on building smaller nuclear weapons.
In six paragraphs of transcript he waffled all over the place covering everything from nuclear deterrence foolishness and warhead reduction negotiations to political gibberish and patriotic propaganda.
In case you can’t tell from reading the excerpt, the guy who wrote the paper is absolutely opposed to nuclear weapons in any number or any form.
The Chinese have made it very, very clear that they intend to retake Taiwan.
You had better believe that if the United States exercised the nuclear option against China or Russia, the countries would retaliate.
They should have appointed H Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. as the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.
In 1990 he was chosen to run Operation Desert Storm, and was responsible for the “left hook” strategy that went into Iraq behind the Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait, and widely credited with bringing the ground war to a close in just four days.
The next in line was General Peter Pace, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
In this capacity, he is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Nation’s second highest-ranking military officer.
General Pace is the 17 th officer to hold the position and the first Marine.
On April 22, 2005, at a White House press conference, President George W Bush nominated General Peter Pace of the United States Marine Corps to be the next Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Current Chairman Richard B Myers will retire from the position on September 30, 2005.
It’s exhilarating because I have the opportunity, if confirmed by the Senate, to continue to serve this great nation.
Gary had better stop running the second stoplight they put in by the Wal-Mart Super Center.
The first Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was a General who had 5 stars on his collar and his name wasn’t MacArthur or Eisenhower.
You realize, of course, that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs was a Marine in 2007 & 2008 and only the first Marine to ever hold the position.
Only 4 Air Force generals and 4 Admirals had held the position, while 8 Army Generals had the job.
He didn’t meet him until years later when he was assigned to the 27th Infantry of the Hawaiian Division.
At the end of operations in Europe, his 12th Army Group was the largest ever commanded by an American general.
Leonard Gerow’s Fifteenth Armies, a force comprising 12 corps, 48 divisions, and 1. million men.
On 15 August 1953, General of the Armies Omar Nelson Bradley left active service.
In the 28 years before his death in 1981, he occupied himself in industry and was periodically consulted by civilian and military leaders.
He retained an active interest in the Army, spoke at its schools, and frequently visited units and met with soldiers of all ranks.
There is no standard against which to compare Bradley as an army group commander.
During the fighting in Europe, his calm and effective presence was important in times of crisis, as was his deft touch in handling subordinates.
It is difficult, for example, to imagine Patton without Bradley, who exploited the talents of that volatile commander as well as any man could have done.
Finally, it was his superb wartime record, combined with his reputation for fairness and honesty, which made him effective in what was probably his most difficult job, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
He didn’t fight for any principles, he didn’t fight to defend freedom or democracy or any abstract idea; he fought because he loved fighting.
In his diaries you can read of his fear of flunking out of West Point; the prospect terrified him because he was certain that he would never be good at anything except being a general or a leader of a country.
His speech at the beginning of the movie is vintage Patton, an almost exact reproduction of a speech Patton actually gave to Third Army.
It’s tough, and no-nonsense; Patton lets you know in no uncertain terms that he is here to win, to destroy the enemy, and by God you’d better be too.
I don’t know if Patton actually directed traffic on the roads as he is shown doing in the movie, but it was a very Pattonish thing to do.
Patton did on at least one occasion get out of his staff car and join a squad of G.I.’s in heaving a vehicle out of the mud.
To those who had been wounded fighting for him he was always kind and considerate.
But to those whose minds could not stand the horrible strain that war imposed on them, he was merciless; he could not comprehend the fact that other people didn’t share his love of violence for violence’ sake.
Not shown in the movie is Patton’s unlovable characteristic of turning on his subordinates once they surpassed him in their careers.
Patton had nothing but good to say about Bradley, until Bradley was promoted over Patton’s head, whereupon Patton savaged Bradley in his diary.
And although mankind’s single greatest stroke of good fortune in the 20th century was that Russia and America never came to blows, it is still hard not to feel sorry for Patton as he desperately seeks his superiors’ approval to carry the war on eastward into the Soviet Union anything, just to have a war to fight.
Certainly those who, like myself, have Jewish blood, or who were otherwise marked for death by the Nazi state, all owe him a great debt of gratitude for his pivotal role in destroying that state.
And yet, had he been born German, Patton would surely have fought just as devotedly for the Nazi side.
My Fellow Americans, At the recommendation of the Chairman of the Joint Chief’s and the Secretary of Defense, and after consulting with my Cabinet, we are increasing our land forces in South Korea.
Recent intelligence has revealed a situation which requires our immediate attention.
For the interim, all passes and leaves are cancelled and members of the military should report to their units.
Secretary Rice will present this matter before the United Nations Security Council tomorrow afternoon.
I will continue to report to the American people as the situation develops.
If this doesn’t break until after they get there, maybe there will be time for them to get here,” Gary announced.
Until the 82 nd lands in Korea, the North won’t really have any reason to invade the South.
Jennifer and Brenda and their families can be here in 3 hours so tell them to make sure they bring everything that they need.
Zero-Dark-Thirty Technically a half-hour after midnight, but commonly used to describe any event that is scheduled to take place after midnight and before sunrise.
What the President didn’t tell the nation was that he had ordered the Carrier Battle Groups to sortie as soon as they had stores aboard.
Under the circumstances, anyone missing the movement would be hauled to the CBG aboard a C-2A Greyhound.
Once the CBG passed the range of the Greyhound, personnel would be forward deployed to catch up with the CBGs out of Japan.
Neither did he tell the nation that the United States military was on DEFCON 3 and ready to advance to DEFCON 2.
However, the Depart58 merit of Homeland Security raised the Threat Level to Orange from Yellow and this was announced by all of the networks and cable news channels.
All submarines not in the yards for repair were ordered to sortie, too.
Emergency sortie plans are contingency operations to evacuate ports in an orderly way in the event of national or local emergency.
These plans are often implemented in the event of hurricanes or other dangerous weather.
Material Conditions establish the fighting integrity of the ship and maintain its survivability.
It is set when the threat to the ship is minimal, during working hours when in port, or when there is no danger of attack or bad weather.
It is set immediately and automatically when general quarters are sounded.
It is also set when entering or leaving port during wartime, to localize damage and control fire and flooding, or at any time the Commanding Officer deems it necessary.
Underway Replenishment ; Vertical Replenishment ; Air Operations; Amphibious Operations; transit of known or suspected hazardous navigation areas.
Severe Condition A Severe Condition reflects a severe risk of terrorist attacks.
Under most circumstances, the Protective Measures for a Severe Condi59 tion are not intended to be sustained for substantial periods of time.
In the event of a national emergency, a series of seven different alert Conditions can be called.
DEFCON 5 Normal peacetime readiness DEFCON 4 Normal, increased intelligence and strengthened security measures DEFCON 3 Increase in force readiness above normal readiness DEFCON 2 Further Increase in force readiness, but less than maximum readiness DEFCON 1 Maximum force readiness EMERGCONs are national level reactions in response to ICBM attack.
Major attack upon United States forces overseas, or allied forces in any area, and is confirmed either by the commander of a unified or specified command or higher authority or an overt attack of any type is made upon the United States and is confirmed by the commander of a unified or specified command or higher authority.
Emergency which exists when attack upon Continental United States, Alaska, Canada, or United States installations in Greenland by hostile aircraft or missiles is considered probable, is imminent, or is taking place.
Sharon and Gary had replenished the cash in the basement and they took it and their ATM card to the Wal-Mart Super Store.
As a result of Wal-Mart’s relationship with these suppliers, Wal-Mart supports 76,444 supplier jobs in the state of Arkansas.
However, union grocery store employees, especially in California, hate them.
Especially when the store is right down the street at the new green-yellow-red stoplight and the Threat Level is Red.
Back in California Sharon and Gary price shopped on their prescriptions.
Wal-Mart not only had the lowest price, they gave a discount for people on Medicare.
At the moment, the pharmacist was very understanding and didn’t make them wait one more day to refill their prescriptions.
The nice thing about the Super Store, among other things, was the size of some of the packages.
They made up the difference in cash and Derek paid for the entire group of purchases.
They only lived a short distance from the Wal-Mart and Mary and the kids were welcome to stay at their house, along with her folks or at their home, it was a very short distance away.
The first people to show up were Brenda and her ex-husband plus their little boy.
Gary got out the folding beds in the basement and Ronnie Joe helped him set them up.
About 13 hours after the President broadcast his message to the nation Ron called to tell Gary that David, Lorrie, Amy and 7 kids were at his house.
Gary said that they should just stay there and put Brenda on the phone to her Dad.
On a straight through drive between Ron and Gary’s it was maybe 19 solid hours, depending upon your speed.
Ron and Linda told Brenda and then 61 Jennifer just to stay put for now.
And then when Damon got there with his girlfriend, and hopefully his 3 kids, they’d have 15 people not counting themselves or Derek and Mary and their 3 kids.
That little detour meant that Mark and Paula arrived before him and his bunch.
Linda tried to get in touch with her sister, according to Ron, but couldn’t get an answer.
When Mark and Paula got to Gary’s, Paula called her Dad and her aunt was at Ron’s house.
The Security Council at the United Nations got bogged down in an argument after Condi made her speech.
Airliners were pressed into service to get the 101st Airborne personnel to Korea and all of the commercial cargo carriers were loaded up with military hardware and sent off as well.
When the original aircraft arrived back in the United States after delivering the 82nd Airborne, they rotated crews and began loading the 10th Mountain Division.
The flying time from San Francisco to Seoul is about 12 hours and the 82nd Airborne is stationed in Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
That makes the flight at least 16 hours, each way, if they don’t have to refuel.
Over the last decade, the 10th Mountain Division has been involved in more deployments than any other division in the Army.
Ronnie Joe was watching Geraldo on FOX and Geraldo said that the country was at DEFCON 2.
It seemed to Gary that if the government wanted the country to know that, they would have told the country.
This was the second time in his life that he’d been though a DEFCON 2 situation.
On 22 October 1962 SAC responded by establishing Defense Condition Three , and ordered B-52s on airborne alert.
Tension grew and the next day SAC declared DEFCON II, a heightened state of alert, ready to strike targets within the Soviet Union.
A Defense Emergency meant they were attacking somewhere overseas and an Air Defense Emergency meant they were attacking North American or Greenland.
It was a good thing they had picked up another dozen 57ounce cans of coffee the way it was going.
By the way, Costco is generally about the same price as Sam Club or the Super Stores.
It had been one hell of a lot easier to get some deli food like potato salad, macaroni salad and hamburgers and hot dogs and turn the whole event into a picnic than to try and fix meals for that many people.
Gary didn’t have a lot of guns and there was plenty of room in the storage cabinet he used as a gun safe for the weapons.
The North Koreans withdrew 5km and the President lowered the DEFCON from 2 to 3.
NORAD was tracking a pair of North Korean satellites that the North Koreans had launched into polar orbits in 2006 and 2007.
Both satellites were schedule to pass over the United States at approximately the same time 3 days hence.
Space Command had always assumed they were spy satellites but the North Koreans had remained mum.
Since the North Koreans had never crossed the DMZ, the United Nations was helpless to sanction the North Koreans and the Security Council dropped the matter.
Dubya decided to continue the troops transfer to South Korea, just in case.
Critics in the House and the Senate immediately got on the media and began to complain loudly.
A substantial portion of the United States Commercial air assets were busy transferring remnants of the 101st and the 10th Mountain Division to Korea and the FCC kept the commercial airlines grounded until the assets returned from Korea and could be returned to service.
Gary gave the same amount of money to Ron and Linda’s daughters and they took off for Cedar Hill.
Both groups of children were planning on driving straight through to their destinations.
Gary was allowing Lorrie and Amy 24-hours because it’s never fun to travel with chil63 dren, regardless of their age.
It took them 30 hours because they stopped and catnapped somewhere in Oklahoma.
OPEC concluded an emergency meeting and the Ministers agreed to absolutely cap oil production at the current level.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average slid $275 at the news Space Command had projected the paths of the North Korean satellites and something was most peculiar.
The satellites would be in a nearly synchronous pattern on the 3rd day and one would bisect the eastern half of the United States and the other would bisect the western half.
Space Command hadn’t realized that the North Korean satellites had the ability to reposition themselves, until now.
Amy had not only brought her kids, she’d brought Baby, Scrappy and the cats.
You go ahead and issue the necessary instruction to our military units.
Electromagnetic pulse In addition to other effects, a nuclear weapon detonated in or above the earth’s atmosphere can create an electromagnetic pulse , a high-density electrical field.
EMP acts like a stroke of lightning but is stronger, faster and briefer.
EMP can seriously damage electronic devices connected to power sources or antennas.
This includes communication systems, computers, electrical appliances, and automobile or aircraft ignition systems.
The damage could range from a minor interruption to actual burnout of components.
Most electronic equipment within 1,000 miles of a high-altitude nuclear detonation could be affected.
Battery powered radios with short antennas generally would not be affected.
Although EMP is unlikely to harm most people, it could harm those with pacemakers or other implanted electronic devices, 64 The Secretary of Energy said that there was a limit to how much his department could do.
The millions of miles of wire that made up the electrical grid would act as antennas in the event of an EMP attack and it would probably take the electrical grid down for an unbelievably long time.
The people of the United States should be warned because an EMP attack could kill people who had pacemakers.
Dubya had his Press Secretary call an emergency news conference and give the news to the nation.
The repositioning of the satellites was a ruse to attract the US’s attention off the growing crisis in Korea.
There was so much going on that it was like trying to rub your head and tummy and chew gum at the same time.
In South Korea the United States was still trying to match all of the soldiers with their equipment and move them to a position between the DMZ and Seoul.
The Herculean effort had moved 2 Divisions to South Korea in 54 hours and the third was on the way.
No one had thought it possible, but they didn’t talk about it, they just did it.
Right about the time the 10th Mountain Division was preparing to land in Korea, the North Koreans came across the DMZ like it wasn’t even there.
They made it 3km into South Korea before anyone was able to react and put up a serious defense.
China and Russia raised their alert status and the United States responded in kind, returning to DEFCON 2 and raising the Threat Level back to Red.
The White House recommended that the local governments impose a voluntary dusk to dawn curfew until the extent of the threat was known.
China had made a lot of promises to Kim Jong-il in return for him distracting the Americans.
Among those promises was a promise not to press on the nuclear question.
Using their new ships and their old ships, the Chinese were able to attack Taiwan with over 200,000 troops.
They also had 80 Backfire C bombers loaded with conventional weapons, permitting them to stage a Blitzkrieg on Taiwan.
The United States was committed to the defense of Taiwan and moved to DEFCON 1.
China introduced three new types of ballistic missiles, including the land-based DF-21 and DF-31, and the submarine-launched JL-2, in the 1990s to replace the older generation liquid-propellant DF-3, DF-4 and JL-1.
The DF-21 intermediateand DF-31 longrange ballistic missiles are both solid propellant, road-mobile missiles with shortened launch preparation times and improved accuracy.
An improved version of the DF-31, known as DF-31 A, has been given real ICBM capability by increasing its range to 10,000km.
This would be sufficient to cover the entire western portion of North America.
There is also evidence showing that China was developing the MIRV capability for the DF-31 A and JL-2 to improve their strike capabilities.
The DF-4A was upgraded in the early 1990s under the name of CZ-1D space launch vehicle project, which gave the missile an extended range of 8,000-10,000km.
The DF-5A was upgraded to an extended range of 13,000km, enabling it to strike any corner of the earth from China.
Both missiles are deployed in “ready-to-launch” status in silos located in central China.
Developed by China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology , it is a silo-based, three-stage, liquid propellant ballistic missile.
The missile carries a single 2 megaton nuclear warhead and has an effective range of 12,000km.
The DF-31 is a three-stage, solid fuel, 8,000-10,000 km range ICBM, which could reach targets in all of Europe, the west coast and several northern Rocky Mountain states of America.
As part of the new generation of missiles, the DF-31’s characteristics include road mobility, advanced materials engineering for payload and booster, improved solid-fuel propellant as well as endoatmospheric re-entry decoys, making it very difficult to counterattack at any stage of its operation, from pre-flight mobile operations through to terminal flight phases.
The numbers of missiles sounds small, but that was in 2003 and they didn’t have MIRV’s.
The year is 2007 and maybe we should change our assumptions about how many missiles China has.
Back in 2004, it was reported that North Korean had as many as 7 nuclear weapons.
It doesn’t seem to make much sense to have more missiles than you have warheads.
The entire world is angry at the United States of American and accuses the United States of being a Hegemon.
If the United States had learned a single lesson from 9/11, it ought to be that there are people out that that don’t like the United States and are willing to die to prove their point.
Osama says that he never expected the WTC to collapse, although he was happy that it did.
The North Koreans and the Chinese are Communists and unless I recall incorrectly, Communists aren’t big on religion.
They may have some issues with the United States approach to problems, but it’s not necessarily about religion.
Boys haven’t worn ties to school in my lifetime and I haven’t seen a schoolgirl in a dress since the 1950’s.
However, it might be very appropriate if terrorist had suitcase nukes, they only have a blast radius of -360 meters.
The reason is that we wanted to persuade the Russians we wouldn’t make a first strike.
The Americans and South Koreans didn’t pursue them as they were still getting organized.
Nobody knows where the boomers are except for the people aboard the boats.
The boats can be staged to a particular level of preparedness and put on hold, if need be.
Under this circumstance, it depends on whether they been given the PAL codes and put on hold for 6 hours or not given the PAL codes and are waiting to receive them.
In the former instance, they may end up launching when the hold period expires if they haven’t received orders countermanding their previous orders.
Today, the Board of Directors of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists moved the minute hand of the “Doomsday Clock,” the symbol of nuclear danger, from nine to seven minutes to midnight, the same setting at which the clock debuted 55 years ago.
Since the end of the Cold War in 1991, this is the third time the hand has moved forward.
The Discovery Channel changed the name of the Wings Channel to the Military Channel.
EANS is the emergency action notification system and EAMAS is the emergency action message authentication system.
Just because we keep telling ourselves that it will never happen doesn’t mean that it won’t.
In the boomer program, they end up the drill by showing a test launch of a Trident I or Trident II missile.
Even if they did, North Korea did what China wanted and China probably wouldn’t honor it.
They aren’t going to reply to missiles that obviously aren’t aimed at them.
That’s a lot of BS; Americans don’t give a crap about most things that don’t directly affect them.
Most Americans think that people who believe in being prepared are crackpots until the hurricane blows down their house.
Be a good neighbor and tell him that he can use it in a couple of months when you’re through with it, unless he has a gun.
Chris never loaned me the generator that I bought and paid for when we had a power outage.
Sure you are, if they’re family, or, your in-laws, or maybe your favorite neighbor and his wife and their 4 kids.
If you were China and you were really, really smart, you’d accept your losses of ships and troops that occurred when the United States launched some nuclear tipped cruise missiles from something at the ships standing off Taiwan.
NORAD saw the missiles being launched and sent the 50 Peacekeepers and some of the Minuteman missiles to have Chinese for dinner.
The President issued the PAL codes to the boomers and put them on a 6-hour hold.
Some of the W87 Peacekeeper warheads will be redeployed on Minuteman ICBMs under the Safety Enhanced Reentry Vehicle program.
Each W87 warhead will displace one W62 , or three W78 warheads currently deployed on Minuteman.
The United States has 44 combat-coded and an active force, 85 of B-52 bombers and a reserve force of 9.
During the Cuban Missiles Crisis in 1962, the first time in history that the United States went to DEFCON 2, all of the nuclear bombs were loaded aboard the planes.
The military has a pattern of doing the same thing over and over again.
That way if the Chinese react to your attacking their fleet with a nuclear tipped cruise missile, all of your bombers and bombs are safe.
It might be a good idea to use up the Minuteman missiles that still have the MIRV’d warheads, too.
Smith had taken a hit, I wonder why, and the radiation drifted to the east, as expected.
THAAD was still in the test stage and the United States didn’t have an ABM umbrella.
Maybe some of the military installations had the Patriot PAC-3 missiles and maybe not.
It had been nearly 30 years into the marriage before she found a spaghetti sauce she liked.
Her chili wasn’t thick and instead of tomato sauce and tomato paste, she used one can of diced tomatoes added near the end of the cooking process for every 2 pounds of meat.
A person had 2 choices, eat the food the way she cooked it or put up with a woman who felt as if she’d been scorned.
Besides, that was the way his mother fixed chili, except for the tomato part.
Plus, you could always add more chili powder to your individual bowl of soup.
Shirley probably would have come to Flippin once she was totally convinced that there wasn’t any other alternative.
They’d gotten into a fight over Sharon’s dollhouse that her dad had built for her 8th birthday years before and didn’t speak to each other anymore.
Sister Shirley had recovered the Ark (as in Noah with wooden animals) and the dollhouse Roy had built and she paid a carpenter to restore them to their original condition and then spent a fortune shipping them to California.
North Korea, China and the United States were, to varying degrees, Wastelands.
However, the mightiest military power in the world didn’t just roll over and play dead because the country had been hit.
Much of the projected power of the country had been at sea or in the air when the warheads hit.
It hadn’t been that difficult for the bombers to find someplace to land, there were places like Edwards AFB, Rosamond Dry Lake and Area 51, for example.
There are 54 of the aircraft in the fleet and they moved back to Area 51 along with the B-2 bombers.
Originally envisioned as a major upgrade in United States long-range capabilities over the B-52, the first B1 program was cancelled by Jimmy Carter in 1977.
The B1-B is a multi-role, long-range bomber, capable of flying intercontinental missions without refueling, and then penetrating present and predicted sophisticated enemy defenses.
It can perform a variety of missions, including that of a conventional weapons carrier for theater operations.
Converting the B-1 B to the conventional role was a gradual process, beginning in 1993 and culminating in October 1997 when the 7th Bomb Wing at Dyess AFB flew the last nuclear mission.
Constraints on development of the B model and budget restraints resulted in an aircraft that wasn’t as good as it could have been.
Dale Brown wrote a book published in November of 1999 titled Battle Born.
It is about a B-1 B Lancer unit in Nevada being trained into a new tactical strike unit.
You don’t have a TV or radio that can get any reception, but you can always play a movie or play cards or clean your guns or read a book or just plain go crazy.
You could try to count the clicks on your CD V-717, assuming you have one.
You know that your house is still standing, especially if you’re in Flippin or Cedar Hill.
You also know there’s a coating of fine ash because your CD V-717 is going crazy.
Finally, you know that the only news you’ll be getting for a while will be very local.
You saw a lot of them at the Wal-Mart Super Store when you stocked up so you’re hoping most of them made it through and have enough supplies to last for a while.
You know you have plenty, for now, but only because you’re one of those crackpots who were convinced Armageddon was coming.
But Gary saved all of the instruction manuals for the stove, hot water heater, dryer and furnace and bought the jets to convert them to propane.
You know you have a problem from the getgo because you only have 3,000-gallons of propane and now you’re going to be running everything off that single tank.
But, you know where the propane company is located and you can always barter for more, or steal it if necessary.
When he moved to Flippin, Gary gave up on writing Patriot Fiction and concentrated on trying to stay alive as long as possible and getting ready for the Big One whatever the ‘Big One’ turned out to be.
To get there, he had to go through Little Rock, which was probably gone, only to get to Shreveport, which was probably gone also.
They couldn’t call him on the phone and order him to active duty because the phone lines were gone.
For a change, he could stay home and take care of his family instead of going God knows where and helping other families.
Amy would be grateful to be alive, but wondering why she had spent the last 10 years getting an education.
Suck it in and establish residency in Arkansas; maybe you can be a politician.
It would be very handy having David there, because you forgot to buy a pair of heavy-duty boltcutters.
Damon had spent the entire 2 weeks calculating where his next model rocket would land, once he found someplace to buy more motors and tubing, etc.
Gary had spent the entire 2 weeks taking inventory of the things stored in the shelter.
Because he was anal retentive, he marked down everything that was used and managed to get everything on a spreadsheet.
Ron hadn’t been on 10-meters yet, but that could be for a dozen reasons, including the fact that he didn’t know anything about radios.
We’re going to need to go to Wal-Mart and find a generator and some wood cutting tools so David and the boys can harvest extra firewood.
They sell firearms so we can probably equip David and the boys pretty well.
Here’s a list of our prescriptions, get what you can from the pharmacy, but don’t take anything we don’t need.
I have a list of antibiotics to take but don’t take more than a couple of courses of treatment for each family.
I wrote down the quantities for a single course of treatment,” Gary instructed.
The scavenging went very well and Gary concentrated on making a list of everything they took.
After the country puts itself back together and Wal-Mart reopened the store, he’d come in and settle up with the store manager.
Derek left a note for the store manager telling him that he and his family had been in the store and taken some things.
If you buy kerosene and store it for a very long time, it will varnish the inside of the jug, but it will still burn.
And don’t 74 forget to buy extra wicks, because to keep a lamp burning evenly, you have to trim the wick.
When the tsunami hit in December of 2004, the whole world rushed to the aid of the people in the Indian Ocean.
South Korea probably took the opportunity to help North Korea recover after the United States launched that single Trident II D-5 missile and ended the Korean War once and for all.
Countries that would no doubt move in to help the Chinese also surround China.
Even though the United States and Canada have had their problems, I can’t imagine the Canadians and probably the Country of Mexico wouldn’t lend aid to their North American cousins.
The United States helped Europe rebuild after WW II with the Marshall Plan.
The United States would probably be inundated by the UN whether or not they’d been invited.
Everyone knows that the ideology of the United States and the UN are at odds.
Without doubt, the UN would move to Europe, probably The Hague, Netherlands, after a thermonuclear war involving the United States and some other country.
The greatest danger from the UN being in the country would be the gun grab that would accompany the other countries lending aid.
The Wall Street Journal by ROBERT L BARTLEY, Editor Monday, October 7, 2002 12:01m.
EDT We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.
The government created by the Declaration of Independence two centuries ago is weighing war against Saddam Hussein before he acquires nuclear weapons.
And high-minded folks around the world are urging it to submit to the judgment of the United Nations as arbiter of when war is justified.
It does serve helpful functions on the likes of post and telephone service.
On a grander scale, it is a forum where the world’s governments meet and talk; if the UN didn’t exist, we’d have to invent it.
At times it has even advanced the interests of security; when the first President Bush was seeking support for the first Gulf War, the UN signed up before the United States Senate did.
Even in its darkest hours its promise a forum for settling disputes among nations without violence is a promise worth preserving.
Whatever its pretensions, and however much they’re cheered by the limp-minded, in fact the UN is the epicenter of world cynicism.
Here idealistic rhetoric is routinely invoked on behalf of power politics and often-sheer tyranny.
They range from long-standing democracies such as the United States and United Kingdom to one-man-all-the-votes politics in Cuba or Zimbabwe.
They range from giants such as China and India to dwarfs such as Andorra and San Marino.
Kiribati and Maldives worry about vanishing if global warming raises sea levels on their Pacific atolls.
Except of course that the five “permanent” members have a veto in the Security Council; the favored members include France but not Japan or India.
For that matter, the permanent members are not so permanent, with the definition of China changing at the convenience of “world opinion.
Of these, 85, with some 41% of the world’s population, were “free,” enjoying political rights and civil liberties.
Another 59, with 24% of the world’s population, were “partly free,” with significant but abridged rights in particular one-party political systems.
The remaining 48 countries, or 35% of the world’s people, were “not free,” with no consent of the governed or respect for the individual.
The United Nations is what you get when you have this melange send representatives, confine them in a hothouse on the East River, stir briskly, and tell them to go forth to solve the great issues of the world.
In the political pushing and shoving, too, some nations follow Marquis of Queensbury rules and others do not.
The pariah is a nation rated free, indeed a nation of 23 million souls and the world’s 17th largest economy.
Namely, of course, Taiwan, which has been blocked from UN membership every year for 10 years now.
The United States has just been readmitted to the UN’s 53-member Commission on Human Rights.
It was voted off last year by opposition from the tyrannies and perfidy by the Europeans.
Other commission members include such paragons of human rights as Cuba, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Vietnam and Zimbabwe.
The agenda concerns much mischief over Israel, as well as efforts to revoke consultative status of Freedom House.
In President Bush’s UN speech in September, he said the United States is willing to return to the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
It withdrew from UNESCO in 1985 after Congress sent its General Accounting Office to confirm that director Amadou Mahtar M’Bow had created a fiefdom without a trace of accountability, financial or otherwise.
Secretary-General Kofi Anann thought it was a great victory when Saddam Hussein offered to talk about letting UN inspectors back into Iraq on the same terms that didn’t work the last time.
The important thing is not whether or not the inspections succeed in curbing weapons of mass destruction, that is, but whether they come under UN auspices.
President Bush tolled off all of the resolutions the UN Security Council passed in its better moments, resolutions that Saddam Hussein has systematically violated these last 10 years.
The UN now faces “a difficult and defining moment,” as the President put it, in progress toward its promise.
If it fails, it has no reason in justice or morality to claim deference from a government that has for two centuries now pursued Jefferson’s principles.
As we later learned, Kofi Annan’s actions with respect to the Food for Oil Program raised a lot of questions.
It would be better if the UN moved to The Hague or Brussels, it would get them closer to their constituents.
Most Americans are pretty independent thinkers and they don’t like to be told what to do.
An all-out nuclear attack on the United States or China wouldn’t kill all of the people, regardless of what anyone says.
Ask most people over 60 what the 7-10 Rule is and they maybe can’t explain it, but they know it means that you have to stay in 77 a shelter for at least 2-weeks after a nuclear war.
Depending on where they are located, some of those people might get a little extra radiation.
If you don’t have Dosimeters or a Survey Meter, you’re going to need to limit your exposure.
That’s common sense and we’ve had Three-Mile Island and Chernobyl to remind us.
Keep the kids indoors as much as possible unless you have Potassium Iodide or Potassium lodate.
India and Pakistan were at each other’s throats over the Kashmir and there was a lot of concern that one or both of the two countries would use their nuclear weapons.
In 2004 and 2005, most of the concern was focused on Iran and North Korea.
Possibly, the citizens of the United States should be more worried about what will happen after a nuclear war than the actual war itself.
The war will probably result in the loss of half to two-thirds of the population of the United States, sooner or later.
Since the United States has a lot of tornados, let’s assume one-half out right in the first few months following the nuclear exchange.
They will either be immediate casualties or die from radiation sickness.
The rest of this story is about what might happen afterwards, when the countries of the world rush to the United States and China to help us pick up the pieces.
It took about 3 weeks to get enough of the weather radio stations up and running for the President to address the country.
My fellow Americans, The attack that the United States experienced was at the hands of the Chinese government in their former capitol of Beijing.
You government has survived and effective immediately the United States will be under martial law with a dusk to dawn curfew.
Any members of the United States Reserve military forces or the state National Guards are ordered to report to their posts, stations or bases, if possible.
Your government has been in contract with the governments of Canada, Mexico and Great Britain and aid for both our country and China is forthcoming.
FEMA will begin organizing camps for those members of our population that have survived.
However, our resources will be stretched to the limit and I am advising you not to report to the camp established in your area if you do not require assistance.
I’m sorry, but I don’t see that I have any other choice in this matter.
Presently Secretary Rice is in The Hague and is discussing the conditions that the UN may wish to attach to that aid.
I shall not allow the other nations of the world to dictate our form of government.
I shall only remain in power for another year, however during that year I will do everything possible to hand a functioning country over to my successor.
Stay tuned to the station you are listening to for further information.
The President of the United States hadn’t revealed where he was located during his speech.
The following Executive Orders are associated with Federal Emergency Management Agency that would suspend the Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10990 allows the government to take over all modes of transportation and control of highways and seaports.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10995 allows the government to seize and control the communication media.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10997 allows the government to take over all electrical power, gas, petroleum, fuels and minerals.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10998 allows the government to seize all means of transportation, including personal cars, trucks or vehicles of any kind and total control over all highways, seaports, and waterways.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10999 allows the government to take over all food resources and farms.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11001 allows the government to take over all health, education and welfare functions.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11002 designates the Postmaster General to operate a national registration of all persons.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11003 allows the government to take over all airports and aircraft, including commercial aircraft.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11004 allows the Housing and Finance Authority to relocate communities, build new housing with public funds, designate areas to be abandoned, and establish new locations for populations.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11005 allows the government to take over railroads, inland waterways and public storage facilities.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11051 specifies the responsibility of the Office of Emergency Planning and gives authorization to put all Executive Orders into effect in times of increased international tensions and economic or financial crisis.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11310 grants authority to the Department of Justice to enforce the plans set out in Executive Orders, to institute industrial support, to establish judicial and legislative liaison, to control all aliens, to operate penal and correctional institutions, and to advise and assist the President.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11049 assigns emergency preparedness function to federal departments and agencies, consolidating 21 operative Executive Orders issued over a fifteen-year period.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11921 allows the Federal Emergency Preparedness Agency to develop plans to establish control over the mechanisms of production and distribution, of energy sources, wages, salaries, credit and the flow of money in United States financial institution in any undefined national emergency.
It also provides that when the President declares a state of emergency, Congress cannot review the action for six months.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has broad powers in every aspect of the nation.
Act of August 29, 1916 authorizes the Secretary of the Army, in time of war, to take possession of any transportation system for transporting troops, material, or any other purpose related to the emergency.
International Emergency Economic Powers Act enables the President to seize the property of a foreign country or national.
These powers were transferred to FEMA in a sweeping consolidation in 1979.
To put a point on the end of his sentence, he instructed Condi to inform the UN that the United States was withdrawing as a member of that august body.
At the moment, he told her; the United States had nothing to spare, especially not what remained of its military might.
Given that set of definitions, I think maybe a friend is better than an ally, but that’s just one person’s personal opinion.
We could always count on England, even if the people were angry at the United States.
We were two peoples separated by a common language, according to George Bernard Shaw.
The string that stuck in George’s craw was the UN insistence of that America disarm.
Some Americans might hand over their weapons, BUT there were many who would not.
If provoked, the citizens of the country would turn the disaster into another Civil War.
If FEMA pressed the public too hard, the President was equally certain that the same thing would happen.
Dick Cheney had addressed the Annual Meeting of the NRA in 2004 and given the membership certain assurances.
The problem is simply that is an oxymoron, at least with some in our state legislature.
Here are two examples of gun control bills that are just plain ignorant, and what is most frightening is that both of them are moving toward floor votes in their respective houses.
SB 357, obviously named after the magnum handgun round in a clever display of whit by the bill’s author Joseph Dunn, D-Garden Grove, would mandate that all handgun ammunition have matching serial numbers on each bullet and bullet casing so ammunition used in crimes can be traced back to the original purchasers.
Never mind the astronomical costs involved making such ammunition, or that it would create a monopoly for one company that has been touting its ability to make such ammo while supporting the legislation.
But the reality is that it wouldn’t help solve crimes, and it could implicate innocent people.
The reality is that it would create as many problems as it might solve, confusing juries in serious criminal cases with questions about otherwise obvious guilt or innocence because the ammo didn’t match the suspect or it implicated someone with a rock-solid alibi.
Since the bill would also create a registry of all these guns, they could go right to the registered owner and arrest him.
Since most guns used in crimes are stolen, this would not be a help at all.
It would make the chamber rough, making the gun less safe, probably causing it to jam occasionally, especially if the gun were dirty.
Now you’ve left brass at a crime scene that points investigators the wrong direction.
Again, never mind that registration is expressly forbidden by federal law or the costs involved in making guns with this feature or the awful bureaucracy this would create.
Massachusetts had a similar law pass several years ago, and the justice department there is recommending it be scrapped because it has cost taxpayers an immense amount of money to run and did nothing to help solve crime.
It turns out that criminals who are stupid enough to be caught by the benefits either of these bills provide, usually leave a pile of other evidence that will convict them.
Legislators know this legislation is stupid, but it’s a back door way to make gun ownership excessively expensive and onerous.
Blair had been elected to a 3 rd term back in 2005 and he had gathered his forces and had sent them to the United States when Bush had given an all clear on the radiation levels.
The new President of Mexico, Roberto Madrazo was ready with aid and troops, too.
Canada had been dealing with the problem from the outset because cities like Windsor and Vancouver had received fallout.
Groom Lake and Rogers Lake looked like parking lots with all of the bombers and fighters moved to those two locations.
The Nighthawks had moved from Holloman to Area 51 and many of the other fighters had moved to Rogers.
It had been a challenge and heartbreaking for the pilots ferrying their aircraft to alternate locations.
They had witnessed several of the Chinese missile strikes and saw their country being destroyed before their eyes.
There weren’t enough tankers to refuel all of the aircraft being moved and some had to land at commercial airports and refuel with Jet fuel A Other military units had dispersed according to long established plans and most made it through the attack.
The President had them remain under cover until the radiation levels were something they could cope with MOPPed up to level 4.
In mid-October, much of the country is cold and some parts of the country even have snow on the ground.
A week before the President’s announcement, the troops were already out there effecting rescues.
In areas where trouble was expected, they put on a show of force with their Bradley’s and Abrams tanks.
He’d had trouble assembling his antenna or he’d have been on the air earlier.
They were overcrowded in New Mexico but some of the kids had moved in with Robert.
Neither man had any idea what had happened to Clarence because Birmingham had probably taken a strike.
They discussed getting together but dismissed the idea as being impractical.
It didn’t take the Manager of the Wal-Mart store very long to show up at Derek’s wanting to know what he had taken and suggesting strongly that payment was in order.
He offered to pay for everything with a check drawn on the Trust fund account up in Iowa.
Under the circumstances, the Manager didn’t want to take an out-of-town check.
Gary wrote a check on Iowa and deposited it in their Flippin account and wrote a check on the Flippin account to pay Wal-Mart.
The Manager agreed to hold the check for a day and told Derek to get to work because they were shorthanded.
He was so happy to be reimbursed for the things they had taken; all of the paperwork on the weapons had gotten overlooked.
Derek had a decision to make and since the President had only told the Guard and Reserve to report in if they could, he decided that, for a change, he couldn’t.
The Russians couldn’t afford to provide aid, per se, but they could provide soldiers and civilians to assist with the cleanup.
The United States bought a lot of their products, guns and ammo to name a few, and had provided homes for many of their criminals.
More than that, the United States had taken care of a couple of thorns in Moscow’s side, China and North Korea.
The United States had finally demonstrated a willingness to use its nuclear arsenal.
Number wise, the Russians had more nuclear weapons on hand than the United States.
However the United States had the delivery systems and they had been demonstrated.
The President had rescinded the order for the SSBN’s to launch their missiles when it was apparent that the Peacekeepers and Minuteman III missiles had done their job.
The United States still had 14x24 missiles roaming the high seas, plus 2 of the SSGN’s.
Israel was on full alert and had fighters standing by with nuclear weapons in case Iran got any ideas.
My fellow Americans, 85 I have an update on the situation in this country.
All of the state capitals and most of our major cities were hit in the nuclear exchange.
The estimates of the loss of life remain unchanged, but at the moment, they are only estimates.
I have accepted their offers and an offer from Russia for relief workers.
If you hear someone speaking Russian, please don’t shoot them, they are here to help.
The United States retains its ability to react to any other threats against this great country of ours.
People have survived in all of the countries involved including North Korea, China and the United States of America.
If your homes are habitable and you have sufficient resources, please remain there.
Efforts are already underway to reestablish supply chains, but we expect temporary shortages in the immediate future.
If you observe looting, contact the nearest law enforcement officer to handle the situation.
In order for the defense system of any country to function, the governments have had to make an assumption.
They have had to assume that when called upon to do so, the men in the loop would push the button.
The dangers of going to a fully automated system were clearly demonstrated in the movie titled, War Games.
There were probably other movies with the same theme, I know there were more, but I don’t remember the titles.
One thing that Americans who had the responsibility of activating the weapons have always had was that the United States would never make a first strike and anything they did was in retaliation.
In this story, North Korea began fueling its nuclear missiles and the United States responded with a single Trident II D-5 from a boomer.
In this story, the Red Chinese attacked Taiwan and the United States responded with nuclear cruise missiles.
Richard Widmark had James MacArthur so wound up he launched an RUR-5 ASROC at a Russian sub and the skipper of the boat responded with a snap shot of a nuclear torpedo.
In the latter movie, Powers Boothe refused to stop his mission to deliver a nuclear bomb with a B-52.
Of that movie, on critic said, “Okay first of all this is just like Dr.
If space command ever detected missiles they would launch the 86 bombers for survivability so they would have never been caught on the ground.
The President would not have been allowed to stay at the White House for a minute.
The Russian President would not have used the old Teletype communications system.
It is so easy to criticize movies, most people were scared shitless by the movie.
A B-47 with 2 nuclear bombs aboard looks just like a B-47 without 2 nuclear bombs aboard.
The base was even named after a pilot who was killed flying another dud, the YB-49.
Glen W Edwards was selected to join the team of test pilots and engineers at Muroc who were then evaluating the Northrop YB-49, the all-jet version of the exotic flying wing bomber.
After his first few flights, he was not favorably impressed, confiding to his diary that it was the darndest airplane I’ve ever tried to do anything with.
Daniel Forbes when the airplane departed from controlled flight and broke apart in the sky northwest of the base.
Perhaps it is fair to say that Northrop’s design concepts were solid, but the means to implement them were still several decades away.
The YB-49 was the “wrong plane at the wrong time,” getting trapped in the transition between propeller-driven and jetpowered aircraft.
The first atomic bomb that was ever dropped was the Little Boy on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945.
The United States had built several of the Fat Man bombs and except for the plutonium core they were ready to go.
Concurrent with the preparations for the Trinity test, preparations were being made for the delivery of operational atomic weapons to Tinian Island in the Pacific for use against Japan at the earliest possible date.
Two weapon designs were available for use the gun assembly Little Boy bomb that used uranium highly enriched in U-235, and the implosion assembly Fat Man that used plutonium.
After the detonation of the first plutonium bomb core in the Trinity test, the next weapon that was available was the completed Little Boy.
Another Little Boy weapon would not have been ready for months, for this reason only one Little Boy unit was prepared.
In contrast many Fat Man bomb assemblies were on hand , and the actual Fat Man bomb delivered against Japan only existed when assembly of the Fat Man unit with the plutonium core was completed shortly before the mission.
They couldn’t really bomb Tokyo because that’s where the Emperor of Japan was and it was the Emperor who needed to surrender.
You may have seen the TV movie about the last minute conspiracy to prevent him from surrendering.
Hirohito surrendered on August 15, 1945 and Japan signed the documents of surrender on September 2, 1945 aboard the USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay.
History reveals that Stalin wanted his own atom bomb and by 1949, the Soviet Union had tested their first atomic bomb.
After the bombing of Nagasaki, no nuclear weapons were ever fired in anger, except in the movies.
And then I came along and the United States made the second first strike in history.
Amy stayed with Sharon and Gary and Damon and his family moved in with Derek and Mary.
At least Sharon could hide out in the basement when Audrey and Udell, Jr. got unruly.
Gary practically lived in the basement, he liked the peace and quiet and he wanted to be near the radio in case Ron called again.
If you can remember how long it took to clean up lower Manhattan after 9/11 think about it and multiply the problem by at least 1,000.
It appeared that it would take about 3 years just to clean up the mess the United States cities were in.
Some cities had to be abandoned, for a while at least, they were simply too hot to demolish.
Electricity and natural gas wouldn’t be restored to Flippin for at least a year.
A 7kw portable generator isn’t intended to run that long and they needed to come up with alternatives to keep Derek’s home and spare house powered.
It took the government 6 months to straighten out a system whereby they could pay the Social Security payments.
The good news was that it resulted in a large check to catch up 6 months’ worth of missed payments.
That solved the problem of having enough money to buy one residential standby system and only left Gary and Derek with the problem of finding one.
They finally located a dealer in Evening Shade, AR, northeast of Mountain Home, Ozark Power Company.
They didn’t have any of the Onan generators but they did have the Kohler model 12RES-LP generators and they had them for $4,000 plus tax, delivery and installation.
They were heavy-duty units that could run a very long time with nominal servicing.
Fat cats could put in a Kohler 30RES with ran on both LP and Natural Gas.
They were expensive at $13,000, but you could always get a home improvement loan to install one.
Gary used the radio in his truck to contact the Shelter and explained the problem.
The United States changed after 9/11 and many argued the changes weren’t necessarily for the better.
We should have known back in 1993 when terrorists attacked the WTC the first time.
In the run up to Y2k, a lot of Americans got concerned because the datafields in databases weren’t big enough and it might bring our computer systems down.
Andrew was a small and ferocious Cape Verde hurricane that wrought unprecedented economic devastation along a path through the northwestern Bahamas, the southern Florida peninsula, and south-central Louisiana.
Damage in the United States was estimated to be near 25 billion, making Andrew the most expensive natural disaster in United States history.
Andrew was only a Category 4 on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale 1-5 rating.
The fact that no lives were lost in the United States due to storm surge is viewed as a fortunate aberration.
The Dade County Grand Jury reported that ninety percent of all mobile homes in south Dade County were totally destroyed.
In Homestead, more than 99% of all mobile homes were completely destroyed.
The Cold War was well and truly over, but it ended with a great big bang.
Lots of other people weren’t and they didn’t, even though they were far away enough from the targets of the Chinese missiles they could have.
Their problem was that they weren’t prepared and guns were such nasty things.
He’d been away from home when the attack came and although Shirley and he had lost their home, they’d managed to survive.
Ron set up a conference call with Gary and The Three Amigos decided to have a reunion.
Anyway the reason I wanted to talk with you guy was that I stumbled onto a collection of brand new Ml 4 rifles.
Anyway, I remember you telling me that they weren’t worth a crap on full-auto.
He said the tri-compensator for the BM59 is 22mm in diameter, the standard internal ID for a NATO Rifle Grenade.
It is a combo Flashhider, Muzzle Brake/Muzzle Rise Limiter, and Grenade Launcher.
It is attached, and serves the same purpose, as the Garand Gas Cylinder Lock.
In other words it keeps the Gas Cylinder from moving forward or backwards on the barrel.
The stripper clip guide on the top of the receiver accepts standard Ml4, 5 round stripper clips.
The BM59 was completely controllable in full auto and a joy to shoot, the tri-comp is real good, and the geometry of the weapon is also good.
The FN-FAL was a real bitch to shoot full auto it took all I could do to keep it on target.
The BAR was a piece of cake and a joy to shoot and if anything is too accurate.
Ron decided to take the bull by the horns and do the whole project himself.
Gary gave him the web address of the company that sold the BM-59 parts and told Ron just to search what was left of the web for a Russian or Chinese magazine.
The Chinese magazine was easier to reload because it had a hinged plate.
You loaded the magazine and when you were ready to shoot, you wound up the spring.
You had what the United States military wanted when they developed the SAW version of the M-14.
They got one hell of an insurance settlement after they got the lawyers involved.
I don’t know how I’m going to pay you for 4 of those rifles and magazines.
It will still be less than $1,000 face in silver and once Clarence gets moved, he can buy them from me,” Gary suggested.
Clarence and Shirley went lot hunting the following day and found a nice lot on the other side of town from Gary and Sharon’s.
Nobody seemed too anxious to leave so The Three Amigos found a meeting and sat in for a few.
Clarence got Gary’s blueprints for their house and after Ron returned to New Mexico and hired a contractor to duplicate the house with a couple of exceptions.
Clarence was putting in the Kohler 30RES and had everything put into his basement before they closed it over.
First he was able to contact the business and second, they had a lot of Lake City 7.62x51 mm ammo on hand.
The price was $239 for 1,000-rounds and Eric was offering free shipping.
They agreed on 35 cases shipped by freight instead of the more expensive carrier they usually used.
With the 15,000 rounds that Derek and Gary already had, they now had 50,000-rounds and could fight a couple of wars.
Clarence bought 12 cases of the ammo, 3 per rifle, leaving Gary and Derek with 38,000rounds between the 4 Ml 4, modified rifles.
They didn’t know what they were waiting for, trouble most certainly, but they had no idea what kind of trouble.
He had 12,000-rounds and figured he had enough for both the next 2 world wars.
Ammo is like toilet paper, cigarettes or coffee; you can never have too much.
Ask Gary, he called up Eric and replaced those 12 cases of ammo and bought a dozen more just to get the same price.
Eric had a special on Lake City .223 overruns and he bought a twenty-five cases of it as well.
Eric’s price on .22LR ammo wasn’t very good at all and Derek loaded up on it at the Super Wal-Mart store.
Gary had been secretly buying guns for some time and if Sharon ever found out, he was sure to get the funeral.
I hinted when I told you that the S&W J-frame revolver is very compact.
The air weight J-frame model 360PD only weighed 12oz. empty and shot .357 Magnum rounds.
All duded up with a pair of Crimson Trace Lasergrips and loaded with .38 +P ammo, the gun was the perfect self-defense weapon.
In the never-ending battle to destroy our constitution, more “big lie” propaganda is being dumped on our elected officials.
The rhetoric given forth by the Violence Policy Center so easily deceived the legislators of California, resulting in the banning of fifty caliber rifles because they are powerful and their bullets punch holes when they strike.
It’s hard to believe we live in such a dark time that someone has actually banned a single shot rifle.
What lies before us is the continuation of the misinformation campaign, trying to coax yet another state to infringe upon the United States Constitution as California did.
The antifreedom/anti-gun movement has discovered how transparent they appear when they propose sweeping gun bans and now are successful by biting off a little at a time.
Ever so small, many politicians are trading off your rights without you recognizing their violations.
First we had the “Saturday Night Special” which was all affordable handguns, then “sniper rifles” which were any scoped deer rifles.
Those were obvious, too big a scam to go unnoticed, but with the creation and demonization of the term “assault weapon,” the Clinton’s Crime bill produced a wasted 10-year setback on your freedoms and safe gun design.
This is the same bull the officials in the 1950’s fell for when they banned the selfunfolding knife.
First the knife was demonized by giving it an evil name, “switchblade,” then we were told that the problem of gang violence was solved with its banning.
In reality, gang violence was and is a serious social problem, but it was not related to manually unfolding verses self-unfolding knives.
The elected officials voting to ban an object like a knife proved themselves unwilling or uncaring to understand the problem, and thus, incapable of any real solutions.
The handful of people that make up the VPC are solely responsible for the big lie on .50’s, claiming fantastic destruction capabilities.
They manipulate fear by claiming terrorists will use these rifles on targets of our infrastructure.
He is boldly telling these officials that the risk of terrorist attacks on these targets will be solved with the banning of powerful rifles, in this case, the .50 caliber rifle.
In reality, terrorism is complex and will be defeated with improved intelligence.
In this instance, the officials voting to ban an inanimate object like a rifle prove themselves to be ignorant of the problem of terrorism and are wasting time and resources.
You must understand the brilliance of this dangerous back door deception.
Your politicians are being told that the fifty is a highly destructive cartridge that can destroy airplanes, fuel transport trucks and depot storages of fuel.
They show videos like the one on 60 Minutes showing a l/ 2 -inch plate of steel being pierced by a .50 cal round while stopping a .308 caliber.
This is all to confuse the people, those with little exposure to firearms; their impression concludes that the .50 punches holes in sensitive targets where other rifles cannot.
First, with the confusion of massive, technical data and the hammering of urgency, the VPC demands a ban or strict regulations on rifles that chamber a cartridge that has the ability to penetrate targets.
VPC’s Tom Diaz appears often on TV with maps of Washington, DC, irresponsibly instructing where to position one’s self to illegally fire on vulnerable important targets of our government, promising these specific targets will be safe when ,50’s are banned.
He pressures politicians to act quickly on this URGENT legislation needed to make these terrorist targets safe, hoping they will act before the VPC lies are discovered.
By the legislation naming and defining the targets that are damageable by rifle fire, and in this case, .50 cal. rifle fire, they create a new class of rifles.
This new class is not defined by such foolishness as detachable magazines, flash hiders, or pistol grips.
If so, the law-abiding citizen shouldn’t be allowed to have this, so they must ban this class of rifle before they can be misused.
No, remember they are banning rifles because specific targets named in our infrastructure are susceptible to damage.
So, in order to comply with the spirit and intent of the law, the Attorney General or State Secretary must add those cartridges to the banned list.
They’re after your hunting rifles, centerfire target rifles and just about any rifle you own.
Unlike California, we cannot allow any of our local, state, or federal officials to be deceived with any of this “big lie” gun control propaganda.
Virtually every real world scenario of firearm abuse is already covered in some law that is currently on the books.
He continued to use his officers in the same deceptive practices formerly utilized with the city council.
These few officers testifying in Sacramento ultimately contributed to the unconstitutional AB50 law being passed.
It saddened me to have to tell members of the LAPD SWAT team that they would have to send someone for their rifle, because I refused to assist anyone or any organization that is in violation of the United States Constitution.
Therefore, since California’s passing of AB50, the state is not in compliance with the United States Constitution’s 2nd and 14th Amendments, and we will not sell nor service any of our products to any government agency of the State of California.
I appreciate all the phone calls and E-mails from LAPD officers and civilians during that time, encouraging and supporting our actions.
I am in the proud and fortunate position that many of our forefathers were in when they risked all for our liberties.
Now it’s resurfacing in city council meetings, in individual states, and it’s being reintroduced in Washington.
I’ve received thousands of E-mails and letters from you offering encouragement and support.
This lie depends on the elected official being naive about firearms and their capabilities.
Stand ready to carry this same message to your United States Senator and Representatives.
You need to join the NRA, the Fifty Caliber Shooters Association, and the NSSF in order to stay informed.
These people have been with me in the trenches, fighting for every inch of the liberty you enjoy.
You can talk to your Representative or Senator until you’re blue in the face.
The politicians already had their minds made up before they were elected.
His re-organization of that 50,000-person department with a $2. billion dollar budget resulted in a 39% decline in serious crimes and a 50% reduction in homicides.
As the LAPD Chief, his responsibilities include the supervision of 9,304 sworn and 3,055 civilian employees.
The next thing you know, someone will be questioning John McCain’s patriotism.
When they threw him into the Hanoi Hilton, he had two broken arms, a broken knee and a screwed up shoulder.
In 1967, he was shot down over Vietnam, and was held as a prisoner of war in Hanoi for five-and-a-half years.
When his captors discovered he was the son and grandson of admirals, he was offered a chance to go home, but he refused to break the military code that POWs are released in the order that they are captured.
He was finally released from captivity in 1973, having survived the injuries he received when he was shot down, the beatings from an angry crowd and his captors, a year of torture, and two years of solitary confinement.
Once released, his POW injuries prevented him from receiving a sea command, so in 1977, he became a Navy liaison to the Senate.
He was discharged from the Navy in 1981 as a Captain, on the day he watched his father buried next to his grandfather, in Arlington National Cemetery.
During his military career he received a Silver Star, a Bronze Star, the Legion of Merit, the Purple Heart, and a Distinguished Flying Cross.
Deciding years later to not live with hatred in his heart, he forgave his captors for his treatment.
And, despite rumors to the contrary, John McCain and John Kerry aren’t in the same league.
Kerry’s first Purple Heart came when he suffered a shrapnel wound in the left arm above the elbow.
The shrapnel was removed and the wound was treated with bacitracin antibiotic and bandaged.
Kerry still has shrapnel in his left thigh because the doctors tending to him decided to remove the damaged tissue and close the wound with sutures rather than make a wide opening to remove the shrapnel.
Kerry was wounded twice that day, and he would receive his third Purple Heart.
His injuries included shrapnel wounds in his left upper buttock, which were treated with antiseptic lotion and bandaged.
He also suffered contusions on his right forearm from hitting the bulkhead when the mine exploded near his boat, which was treated with warm soaking.
Kerry also got the Bronze Star on that occasion and had earlier received the Silver Star.
Kerry’s commanding officer, Lieutenant George Elliott, joked that he didn’t know whether to courtmartial him for beaching the boat without orders or give him a medal for saving the crew.
Elliott recommended Kerry for the Silver Star, and Zumwalt flew into An Thoi to personally award medals to Kerry and the rest of the sailors involved in the mission.
To put Kerry’s Vietnam career into perspective, Admiral Zumwalt was Kerry’s Fredric March and John Kerry was Admiral Zumwalt’s William Holden.
Admiral Zumwalt must have gotten tired of giving Kerry medals, he sent him home to his girlfriend, Hanoi Jane.
Yes sir, both John McCain and John Kerry were heroes of the war in Vietnam.
The New Madrid Seismic zone lies within the central Mississippi Valley, extending from northeast Arkansas, through southeast Missouri, western Tennessee, western Kentucky to southern Illinois.
Historically, this area has been the site of some of the largest earthquakes in North America.
Between 1811 and 1812, 4 catastrophic earthquakes, with magnitude estimates greater than 7.0, occurred during a 3-month period.
The largest earthquakes to have occurred since then were on January 4, 1843 and October 31, 1895 with magnitude estimates of 6. and 6. respectively.
Instruments were installed in and around this area in 1974 to closely monitor seismic activity.
Since then, more than 4000 earthquakes have been located, most of which are too small to be felt.
On average one earthquake per year will be large enough to be felt in the area.
The New Madrid seismic zone is so named because the town of New Madrid, Missouri was the closest settlement to the epicenters of the 1811-1812 quakes.
Louis and other major cities in the central United States were sparsely settled.
At least 3 of the series of earthquakes were felt throughout much of the United States and as far away as Quebec.
The potential for the recurrence of such earthquakes and their impact today on densely populated cities in and around the seismic zone, has generated much research devoted to understanding earthquakes.
By closely monitoring the earthquake activity, scientists can hope to understand their causes, recurrence rates, ground motion and disaster mitigation.
The probability for an earthquake of magnitude 6. or greater is significant in the near future, with a 50% chance by the year 2000 and a 90% chance by the year 2040.
A quake with a magnitude equal to that of the 1811-1812 quakes could result in great loss of life and property damage in the billions of dollars.
Scientists believe we could be overdue for a large earthquake and through research and public awareness may be able to prevent such losses.
Gary didn’t feel whatever it was that Clarence was talking about, it wasn’t the New Madrid Seismic Zone.
Unless an earthquake rattled their mirror doors, Gary never knew when they happened.
Perhaps Clarence was just over sensitive, he only lived a mile from the San Andreas back in California.
Fie wanted the walls a minimum of 9” thick and a foot would make him happier.
To finish their new home off, Gary put a 30kw Onan residential generator and an air filtration system for the basement.
The overhead of the basement was made from pre-stressed concrete slabs.
We might shake, rattle and roll if they have a Big One, but considering the alternatives, Flippin is pretty safe.
The region is home to millions of people, including those in the cities of St.
Adding to the danger, most structures in the region were not built to withstand earthquake shaking, as they have been in California and Japan.
Earthquakes in the central or eastern United States affect much larger areas than earthquakes of similar magnitude in the western United States.
Differences in geology east and west of the Rocky Mountains cause this strong contrast.
You’ve seen epidemics, tornadoes, floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides, volcanic eruptions and those are just the natural hazards.
Maybe things like wars aren’t predetermined, but name a few wars that were avoided after the ball got rolling.
The only one I can think of was The Cold War, which never really ended like everyone thought it did until China and the United States ended it.
Military forces use first strikes, also called preemptive strikes, when they need surprise or the extra strength they get from the element of surprise.
The United States made a first strike on Korea when they saw the Koreans fueling their missiles.
The United States made a first strike on China with 2 cruise missiles when China attacked Taiwan.
If they were going to do that to China, they needed to attack all of China’s missiles simultaneously using Trident II missiles.
The fly time on a coastal launch of a Trident II is a matter of very few minutes; perhaps so short China couldn’t have retaliated.
Moshe Dayan hadn’t planned on taking either the Gaza Strip or the West Bank.
The First Gulf War was won by using a preemptive strike against Iraq and following it up with a major land battle that lasted only 4 days.
Operation Iraqi Freedom captured Iraq in 3 weeks, but the United States screwed the pooch because they lacked the final element of every preemptive strike, a viable exit strategy.
There is a disaster every minute of every hour of every day of every year somewhere in the United States.
It might be something as serious as one of those super volcanoes erupting.
I sure hope the squirrels down in Florida got the generators, spare gas and flashlight batteries.
Gray’s team issued their first extended range forecast for the 2005 season.
They predicted a slightly above-average season, with 11 named storms, 6 reaching hurricane strength, and 3 reaching Category 3 on the Saffir-Simpson scale.
Additionally, they predicted a greatly increased chance of a major hurricane striking the East Coast of the United States and the Florida peninsula.
Flowever, even these abovenormal forecasts are below the activity level of the 2004 season.
The updated forecast predicts 13 named storms, 7 hurricanes, with three reaching Category 3 strength or greater.
The odds of a storm striking the United States were also raised slightly.
The first 13 names on the list of 2005 hurricanes are Arlene, Bret, Cindy, Dennis, Emily, Franklin, Gert, Flarvey, Irene, Jose, Katrina, Lee and Maria.
The other names are Nate, Ophelia, Philippe, Rita, Stan, Tammy, Vince and Wilma.
Flaving survived losing her first husband to Elizabeth Taylor, she was becoming the unsinkable Debbie Reynolds.
She had to keep working and turned to stage musicals when Hollywood stopped making them.
Now she has her own casino in Las Vegas, a home for her Hollywood museum.
And, her daughter Carrie looked pretty good in a bikini as Princess Leia.
Gary looked out the window too, but he didn’t see any rocks hurling in from the sun.
The dancer that Jabba drops into the Rancor pit loses her top as she falls in.
David Prowse only portrayed Darth Vader completely for the first half of the movie.
In the second half of the movie, the character was played by Bob Anderson during the fight sequence, and Sebastian Shaw after the character is unmasked.
James Earl Jones voiced the character throughout, with the exception of the unmasking scene.
Carrie Fisher complained about her costumes in the previous two movies.
Those complaints led to the skimpy outfit she wore as Jabba’s prisoner.
Patricia Neal has admitted in interviews that she was completely unaware during the filming that the film would turn out so well and become one of the great science-fiction classics of all time.
She assumed it would be just another one of the then-current and rather trashy flying saucer films that were popular at the time, and she found it difficult to keep a straight face while saying her lines.
When she and her husband of 30 years got divorced, he married her best friend.
Yes I’m stalling, it’s too late in the chapter to start something and introduce you to Cliff Hanger.
