These two countries were involved in various confrontations, very few of which were deadly.
An atmosphere of tension and mistrust lay between them, as each country wanted power over the other, whether it is through weapons of mass destruction or through space travel.
The two countries were involved in a 'space race' where each country tried to be the first into space, and on the moon.
The USSR were successful in carrying the first man into space in 1961, but the USA were the first to carry man to the moon, some eight years later, in 1969.
This was a race to see who could produce the most destructive nuclear weapons.
Both countries tried to keep an eye on each other by using a network of spies.
One incident involving spies was in 1960 where an American pilot, Gary Powers, was caught taking aerial photographs of Russian military sites in a U2 spy plane. ...read more.
One of Castro's promises was that Cuba would have a better standard of living once he was in power.
Castro was not communist, but he was fast introducing communist ideas into the country of Cuba.
The new president of America, President Kennedy, was not pleased with the fast growing communist Cuba.
There was a plan to get rid of Castro that Kennedy had inherited when he took over the role of president.
It was t be known as 'The Bay of Pigs' invasion and it was a complete failure.
There were heavy United States casualties and Kennedy and the United States government were made to look fools.
Meanwhile, Castro and the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev were becoming even friendlier.
These bonds between Castro and the USSR were arousing major suspicion over in America.
So much so that Kennedy ordered U2 spy planes to fly over the island of Cuba and take photographs of the area.
Kennedy was told that the Soviets were building nuclear missile bases on Cuba. ...read more.
Conclusion This one said, 'You are worried about Cuba...because it is 90 miles from America, but Turkey is next to us.
We agree to remove from Cuba those means, which you regard as offensive.
It was actually Kennedy's brother, Robert, who came up with the idea of replying to the first letter and to pretend that they had not received the second letter.
It had seemed that Khrushchev had written the first letter by himself, without the advice of his associates.
His associates must have seen his letter after he had sent it, and had said that he could have got more out of this bargain, and that he had come away with nothing.
Kennedy written a letter saying that if the Soviet bases were removed from Cuba then the United States blockade of the island would be lifted and no invasion of Cuba would occur.
He also said that if there were no reply by October 29th there would be a war.
Khrushchev had accepted the American offer and removed the missile bases from Cuba.
Cuba's greatest trade was sugar and earned Cuba alot of money so because America weren't trading any sugar many Cubans began to lose their jobs.
Firstly Khrushchev asks of America to get rid of its blockade and pledge not to invade Cuba, and in exchange he will take away missile installations on the island.
History Cuba Missile Crisis Describe the key features of the Berlin crisis.
Between 1950 and 1961, the refugees continued to leave at a rate of 100,000 to 200,000 a year.
He promised to not leave the Warsaw Pact if these new reforms were implemented.
Dubcek told the Czechs to not resist militarily when the Warsaw Pact troops moved into Czechoslovakia.
Edexcel Cold War 1943-1991 Revision The Soviet Union did not react because they were preoccupied with Czech and issues there.
Cold war Relations worsened within the Soviet Union and between East and West.
Britain and USA staged protests about the actions of the Soviet Union, however, it was not a serious threat to their relations and détente started after a slight break.
The Marshall plan used money to do it while the Truman doctrine used soldiers.
These events are quite important when put together because they both show the United States willing to fight off communism.
The significance of this is that the communist powers see that the United States is doing something about communism, which the communist powers were not.
