Fifty years later, one of the last remaining communist regimes shows signs of opening up to the outside world.
F With the world teetering on apocalyptic war, nuclear disarmament activists protest © Getty Images GEOGRAPHY HISTORY & POLITICS ifty years ago this week, humanity country, the new Cuba was a natural enemy ment finally decide to drop some of its came as close as it has ever come of the USA, and an ally of the hostile USSR. restrictions on overseas travel.
For thirSoon America’s worst fears were it was announced, Cubans will no longer teen terrifying days two enormous confirmed.
In 1962, a United States spy plane spotneed an exit visa in order to leave.
After fifty superpowers stood at the brink of war. ted the unmistakable silhouettes of years under siege, Cuba may be opening In secret bunkers in the USA and the Russian nuclear missiles hidden in the itself up to the outside world. communist USSR, thousands of nuclear Cuban countryside.
One of the world’s last communist dictatorhave unleashed a hail of radioactive fire President John F Kennedy reacted by ships is reaching out – but is the world ready – enough to poison half the world. putting Cuba under virtual siege.
The mood in the USA is still Caribbean island tucked under the US’s island were turned away by the United States navy. unforgiving.
Finally the USSR gave way, and the the trade embargo until Cuban communism is fate of the world depended on Cuba.
During World War II, Cuba had been a But Cuba’s isolation has continued.
But in 1956, a group of young The United States still maintains a trade embargo open hand could be more persuasive than a communists led by Che Guevara and Fidel against the island.
Cuba has been a difficult neighCastro rebelled against the Cuban governgovernment (now led by Fidel’s brother, bour, they acknowledge, but it was always ment.
United States leave the island at all. hedgehogs or porcupines, countries are most leaders were horrified.
As a communist Only last week did the Cuban governprickly when they feel most under threat. anyone realised.
A United States airstrike (strongly now only one real superpower, more weapons Q &A considered) against Cuba would have ended in disaster. today are in danger of falling into the hands of terrorist groups.
And it ‘The USA has done more harm than Cuba thousands of warheads scattered around to world peace.’ was worse even than he knew.
Russia had the world – enough to destroy the planet more weapons and soldiers on Cuba than several times over.
