Foff^wijlv(^ Reproduction of this document in whole or in port is prohibited escspt with permission of the issuing office.
If will not be removed from the WSEG area in (he Pentagon without approval of the Director.
Enclosure B Procedural Analysis of tf-3 Comsruid and Control Operations during the Cuban Crisis, October 1962.
Enclosure C Functional Analysis of command and Control Information Flow in the Joinb Staff during the 1562 Cuban Crisis.
Enclosure D Analysis of Command and Control In the Service War Hooms in Support 01 Joint Staff Operations during the 1962 Cuban Crisis.
It addresses itself to the substance of command and control experience that shaped the United States response, concentrating on apecific actions, their circumstances, and their consequences.
The purpose of the historical analysis, ao indeed of the entire study, Is to assist the Joint Staff by providing an empirical basis for improving national military command and control capability to deal with crises.
It is intended a3 a case study to demonstrate the actual structure and processes of command, and control attending a recent real, crisis of major proportions.
The central objeotive 1b to identify significant command and control phenomena, examine the context in whicn they occur, isolate the critical variables involved, and determine their implications regarding the dynamics of the national military command and control system then in effect.
Secondly, it seeks to expose the anatomy of the command and control mechanism in terms of how it coped with particular crisis problems.
Throughout, the onphasis is on discrete acts and explicit circumstances.
It is expressly not the purpose of thi3 analysis to pass judgment on the intrinsic merit of actions taken at any level TOP SECRET top srrrei gr data sooRcsa 7.
All available sources of Information potentially relevant to the inquiry — from official to journalistic, from formal documentary records to informal testimony based on personal recollections — have bean enlisted and utilized.
However., all of the pertinent sources known to exist have not been made available.
AcceB3 to some of the primary sources of intelligence and reconnaissance data, which had a key role m decision making, was denied on grounds of security sensitivity, as were also the records of proceedings in the meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the sessions of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
A considerable amount of Buch information, though, is reflected directly in secondary official sources, or can be reliably inferred from collateral and derivative documentary indications.
The, consist of messages, memoranda, and sundry other documents that represent mo3t of the con Temporary means by which command and contrcl vis."" actually articulated at the time, contained among them are also much of the background considerations and immediate anteceoents from which specific actions stemmed, as veil as the consequences of those actions.
The whole constitutes perhaps the best single source extant that approaches full coverage of what happened in the crisis.
Since the research phase was undertaken wall uefore tha crisis was over, many members of the J-3 staff, and others TOP SECRET Tor srcp^T elsewhere tn the JCS organization , who participated in the command and control activities described ware intervip-wsd while their recollection of evanta *was still fresh, from themere elicited many important details not reflected in the formal record.
In addition., through the cooperation of the Services, much valuable material was made available that cast light on otherwise obscure areas.
Although advantage was taken of unclassified official information that had been made public, moat of the published open sources offered l'.ttJe new information aid were used sparingly.
Besides the restrictions imposed on access to certain classes of recorded data already noted, another limitation is the fact that some of the data most crucial to an understanding of what happened are irretrievable.
Much of the command and control activity was conducted via communication means that leave no record. rVhs evidence suggests that direct secure voice channels, such as KY-9, were widely usedj Tnese conventions were exclusive between the immediate individuals involved and no one else vas privy to what transpired, unless one of the principals divulged it to his staff or a suosequenu ref<5rano« to th<3 conversation appeared in a log or other document.
There is reason to believe that some of the more formal communications that by their nature leave a hard-copy record, such aa messages and memoranda, were post facto official confirmations of something conveyed earlier telephonically.
An analagoua research constraint exists with regard to personal contacts.
As a result of ths3s data limitations not every aspect of the analysis could be fully developed.
TOP SECRET _ 4 * TOPJfcCRET top yr rjRST ^^' i OBSERVftTIQNS OP SIGNIFICANCE TO COMMAND AND CONTROL PR5CHTSIS POLICY AND Plfll/MIUg DSyELOPKEUTS 12.
Bsfore the crisis, United States intelligence sensing wag aware of the Sovlet~sponaored military buildup in Cuba., but intelligence estimates did not expect it to include strategic offensive weapons systems.
Intelligence evaluations and policy interpre cations saw Cuban military developments in terms of their political implications, as jeopardizing the atability of Latin America — not as a potential military threat directly to the U.3, itself.
The United States precrlais policy response to the military developments .^n Cuba evclved gradually on an ad hoc basis.
It bad been initiated by Presidential directive immediately following and as a reaction to the Bay of Pigs experience of April 196lj_j l6,j Contingency planning started from a single sharp focus as a stralghtfor'./ard invasion plan, but because of continuous national political requirements to rsduce reaction tinea, progressively multiplied until by the eve of the crisis a ""family"" of plans V0.
TOP SECRET 5 JJj^fcc a"" ©IP JACKET top sr.cs i *^ 17.^11 of the precrl3ia planning was oriented to a simple unequivocal contingency situation.
It assumed a localized limited-war confrontation involving the United States and Cuba alone, in which vital United States interacts would not be at stake, where the motivation for military action would be esoentially preemptive, and in which the tactical initiative was a United States prerogative.
The predominant influenced governing contingency planning were the United States attitude toward Cuba's internal political system, which was never articulated in terms of firm policy objectives, and the local military ciroumsBances of Cuban defense capability JTn the event the United States undertook to charge that system by force.
The impetus for most of the significant planning developments came from outside the military establishment.
In each instance the national political authorities, usually the President or Secretary of Defense personally, wore the prime movers v;ho expressly directed that particular planning actions be accomplished.
On occasion, political authorities stipulated specific operational provisions lo be incorporated into the plans.
Most of the substantive planning was actually performed at the LANTCOM staff level and by the Service commands designated to become LAHTCOM Service component commands.
The Services themselves, althoughot in the direct chain of command, contributed TOP. y^v.K-; importantly to the content of the plans.
The JCS had largely an intermediary, and somewhat procedural, role between planning principals,e., as agent betwaen those who levied planning requirements and those who fulfilled them.
The pattern of command and control processes was correspondingly variable.
As a result, the complex of incomplete ana overlapping plans, rather than being a product of comprehensive programmed development, emerged piecemeal without benefit of a common overview or master design to lend focus and direction to their evolution.
The precipitate onset of the crisis, and its unanticipated character, caught the United States by surprise.
Covert discovery of the presence of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba had revealed a suddenly materialized strategic confrontation of the firHt order directly with the USSR, in which vital U.3. interests were threatened.
The crisis situation at hand was quite different from the abstract model of a Cuban contingency such as had been contemplated in plans.
Because of the unexpected nature, gravity, and imminence of ■che threat, an immediate United States national response had to be devised on an ad hoc and short-term oasis.
The earlier broad policy objectives vis-a-vis Cuba were abruptly abar-dored and the prir-ary United States concern became limitedj to a return to the status quo ante missiles.
It was taken out of the usual institutional channels as Boon aa the significance of the photographic evidence waa recognized, and put Into the hands of specific personalities at the very apex of national authority.
The focus was the Executive Office, with the President immersed in every step of the process.
Those directly involved in the decision-making group advising the President numbered very few and were almost exclusively civilian officials.
The JCS itself, aa a corporate body, had neither a direct nor central role in formulating the basic national decision.
Only the Chairman participated in the NSC Executive Committee's deliberations.
The Joint Staff, in the institutional sense, generated no formal staffed inputs designed to structure or influence the choice of alternatives.
The basic national decision on the United States response began to emerge on IS October, four days after the initial evidence of the crisis situation was acquired.
The proposed course of action agreed upon was tentatively adopted by the President on the afternoon of the same day , and as implementing preparations got under way, the United States was rapidly committed de facto to the choice made.
The commitment became formal two days later on the TOP SECRET 9 J& '«pwk< TOP 3ECH3T -""^ evening of 22 October, with bM President's public diaoloaure of United States intentions.
One week had elapsed between the timethe issue first came to the attention 1 of the national decision authority and the time when the course of action decided upon as the United States response went into effect.
The basic national decision was, in essence, open-ended, namely, to employ minimum force initially yet be in a position to raise the Scale to any level that circumstances might require, in effect, this concept amounted to responding in graduated stages, with the first course of action (Imposition of the naval quarantine) but one step in a potential series of Increasingly forceful measures.
Within the framework of , the basic decision, successive moves were to be contingent upon Soviet reaction to the first.
The rationale underlying the open-ended decision to adjust progressively the United States response was that the Soviets would be forced thereby Into a reactive role, vrffch the burdsn of choice on tnem.
Eiey coul<relther elect to disengage early at relatively little cost or, alternatively, risk allowing the confrontation to escalate to unknown proportions.
Because of the need for eeoreey and speed (In order to 1 / ' spring the United States response as a surprise before the missiles ' ' .. become operational), the basic national decision was arrived \J~ at and the opening course of action planned and launched > unilaterally without prior consultation with Allies.
For similar reasons, the overseas Unified Commanders were not formally apprised nor consulted until shortly before the decision was Implemented.
Tfc ""fas equally Important to gain Allied political and military support in order to present a common global posture that would deter the USSR from risking escalation of tne crisis.
USCINCEUH and CINCARIB, the overseas Unified Commanders most immediately concerned., were especially hampered by the strategic requirement for surprise, though the United States for once enjoyed the advantage of holding the initiative, the JOS were not authorized to alert and inform them of the developing situation in advance.
Last-minute notification thus imposed the added hand, cap of l'ctle time available for planning and operational preparations in anticipation of possible repercussions in their areas.
Besides the direct effect on readiness of assigned United States forces, it precluded timely military coordination wich friendly forces of host countries.
In the case of CINCEUR, the constraints and obligations implicit in the existing United States -NATO relationship posed fundamental command and control dilemmas.
On the political side, a certain degree of policy coordination was accomplished through the ad hoc means of the President personally communicating with key Allied leaders, and by a personal emissary of the President being sent to the North Atlantic Council.
Yon the military side, however, a major strategic problem was to coordinate NATO-committed United States forces in Europe with the remainder of United States national forces elsewhere in connection with a contingency that geographically fell outside the sphere] TOP SECRET 10 'il w nisr.T /of primary alliance responsibility and interest.
In the ease of CINCARIB, one of She chief coordination problems revolved around the limited CARIECOM capabilities in relation to the extent of assistance thac nishfc be required by Latin American gov~rnnents to suppress an/ Comsjuniac-incipired internal uprisings in support of Cuba.
It was aggravated by the fact that the residual force resources of CINCGTFfflCE severely restricted tne augmentation available.
Another coordination problem attended Implementing the United States policy objective of actual Latin American military participation in operations against Cuba.
On botn scores, complex politicomilitary arrangements had to be negotiated quickly, /rifch each country involved having to be dealt with on an Individual national basis.
Ywith respect to policy coordination, formal Allied political support of the United States position in fch2 criaia was achieved when all of the Allied governments declared their official backing J In Latin America . some military support was also obtained.
But the NATO powers, because of standing attlt;.d-_3 an the Cuban issue and differing perceptions of the crisis threat, gave little military support to the overall deterrent posture.
Of a leaser order, even coordinatJou of United States military operational activities vis-a-vis Allies was conditioned by local policy reservations.
The problem of keeping them properly synchronized with one another and, together, all in phase with political developments, exercised the total politico-military command and control system, from the white House to the forces in the field.
Although thay were the ones ™ho most needed advance warning, in view of the ponderous marshalling and staging ntcesspry, they could leas-c benefit from it, because the magnitude of activity would tip the United States hand and might be undesirably provocatHreTf 42.
Optimum mobilization had to give way in favor of promoting a national image of deliberate rtstraint balanced oy firr. determination.
Ultimately, it uaa hoped, the purpose of military operational preparations would be symbolic as an earnest of United States intentions in the larger dialogue witn the Soviet Union.
Hovjever, the CONUS-based CINCs,e., LAIVT, SAC, GONAD, although not officially informed by the JCS of v/hat the United States course of action would be until 21 October, were alerted to ccains events early enough by the Services to permit staff preparations in anticipation of operational requirements, so that all were engaged in readiness activities by 17 October.
USAP forces, especially, exploited to advantage she grace periodj actual operational air deployments began on 17 October, v/ell before a national decision had been reached.
The effect was &t once to expand and narrow the ocopej type, and degree of combat readiness required and permitted, because measures to deal wixh tne local contingency inescipally iinp-'.-^ed upon general-irar issuea.
There wa& a notice.c u le reluctance on the part of the JCS to make precom,iUttins decision defining the criteria for initiating, and the parameters for conducting, coi>oit opex'ationo not explicitly cevsred in plana, especially regarding the critical issue of tactical response so hostile acts of the eneny.
The guidance provided by the JCS that ostensibly was to govern United States reaction in the hypothetical exigency in question was sometines so Qualified as vo be gelfcontradiefcine.
Whatever handicapping effect this may have hed operationally for the tactical forces involved, the resulting ambiguity tended to enhance centralised control at the highest level, for it insured that field commanders would in each instance have to seek authorization before taking a potentially serious move.
Current operational activity connected with readiness preparations under >i-v accounted fcr many urjeiiu ^u^ataniive problems to which the military coiimiand and control system had to address itself.
Limitations in available resources, particularly forces, lift capability , and base facilitied, required iri^fsive rescheduling oi ctovenenta and revising of staging plans, which amounted to a complex sacondary order of technical decision Junctures, Monitoring the response of all fcne forces 30 affected in order to keep abreast of the atatua of readiness .«s a ?.hcle, posed extensive informa~ tion requirements.
In both respects, the burden of attendant command and control functions fell on the Joint Staff, specifically on J-3, as the focal common denominator embracing the various Service interests and command echelons involved.
When operational conflicts arose oet jeen CINCs, as in ths case cf competing demands of LAilTCCM contingency air dsplojmentff against those of CONAD and SAC, coordination was effected at t'-e JCS level.
The degree of detail in which so ,1-5 of thss2 -rociems had to be approached before they could be resolved by the JCS imposed correspondingly Intensive ad hoc information and staffing support requirements on J-3.
Discrepancies oecweers operational noeds of a CllfC aid logistic resources and capabilities of a Service similarly had to be reconciled at the JCS level.
Sometimes these required that the JC3 render explicit rulings on the technical and teetical details of operational deployment for the CINC concerned.
Jin t-e process, because an appropriate ready data base \iaa not normally maintained vrithin the OJCS, J-3 had to improvise information retrieval and perform technical staffing to support the JCS disposition of the problem^ TOP SECR5T 15 a a'0« B W&ZZ'I TOP SOCKET TOP C3C3FT 49.
During this second phase, the pei'epective of the JCS role gradually reverted to broader overall functions of conveying requirements, review, and approval.
The limited, selective naval Quarantine that was actually implemented ae the initial course of action in the 3, response waa essentially a form of military demonstration in support of diplomatic measures, MevertheJ ico, it constituted the most critical area of command and control of the entire c-isis.
Since subsequent decisions on other political and military moves viould be dependent in large measure upon Soviet reaction to the Guarantlne, it tias pivotal to the overall national strategy for dealing with the crisis.
Quarantine operations accordingly received the intensive attention of national decision makers, and command and control related to them was subordinated to considerations other than military operational criteria alone.
Fundamental ad hoc adjustments to the cstaollshed Institutional command and control system were occasioned early in the cri3ls by she desif^iation of the CWO to servea JCS represpr.tative for the Quarantine.
She affect wis to shift the focus of Quarantine command and control from th3 Joint Staff to OPNAV, thereby precipitating a series of secondary charges in staff organization and procedures.
At crucial junctures, the ertire system was radically compressed; national decision makers preempted tactical command , bypassing intermediary command link3, and would themselves exercise direct operational control over the immediate actions of Quarantine tc.sk force unital 54.
The first was in connection vd.th the principal targets for interception reversinE course when the Secretary of Defense, the CNO, and thcirj TOP SECRET fc tW#ECRft'il TOP SECRET /""deputies relayed explicit White House instructions via secure voice cnanneli directly to cctrmanderc of ships assigned to carry out the intercepts^ 554A^aecond instance of similar real-time national command and control was Jn connection with Soviet tankers., especially the BUCHAREST when the CNO and his Executive conveyed White House guidance direccly to quarantine task force elemenfcsTJ , 56.
Ajfchird instance was in connection with non-Bloc vessels, particularly in the case of stopping and boarding the Sovietchartered Lebanese freighter MRUCLA when decisions governing the moment-by-moment operational moves of the specific quarantine ships involved were made by the Secretary of Defense and his Deputy acting on specific instructions of the President then communicated directly ro the individual ship commander concerned.
The terns of the bilateral United States -Soviet inspection arrangements that were negotiated on the political level, however j covered in comprehensive detail the operational procedures to be followed.
Command and control considerations pervaded contingency planning during the crisis.
The function of the plans themselves was escantially aa a venicle of command and control to optimize military responsiveness to national political direction.
Concern at che political decision-making level with operational details deemed criticcJ to the larger United States strategy in the crisis accounted for most of zhe planning activity and largely determined tne content of cho provisions that resulted.
The contingency plana became the midpoint on a projected spectrum of military courses of • action ranging from the naval Poarantine, on one extre-ne, to general -rav on she other But because Cuba .ias the immediate locua of the crisis issue, the contingency plana remained central to the total United States response and were accordingly a major focus of attention for the entire national politico-military command and control complex.
Much the same general patterns as had been evident before the crisis characterised cor.t1n3er.cy plannire-.p-nence c_._\^c the crisis — > only they were wore pronounced. * 1 aalien-iifference was in the greatly accelerated pace and intensity of the planning, but despite the cnanged context, che oasic iorm and substance of che earlier plans were retained.
Helthar of the two contingency plans ever reached final completion, but, owing to modifications and additions, were constantly in a state of transitional growth.
Although individual portions gained specificity, the plans as a whole, rather than being narrowed by materialization of the crisis^ progressively expanded in dimension and detail.
The cumulative effect over time was a considerable transformation of the original plana.
The associated command and control processes also were similar to precrisis practice.
As in other crisis-related military activity, the hignest echelon of national political authority interposed itself into the contingency planning machinery.
The typical role of the JC3 was, as before the crisis, largely still that of intermediary agency between planning principals.
Within the OJCS, the special ""Cuban Planners"" group was created in the Operations Directorate to deal with""] 3 r pair DiMfra TOP SECRET ^con tingency planning matters exclusively.
Organizationally separate from the Joint Battle Staff or regular Divisions and Branches of J-3, the Cuban Planners functioned independently of established channels and procedures.
Rather than substantive planning, their job was one of monitoring and providing informational coordination and staffing, support in connection uith the plansjf 65 i Within LANTCOM headquarters, as soon as tactical command for planned contingency operations was centralized to give CTNCLANT operational control over all forces involved , a separate LANTCOM staff was formally activated to handle Cuban contingency responsibilities, including planning.
Instead, it was informally integrated into the regular permanent CINCLANT staff, which performed the Cuban staffing along with general-war staffing.
Lack of unequivocal criteria for determining, the approval status of basic plan3, components, and changeo at any given time made for an element of procedural ambiguity, potentially of farreaching command and concrol consequence.
Various kinds of approval, and inconsistencies in their application, sonecimes made it impossible to know which particular planning provisions were currertly govsrning and official.
Stringent security restrictions Imposed in the early stages of the crisis were an added constraint militating agamsr full and timely dissemination of planning information to all tha staffs and forces affected by the plans.
The same themes that dominated preerisia contingency planning were the major planning problem areas during the crisis.
Crucial to the whole command and control procegs involved was reciprocal Information exchange.
As the number of planned specific courses of action multiplied, settling upon reaction times that were both politically acceptable and militarily feasible necessitated intensive coordination between planning and operations, and in the interim, occasioned no little confusion before the various reaction times were firmly codified and universally understoodTj 70.
The elaborate definition of selective options in ascending order of magnitude, coupled with austere reaation times, grew out of Presidential demands for precise and virtually instantaneous military response capability to implement predetermined operational courses of action, in discrete increments of specified kind and measure, on call.
Such fine-grained choices from a range of programmed/ TOP SECRET 22 /alternatives as was ultimately provided for in the contingency plans made for unprecedented national decision flexibilityj J ^ . / y 71.
Augmentation of force level commitments for contingency operations accounted for extensive planning modifications throughout the crisis period.
The steady force increase was partly related to order-of -battle intelligence factors, and in part to planning refinements designed to accommodate secondary or peripheral requirements or to cover more remote exigencies that might conceivably occurThe chief motivation, however, was the desire on both operational and policy levels to Insure adequate safety margins.
On the one hand, tactical commanders on various echelons were inclined to add, on their own initiative, combat strength in excess of what they were authorised to deploy, and the plan3 would subsequently be adjusted accordingly.
On the other, political decision makers, remembering the Eay of Figs e::perience, formally directed ■ further large-scale augmentation, even in the face of military advice to the contrary.
In view of the nature of some of the planning issues dealt with, the essential information requirements for staffing support TOP SECRET fCl'^ dp aJrcR TOP i^TOEl TOP SRCRET of many planning actions were fundamentally in the realm of Judgment.
Some of the information inputs demanded of the military command and control system amounted to hypotheses in a subjunctive mode , rather than hard data in the sense of verifiable facts.
Successful resolution of the crisis was achieved primarily through diplomatic measures conducted at the national political level.
The specific means employed were bilateral communications In the form of a dialogue involving an exchange of messages between the United States and USSH heads of state.
Military command and control had no direct participating role in the actual dialogue itself.
In the light of the continuing missile buildup, the JCS, as a corporate body but minus the Chairman, formally proposed implementing the contingency plans in 24 hours unless there ./-are in the meantime evidence of Soviet compliance to remove the missile threat.
The Chairman disagreed with the JCS position and independently submitted his own separate reconmendarion that.
As he felt constrained to explain in his dissenting memorandum, the Chairman had been unable to participate in the JCS deliberations be« u « at the time he was at the White Hou ne functioning in a staff capacity as the military member of the NSC Executive Committee.
Attending the gradual military unwinding that characterized the termination of the crisi3 were many command and control requirements, though progressively less urgent and less crucial.
A series of decisions and complex operational coordination was necessary to maintain a balanced and orderly stand-do\m of operational readiness in phase with political developments, the military significance of which was not always clear at the time.
Concomitant with the return toward normal precrisia posture was a decrease in intimate participation by national political decision makers in the immediate operational details of reducing military readiness.
As tensions eased and the crisis subsided, the ad hoc military command and control adjustments were abandoned, although not necessarily ,to revert to precrisis arrangements.
Within the Operations Directorate of the Joint Staff, particularly, a number of basic changes in command and control organization anr) procedures wsre put into effect even before the cri3is was over.
There was little tendency on the part of the Executive Office to relinquish centralised control and delegate autonomous prerogatives along institutional lines to the mili'.iry establishment in its own traditional sphere of vested interest Generally, moat of the managerial Initiative shaping the United States military response was exercised at the very apex of government.
During trie first three years of Castro's rule in Cuba, it became quite clear that the Soviet Union fully recognized the advantages to be derived from a Cuba hostile to the United States.
In the increasingly exacerbated course of United States -Cuban relations during these years, Cuba became the recipient of Soviet moral and material support, The latter, in the form of economic aid and military equipment, .fas relatively modest in scope, and probably had a greater symbolic than actual impact.
It was a marked change in this pattern which led to the missile crisis of 1962.
President Kennedy made the first puollc statement in regard to the increased flow of iien and materiel at his ores-a conference on August 22.
On September 2, the Soviets confirmed what had been knosm by announcing an agreement to aupply arms to Cuba and to provide specialists to train the Cuban armed forces.
Such forceful action, however, required more concrete information and evidence than *ias currently possessed.
Furthermore, political reactions, in the light of the abortive expedition to the Eay of Pigs in April 1961, had to be considered.
Consequently, United States declaratory policy was to rule out invasion, but to keep up a relentless pressure, with the economic emoargo the United States had placed on Cuba, to isolate tne island, and to allow and to help internal forces build up to the point where the Castro government could be overthrown.
The President himself ruled out invasion in an August 29 press conference, In a reply to suggestions from Congressional sources thatie United States invade Cvoa because the presence of Soviet troops had violated the Monroe Doctrine.
However, for the moment, the United States would depend upon nonmilitary measures to hamper, if not prevent, the flow of arms to Cuba.
For these measures to have effect, the cooperation of our European and Latin American Allies would be indispensable.
B AraSMPglNO TO IMPLEMENT AMERICAN POLICY 86, That a large part of the Soviet commeroe with Cuba was carried in Free World bottoms was painfully clear to American decision makers.
In Che same period, Free World ships carried about 55 percent of the Soviet oil on which Cuba depended.
Free World ships also carried almost 3o percent of the dry cargo received by Cuba.
The United States ii August haa consulted with NATO Ulies w^ose shipping firms had chartered vessels to the Eloc, but aj midSeptember it was apparent no major gains had been made, Ifte Governments of Britain, West Germany, and Morvay had begun inquiries among their shipowners, but these were generally regarded as polite responses to United States diplomatic pressure, and centered on the question of whether Allied ships were carrying arms airong, their cargoes to Cuba.
American dissatisfaction with the situation was atartlingly formalised on September 20 when the House of Representatives approved the foreign aid bill, including amendments which would cut off all aid both to states whose ships carried arms to Cuba, or which sold or furnished arms or supplies of strategic value like petroleunij and to states whose ships carried just items of economic assistance to Cuba.
While the Senate, on October 1, voted to restore the President's discretionary power in the second category, to determine whether or not such withholding of aid would be contrary to the national interest, the depth of American concern and intent was made manifest.
In the second half of September, some small progress appear3d to be made in enllstins tne support of Western European Governments in measures *-o restrict the use of their shipping by the Soviets in the Cuban arms traffic.
On September 22, Secretary of State Rusk met with the Britisn Foreign Secretary, Lord Home, to discuss the enbar&o, and then conferred *iith Norwegian officials fcne following day.
However, tne only concrete success American diplomacy scored was the announcement on September' 27th by the Tur'.:±sh Foreign Minister that Turkish shipowners had agreed to halt all cargo shipments to Cuba.
Lack of success led the Administration Into consideration of harsher and far-reaching embargo measures.
The letter suggested Beveral nonnaval courses of action which could have the effect of naval actions, the least effective measure was a Presidential Declaration that ships calling at Cuban ports may nos call at United States ports immediately thereafter or for a specific period thereafter.
The inhibiting effect could be heightened by requesting Western countries, especially Latin America, to maj-.e similar rulings .egarding ships not of chair o-/n registry and not specifically protected by treaty.
Seme of the beneficial ovmers who could easily operate a fe"" ships to Cuba without using U S ports would be greatly inhibited by the financial burden of having to-lng th^se ships home empty and in ballast from the Vtestern Hemisphere.
Hie third and moat affective recommendation would be a declaration that no Bhips belonging to the beneficial ovmers of any ships calling at Cuba would be allowed into United States ports until further notice.
This action would have amounted to blaolc -listing owners and their entire fleets if a single ship called at Cuba.
Such a declaration would admittedly be difficult but not impossible to enforce.
The Secretary of the Wavy pointed out that, from the Havy's point of view, all three courses of action were legal, but the-*e must also be taken Into account the opinions of all other Government agencies in regard to subsidiary * effects upon U S trade, foreign relations generally, and hemispheric economic relations specifically.
Qoverr.ir.pnt cargo shall be carried on a foreign flag ship if any ship of the same owners is used hereafter in the 31oc-C-ihar. srace; Direct that no U S flag ship and no U.3.-ownsa Slip shall csrry g&oda tc and from Cuba, and Close all United States ports to any ship that on the same continuous vojage .rcis used or is being used in Bloc -Cuban trade.
The United States recognized that these measures may cause problems for shipping companies in some NATO countries, but we hoped that the NATO Governments would be able to persuade them to make adjustments.hs OAS was informed of these 1 measures by the Secretary of State on October 2.
While the first reports indicated that North Atlantic Council representatives had seemed to appreciate the seriousness of the U.3. presentation, reactions to the forthcoming measures were obviously mixed.
A major success was achieved, the first one in regard to Free World shipping, when on October 10, the Greek Shipowners Union in Athens announced that It would recommend to Its members a total embargo on cargo snipments to Cuba.
However, in the case of Britain which came second on the list with 77 ships, cne reaction was different.
Brltisn shipowners in London decided unanimously on C:tobsr 11 to oppose any United States restrictions on their tradeitn Cuba.
Hie telegram summarized the nonmilltary stage that had been reached in United States policy just before the receipt, three days later, of positive intelligence of Soviet offensive weapons abruptly turned American efforts toward more forceful measures.
United States policy, it stated, was intended; to deny the Bloc and Cuba access to Free World shipping for use in arms shipments to Cubaj to make the Bloc-Cuban trade as costly as possible for Free Vforld shipowners by denying their ships engaged in that trade the opportunity to call at United States ports on the same voyage; to compel shipowners and operators to elect between engaging in Bloc-Cuban trade and in carrying cargoes -financed by the U.S., such as foreign aid cargoes, shipments of surplus agricultural commodities undar Public Law ^0, and Department of Defense cargoes.
The United States itself did permit exports to Cuba of certain foodstuffs and medical supplies.
A State Department cable of a few days earlier had stated that the Department wished to make clear that although it wanted to hear of significant reactions, in thi3 case from Latin America, to the United States Pour Point Action program, adoption of the measures was not dependent upon the reactions Gf others.
This, then, was the nonmilltary aspect of United States -NATO relations over Cuba.
Until late in the sumner, American decision -makers appear to have considered Berlin the next mo ah likely crisis area rather than Cuba.
The impression given in Washington was that a new crisis in Berlin might have to be faced by tha turn of the year, assuming Khrushcncv kept his promise not to sign a peace treaty until after the American elections.
The apparent United States insistence upon keeping the suo;ecfc current led to some puzzlement among observers.
Berlin remained the saoject of greatest United States and NATO public attention until virtually the very day of the President's proclamation of the Cuban quarantine.
In faot, the six-anda-half -hour conversation between the President and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko on October 18, in the midst of preparations for the United States Cuban move., dealt in greater part with Berlin, On the 17th Washington sources had indicated too that Khrushchev waB due to visit the U.M, and to see the President the following month in order to discuss Berlin.
It was obvious that American decision makers conceived of a direct relationship between Cuba and Berlin.
The development of the Soviet base in Cuoa could be viewed as a pawn to be used in the greater game over Berlin, even if no offensive weapons had been Introduced.
The possibility of the introduction 'of these weapons made the relationship all the mors certain and critical.
Secretary of State Rusk, in a briefing to a joint session of the Senate Foreign Relations and A^med Forces Committees ,m September 17, painted out the ""direct relationship"" between events in Cuba and Berlin, particularly In lhf> next three months.
The theory expressed was that the West's invasion of Egypt distracted world attention from Budaoest, 1 permitting the Russians a freer hand. vJBjLX s so 107.
In the light of puollc discussion of the Cuba-Berlin relationship, it waB inevitable that public speculation should develop over the possibility of a ""deal"" between the United States and the Soviets.
Cuba also became linked in this speculation with the United States base system overseas.
However, on September 30, the Secretary of State, in a press conference, categorically rejected the idea of a deal with the Soviet Union under which the Soviets would withdraw from Cuba in return for the United States closing down some of its overseas bases.
The Soviets took the same line, Izvestia on October 17 denying rumors that the Soviets were sponsoring a deal, and rejecting the idea of any effort tc link Cuba to either Berlin or to the United States overseas oases.
It was felt that the United States Hlew vork Tin.es, October 1, 12o2 . dew York Ti.nes, October l£, 1J62. ssqgffi ""creation"" of a crisis in Cuba would invite Soviet pressure in Europe and thus provoke the very orisi3 we were seeking to delay if not avoid in Berlin, 111.
Thia sensitivity to the Cuba -Berlin relationship revealed Itself clearly in the v/idely held expectation, once the Quarantine had been announced on October 22, thac the mast likely place for a Soviet counterpreaaure would be In Berlin, The very fact that the President, in his address on October 22, specifically warned the Soviets against interfering with United States access to Berlin or against any other ""hostile moves"" suggests the weight which United States policy maksrs attached to the relationship.
Tiie interest of the Latin American states in the ne*» American policy toward Cuba was not so much mercantile as political.
For some, those states in or bordering on the Caribbean, there tras also a military interest, .since they had been the objects of the several Castro-inspired little filibustering expeditions around the Caribbean in previous years.
At the governmental level at least there existed in these states a strong antipathy to.rard Cascro's Cuba.
On the other hand, the major Cariboean state, Mexico, had shown itself most cocl toward earlier United States efforts tn penalize Cuba.
The rapid growth of Cuban military pc/er during the year had shaken complacency and tolerance.
Consequently, when Secretary of State Rusk met with the Ambassadors of nineteen Latin American states on September 5, his declaration of U.S determination to prevent the"" export of Communism from Cuba was well received.
Vy i , A more specific statement of United States policy was made by the Secretary of S-cate on September 25 to the Foreign Ministers of Chile, Haiti, Peru, and Venezuela.
The Secretary reviewed the Cuban situation, emphasizing the rapid Soviet build-up.
He stated that if it should become necessary for tne United States to take military action, only three or four hours' preparation would be required to reduce the effectiveness of the Soviet war materiel so far received since July.
If it should be .lacessary to use force, the United States would use the maximum nonnuclear violence in order 1 to minimize time and casualties.
However, the United States was ar.«±ou2 to avoid this course since _t would leave lasting wounds both in Cuba uid els. . \'here.
Because of special inter -American relationships and agreements, the Cuban aituation was in no way comparable to or linkable with situations elsewhere, such as Berlin or United States military assistance relationships with other free countries like Turkey.
He stressed that the United States was not seeking to import the cold war into this hemisphere or to drag the OAS into problems not their responsibility.
The invitation was sent specifically to aiscuss the Cuban situation in rhe lijht of the Soviet build-up there, the tempo of which had increased sceadily tnrougnout September.
The United States Secretary of S'ate reviewed recent developments and the U S response in th2 setting of a worldwide Communist offensive, lie expresses tho vj.e 1 that ,-he Soviet Union would not go to /far over Cuba, but reassured the OAS ministers tnar 1.. the event of a sneak attack on the United States or elsewhere, the United States would still be able to destroy the Soviet Union.
There was a military side to the conference, for which United States planning provides an interesting background for the concept of United States -Latin American military cooperation which emerged during quarantine operations a month later.
In fact, these ideaB are shown to have been under consideration for some length of u_ne.
The CJCS in his reply first warned that in the preparation of a public political statement to be isBued by the Foreign Ministers, there be no mention of invasion or the use of blockade as a major means of handling Cuba, suggesting that instead, discussion should be concentrated on actions designed to prevent the export of Communism.
The Chairman pointed out that the JCS had already taken actions along thdse lines in August 1962, having directed CINCARIB and CINCLANT to develop a United States alerting system to _nclude anti-infiltration phases In all exercises and to encourage Caribbean states to develop country alerting systems with plans for opposing subversive infiltrations.
However, the foregoing actions were clearly dependent upon participation of the states concerned, and the U S position at the meeting should, therefore, lay emphasis on these actions and invite greater participation.
If it were considered politically desirable to elicit surveillance contributions, Mexico, Venezuela, and Colombia were capable of providing assistance.
He warned that creation of a multinational force would require that contributing natioiis be prov_ded with add_b_o.ial fuel aud spare parts support.
Nevertheless, this position need not preclude encouraging cooperation among the Caribbean states, and the central thene of the United States at the meeting should be to encourage a marked unilateral effort -and multinational cooperabion in the 1 maximum utilization of existing facilities and forces.
PRECRI3IS MILITARY CONTINGENCY PLANNING A GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OP THE CONTINGENCY PLANNING 127.
The main vehicle of preparation for the Cuban crisis was the military contingency plans.
Long before the event, relatively elaborate planning had been undertaken in anticipation of a contingency arising that would require United States military action against Cuba.
By the eve of the crisis, there existed a body of contingency plans in various stages of development, some completed and formally adopted, others being formulated, undergoing revision, or awaiting review and approval.
Togsther these plans constituted, to the extent that they were developed, the prepared point of departure for a United States military response to a Cuban contingency.
The compass of these precrisis contingency plans was intended to be comprehensive.
Within the bounas of the contingency postulated, the rai-.-e of optional courses of action under consideration was fully expected to cope with whatever the contingency presented.
A/han the actual contingency materialized, the resulting plans were found to be less than allinclusive and fell short of accommodating the entire military dimensions of the total crisis.
Furthermore, over and above limitations of concept, the state of the planning at the time the crisis occurred proved less than propitious • f °rj TOP SECRET k 3 ' j5|F R TOU^ECRfcT TOP SECP1T [generating the explicit plan9 needed immediately in Che heat of the moment.
The deficiencies were attributable to the basic premises underlying the substance of the plans and to the way the planning function was carried outTj 130. pone of the working assumptions on which precris-s plana were predicated took into account the possibility of a contingency of strategic proportions in a general war context.
Nor did the conduct of the planning, with its ever-changing terms of reference, permit a systematic program of orderly integration and fallowthrough of the various plans initiated.
Nevertheless, different as the character of the real contingency turned out to be, and despite its inopportune timing in relation to the status of the planning, the complex of plans addressed to the hypothetical situation was not rendered invalid.
With appropriate modification, plans applicable to one of the major military aspects of the crisis eventvally emerged.
These prscri.sis contingency plans, thus, although not oriented specifically to the kind of conditions tohicii they had to apnly, •.,•-.•» in t v >c direct lins or evolu.Jor leading to those that became current and in effect during the crisis . j 131, In view of their formative role in influencing subsequent crisis experience, it is necessary to trace the ontogeny of the precrisis plans a^d ^econstr'.ict the contemporary environment in i/hich plannirg developments occurred.
In the course of isolating the impetus, rationale, and circumstances of particular planning actions taken, significant command and control pnenomena bearing, upon, contingency planning processes can be identified.
SECRET _ jjj, iin, Refits -GREr TOP JACKET L "" top sscira T , ™ s ^ /some ] p j^fo 18 months before the crisis.
Their provenance goes back directly to ths abortive Bay of Pigs adventure of 17 April ' 1961.
The terms of reference laid down by the President 1' at the time stipulated that the plan provide for the use of ""overwhelming force"" in order to insure success of the operation.
Also included in the guidance given was that the plan be designed with the objectives of bringing about the sub',' jugation of Cuba in the shortest time possible, and of mini} ' ' mizlng United States and Cuban casualtie s, / l 133. phis Initial reflex action at the national political level proved to be the genesis of a veritable program o** military contingency planning for Cuba, out of which ultimately a ""family"" of plans culTiInate'dj', 13^ » v |tefore the end of April 1961, the requested plan was completed by the Task Force on Cuoa and submitted to the t "" ' President.
Identified ss ""Contingency Plan 1,"" it became ' the basic national contingency plan for United States action"" regarding.
The mission to be accomplished was to overtures; the Castro regime by military force and install a government acceptable to the United States Tre plan that had been produced, in accordance with the President's directive, called for a relatively large-scale military operation, to invade, subdue, and occupy Cuba.
It set forth the terms of reference laid down by 'trie President, defining furtner the conditions andl jgFilc :30V3^j 2 May 1961 j TOP SECK v mx lOV jfiKGRET TOP MTCR1ST ITcriterla that would apply, and specif led • the means that were ' authorized to achieve United States military objectives.
To carry out the tactical phase of the Invasion, the plan provided for the employment of 60,000 troops, excluding naval and air units, but stipulated that all the forces involved, whether land, sea, or air, were to ba drawn from existing force levels.
Execution of the plan would require a leadtime of twenty-five days from the date of decision to the commercing of D-Eay assaults ' 135. ;0n 29 April 1961 the President, meeting with the S<3cre fc*ry of Defense and the Chief of Naval Operations, reviewed Contingency Plan 1.
He approved the general outline of the plan, but demurred with respect to what ne considered an unduly long reaction time.
Rejecting the twentyfive -day Interval provided for between decision and execution, he requested that tae leadcine period bs drastically reduced, suggesting no more than a weet; as being desirable.
Henceforth, the issue of reaction time first raised by the President on 29 April 1961 vrould dominate Cuban contingency planning.
The discrepancy between ideal political requirements, on the one handj and realistic considerations of military operational feasibility, on the other, was never reconciled; but efforts to close the gap lent unforeseen complications to the planning task.
The Precedent's demand also marked the beginning of a pattern that was to persist until the 2962 crisis was over.
Intensive political \' \ l\ direction in technical military operational matters proved ^ to be a saliew; characteristic of how the United States response was ] f ' managed.
JOn 1 May the Secretary of Defense, in a memorandum to the JCS, instructed that the ""Joint Staff and CIHCLANT"" be assigned responsibility for preparing the necessary detailed military plan to carry out the course of action prescribed in the national plan.
Besides specifying the -cerms of reference outlined in Contingency Plan 1, and those expresnly laid down by the President when he reviewed it on 29 April, the Secretary added guidelines of his own.
Citing the requirement regarding lead-time, he emphasised that the military plan bo designed to minimize the time necessary for executing the operational response after an order was received.
Distribution Outside the USA ProQuest Information and Learning, The Quorum, Barnwell Road, Cambridge CB5 8SW, England inpip^^ ffllW w www INCHES I 1 I • 2 iiililJil.ilililiiilililili-li.il rffffp^W 111) llll llll I, iiilihlihlihliiiliiiliiilii TO IP SJSfc&ET TOP SE^nF,? -™^ J and presumably in other interested agencies as well — these activities were carried on outside the established organizational framework.
An exclusive ta3k-force-type group (informally referred to a3 the ""Johnson Task Force""), whose very existence was kept under wraps, was created and functioned in shadowy isolation from bhe regular affairs of the various divisions and branches of JCS Directorates.
Separate procedures vrere followed in order to limit the number of people who might have acoess to information that was now considered extra sensitive.
From then on, anything pertaining 'bo Cuba was so closely held that only a few designated individuals were privy to what was going on.
The rigid security measures thab had been imposed acquired., through time, an inertia which was never completely overcome even in the midst of the crisis, when pressing operational needs of the moment, demanded somewhat broader access to the data expressly prepared for juat sucn an eventuality^ 139.
The principal difference between the two was. that the newer plan provided for increased forcea and an expanded operational concept.
On the baBis of precedent and an existing cognate plan, CINCLPOT planners were able to prepare a draft outline of the required contingency plan in relatively short order.
On 19 May following the President's directive , the draft outline plan was submitted ""to JCS for review.
Referring to the serious problems that this posed, even if it were feasible, and pointing out the consequences of doing so, he recommended that it would be in uhe interest of military efficiency to allow more lead-time than five days.
J TOP SECRET » UQ T-XW JURIST T01P SECRET M^a/fche JCS, in reviewing the draft outline plan, took into consideration CINCLANT's reservations and concluded that more time than five days should be allowed between the order to execute and the initial assault.
They agreed that even if I / the readiness posture required for such a capability could be achieved, it could not be maintained long because of costs involved and dislocating repercussions on general force poBture elsewhere.
Certain limitations* including a necessity for prepositioning and redeployment, militated against a realistic plan baaed on five-day lead-time, In the JCS view, availability of assault sea transport was the determining factor, shortage of which might well preclude a fiveday reaction capability.
Nevertheless, the JCS decided to approve the quick-reaction outline plan for planning purposes only, whila trying to obtain authorization bo extend the leadtime as CINCLANT had re contended., 1; 1 1*3., Three days later, on 16 June 1961, the JCS advised th-s Secretary of Defense that more leeway than the stipulated five-day reaction time ""must be provided "" cifcirg the reasons referred to above.
Nevertheless,/ CINCLANT was instructed to continue to develop the required quick-reaction plan , cutting the lead-time to aa 3hort a period as possible, The concept of operations on which it was to be based was an early airborne assault followed by seaborne build-up.
This plan would apply in case a sudden emergency situation necessitated such rapid response.
Meanwhile, the JCS granted CINCLABT, the requested authorization to proceed to develop his proponed alternate plan of (eighteen -day ^reaction tine as a matter of priority [ lHj, VThus, by this action t're JCS i^i 3ati l*i motion t'.o parallel but different contingency military operation plans for Cuba to be developed simultaneously.
It was approved by JCS on 30 November 1961., •? . /}-__> subject to cerfcaJn conditions, including incorporation of specified ohangeo and receipt of mlsBing Annexes.
OPLAN 31^-61 provided for simultaneous airborne and amphiblwus assaults against western Cuba, concentrating on the Havana area, and a concurrent ampr.ibious assault on eastern Cuba.
The Commander, Second Fleet , was designated to function in the role of CJTP-122 when the Joint Task Force was activated.
The respective Service component forced making up the Joint Task Force were to be organized into three Service Task Forces under CJTF-122.
As Commander Joint Task Force-Cuba, he would be directly responsible to CINCLANT rather than CJTF-122.
Also contained within OPLAN 3l4-6l were provisions for development of a separate, alternative ""Quick Reaction Plan"" utilizing reduced initial forces in the interests of minimizing lead-time.
Not until 27 March 1962 3 when ths missing Annexes of QPLAN 31*1-61 were completed and the various subordinate and supporting plans were well enough/ 'JCS -2O18/306, 15 November 1961, (Decision on, daced 30 ' ^. ''einber 1961), TOP SECRET. ^^ glbld.
I Early in January 1°62 the Secretary of Def°nss expressed to -che JCS sti-ons dissatisfaction with the reaction tljnsj being provided for in the contingency pla.is for Cuba under development so far.
I TOP SECRET 5If 1D.p«SlE JURIST / l TOT T OP SFCr OST Ftnat appropriate measures be taken to acnieve a rapid-reaction air-strike capability against Cuban military targets, Hating in dptail the order of priority for cpecific kinda of targets and the respective reaction times for each from a condition of no alert.
ET tot airci&rcr T OP 3EC.1ST ^^ /JpiCIAHT was further advised that the Secretary of Defense , . had stipulated that Navy and Air Force tactical aircraft, \ \ armed with conventional weapons only, were to he employed. , P J 153.
In the same message, the JC3 informed CINCLANT of the Secretary of Defense's desire to have the reaction times of the two contingency plans under development reduced drastically.
Estimates of 'costs, and of the impact on other major plans and programs, resulting from such reduction in leadtime.
CINCSTRI] ^>-UaRCary 1962, TOP SECRET r\ TO^PjRCRaSl mCRRT TOP SECI^T > / fr 157./ciNCLANT held a conference on 7~8 February 1962 with 0} /j i ccmmanda concerned to discuss the Secretary °f Defense's ref\ £ quirements.
On 24 February CINCLAOT responded to the JCS directive of 2 January containing the terms of reference.
As a result of the conference, an outline for the required air-strike plan had seen produced, which was submitted aa part of CXNCIANT's response. y3ufc with regard to reducing lead-times in the contingency plans , 'he expressed concern over the risks involved in any invasion plan calling for such a short reaction time from a nonreadiness posture, with no prior notice or preparations.
However, CIMCIAHT informed JCS of other significant results of the oonferencp.
It was based on the assumption that mere would be considerable prior warning and, indeed, that some of the foroe3 involved would hav-e even, been prepo3ltioiied beforehand.
At no time did the) tuo-day/reaction plan contained In Annex ""'(J' 1 reach, in form""or status, anything approaching a complete, approved operation plan, / iSl./ln August, biie generally increasing Cuban military capacities, which had been observed earlier, now became more apparent and an appreciation of their tactical significance to any contemplated United States military action more conclusive.
Signs pointing to a considerable improvement in Cuba's hitherto rudimentary air-defense capability v»ere particularly disturbing.
By early September recognition of the extent of the improvement, in ""quality and quantity, injected fresh impetus into planning, lending especially a n^w point and urgency to the -""equl rpment for air-atntcs plans.
On 7 September CCOTAC formed a special staff planning group expressly charged with, developing a detailed air-strike operation plan based on CINCLANT's concept and outline that had originated the previous Marcn.
Before the montl"" was out, a proposed operation plan, nicknamed ""HOCK PILE,"" wa3 produced.
Preoccupied in it were not only CINCLANT, who had overall responsibility, but also the three Service component commanders under LANTCOM , plus CJTF-122 and the three Service Task Forces under CJTF-122,.the JCS, she Services, the Service commands directly affected (CONARC, COMTAC, CINCSTRIKE), the subordinate tactical units that were to carry out the operation, and finally, the combat support and logistic organizations.
The complexity of all the planning coordination that this involved was further complicated by a changing ""enemy situation.
One of the specific immediate prc'olems posed by the improving Cuban capability was defense of the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo.
There was mounting concern over the potentially Inviting vulnerability of the Base in relation to growing Cuban ground strength.
CINCLANT responded on 26 September 1962 with a request for the 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade (one regimental landing team, one air group, and associated amphibious assault lift), then assigned to CINCPAC and stationed on the Meat Coaat, to be made available to LANTCOM for the required Guantanamo reinforcement.
As an alternative, if this were not possible, he proposed using STRICCM forces {two airlifted . airborne battle groups) that were scheduled for another mission in OPLAN 31V316* CINCLANT cautioned, however, that the ubq of STRICOM or LANTCOM forces for such augmentation of Guantanamo defenses would be at the expense of subsequent Cuban contingency operations as then planned.
On 8 October, when JCS forwarded to CINCLANT a Secretary of Defense request for readiness requirementso meet Cubsr onntingencies.
In addition, he requested withdrawal Qf the PHIBRON and Battalion Landing Team then deh ployea in the Mediterranean.
TOP SECRET 5a biubsec ro * I^CKKT make the 5th KEB available to CIHC3LAMT, despite the fact that this would seriously degrade certain of PACFTjT's capabilities, hut recommended against any redeployment of these forces until actually needed, 1 CINCEUR and CINCNELM, however, both recommended against withdrawal of the requested forces then deployed in the Mediterranean, since their presence was crucial to executing CINCEUR and CINCNELM contingency plane.
The JCS took the issue under formal consideration, generating a ""JCS Green"" on it on 12 October.
West Coast to the Caribbean area but that the PHTBRON and BLT in the Mediterranean should not be withdrawn.
They were in the process of so recommending to the Secretary of Defense when the whole matter was overtaken by the event of the Cuban crisis, itself , and the original planning proposal calling for reinforcement of Guantanamo defenses became c requirement of immediate operational urgency.
Through September, reflecting a growing awareness of the extent of the Soviet -sponsored ouild-up in Cuba, there were other reactions affecting contingency planning.
TOPJfTORKT TOF SF CPF 11 and advised him to bake measures bo insure that nis contingency plans and capabilitleG keep pace with the changing enemy situation.
On 19 September, CINCLANT apprised the Chairman of the actions he had directed to be taken in the light of increased Cuban defensive capabilities.
CJTF-122, CG XVIII Airborne Corps, Commander Amphibious Forces Atlantic {COMPHIBMNT), CG Fleet Marine Forces Atlantic , and Commander 19th Air Force were instructed to review Tor adeouaey the ""complete family"" of plans for Cuba.
They were al30 requested to consider the possibility of requirements to conduct other operations corollary to those provided for in existing plans, such as deception and electronic or unconventional warfare, which might contribute to accomplishing their respective combat missions.
TOP SECRET A"" on the matter was referred by the Secretary of Defense to the JCS, and on 1 October 1962, the Chairman, JCS, submitted a \ draft response to the Secretary based in large part on CIHC)1 \ 1 ' LANT'B earlier comments, the substance of which was forwarded to the President on 4 October.
The Council was particularly apprehensive about the possibility of a Soviet MRBH or suDmarine atomic capability being established in Cuba.
In the present circumstances and prospects, it saw only two courses of action for the United States • invasion or blockade.
Although the tenor of their position was In favor of Invasion, they pointed out tnat a blockade, if continued long enough, would starve out Cuba and forestall further Soviet delivery of arms of all types.
These references, however, hardly constituted a detailed plan for a blockade operation as such.
The resultirg olockade plans, however, proved inapplicable during the crisis.
JBy the end of September, the spate of contingency operations plans under development was beginning to become both confusing and unmanageable.
Their number 8nd variety hsd grown somewhat unsystematicallyj with no assurance of comprehensiveness.
Moreover, circumstances and objectives had changed from the relatively simple, clear-out purposes that had initially motivated the contingency planning.
On 1 October, at a meeting of the Secretary of Defense with the JCS, the question was raised as to the kinds of contingencies under which military operations against Cuba might be necessary.
Attack against the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo, or against United States planes or shipping outside Cuban territorial watarB or airspace.
A ""substantial popular uprising"" in Cuba against the Castro regime in which United States aid is requested by insurgent leaders.
A Presidential decision that the Cuban situation has ''reached a poin£_inconsa.stent with continuing United States national securx-cy -3J ; He requested JCS views on the appropriateness anil completeness |_of -this list.
The military operational plans considered suitable for each contingency listed above.
In the course of the discussions, the conference considered, besides readiness -posture itself, most of the other points raised by the Secretary of Defense.
The basic JCS paner, staffed by J-3, was dated Ik October and received tentative JCS approval on 15 October.
There was no final approval in the form of a ""red band"" decision-on, nor was the draft memorandum contained in Jts enclosure forwarded, inasmuch as by thi3 time the entire matter was being overtaken by events, its substance, however, was conveyed Informally to the Secretary of Defense in various conferences, oriefings, and consultations immediately attending tne first reactions to the crisis.
There was no mention of the 4-day and 2-day raaction times that the Secretary had demanded earlier.
Some preparatory measures, it was pointed out, had been taken by the Services to improvp readiness posture.
Among these were prepositioning of POL, ammunition, and other expendables by the Navy and Axr Force at bases in southeastern U.S., preloading of supplies In amphibious shipping by the Navy and Marine Corps, and positioning of accompanying supplies and equipment for Army assault forces at or near home stations by the Army.
Constraints upon further reduction of reacxion tlm?. the JCS pointed ou^, vers primarily those imposed by budgeting considerations.
Significant reductions in reaction time could op effected by talcing pertain other preparatory measures to improve readiness, if a raise in budget ceilings permitted.
If the United States imposed a blockade on Cuba, it would have little airect military ""effect on United States posture in Berlin or Southeast Asia, but would have major international political ramifications, ""aa it constitutes an act of war, "" and would thus result in increased DEFCON status of United States forces worldwide.
Adequate airlift uo Europe and Southeast Asia uould not be available for an estimated 8 days, beginning with D-5.
Airlift vfibhin EUCOM, PACOM, and CAHIBCOM would bs ""severely restricted"" if C.-130 aircraft were withdrawn to CONUS, as presently envisaged, instead of calling up Air Fores Reserve C-119 aiz-oraffc.
Thirty percent cf cargo ""shipping and seventy percent of passenger shiop ng in tlr>e Aula-cle presently under United States control »ould be required for a reriod of 30 days.
In it there ^ <_> ^was no indication that United States military action addressed to Cuba might be expected to raise central strategio issues with the USSR aa one of the principals.
There was also the CJTF-122 contingency plan for sea and air blockade of Cuba.
Besides these contingency plans, other existing plans that later proved to have intimate operational relevance to the crisia were the standing general war plans, such as those of CONAD for the defense of the United States mainland and the SIOP/I 188.
However, the means directly employed to articulate the military issues, to achieve the military objectives and ultimately to resolve the military crisis were manifestly political -diplomatic measures.
SECRET TOP JF Ci TOP S5QKCT W /;' /""role of military action itself i/as always imminent Jjut remained latent, and the task of maintaining the required delicate balance between the two devolved largely upon contingency planning.
The precrisia contingency planning had begun, some 18 months before the crisis, with a crisply defined., single focus.
It had been expressly initiated as a reaction to a specific event — the ignominious Bay of PigB fiasco.
The original purpose was to devise a straightforward military operation plan to accomplish the explicit military objective of invading and subduing Cuba by United States forces.
Gradually, as technical military considerations and policy desiderata injected qualifying ramifications, the planning became more complicated.
The trend toward complexity increased with time and the original sharp focus progressively gave way to a multipleperspective approach.
New planning requirements tended tc be cumulative. l91-(£ major bifurcation xn tne planning had occurred a year before the crisis.
It was the result of dissatisfaction at the national deoision-making level with the speed of reactior being provided for to implement the invasion plan.
As a consequence, eventually four categories of invasion planning, each oriented to its respective reaction time, vere simultaneously und3rv;ay.
TOP SSCK5T LJ^-jThe second j and more important, bifurcation in the. cona / 3 tlngency planning occurred six months before the crisis as a result of the lntroducbion of a new planning requirement for a different kind of contingency operation.
It too reflected dissatisfaction on the national decision-making level with the best reaction times 'that military invasion planning had been able to achieve.
In order to bring military force to bear more rapidly than in the form of invasion, planning was undertaken for large-scale air-strike operations against Cuba.
It presumed a localized off-shore incident In which ""police-action"" measures would be brought to oear against a malefactor, in order to eliminate the source of provocation and ressors oraer to the Carlboean community.
It further presupposed the tactis> -' cal initiative to be a United States prerogative.
Not until the very eve of the crisis was the possibility / raised, in explicit terms, that the nature and circumstances | of a Cuban contingency could be quite different from what had been assumed.
This did not j however, bring about a fundamental reappraisal of planning requirements.
Certainly the existing contingency plans themselves v«ere not materially affected.
Lccal operations addressed to Cuba were still viewed as comprehending the main military aspects of a Cuban contingency, with the Soviet factor peripheral or incidental J 197.
The orime-mo\er force that initiated planning actions or subsequently redirected their course was outside the military establishment.
The JCS relayed requirements and instructions received from the Secretary of Defense to CINCLANT, who In turn usually referred them to his appropriate Service component commander concerned.
Since the Army and Air Force component commands of LANTCOM had not been activated and staffed as such, responsibility for conducting the planning devolved upon them in their other command capacities, namely as CGUSCOHARC and COMTAC respectively.
In praotioe, thus, the JCS, and to some extent CINCLANT as well, had a largely passive, intermediary role as agents between the planning principals who originated and responded to planning requirements, The participation of the JCS was essentially post facto and confined to either delegation of planning tasks or autnorxzation of tha way the planning tasks were fulfilled^/ 199.
The basic plans, alternate versions of them, and their organic components were in various stages of development.
Some had been completed and formally adopted; others were pending, awaiting review and approval; and still others were only outlines of p±ans, or even mere proposed concepts that had yet to be accepted.
A few had haidly gotten ceyond the articulation of a planning requirement, then were not heard of again.
Among these different planning elements, there sometimes was Inconsistency, and occasionally contradiction.
Its processes, rather than consistently following regular patterns of dependent interaotions> were variable and unpredictable, with the key determinants impingeing at random from outside.
The formulation of United States policy in response to the Soviet stratagem in Cuba was a unique process, marked both by informality and effectiveness.
White House purview, with the president taking part in every step of the process from which the policy finally emerged, mils Executive decision-making process was almost textbook in its quality, and accordingly, the events of the critical week have received a phenomenal degree of public attention.
While no actual White House records have been made available, either to the public or to this study, enough Information has become public for an accurate picture to be drawn.
I planning and intalllgsnce operations covering the military j, / buildup proceeded on parallel but essentially distinct pasns.
K l Without doubt, the resultB of the latter Influenced the farmer, the growth of Cuban capability, for example , obviously bore a direct relationship ta contemplated United States force requirements In the plans.
Eie plans were based upon a U.S.-C.ioan clash but the Intelligence operations snowed a cortlnuing and increasing Soviet Involvement.
T^is fact cha^gsd the perspective of United States military action against Cuba, since it brought Into the picture new and incalculable factors of significance going far beyond the Caribbean,/]/ f{ 203.
However, there had been a marlced di3lnclination to believe the Soviets would be so rash as to base offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba.
JACKET Wu /indications to this effect, or even aeriousiy entertained the it"", possibility in their interpretation or Cuban military developft manta.
On the contrary, the Special National Intelligence Estimate of 19 September 19^2, which expressly addressed itBelf to the military buildup in Cuba, was actually misleading.
The burden of the conclusions contained in the Estimate were that the USSR's interest in Cuba was ""primarily for the political advantages,"" that the military buildup was for purposes of Cuban defence, and that the Soviets were unlikely to introduce strategic offensive weapons systems into Cuba — especially discounted was thef probability or Soviet deployment of nucleararmed missiles.
Undoubtedly as the crisis approached there were other, tenuous indications received which, because of their sensitivity, were extremely closely held and not reported in the circulated intelligence publications; but apparently these did not materially alter United States expectations, certainly not enough to trigger a fundamental reappraisal in time.
Consequently, when the event was suddenly recognised as having already occurred, it A b""' came as a surprise and a response had to be concriiad o-ia V **,. ad hoc basis.
A choice had to be made between the direct pur^ , N suit of the courses of action embodied in the contingency i v ^ plans and some other less final course which toolc Into account .y ■S' the Soviet presence in Cuba.
Baaed on a systematic analysis of the pertinent NIEs and SHIEs •' ' issued In the aix months prior to the crisis, all the CIA J Current Intelligence Weekly Summaries for the period Seotember.
Although intelligence information on the Soviet . ' buildup had begun to increase markedly in early summer, it was not until October 1 that routine peripheral photo reconnaissance missions around Cuoa .fere begun.
In addition high-altitude U-2 flights over Cuba were also floim, and it was by this P"" -, /205.
The U-2 photographs taken on October 1* were not avail[ / able until late on the 15th, although CIA officials and others in the intelligence community had apparently been alerted to the tentative nature of the findings by about noon of that day.
Ordering increased surveillance of the wnole island , the President organized a group of key advisors who would finally be the ones to thra^n out a United States response.
The body of advisors was eventually narrowed to a group of eight ivho later iiere constituted into an Executive Co-nmitcee of the MSC 1962, TOP ^Geographical discrepancies in time have been reconciled on the basis of greatest significance from the Joint Staff OH-ICC point of view.
All ti^es given in the text, except where indicated otherwise, have been converted to a common equivalent corresponding to tne pre', ailing local tiitie in Washington, v/hereaB time references in footnote citations r stain the original Greenwich Mean Time constant designated in terms of 2 time.
Hecause of ' uayli^nt saving time"" being in effect during part of tne crisis period, two time c'ifferanuials between local Washington time and 2 time must be taken into account; Eastern Daylight Saving Time,e., Q-tlme, Jhicn terminates at uo002, 2d October iy62, is 2-^ime ninus four hoursj Eastern Standard Time,e., R-tirae, to ;hich local Washington time reverted as of 06CCZ that date, is 2time minus five hours.
Official publication based on information provided by the Wnifce House P^eas Office, DoD Office of Public Affairs, and the State Department Bureau of Public Affairs.
TOP SECRET C0CTIJTOT1AL tout these constantly drew on the counsel and support of a wider group.
In total numbers, those who were informed of the critical situation were very few.
The key element in the situation appeared to be the urgent nature of the clandestine Soviet move.
The decision to station Soviet strategic forces outside the Soviet Union for the first time was a deliberately provocative gesture, an attempt to overturn swiftly and by surprise the existing nuclear status quo.
It was felt that the Soviet move was undoubtedly tied to larger objectives than Cuba per se.
It was all too clear that a sudden dramatic Soviet revelation of an operational capability in Cuba, coupled rfith a renewed effort to change the Berlin situation, would put the United States at a grave disadvantage.
Arrant defiance of America with impunity would seriously underline confidence in the United States among frienda and Miles, while the missiles themselves soald go far toward redressing the strategic equation in favor af the Soviets.
On September 11, the Sovieta puolicly stated tha* the armaments sent to Cuba were defensive only and that there was no need for the USSR to base Its offensive forces 2 overseas.
Again, during the critical week of decision making itself, Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko personally assured the President, during their meeting on October IS, that Soviet assistance to Cuba ""pursued solely the purpose Chronology of the Cuban Crisis, op. clt., page 2.
He said he had been explicitly instructed to make this clear once again, that the training by Soviet specialists of Cuoan nationals in handling defensive weapons was ""by no means offensive"" and that ""the Soviet Government would never be209.
Some confusion over objectives became evident at the first meeting of the Executive Committee.
Some members thought the prime aim should be bo get rid of the offensive weapons; others considered it necessary to remove the Castro regime . 210i The courses of action open to the President ran the gamut from passive acceptance of the Soviet coup to iti""asion of Cuba without warning.
Intermediate steps possible included, in ascending order of forcefulness, a major effort of protest through the U.N., a blockade coupled with a demand for the removal of the offensive weapons, and a surprise aii' strike against these weapons , Combinations were possible , such as an ultimatum to be followed by invasion, or an air strike to destroy the offensive weapons accompanied oy a blockade to prevent the introduction of further weapons.
For purposes of propaganda, tney could claim che offensive weapons were there only as pert of the defense of Cuoa.
CONFIQjgflTIAL COHFIjgPTlAii 212. surprise invasion was soon ruled out for two reasons.
In the first place, the effect might be so startling as to provoke the Soviets into an almost automatic reflex countermove in ■which lay the grave possibility of escalation to general war.
It was apparent that a decision would have to be reached and a course of action implemented within a few days, since the Soviet missiles would very soon oe fully operational.
If this occurred before the United States action had been launched, our move would become a countermove, all the advantages of catching the Soviets by surprise would be lost, and the Soviets would be compelled to more Btrongly defend their position in Cuba, especially if its presence had previously been announced to the world.
In vie* of the lengtn of time necessary to prepare an invasion and the scale of the operations involved, surprise would almost certainly be lost.
By Thursday, October 18, discussions in the Executive Committee began to center on the use of a naval blockade.
The disadvantages of this alternative were perhaps more glaring than its advantages.
It would not per se dismantle the missile bases and remove the weapons; unfavoraole repercussions among maritime nations, especially within NATO, might be severe; it might be necessary to sink Sovist ships if the Soviets chose to challenge the blockade, the natural Soviet riposte appeared to be a counterolockade of Berlin, with all the potentialities in this; finally, a blockc.de might not take immediate effect, and hy prolonging the crisis, could permit the Soviets more uime to counteract.
The most attractive feature of the blockade, on the other hjaid, lay in the fact that it was not irrevocable.
CWIDBJKTIAL 85 COWPI^TIAL Coupled with a stern warning, and accompanied by obvious preparations for direct millfcarv aucxon against the island, blockade would still leave the Soviets the possibility of withdrawal without leaving a record of American, Cuban, and Russian dead.
The restrained nature of the United States response, once the full extent of the Soviet duplicity was revealed to the world, would be more likely to gain the political support we wished to use as pressure against the Soviets.
To be sure, if the blockade were to fail in its purpose, the Soviets would have time to develop a countermove somewhere, as well aa to get their missiles operational.
However, the U.S, vrould also have time to marshal its forces for invasion.
We would then be in a position to raise progressively the degree of pressure at will, without having initially thrown our whole hand down on the table.
The choice thus was between the competing demands of measured restr.nnfc and time.
Ey Saturday, October 20, a consensus of the Executive Committee had been reached; and that afternoon, after a detailed intelligence briefing which illustrated the rapidly advancing state of work at each missile site, the President tentatively decided that the U S course of action would be a blockade.
Ultimately called a quarantine, it would be coupled with a warning to the Soviet Union and a derand for removal of the offensive weapons.
In the event of a security broach, the possibility remained or acting sooner.
Forces would bs gathered, prepositloned and readied, but no ""executa"" date would be set for assault.
Imposition of a quarantine on Cuba to halt the further introduction of offensive equipment, the qaarantine to be extended to other types of cargo and carriers if needed.
Evacuation of dependents from Guantana.no and reinforcement of the oase.
The calling of an emergency meeting of the Security Council of theU. and the presentation of a re solvit ion demanding the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons in Cuba under United Nations supervision before the quarantine would be lifted.
A personal call upon E^e'iier Khrushchev to halt and eliminate the threat to the peace involved in the 1 Russian move -a.
In Washington the Soviet atrbaosador had been summoned to the Secretary of State's office at 1800 hours on the 22nd where he met with the Seoretary and a group of senior officials for half an hour, at «ftiioh time he also was given a copy of the statement the President was about to make.
Shortly after the President's address to the nation on October 22, the State Department sent to all Snbassies and Posts an amplification for use in dealing with local gover.iTients.
It; sketched 00 u the rationale behind tne sevenpoint, program, attempting to anticipate reactions to it , and providing ammunition to meet thoso reactions.
The message emphasized that for discussions with foreign governments the restrained nature of the V.S. program should be stressed.
Minimum force would be used to accomplish the United States objootive In the quarantine m order -o provide maximum opportunity to gat a peacef al settlement , The President's final remarks were meant to indicate that the United States was receptive to proposals fo~ s high-level neiting with the Soviets.
The objeccive of tha United States was to obtain dismantlement of the offensive facilities.
If the Soviets vetoed this resolution and did not begin to leraoce fcne weapons, che issue would be talcen to the General Assembly.
In the meantime the operational portions of the President ' s program would be pursued.
The OAS Council would be asked on the morning of October 23 to constitute itself into a consultative committee under the Rio Treaty, and the United States would then present it with a resolution embodying the President's Beven pointB for approval.
However, the message stressed that the United States looked upon the action as a use of force to meet a threat to the peace and that the legal basis for the quarantine did not depend upon OAS approval, but rather on the inherent right of • self -defense.
The United States considered the quarantine aB a sanotion appropriate within the OAS framework, 227.
The message distinguished between a quarantine and a blockade, pointing out that while the former does have some elements of the latter, the latter is usually associated witn tne conduct of war.
In this case, the quarantine was to be applied for purely defensive reasons.
The message reassured United States representatives that the United States was prepared for repercussions anywhere In the world.
To questions regarding an alleged parallelism between Cuba acid the arrangements the United States has unoer NATO for positioning IHCM'r/in Italy and Tdrlwy, United States representatives were to draw a sharp distinction, pointing out that the missiles in Italy and Turkey had been installed as a result of the decision of the NATO Council at the December 1957 meeting of the HeadB of Government in Paris.
The action was publicly announced and was taken in response to repeated Soviet threats that they had mediumand intermediate-range missiles and were ready to use them.
This warning had been supplemented by comprehensive briefings Just prior to the President's speech for all NATO, OAS, SEATOj and GFjTO mission chiefs here, as wall as for r? . tral 1 missions.
It now renained both tovait the Soviet and Cuban reactions and to prepare further measures toward gaining our objectives if the Soviets cnoee to ignore the quarantine and its associated steps.
The American action againat Cuba in October 1962 was planned and launched without any prior concert of Allied states.
The absence of consultation was a consequence both of the unique sensitivity of the circumstances and of the shortness of time available for the development and implementation of an effective American response to the Soviet thru3t.
However., once that response was prepared and launched, it became a matter of major concern to coordinate the action with Allied states, primarily in Latin America and in Europe.
There was need, in the first place, to gain political support of an action by which the United States hoped to achieve ita objective through the use of limited military force plus policlcal pressure.
If this combination were to fail, political support and sympathetic understanding would be highly useful when direct assault on Cuba was undertaken. 23h, In addition to the political motivation, there we^e military ones.
This coordination with Allied states took several forms and raisea a variety of problems for the United States national decision makers.
The intensive preparations that began in Washington fo3 7owing the positive identification of Soviet offensive missile capability in Cuba on October 15 were tightly bound by security.
So necessary was it to prevent a leak which might DOBBibly compromise the whole United States action that even the overseas Uni-Tied Commanders were not formally notified until almost the last minute.
That this increased their normal problem of coordination with Washington on the one hand and with local Allied nations on the other was fully recognized but was considered unavoidable.
This chapter will examine these in derail and the political-military measures associated with them.
Accordingly, the military coordination problems of CSCIUCEUR and OSCIIICARIB were primary.
It vfas not until 1214Z on October SO that the JCS sent a message to all Unified Commanders to the effect that the increased state of tension with respect to Cuba could lead to military action.
It promiBed to keep the Unified Commanders informed, and would dlreot a higher DEFCON aa required, noting 241.
This waa followed by a formal warning message at 1814Z on Ootofcsr 21, announcing that the President had blockade operations under consideration.
It warned that a reaction by the Cuban military forces could lead to United States air strikes and an invasion of Cuba.
These actions, if initiated, it was recognized, would probably result in uoe of force against Soviet military and civilian personnel in Cuba and would thereby directly challenge the prestige of the Soviet Union.
Under these circvmucances, the reaction of the So /lexis could not be predicted.
Therefore, it was imoerative under circumstances which could arise to present the strongest possiole deterrent to any course or Soviet military action.
The United States must unequivocally demonstrate it was ready militarily to meet and to defeat retaliatory Soviet moves at whatever level was necesoaiy.
At the same time, the message cautioned against actions in other areas wnich iraght be considered provocative or which could create civil alarm.
JDefense Condition Three was established for all United States forces at 23O0Z October 22, with USCIHCEOH being authorized to exercise his discretion in complying with this directive in the light of the requirement for nonprovocation expressed in the JCS warning message.
With the imposition of HINIJ1IZE worldwide at 23002 on the 22nd, the process of alerting was completed.
Willie formal notification of the SIHCS ca^e iUte in the week of preparation, undoubtedly some indication of a forthcoming crisis had reached all of them.
Individual Se.-vice messages and information cooles were already circulating.
Of the four overseas UnifJoS Commands"", NELM was least likely to be immediately involved in a Communist reaction, with PAC coming next.
While it was thought to be almost certain that CINGARia would be immediately called upon for support action to help suppress* rebellions against Latin American governments, the possibility of a Soviet riposte in Europe, evon if somewhat less immediate, would be infinitely more aerioua.
The military-political problems of coordination with NATO break down into thrae convenient aspects.
First viae the problem of alerting United States forces in Europe; then came informing the NATO Allies of the 'S.S. mo/es against Cuba; finally there was ths macter of NATO political and military reaction.
TOP SSCHST S5 TOP SECT ET irofuflkciaKT out that any contemplated action w'nch exacerbated East-Weat relations would likely bring increased tensions -or action in Berlin, in preparation for wnich certain preaaut-.onary measures Bhould be taken to improve the readiness posture of United States forces.
The piecemeal information received thus far, he asserted, raised questions as to Just what may be expected; for example , if sctiona elsewhere in support of Caribbean operations should require all available forces, could he expect to receive the TAC additive forces on which USAPE relied heavily to meet Berlin contingencies' He felt it was vital to the United States posture to know now if he would be expected to deal with Berlin with forces currently available.
The problems of reinforcement for Europe and the reconst<tution of a general war reserve were to continue to receive attention, altnough not part of tl-is report.
This JCS answer to USCINCEUR's message of the previous day also stated that Ambassador Finletter would seek NAC Instructions to NATO commanders with regard to an alert posture.
At 0925Z on the 22nd, USSINCSUR"" replied to the formal JCS warning message of the previcn a day, stating that nis knowledge of the Cuban situation was limited 60 the two JCS warning messages.
Thus, he felt hs had no basis for commenting on the substance of the action proposed.
He stated that if the Bltuatlon was serious enough to warrant sending Acheson over to brief the North Atlantic.
Council and to ask for a NATO alert, he should have been given before this time some information on the ""uhy"" as well as the ""what • in order to discharge properly his responsibilities which could rapidly become critical.
U3ing the two points rciaed in the JCS formal warning message, he stated that he could not comment on whether a NATO alert would be ""considered provocative"" sinca he did not know the background j but sucn action would certainly create ""civil alarm' 1 of a very high order.
TO forces to assume an alert posture weis tioo being overlooked, since he felt that unless the case for such an action were overwhelming and dramatic, opposition may be expected.
Furthermore, it Bhould be assumec that even discjssion of the subject would very shortly become public know ledge in Europe ""■ 255.
Instead , these farces were directed to take military precautionary measures in aoufJDdance with those recommended to all ACE force commanders and Ministries of Defense.
Such measures included the intensification of intelligence collection; increased security and antisabotage plans; review of alert procedures and emergency plans; the manning of operational centers at reduced strength; and checks of equipment and supplies.
No measures would De taVran which could oe considered provocative or which might disclose operational plana , and all actions would be taken as far as possible vitnout public notice.
It would appear that USCINCEUR decided to enforce a greater degree of stringency the next day, since he reported tnat he had imposed MINIMIZE on USEUCOM effective 2*n631S October.
Furthermore, effective 2^l650Z he had directed an increased state of readiness for Hq.
The Commander., United States Forces Korea, informed CINCFAC that establishment of the higher BEFCON for his command dictated that the Republic of Korea forces maintain a similar alert status.
ET TQP gEGRF m rOFJj^KET assumed a state of readiness both in Cjuia sj. and Europe,all readiness measures being closely coordinated to oe compatible with thp United States posture.
It will be recalled from the chapter en precriiis United States policy toward Cuba that until the moment when the Soviet missile bases in Cu^a were exposed, our European and Latin American Allies generally took a less than sympathetic view of American policy toward and thinking about Castro's Cuba.
In the case of Europe, it vies widely felt that Cuba had become an American obsession which blinded us to even the possibility of a long-term rapprochement with Cuoa.
In Latin America, ""Fidelismo 1 apparently attracted large segments 01"" the population.
Net merely wa3 Cooa. 3upwoi*t3d by Leftist groups, hue without douot lingering enirrositiea toward the United States uere anarpened by Castro's successful defiance of American hostility.
There had been some change in Latin America during the previous year as Castro openly embraced Communism ard the Soviet Union.
Nevertheless, it was difficult to-'uge the real measure of support Ciscro cju1'2 muster in Latin America.
These were sent in code to the United States Embassies of the respective countries for delivery the next day.
Altogether individual letters were sent by the President to forty-three Heads of Government, many of 1 these being outside the NATO arsa.
Burj.na che day or the 22nd, Priuje Minister Macmillan was personally briered by United States Ambassador Bruce, President dd Gaulle by hr.
It was later repeatedly reported on good authority in the press that the President had also personally phoned these three leaders.
Houever, no confirmation of this has been found in the available records.
As previously nsntioned, Mr Acheson fleir to Paris to brief the North Atlantic Council two hours before the President's address to the nation.
At 1315 EST, tne ambassadors of forty odd nations in NATO, CENTO, SSATO and a number of Chronology of the Cu'oan Crisis j drawn from DOD, State Department, and lliite House material.
At the end of the briefing the ambassadors watched the President's address on a giant television screen.
Following the President's addrcBs, a briefing was given to ambassadors of all other countries.
Briefings continued through the week., and J-3 was directed to give daily briefings to the NATO Standing Group.
The Director of Operations of J-J had earlier been directed to provide daily briefings for the Chairman of the Canadian Joint Staff in Washington.
A comment may be made here regarding United States policy in the U.K. during the crisis.
The United States made full use of the United Nations as a public forum in which to maximize the e:, oarrassment and confusion of the Russians, at the same time indicating the reasonableness of the United States actions.
As a oody, NATO lined up solidly behind the United States position, but this was not done at a uniform pace by the individual states.
However, the matter of force alerts in Europe was a somewhat different matter from politioal support of the American position.
The general official attitude prevailing may well have been expressed by President de Gaulle for moat of the rest of NATO, /information from the British Embassy In Paris reported a discussion between the British Ambassador with the French President in which de Gaulle said he would follow the British lead in sending Instructions to the French U.N, delegation to support the United States resolution.
President de Gaulle was reported to have said that as long as the situation concerned only Cuba, he was '.'illing to follow American iritiacivac in the matter, but that should the area of action expand, he would insist upon tripartite consultation r 276.
On October 23rd, the British government declared its support of the American position.
Prime Minister Macmillan, addressing Commons on the 24th, again supported t-he United States pcsit-ion in its objectivps, but did not specifically endorse the United States quarantine.
TOP « t TO P SECRET w ^ Netherlands, and Italian governments endorsed theUnited States stand that day, but Prance remained ""officially silent,"" presumably because of the lack of prior conaultation.
However, despite governmental approval, the United States move was generally ooolly received at best in the European press.
Minor ant 1 -American demonstrations occurred on both sides of the Iron Curtain, specifically on the NATO side, in London.
The publication of the official United States photographs of the Soviet missile sites on the 24th, however, brought an almost abrupt change in European public opinion, swinging it around to a much more sympathetic position.
It would appear that while SACEUR had estaolished certain precautionary steps for the NATO forces under his command instead of DEFCON 3, each nation responded in its own way and according to its own appreciation of the situation when it came to national forces not under SHAPE control.
It was reported that British forces were alerted, but this By midnight of the 24th, -■•New YorK Times, October 25, 1962.
Apparently, the military chiefs in all thece Btates Mere from the beginning enthusiastically in support of the United States action, but were unable to raise alert levels until directed by the political authorities.
Neitl.sr these authorities nor, for that matter, SACEUR, felt the need to do bo.
This may have been largely a matter of outlook, of difference in perspective when viewing the Cuban crisis from Europe instead of the United States There was alao very likely a marked reluctance to do anything which might aid in provoking or providing an excuse for a Soviet riposte in Europe.
In the actual implementation of the quarantine, Allied corporation was soon achieved.
The British on the 24th asued thel.-ahlpowners to cooperate and to permit United States search parties aboard their vessels.
However, some confusion and unspoken disagreement did arise in the never fully developed American effort to establish an air quarantine to match the sea effort.
TOP SECRET -ji< SflRiST 71W ISJpiWir £ TOP SK nr >ZS v l/obligations under International C.S.Y11 Airlines Organization with \ the desire nob to run counter to United States objectives ,n 283.
Uhile the United States desire for Latin American support in the Cuban quarantine Was essentially political in nature, there were positive military advantages which might flow from suen support.
The steps followed in preparation for Latin American coordination resembled those taken in Europe.
On the 20th., the United States Information Agency prepared to go on a twenty-four-hour a day schedule of transmission in Spanish.
On the same day the Department of State sent ""preposition messages ' to all Latin American posts, QUbject to the 'go 1 ' signal on the 22nd, indicating the course of action to be followed.
These messages alerted the United States posts to the possibility of outbreaks, and procedures were to be initiated for the protection of trie Embassy or Consulate , its classified contents, and its personnel.
On the 22nd, nine radio stations were requested oy the '/hibe House to broadcast the President's speech in Spanish to Latin America.
At 1500 the OAS reconvened and by 164$ EST, by a 19 to vote, it had adopted the United States -sponsored resolution backing the quarantine and urging iai mediate removal of the Soviet missiles.
American policy toward the Latin American states may be viewed as a twonsrt operation suwviriaed ir the two words 'protection' arrt ""contribution.
However, we could not elicit contributions unless we could be sure those governments would be able to maintain themselves.
That CIWGAHIB be instructed to prepare lists of control measures, riot control equipment, etc., needed by Latin American states in the event of United States action against Cuba.
That it be determined which Latin American states could assist in a blockade through the OAS or by other means.
He wished to know whic\ states rad naval resources to assist us, which one3 we coulu count on, and how we could approach them 293.
The JCS, m Its reply the next day, said that it felt that non-Coi/imunisfc opposition elenonts would oe disturbed, out not zo the point of violent disturbance either against the United States or their own governments.
The Communists could be expected to exploit the United States action, and would fomenb a wave of violence and terrorist* both to distract the United States and to preventieir own governments from supporting, the United States TOE SECRET rw Jt£tVR>\V L TOP SECRET 295.
In the matter of specific internal reactions, It was felt that the moat serious disorder would occur in Brazil and Bolivia., with lesser trouble in Ecuador and Guatemala and a strong, potential for trouble in Venezuela and Colombia.
Finally, in the matter of expected assistance, it was felt that only Colombia, Venezuela, and the Dominican Republic were likely to be willing fco participate, for a maximum total of eight destroyers and ten frigates.
The JCS on the 21st sent CINCARIB a message encompassing much the same sort of questions as had been raised fcy the Gilpatric letter.
CINCARIB was told that m the event of direct action against Cupa, violent Communist reactions might occur and requests for United States aid Must be anticioated.
As to his own capabilities, CINCARIB replied that he could provide the ^oint task force headquarters and the airborne companies for the two TaBk Force Alphas, hut he could provide airlift for only one TF Alpha.
CINCARIB had one brigade of two tailored ""battle groups"" as his Canal Zone combat force, something under 2000 men.
With only six C-130 aircraft aa airlift, his task in the face of more ^han one call for help was overwhelming.
Apparently the last exchange with CINCARIB raised such concern in the JC3 that % steps were immediately oegun to reinforce him.
In view of the residual force capabilities available to STRICOM after OPLAN 312/316 requirements were covered, the two CINCs were requested to design an austere augmentation force requirement.
ThiB, then, vraa the United States concept for the most extreme form of coordination with Latin .^-urica.
Agreement was promptly reachad on increasing CINCAHIB' q capability to csvvy it out and approved by the JCS on November 12.
The augmentation became CIMCSTRIKE OPLAN 2-c, but waa never earned ouc, 307.
Despite the unexpectedly mild Communist reaction in Latin America, the fear of further trouble was slo""/ in dying.
On October 31, the j-3 Cuba 5PTREP reported that Communist activities in many Latin American states had increased, possicly in response to Cuban directive, and that government plane were undor'/ay in all twenty countries} to 2 counteract the threat.
However , by November 4th, the J-3 SXTREP was reporting that the current major Tear was of widespread sabotage only, the Soviet retreat appa->er>tly ha/xng thrown local Communist parties into such confusion that overt action waa no longer possible.
The subject was raised by JCS when it adviaed CINCARIB that if a blockade of Cuba were ordered without offensive action against the Cuban Air Force, the possibility existed of air attacks against Ramey APB, Roosevelt Roads NS, and the Panama Canal.
His recommendations for augmentation of the air defenses of the Canal were reuuested.
IB'3 air oefeise requiresr.ss \,are •ir'.s.r review, considering, the estimated threat to the C;nal and tne resources availaole ';hen welded against worldwide rssponsibilities.
When requests for United States aid actually csme to pass, it was for arw3 and not troops, and the requests themselves ware nowhere near as great or widespread as had been expected.
CINCARIB reported on the 24th that the first recipients were the Dominican Republic, Bolivia, and Chile, commercing that requests received to date, with the exception cf that from the Dominican Republic, appeared excessive.
Ke asked too for immediate replenishment of uhs CARZBCO'4 stock of similar ifcoma — gas grenadaa, shoc2 tuns, ammunition, radio equipment, 313.
Theiaafter the action along this line vras confined to arms deliveries to CINCARIB for transmission to Bolivia, Chile, Venezuela, HI Salvador and Colombia during tho next week.
With the obvious decline in the likelihood cf trouble after November 1st or thereabouts, requests for luct ccntro_ equlpmert ceased.
Furc^rmore, additional supplies cf riot control cqv. pnant wjr>9 flown to ,' JH3C0M on the 26th to augment ths stockpile and further augmentations were prepared during the next few days.
CIMCARIS's connection with, actiol qu^iantins oparebions came about through a curious epiaode involving the legal status of the Panama Canal.
The incident illustrated the type of unforeseen international complication which can arise in a contingency operation.
The issue apparently had been raised as early as October 19 in Navy circles, the Havy Flag Plot log recording that the question of an arms ship attending to paoa through the Canal had been sent to Op 60 for comment on the legal aspects.
The subject was next raised by CINCLilNT on the 22nd, recommending to the JOS that toe Blockade of Cuba Plan be amended to charge CINCARIB with the prevention of the passage through the 'Cars] of erips carrying p-chibited raato^laL destined for Cuba.
The issue had obviously been overlooked in the urgency of planning during that veek and, in the absence of an immediate alternative, the JCS ordered CINCAflIB to hold all action on the matter of Canal transit until lurther advised.
It would appear that CIHCLANT's original suggestion had not been aleared with the Department of State, despite its obviously political content.
We JCS had missed its significance, and it had not been caught by the POLAD at CINCLAHT, although this is precisely the reason why P'jLADs are assigned to Unified Commsrd headquarters * i 318.
The Department of the Army notified the Governor of the Canal Zone that CINC-'RIBould be instructed only to notify mascers of desig'rtaTJed Caba-oound vessels that their snips would be subject to quarantine action after passage of the Canal.
It was spscirically desired not to use U,S. control of the Canal for quarantine purposes.
The creation of an international precedent could oe a future source of difficulty elsewhere in the worlcij and the uneasy r-3. 1 at-ionshlp with Po-ta-na furthera:.act>rbeted.
However, theso co, siaerationa v;sre net to prevent a thorough inspection of any vessel if there were reason nc suspect it3 passage threatened the security al the Canal.
TOP SECRET » pfrWRtiT TOP gg HFTP ^^ Defense acreement of May 1957) were to be continjed.
If more stringent security measures were desired, the agreement provided for delay of a Bloc vessel pending Secretary of the Army-DoD-Department of State action on the recommendations of the Governor and CINCARI3.
The government of Panama could be Informed by the Governor that more extensive inspeceion would be made of transiting ships on an individual bas-'a, but that passage would not be denied any ship conforming to security regulations""^ _3_21.
Results of inspections ivsre to be forwarded to ClilCLMTS and, in the case of vessels carrying prohibited mate rials, CIHCARIB '..as to subject uhs shi t > to air surveillanafe upon departing the Canal Zone until it passed beyond the range of surveillance or until CIJ7CLANT accepted responsibility J\ The operational asoecus of this whole episode are treated in more detail in the ciapcer on the Naval Quarantine.
While United States quarantine ooerations were oasea upon the expectation that United States forces only would dc the job., as they also would in the further event of DPLANS 3i2-3l£|oe""ing implemented, it was nevertheless consicered very desirable -o gain some active Latin American support.
The United States therefore went to considerable effort to gain active Latin American support on two fronts, the use of facilities and the actual contrloution of forces to the quarantine operations.
In fact, a problem soon arose in the handling and exploiting of these offers.
State informed CINCARIB and CIMCLANT that it had already told DoD that offers of assistance received from the four governments in question were of such a character that specific dacailed kinds of requirements could be taken up tnrough military channels, Ambassadors oeing kept informed.
Tbis same guidance was to be valid if similar rights were sousht elsewhere in the Canboean — Guatemala, El Salvador, Panama.
Some of Vhe ofl3""a c "" por"";id airfield facility use uere not restricted to quarantine use.
Four Latin American countries officially offered forces for the quarantine and three of then actually deployed unit3.
The destroyers would oe ready for sea m thraa days and the subr.anns sooner.
However, at United States suggestion, the submarine and marine battalion were put on a standby ""oasis only.
Message CCMSOLANT to CINCLANTFLT, 020520Z, October 1962, SECRET TOP SECRET 124J Ttfp ft 235.
The Venezuelan Navy on October 25 offered four descroyors, available on four-hour baal3., and a sub~.arine, with 2 other destroyers available but of dubious value.
TheS. accepted cwo destroyers and recommended that the submarine be employed in giving COMSOLAOT forces ASW training rather than in quarantine operations.
The ships were to be ready for sea ->ci liovcmber 2, out nad already reported to C0MS0LAJ1T on October 30 for planning purposes.
UH&e Venezuelan destroyers arri/ed at Trinidad on the 9th and.th of November and commerced their patrol duties on the 12th.
This represented an ambitious program and the United States Military Group in Santo Domingo recognized the problems inherent in it.
The ships both had defective evaporators which needed replacement before the ships could become part of regular United States patroltype operations.
It al30 was unlikely that paftroJ could be maintained more than two ;.eeks because of ship condition and lack of fuel.
In order to secure Dominican friendship and to raise the prespige of the Dominican Navy, these United States representatives even suggested the United States lend the Dominican Reuucllc three ope-hundrt. -foot Coast Guard type vessels for 1 purposes of quarantine participation.
However, instead, the United States offered to supply pares and fuel,' 3^1.
The Do-nniccn ships put irfco San Juan, Puerto Rico, for repair of thai.evaporators and vrere ready for sea by i'ovaaaer li.
The greatest of the Caribbean states, Mexico , declined to send forces to the quarantine operation, but reaffirmed complete coaperanion with United States efforts, closing her porta to Cuban traffic and setting a ten-ahlp surveillance patrol in the Yucatan Channel.
Apparently the measure of success that the United States actually achieved in getting Latin American cooperation led to even more expansive hopes.
Early in the crisis the concept developed of using Latin American forces in OPLAN 316.
This represented such an unlikely possibility that i""c would be useful to know ho.r it got started.
Thtse were that L^tin American army forces *culd not be committed in the initial orase of 31S but in subsequent phases, that tne siagirg of treoe fcroes ,vould oe through AKTCOM; that these forces would need assistance in Message from CIMCLANT to COMSOLANT, IO2338Z, Movemcer 196& C&NFIDENTIAI,.-} LJ^T TM W<CRttV ^ / the matter of equipment prAor to c^Tiitmenof U S troops.
However, nothing further developed before the ending of the quarantine.
Ihe^e concern the n&ya in whici trie U.S coordinated its policj; decisions with its allies on tr.s one h:-.d., and iich it& pertinent overseas unified cor uanders en tne other.
J TOP w— involved our persuasion of the Ailx-ss to Join with ua in maximizing the deterrent posture wo presented to the Soviet Union, thus reducing the likelihood of a potentially dangerous Soviet riposte.
The expression ""Soviet Union"" should really be broadened to that of ""Communists"" generally, since our hope, if not expectation, in Latin America was that by an apparent readiness to assist Latin American Governments in supressing uprisings, the instigators of such uprisings might be deterred from starting them.
Ey presenting a common posture of readiness, it was felt that there would ba a much greater chance of keeping the Cuban situation local.
It remains true, nevertheless, that the inability of the Soviets to make a direct riposte in Latir America meant that Europe remained the key area in the deterrent role.
Previous attitudes toward U.S Cuoan policy ran from quite cool in mo3t of Europe to enthusiastic in parts of Lai. in America.
The nature of the policy which emerged was restrs.ir.ed and offered the Soviets and Cubans a way out In view o** the evidence the United States presented, it became difficult to take exception to the United States policy.
Furthermore, while public opinion varied In regard to the United States move, Allied Governments all declared thoir official support.
Coverr-.pnts fully believad in the U S position or bocaus3 they feared the consequences of appearing disunited at s posrioiy critics 1 moment.
It would appear tnat thxa was basically a matter of differing threat perception.
Since USJZ.CEUR 7 LiH^r r rw smzw.t l> /himself apoarently did not canine a So/ret riposte in Europe as lifcely, it was hardly to oe exoected thet the NATO countries would.
In summary, the United States achieved the political support it wished from Europe, out there waa really no united action.
America, we achieved poL_tical support and a good deal of military support.
As to the 33cond focal point of this oapter, tr.a zc?-. nation with United States overseas Unified Commands, this :as primari. a military problem, handled by the JCS, Just as ce first on lem was primarily a political one, nandled by the Vihite hcusi and the Department of State.
It was curious that this should occur, since one or the unique charac*eristics of the Cuban crisis was the fact that the United States held the initiative, unlike other crises in which the United States has found it necessary to respond to a situation in which the ' ar side provoked and in which the initiative lay with our potential enemy.
There was a week in which to coordinate an overall military-political effort Instead of hours, as in most other crises.
Nevertheless, m the end there was not much more opportunity to coordinate the national effort than in pre/ious cases.
Clonsly related to the problem of timing in the slurting of the two most concerned CJtiCn -is ""zae dilemma posed by the USSOCOHL'ATC relationship.
This queation of how one member of an Alliance wish forces committed to NATO can coordinate those forces with the rest of his national forces in meeting a local contingency sltu?'-ion oueaide the Allion/a theater .iaa nov. resolved m the Cuoan crisis.
U3CIi'IC£Un was granted discretionary power and producer _.i ad hoc solution.
This sensitivity lasted until tne very final nours before the President's address.
SPmi TOP SKCEKT 35X, The second major prob^e-i ir.--o""Lved in coordinating United States overseas Unified Commands had its roots in the inadequacy of resources.
Both in Europe and the Carlobean additive forces were felt to bs needed in order to meet potential developments.
In both cases lack of the augmentation forces would have seriously hampered contingency plans predicated upon the presumption of their presence.
C1N0ARIB was repeatedly warned to be prepared for single or multiple calls for help, yet steps to augment his force did not even reach the planning stage until the crisis was under way.
We were committed to the defense of friendly governments whose support in our policy was sought, yet the means available to do so were extremely thin.
In total., the crisis sharply demonstrated the critical interrelationship of military and political factors in national 2 1 coiCTand and control.
Political considerations aria-rig from the attitudes of Allies placed .restraints upon the military freedom of action of the United States We could to soma de&ree influence these attitudes and estimates of the situation, but we could not totally transform them.
Cn th « other hand, United States national security interests .rare considered so vitally involved that tj-s United States was willing to prepare and launch its move wirho^t informirg its Allies until the very last minute.
Thus the United States showed Ihe limit a bu folxfcj.cal t-oi.aideracions-hior military necessity car. imposs.
In snort , the United States was faced with . three possible contingency situations — Cuba, Europe, Latin America.
Thrf lot posed the possibility q2 further multiplication of individual situations.
It is highly instructive to contemplate how the United States might have responded to trouble in these areas had the attack on Cuba actually been launched. «jKT / TOj^ira&CT A QEMEHAL TATCCHN OF TH3 MILITARY MOVES 3S5.
The period of national decision making, which ran from October 15 to the 20thj was not accompanied by major military deployments.
In fact, the formal JCS warning to the CIMCS was not sent until l8l4Z on October 21.
However, as the decisionmaking week drew to its close, certain steps were put into effect.
The phasing of these was based upon urgency and the degree of danger of specific Cuban counteraction.
With the President's address to the nation on tne 22nd, all military activity became overt and weit into high gear.
By the time Premier Khru&hcnev agreed to dismantle the missile bases, early Sunday morning, October 28th, nearly all the required U.S moves had been accomplished to fulfill the several missions.
The Soviet concession brought a sharp reduction in fcensjon, but United States wilitaiy preparations continued until the very end of the crisis.
Nevertheless, the 20th repi-ssenfca a definite watershed, and ha3 therefore been chosen as the terminal point of the ""first phase"" of the crisis.
Continuing deployments thereafter are covered in a later 3eccion of this study.
They we -a constant during thi? ..se'e, but because the necessary aata were net mads available, their existence vill only be recognized.
SgO"" CT deployments undertaken to support tha President's program of action.
However, the chief naval activity, the quarantine, Is the subject of a separate chapter.
A great many other problems on lower levels of command, highly interesting and Instructive in terma of command and control, must necessarily be ignored.
The military contingencies faced in Cuban operations were limited blockade, selective air strikes, land, sea, and air defense of Guantanamo end of the southeastern portion of the United States, invasion of Cuba, and preparation for general war.
With the exception of the"" requirements for invasion, these contingencies had all been provided for by tho time the ^ovIe~ concession came about.
The military concept designed to achieve the United States objective of removal of the Soviet missiles and prevention of further introduction of such weapons was oaaed upon the establishment of a quarantine, employing United States naval forces primarily.
The degree of the Tuiiza reacti'n c-iul-i nob ba escimajeiSj so it was deemed wisest to prepare for vhe maximum danger.
Should an actual clash between United States and Cuban forces occur, eicher near the na'-al base or in the air, it was possible that the Cubans night be goaded into attempted raids ag2in3t the southeast United States with thair MIO Force and such of their IL-28's asere operational, To have attempted this early, before tnera had been any ma,)or military clash, vould seem to have been suicidal for the Cubans.
On the other hand, it was recognized that their caoabillty to do so vss greatest at the outset cthe crisis.
Thus the first two United States dcpl-jyrent-s were defensive in nature.
Si.nulbaneously with the second ofiese came the Infiltration into Florida bases of a large number of TAC airplanes in readiness for execution of OPLAH 312.
Marine forceB assigned were mostly deployed or in the process of moving to assigned assembly areas fcy the a8ch, while Army forces never did reach such a state of prsparation.
Prepara-cions for general war, both offensive and defensive, moved with speed and effectiveness on the part of SAG, GONAD, and naval strategic forces.
All strategic forces were at maximum readiness before the first phase closed.
As might be expected, most of the problems occurred early in the crlsi3.
The hectic tempo fell off fairly soon, and by the morning of the 25th the Battle Staff could report to the CJG3 that the previous twenty-four hours, and especially the last twelve, had been significant because of the ""slowdown"" of Battle Staff activity.
In all area3 thingB were reported as having V>n>IP SlE/l&EY fallen Into place and were beconi.i* routire.
Movements ' were generally on schedule as plan3 were rapidly changed into realities.
This report will examine the deployments in support of each contingency category.
The Eaae Defense Force at Guantanamo , when the crisis began, was obviously inadequate to defend a large area agaanst overwhelming odds Tor any length of t3me, especially since the base was surrounded by prepared Cuban positions.
The airfield particularly was vulnerable to fire from dominating terrain features.
Furthermore, water supply sources v,ere in Cuban hands outside the Base perimeter.
The first step vras taken by the JGS un the l8th '„hen it ordered CINCPAC to chop in place one reinforced infantry battalion fron the 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade of the 1st Marine Division (stationed at ""amp Pendleton near San Diego, California) to CINCLAKT, CINCLAOT would direct the movement to destination and nhasing of tne movements as 2 necessary.
Cn the J 9th C1NCLANT requested the Coomjandant, Karlne Corps, to nove the reinforaed Infantry battalion to Guantanamo as quickly as possible in phased tactical group arrivals at the Base.
Execution ofva basic plan would raoet liUaly cause Cuban attacks on the Eape, or, on the other hand, Cuban attacks on the Bace would be tho .occasion for executing the basic plan.
TOP SECRET HW CKET TOP , f I'OPJSKCR&'l 304, In the event of preemptive &l>strjlces against Cuba-, it was anticipated in the Plan that all or r-""c of * ne reinforcement a ;*oa"">d he deployed to the Base prior bo the commencement of operations.
CINCLANT was further directed to Zand the afloat Mirine bf-.ttalion from the Carib PHXSRON on the afternoon of the 22nd.
In both cases, warning having been received, the reaction times v;ere muci\ reduced iVom the requira'-nsnta given above.
Distribution Outside the USA ProQuest Information and Learning, The Quorum, Barnwell Road, Cambridge CB5 8SW, England iiti^o^ jjijlijii iiiijiiji iir INCHES I 1 iiihlil.il.ilih hlilililihli ffll' || T i ' l'l f l fl' i 'l' l'i 1 H 'l fl ' i ' l'Ht ' I 3 I 4 TJT ililililililil ililihlihlihlili TOP S FCPJST ground force reinforcements madet desirable fco ge -the.
PHIBHON battalion eshore at the tine of its scheduled arrival at 0800 on the morning of the 22nd, Instead of waiting until the afternoon.
This request was granted by the JCS a few hours before the b:.';talion arrived.
Evacuation of dependents and noncombatants from the Ease was ordered in accordance with plans, with embarkation Monday and sailing vrhen loaded, and the last ship bo clear Guantanamo no lauer than 1300 hours that same day.
The Commander cariobean 3ea Frontier was to provide air and surface escort for the evacuation ships and air escort for aircraft carrying out dependents until well clear of Cuba.
Evacuation ships v;ere to proceed at best speed on a track to keep as n clear of Cuba as possible.
A total of 2810 persons w&3 evacuabed aboard 3ix aircr-ft and four ships, tne last ship clearing fche Base at 1730 hours and the last aircraft half an hour late.-.-* 391.
One additional element of reinforcement to she Naval Base './as a HAWK battery from the 3rd Light Antiaircraft Missile Battalion fco improve lou-altifcude defense capabilities.
Message JCS 678O to CNO, CMC, CINCLANT, CIMCPAC, 191726Z, October 19o2, TOP SECRET. twj/i arrival there, CINCLAOT decided to send one battery on to' 1 Guantanamo V»y Marine aircraft., comirenelrs October 26.
The thought is directly contrary to the planning presumption that any attack on the Ease would provoke execution of OPLAN 3l2j as spelled out in CISCLANT's message to OIHCAPLANT and C0MANT3EFCCM on the 20tiQ 3P3.
A similar disparity appears between this CINCLANT 3 presumption and the original JCS blockade of Cuba order.
This order stated that establishment of the blockade might lead to Cuban attack on the Base or on planes and ships sneering ar leavirg.
However, a major constraint on the Base Commander and crNCLAIJT was built in by the next statement to the effect that ""only in the event that it la absolutely necessary in order to project United States lives will United States forces be authorized to accaclc the bases from which the aircraft or ships-e operating,"" The order of magnitude of these United States caouaicies v,hlch m_ghhave to be suffered before such authorisation was g-vsr was not Indicated.
This order was itself amended by the JCS on 2300092 to read""... will United States forces oe authorized by the JCS to attaclc ..„,"" thereby further tightening controlThe lack of precision in regard to operational responsibility was compounded by a further message , presumably designed to clarify the situation, from the JCS to CINCLANT on the 23rd.
However, the last mentioned message had barely been sent before the JCS again seemed to change its mind or its emphasis.
In a message three hours later the JCS told CINCLAIIT to delegate authority, previously reserved to themselves, to C0MNA7BASE OTMO to order strikes against bases from union Cuban attacks on 2 Guantanamo had been launched.
This was certainly a major extension of the Base Commander's authority, bus the authority clearly had to be lcept within the nontext of the obvious JCS intent to control United States responses, as evidenced in t-hs body of previous messages.
The full extent of the Base Commander' z authority was still not 3pellod out.
The naintenance of ultimate control in Washington was further implied by the establishment around this time of a direct communication link between tho Unite House and the Naval Base.
Above all, neither these messages nor the blockade of Cuba order specified JU3t hov, large an attack on the Bass '„ould be toleratec oerore United States forces from outside the Basa would be employed.
At any rate, total Ease personnel numbered some 5860 me^ 1 by the morning of the 25th, and the HAWK battery that arrived that day further Increased the total.
The Base remained on a tense alert during the week, but the lack of any obvious hostile movss by Cuban forces encouraged confidence.
The water supply was not tampered with nor were Cuban workers at all prevented from entering the Base.
Measures to improve the air defenses in the southeastern comer of the United States were among the first United States military actions to be taken in the crisis.
In fact, as early as October 9 the obviously worsening situation in the Caribbean had led to the da~ ployment by CIHCLANTFIffl of an F4H interceptor squadron to Key 2 We3t, where it was chopped to CINCONAD control for air defense.
However, it was not until the 17th that tne JCS directed CINCOHAD to take action immediately for the necessary augmentation of the air defenses of the soutneastern United States Cn the same day, CIHCLANTFLT alerted shore-based Navy and Marina fignfcsraquadroia bo be ready to augment CONAD forces in the air defense role in 4 that region.
He further requested a 4-battery HAWK battalion for employment at Key West NA3, suggesting that the most readily available Army or Marine unit should be considered.
The JCS promptly approved most of CINCONffD's proposals for implementation.
SAC immediately offered to provide the necessary facilities at IlcCoy and Homestead.
Within less than a day, tne JCS reversed itself on the matter of the HMJX battalion, and informed CTNCOJTAD that the Army had been ordered to expedite the readiness scatus of a HAWK battalion at Port Meade.
The move took a surprisingly long time and the HAWK battalion was not fully operational at Key West iintil the 1 night of tha 27th.
Despite the JCS-approved augmentations, doubts persisted about the air defense problem, and on the lgth the JCS asked CINCONAD's Judgment regarding the overall adequacy of the air defenses of the southeastern United States and of the whole United States in the light of the augmentation of the southeast , CINCONAD was aoked whether approval should be sought for the call-up and assignment to him of reserve foroea interceptor units , and whether these units should be drawn from the Gulf Coast area only or nationwide.
Nor did he think the deployments had appreciably affected overall COJKJS defense capability.
He also suggested that the redeployment of some regular interceptor units into A.-IG bases could be made without degrading the overall air defense posture.
Beyond that, he had no further reouesta for the imp--ove.(ient 3 of air defense measures.
TOP SECRET ilW top ssraar TO|||PkCMT 407, CBICLAOT at this point recommended another air defense measure, in response bo a JCS query of the 19th, namely, the mobilization of the Puerto Bican Air National Guard when the blockade was established.
The movement of fighters into Florida brought in 62 additional aircraft for CONAD, raising the total available to OINCONAD under the operational control of the Montgomery Air Defense Sector to 183.
Of these, 15k were based in Florida, south of a line Panama CityJacksonville.
Twenty-two aircraft were kept on a five-minute alert, 72 on a fifteen-minute alert.
Four to six were maintained on airborne alert patrol around the Florida peninsula, augmented by five mors £or the two hours before and after 3 first light.
During the President's address to the nation at 1900 EOT on the 22nd, 22 interceptors were airborne in the event of same rash act fror Cuba during or immediately following the address.
Despite the affirmation by CINCONAD on 201722Z that he nad no further requests for ths improvement of 5ir defense measures, the subject was raissd again in a telecon c/ith the JKJ late on the 20sh, as a result of3ich CINCOMAD was directed to reexamine hiG air defense plari3 for the southeast.
This tlir.e the dam oroUe, and ddCCHAD began to put forward mas3ive requests.
H-* USAF Chronology of the Cuban Crisis, prepared by USA*"" 1 Historical Division Liaison Office, TOP SECRET, Volume 1, page 15.
K ' JCS insistence upon urging CUCDKA.""* to males neu evaluations is unYeiown., and 1b doubly curious since moa'-i of his requests were from this point on not approved.
The Cuban HE threat hardly merited such activity and measures as CIHCQNAD proposed, and the JCS seem to have chough* so, too.
At the same time, the likelihood of a, Cuban nuclear attack as an opening move was Judged as extremely lov;, Ull.
In addition to the KAHK battalion already assigned hin, he asked for eight more battalions to provxde adequate high-level defense for Homestead, Patrick and MacDill Air Force B^ses, the population contiguous to Homestead and MacDill , and the population at Houston, New Orleans t Mobile, Jacksonville. ftll.^lf leas than eight battalions could be made available, CINCCNAD proposed to use whatever units were furnished to protect the three large airbases as a first priority, and to dispose any remaining missile units to provide minimal protection to the population centers.
A mininrum of three and a half battalions was considered neoersary for this reduced -scale effort. -D 4l4.
CIMCONAD further requested the 2nd Pattalion, 52nd Artillery, a NIKE -HERCULES unit currently stationed as a STRAC unit at Fort Bliss, for deploymerfc L o ths Mi^rj.Hom^s-cead area.
If less sha.i '.r.o fuJi amount could Ire furnished, he proposed using whac hs received on the 2 same priority basis as the HAWK units requested.
He proposed therefore disposing the HERCyrSS battalion and one Army HAWK battalion to protect Miami-Homestead., while the two Marine HAWK battai-ona would be deployed by batteries to cover Patricia MacDill, Houston, Hew Orleans, Mobile, and Jacksonville.
Patrick and MacDill each were to get two batteries, the other locations one eachTn 417.
Some confusion arose over the JCS order in regard to deployment, CINCPWAD understanding the JCS message, reinforced oy a celecon earlier,3 meaning both oattalions sho *d be put m tne ''ixcmi-nonestead area.
He proposed instead to place the HERCULES battalion in that area to cover rfomestead first and the contiguous population second.
The HAWK battalion would be broken up zo covtir MisuuiHomestead, Patrick, and MacDill and ita comMgacus population.
The SAM problem having been disposed of, the JJOram ' gun lsaue took over bhe role as chief pubject of cojwunication.
Presumably CINCONAD's request for twelve battalions of AAA AW was found to be grossly in excess of what could be provided.
The JCS instructed hi-n to give priority in proposed deployments to Key West and Homestead, and asked his recommendations for disposition of units 1 excess to these priority requirements.
The JCS request to CINCONAD for his estimate of AAA AW requirements had been based upon consideration of both the MIO and IL 28 threat to the southeast.
He indicated thar the MICthreat was a very marginal one in viavr of the recently taken air defense steps.
On the other hand, the IL 23 threat, botn high and low level, which would davelop as the IL 28's became operational, had not yet been fully evaluated.
Therefore, CIHCOHAD was asked to reevaluate his AAA AW priority requirements for airfield defense in view of the reduced Mia threat, and to do the came for uoDulated areas co rrset the IL 23 bhreat 'jhsn it developed.
CINCONAD, by the 28th, indicated that hi:, entims-fcad requirements nad by now risen to 14£ battalions of 4omm guns., with 8& battalions to cover Miami -Homestead, Key West, Patrick, MacDill-Tampa, and McCoy-Orlando.
The remaining six units would cover Houston, New Orleans, Mobile, and Jacksonville.
The request was quite unrealistic, since that number of active units simply didn't exist.
It would have required calling up some 9500 reserve personnel to provide these units, 2 CENCNOR4D ^ realized that the 40mm guns would have extremely limited value, and he appreciated the mobilization problem,it still felt the guns would make some contribution to the defense.
In connection with tne Dossible XL 28 threat araaist cities, the JCS on the 24th sought CJNCHORAD's (slcj^ comments on possible civil dcfanse autj.ona ir Florida.
Ho felt tlw population in the area should have the benefit of an announcement by the President or the Secretary of Defense to the effaot that the military build-up was precautionary, and by virtue of it the probability of attack via lessened.
Fa would urge the population to continae a normal life, and suggested increased news coverage be made cvailable.
Certainly no drastic steps, each 33 blackout, or CONELRAD, or evacuation were required.
Meeting this posed a much more severe sat of problems which were handled on an ad hoc basis.
Tha nub af the problem lay in fchg fact that che United States had no missile detection and tracking radar coverage for the area of the Caribbean.
To meet the possibility, no matter how remote it seemed, that the Cubans might launch missilea against the U.S., H3 U3AF was directed to place an FPS-^9 BMEWS bracking radar at Mocrastown, New Jersey, on 24-hour operation to provide some detection capability.
Their role in this trisaian. was critical and upon tieir success In eliminating Cuban missile and axr capability aid m crippling Cuban mobile forces wauld ^ psn ^ s ^ el y J ;^f the recess of the ground assault.
They were to hg-v^^^^^^W-n w:iich to do their job before the assault landingB were made.
While TAG aircraft crowded into Florida bases, they were joined by Marine attack squadrons meant to support the Marine amphibious aaaault 3.
At sBa Qw^ carrier divisions took position off Cuba to support the landings and to aid the clBfenBe or Guanfcanamo.
On the 18th, the JCS granted CZNCLAKT authority to release special intelligence planning information for use at air crevf level, thus pernitting pilot briefinge and cargsc aSBignBJJr.-'-s.
As a result or the situation in the Caribbean , CIHCAFLAHF requested CINCLANT's support m getting these for« B returned.
In short, the JCS felt the danger of concentration outweighed tn^six-hoar advantage which concentration permitted.
WQ CXMCLANT called CINCAFLANJ to relay this infornaticn, and CXt-TCAPLANT ' attitude toward the JCS suggestion was quite negates.
He pointed out that the move to forward benes had bean undertaken as e rssul"" of 3^,5 action oil <• :o evening of the SCtn.
H3 ':ncw of rsu 2t el ' 3 genco j-'ree received union would <ir prial iy c3ie ' I hi a vi bVcC vcwrnsional limited attack.
As to nuclear attack, the risk nay cave in-reaced as a result of recent additional irtfllJsanrs.
Kowevar, he did r ji, belie' ^ anyone Lnaught that tne nuclear threat before we -ttaek&H was a real ens.
If It 'jar--, he fsls v-i were erproachir^ t\ce whule Cuban coe.'ation with the wrong 3tratecy and wrong weapons.
CTNCAFLAOT's position was that any redeployment of some strike forces would seriously jeopardize hio ability to deliver a maximum strike at 1 dawn on the 23rd.
This strike timing, it should he added, was the one toward which CIHCAFLANT had been striving in readlnaBs terms ever Bince the crisis activity started . 44a.
This message temporari3j' stilled the i3rue, but only temt>')/Mrily, It was t~*uirt to recur as the crxais woelc advanced and airplanes continued to pour into the bases of the southeast.
The ls.ttev question penraa superfluous, since CINCLANT had -cwice already made known his po-sitlon on it.
In reference to the first query, he stated that in nost cases the planes would return to their home bases.
CINCLANT added parenthetically that he was taking eps to improve local dispersal at the bases.
As to the Becond query, he remained adamant in his stimate that such a move would heavily influence his ""bility to launch OPLAN 312.
Despite this firm position, the next day CIMCLAJfT reported to the JCS that he was taking several steps to reduce the concentration.
He had ordered AFLAOT to reduce the number of Air Force and Marine aircraft by 15 percent by rotation to home cta-cions or other stations.
LArTFIT had been dire^sed to relocate or.e fi&hter squadron from Key West.
Maximum local dispersal of bhe remaining aircraft a being effected, and CINCLANT did not consider that hiB adiness poatura should be further reduced by additional 1 . locations , 452.
It would appear that these proposals did not meet ifch JOS approval, they having also asked CINCCHAD's views •n CIK'CLAOT's recommendations.
Presumably the suspension was related to the Soviet concession of that morning, 453.
This exchange of messages coincided with the Soviet concession which ended the first phase of deployments.
One other item of interest may be added in connection with air strike force deployments.
Sometime on the 28th the naval carrier divisions wsz'e/bothl withdrawn from cie Booth of Cifoa after submarine locations indicated possibly 2 inc--oaspd undersea threat.
Xhe account of the assault forces role in the crisis involves Army and Marine forces.
RET ^55 • In order to understand the purposes of the assault forces' preparations in this period, it Is useful to have some comprehension of the nature of OPLAN 3l6 in Its tactical details.
Simultaneou sly a Naval Task Force would make an ashore tnoGt ofhe 2nd ^rine Division.
Other Ai-rcy forces would also land her9 through the Marine bridgehead, Marin e Deployment q 453.
As has been recounted earlier, fTwo^oattalions from LAOTCOM and{onelfrom the 5th MSB in California were larded by sea or air at Guantanamo on the 22nd and 23rd, With two BDT's In Guantanamo and one In the Medit3rranear (CIMCLAHT's suggestion that this be withdrawn for use in Cuban operations was vetoed by the JC£ as politically unwise), the 2nd Marine Division hadCslxJ'eKiainlng ETJT'a.
PACOM was the^fore called upon early to provi-le further support , 459.
Ths JCS ordered a Marine H£WK battalion ~roni Twenby-Nlne Palms, California, to Cherry Point on the 19t.i TOP S5CRBT :r n v sg/f.
RET TOP gflfajRKTT TOP SECRET ™^ for temporary deployment, part of the uni t scheduled for duty at Guantanarao.
In the meantime, CINCLANT had raised with the JCS the matter of the missing battalion from the 5th MEB, vihich had been sent to reinforce.
CINCLANT suggested the Brigade be reconstituted by the addicion of another BLT.-' Hi 3 proposal was accepted by the JCS who instructed CINCPAC to reconstitute the 3rigaae.
Tne JCS SITRSP for the next morning reports that a new battalion had already been selected.
TOP SSfR ST TOP SECRET 463. p or some reason, the JCS on the 25th modified its order to.
CINCPAC of the 25th, instructing him to load the 5th MEB aa soon as possible and to advise them of the earliest sailing date.
The Brigade of)850ojmen got under way at 271710Z in three increments; its estimated time of arrival at the 3 Canal Zone was November 5th.
It was called Landing Group East in CPLAN 316, and was to be ready to land at Guantanamo or wherever else CINCLANT determined. k6b, in the meantime Marine fo; lng.
Aa of tl-,3 nejet morning, ^;-e [mreslsLT'acrr El-sasher-a were designatPd tha h-th MSB, with [Threejmore BLT's of the 2nd Marine Division outloadlng frnm Moorehead City.
Marinas of Landing Group West were either near or en route to Cuban waters.
In addition, support units of the 2nd Harins Division and of the II Marine Expeditionary Force were being readied.
J66. probably the ma^or set of problems facing the Army arose out of efforts to improve on movement schedules so as to reduce Jjhe time of getting Army fcroes ashore in Cuba.
The operational problems derived therefrom were essentially logistical, the same farailier tale of inadequate facilities an-, .shipping.
With the changes in PLAN'S 314/316 />hich cccurrad up through the crisis itself, the Arriy's participation therein varied accordingly.
By identifying the major Army units in the troop list as it appeared In mid-crisis v/eeJc, it v/ill be simpler to follow the various Array efforts.
Tha total Army force planned for commitment a outset oi""* the crisis was therefOi-e/gg^aooTl ^71.
The air echelon vrould deploy directly from its home bases at Forts Bra&g, Campbell, and Benning.
It would stage from parts of ^mbarkstion at the> Florida air bases. l72 * Fji e surface eahelon trauld deploy from home stations except for Task Force CHARL7E and one tank battalion v/hich vrould de?:<./ from Camp Sto.fart.
TO ft* JfiKCRE,"" and Banning, as would moat < _hese units would embark frni ipploy from Stewart and Banning, as would moat of the i call reoerve.
All ZI armies had opened emergency operations centers by the S2nd and all units earmarked for OplAM 316"" were 2 ordered to return to their home stations, Aa it happened, a number of these units were engaged in exercises when the crisis began.
CINCSTRUCE reported to the CJC3 en the 20fch that Exercise THREE PAIRS had been underway at Port Hood, Texas, since October 15th, involving the 1st ard 2nd Armored Divisions, key element a in OPLAN 3l6.
He had approved withdrawal of tactical air units involved in the exorcise and their return to home base, *it,h only a minimum number of sorties arranged for exercise purposes.
Several ocher unite not b-ised at Fort Kood ware released to GIIJ^STFIKE for return to home station.
Furthermore, ha was concerned over the possible impact of cancellation on tactical surprise for OPLAN 316. if 75.
TOP SECRET _o9 _ ^0r% TOP SECRET TOP SJKRKT were not included in Cuban plana.
The exercise was to continue on a reduced basis until October 27 to provide cover 1 for Cuban deployments.
CINCPAC was conducting Exercise SHORE LINE at this same time, and he received similar orders concerning} 312/316 I units participating in it.
This was the composite armored combat command designed to support OPLANS 3lV3l6, totaling 4600 men from the 1st Armored Division.
The Chief of Staff of the Array took a personal hand in attempting to improve this .-situation, insisting that some United States armor go ashore on rD-DayA By moving TF& forward to Fort Stewart, its arrival in fch ff|ffi8w tsaoh5:i8a<i could te significantly speeded up, provided LST'b were at the porta of embarkation on time and other transportation arrangs.nent3 were properly made.
The new movement schedule was ready by the 26th and called for TJC's introduction being speeded by one to three daya.
At the same time the 2/69 Medium Tank Battalion which was to support the Marines afc Tarara would also be speeded up, and a portion of the unit's 67 M^S tanks would go ashore on D-Day.
The forward move of TFC uca plagued by a numoer nf mishaps and shortages if fad-jlti^s.
The 3rd and Ufch Increments were scheduled originally to go to New Orleans, but on the 27th it was proposed they movB to Port Lauderdale.
Florida, reducing their movement 1 time to the objective area by 3 days.
The floating reserve was alerted for movement to Fort Stewart and ooirmenced on the 23th.
The on-oall reserve forces ware alerted for rail loading commencing November 2 2 for Fort Stewart.
The saturation of bases in southern Florida waB rsoognized as a potential source of trouble, and CTNCLAOT began early to look for additional baBes.
He reported to the JCS on the l8th that after a conference with CINCAFLAfiT and the CG XVIII Airborne Corps., he was convinced of the requirement for opa?.ocka Airfield, a V'.rld Uar II installation which had bee.i Uu/ned over after the war to Dade County.
The JCS thereov^on immediately authorized the iroveraer.t of units, at CINCLANT 's discretion, into OpalockaTJ i^BS, Similar efforts -vrere launched by CINCLAMT on the 21st to get the use of"" the Key West International Airport, but no results had been achieved before the first phase ended.
The problem *,is the standard one of time ana an inadequate minber of the proper type of ships.
There was a feverish search for amphibious vessels which were in particularly short supply to carry the Army forces.
CINCARIB, faced with possible multiple calls for help from Latin Ameriaan governments., had hisjtwcJLST's taken from him and given to CH7CLANT, Even coirmercially owned LOT'S in the Gulf area \teve considered for chartering.
However,, most of the activity over shipping came after the first phase when the rather ponderous machine of the assault force began to achieve some readiness stacks, 409.
With the additional requirements for airlift imposed by the reinforcement of the Army air-landed echelon under the revlse<|~OFLAW 3l£j consideration was given early to tne possible call-up of reserve units,, especially troop carrier ones.
Presumably this restriction co D-Day was part of the security apparatus Burrounding Cuban operations, but at all events the decision was made not to wait for D-Day.
Ab of 0900 October 28th, the Air Force directed the callup of certain reserves, consisting of /eight/ troop carrier wings.
The additionalQs82J aircraft thus would make an invaluable augmentation to follow up airlift operations.
In total, then, the forces preparing to assault Cuba at ^na close of the first pn_se numcered eone [2py,000 > \i«en.
These included the Army and Marine forces described, and a Navy force comprising a ctri.d.ng and covering group with (twoj attack carriers, an ASW group, and a submarine group.
Total Navy personnel afloat J 65,000 Total Army personnel afloat \ 100,000 Total Marines I 44,OCO Total Air Force personnel 150,000.
J General war offensive forces deployed or brought to readiness included SAC naval strategic forces, and tactical air units assigned to general war missions in the overseas contrands.
The records available did not provide any data on the readiness process for naval forces, so ifc must be presumed they reached proper alert status at the assigned times.
UZ jr.-' r-j / 501jf/rot:aia vary considerably as between the several sources checked.
In Eurcpe additional precautions were taiwn coward the end of the crisis week.
Defensive preparations for general war were taken both by air and sea forces in thia period.
CCUi*D Treasures to raise the alert level of all national air defenses.
The dispersal order itself came the a very Cj->> following afternoonj the move to be carried out < 3 quiet, low key basis.
The dispersal of the NOP.AD fighter force was completed during the 23rd, Jl73jalrcraft moving to their dispersal sites. 'i 5C6.
Air defense capabilities remained high, CltfCOHAD reporting at SOOO on 26 October that 94 percent of his fighter forces, 92 percent of the SAMa and 99 percent of surveillance equipment were operationally ready.
Before this time, however there had been a alight decrease in the pressure on CTNCONAD's forces nationwide.
This was probably the result of the generally sound stafce of air defenses.
In a summary to the CSAP early on the 23rd, CINCONAD stated that the former air defense capability had been only slightly disturbed by the deployments to the southeast, and that, in the light of the present situation, the overall air defense capability had been substantially inareased.
The airborne alert ma^n^ne, level was reduced fromT cenj interceptors [to fouij effective 1145 on 23 October, the new level to ba ^ai.italned buc increased immediately if .leaded.
Additional interceptors would be roaintainod on strip aleri available for immediate scramble and augmentation of the airborne alert force.
Hie reduced le^el would allow for continuous operations and '.lould conserve the interceptor force for any higner alert level required.
The extent and complexity of operational air deployments connected with COKUS defense and SIOP readiness preparations, and the concommltant need for central coordination of the respective activities of the two co-equal CI*VCs involved.
She barrier v/aa to be composed of patrol aircraft and submarines, and should the situation worsen, the barrier would be moved outward to the Greenland -Iceland-United Kingdom line.
SUBROH 8 moved out of New London at 1400 on 27 October, comprlsingften (submarines, which were to take up positions on the Argentia' Barrier.
From the events and major command problems described, certain inferences, may be drawn concerning underlying command and policy dilemmas.
These are not the sorts of issues which appeared specifically In the flow of messages and airecti""es, but rather appeared indirectly at intervals as certain problems arose.
Nevertheless, the influence of tnese dilemmas //as pei*vasive and quite evident in xshe nature of the major operational problems and in the way the JCS dealt wi»h these, 512.
The really crucial and interesting lessons derived from United States military deployments all came between October 20 and 28.
These were tha deployments made under the pressure of time, secrecy, and the need to act without provoking What we wished to avoid.
Presumably such action was taken informallyi tne course of a JCS meeting on the 24tn and. tne only instructions were relayed orally at the time.
However, these Jlatter deployments suffered little of the pressures of the first week.
The entire psychological atmosphere was changed by the Soviet concession on Sunday the 28th.
Th9 relative smoothness demonstrated in some of the deployments was due in no small measure to the fact that United States foroes had warning.
While the CINC's were not officially informed by the JCS of the nature of the United States action program until the 21st of October, we have seen how the CONUS-based CINC's, LANT, SAC, GONAD, were all engaged in preparations by the 17th, the day after the president had seen the incriminating photographic evidence.
Their subordinate commanders and the overseas CINC's were also very Boon the recipients of information copies of meroages or Service directives which alerted cnem to coming action.
For example, /CINCSAC oui the 17th directed his staff and Saoordinate commanders to prepare zo execucc the 1/8 airoorne alert and the dispersal of the B-hJ force, and ysc t'.e troves vure net ordered by -che JCS until the 22ndJ similarly, no air chreat against n-e southeastern U,S, was likely until after the President's address on the evening of the 22nd, but CIMCONAD had been dLr°ctpd l-o take action to augment che area's defenses on the 17th.
AFLANT's deployments began at noon on tne 21st, but were preceded by three days' preparation ti'se.
TOP SECRET )S£M,T TOP SF ^RST TOI^reCEET 515. in these cases strategic warning was put to excellent U3e, However, the nature of the forces, their mobility and speed of response, allowed thsm to exploit the advantages of strategic warning.
In the case of the assault forces, the other side of the strategic warning coin was shown.
It is very often forgotten that the simple receipt of strategic warning itself is not enough to confer an advantage j one must be able to use it when one gets it.
In other crisis situations of recent years the United States has sometimes received such warning, but has often been unable to act militarily oecauae of political considerations.
It has been necessary not to alarm friends, not to provoke enemies, to preserve secrecy.
The second and third of these considerations were very evident in the Cuban crisis.
The dilemma of the Cuban crisis was that the very forces which had greatest need of the maximum strategic warning in order to prepare and to deploy, the assault forces, >vr»r o tne very ones which could leest exploit what warning they did receive.
This v/as crucially important because of the need of the assaulc forces to reduce to the minimum the time span between the openinof_OPLAH 32 2 and the closure of all a3sao.lt forces en Cuba.
There was also evidently operative the other contradictory aspect msnnioned above, political constraints.
The United States policy was to ensure that the Soviets were fully a'vars of our intention and our ability to remove the Tt».^mK<CRfe , I 7i top sscEra ; TO^J^i-iKIT offensive weapons, even if It meant invading Cuba to do bo.
On the other hand., we also wanted them to understand that we would do this only as a last resort in pursuit of the stated objective.
We were threatening invasion and preparing for it clearly, but vie did nob wish to create the impression that a United States invasion was utterly inevitable, since this was the extreme measure of violence as far as Cuba was concerned.
Invasion implied the destruction of the Cantro regime, and tnus raiBed an entirely different set of problems for the Russians. i H 518.
Even if the secrecy requirements of the week before the 22nd had not tended to preclude it, any major assault forces deployments in that period may very well have been held up in order not to create an impression of inevitability as to employment , 'and thus tend to paint trie Soviets into a corner.
In other words, the critical political consideration of leaving the Soviets a \»jy to escape a clash by simply removing the offensive weapons and thus tre.lce unnecessary a United States invasion of Cuba may well have strongly influenced the assault forces depj^ymenco.
Another aspect of thi3 same general problem concerned the possible Cuban use of nuclear weapons against a United States assault force.
The clear academic distinctions between the aforementioned sets of categories were seen to be nob so clear after all.
The result was a deliberase effort on the part of the JCSj presumably mirroring th2 concern of higner political auchoritieB, to maintain a very tignt control.
In some cases this was done by carefully spelling out directives., such as in the Blockade of Cuba order.
In other cases it was deemed best not to be e::pl±cit, but rather to maintain control through flexibility.
This sometimes, in fact almost inevmably, concurrently produced ambiguity, as in the rules of engagement instructions to CINCON^D for the southeast United States or the instructions to the Base Commander at Cuantanamo.
Presumably cy not spelling out limitations of authority, the JCS would de facto compel responsible commanders bo checx back with them before making any serious move.
Hence, pa wares'.,-, control te-i.'ec"" ta ;s strengthened through ambiguity.
