In pursuing these questions, what the serious analyst seeks to discover is why one specific state of the world came to be the case -rather than some other.
Faced with a demand for explanation, most analysts proceed by showing how the nation's action constituted a reasonable choice, given rational objectives.
Thus, missile construction in Cuba is explained as a Soviet probe of American intentions.
United States 7roops marched across the narrow neck in Korea, according to standard accounts, because American objectives had escalated as a consequence of easy victories in tne SouCh.
The attack on Pearl Harbor is explained as Japan's solution to the strategic problem posed by United States pressure in the Far East.
What these explanations assume is th&t occurrences can be most satisfactorily understood as purposive acts of national governments, conceived as unitary, rational agents.
Treating nations as if they were rational individuals provides a productive shorthand for understanding problems of policy.
But this assumption -like all assumptions -obscures as well as reveals.
To explore the implications of this fact for the activities of foreign policy analysts is the purpose of this exercise.
Specialists in foreign policy and policy makers, as well as plain men reading the New vw-Times, think abnr.""-oblems of foreign policy in terms of implicit conceptual models which have significant consequences for the character of their thought.
Explanations aimed at relieving puzzlement like that surrounding Soviet missiles in Cuba or the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor constitute a considerable part of the intellectual product of foreign policy analysts.
The discursive, non-cumulativw, almost casual character of this work has become a commonplace.
Careful inspection of these explanations reveals a number of underlying clusters of fundamental similarity.
Explanations produced by particular analysts display quite regular and predictable attributes.
The first proposition of this essay is that these regularities rtflect frames of reference or conceptual models with which analysts approach problems of foreign policy.
One conceptual model so pervades the literature of foreign affairs, diplomatic history, and international relations, as well as the normal reactions of plain men, that it way be said to constitute the standard frame of reference.
Explanation of the occurrence, according to this model, consists in showing how placing missiles in Cuba was a reasonable choice from the point of view of the Soviet Union, given Soviet strategic objectives.
In arguing that explanations proceed in terms of implicit conceptual models, this essay makes no claim that scholars of foreign policy have developed any satisfactory theoretical models.
In this essay, the use of the term ""model"" without qualifiers should be read ""conceptual model."" -33.
Two alternative conceptual models offer considerable additional power for understanding happenings of international politics.
Although the standard frame of reference has proved useful for many purposes, it is now clear that this model must be supplemented, if not supplanted, by frames of reference which focus upon the detailed functioning and malfunctioning of organizations and individuals in the policy process.
Recent developments in the field of organization theory provide the foundation for the secorid model, According to Model II, what the rational policy model analyst categorizes as ""acts"" and ""choices"" are instead outputs of large organizations functioning according to standard patterns of behavior.
Explanation of the occurrence, according to Model II, consists in identifying the relevant Soviet organizations and displaying the patterns of organizational behavior from which the action emerged.
A third model, implicit in the work of a small but growi'o group of analysts, focuses on the internal politics of a government.
Happenings in foreign affairs are understood according to Model III, neither as choices nor as outputs.
Rather, what happens is categorized as outcomes of various overlapping bargaining games among players arranged hierarchically in the national government.
Explanation of this happening, according to Model III, displays the games, power, and maneuvers of principal players and the understandings and misunderstandings from which the outcome emerged.
If one were limited to observations on a screen upon which moves in the chess game were registered without information as to how the pieces came to be moved, he would assume -as the standard model does -that an individual chess player was moving the pieces in terms of strategic plans and tactical maneuvers toward a single goal, namely, winning the game.
But a pattern of moves can be imagined which would lead the serious observer, after watching several games, to conr;t-. ti... hypothesis that the chess player was not a single individual but rather a loose alliance of seLai-independent organizations, each of which moved its set of pieces according to standard operating procedures.
For example, movement of separate sets of pieces night proceed in turn, each according to a routine, the king's rook, bishop, and their pawns repeatedly attacking the opponent according to a fixed plan.
Furthermore, it is conceivable that the pattern of play would suggest to the imaginative observer that a number of distinct players, with separate goals and objectives but shared power over the pieces, were determining moves as the consequences of collegial largaining.
For example, the movement of the black rook might contribute to the loss of a black knight with no comparable gain for the black team, but with the consequence that the black rook became the principal guardian of the ""palace"" on that side of the board.
The limits of this essay do not permit adequate development and support of such general arguments.
Analogues of these conceptual models are employed by analysts of various areas of governmental policy.
A crisis decision, by a small group of men in the context of ultimate threat to the nation, this is a case of the rational policy model par excellence.
The dimensions and factors which Models II and III uncover in this case are therefore particularly suggestive of the character of work produced by these styles of analysis.
Within these limits, the general argument is developed by three sections each of which sketcheE q conceptual model and articulates it as a paradigm.
These alternative explanations of the same happening illustrate differences among the conceptual models -at work.
The concluding section generates predictions in terms of each of the models and suggests how the three conceptual models may be related.
Soviet anti-ballistic missile deployment, and evidence of Soviet actions towards detente, when slotted in our implicit model, produce a question.
This question arises only when the analyst brings to the phenomena a frame of reference which conceptualizes occurrences as purposive choices of consistent, unitary actors.
The most widely acclaimpd explanation of this occurrence has been produced by two eminent RAND Soviotologists.
Then, in Sherlock Holmes style, they proceed to test each possible objective which the Soviets might have had against all available information concerning the details of Soviet behavior.
Horelick and Rush's explanation presents an argument for one objective which allows interpretation of the various details of Soviet behavior as a value-maximizing choice.
If either power combination could gain a decisive advantage in the Balkans, it woull achieve a decisive advantage in the overall European balance of power.
When explaining particular occurrences, nevertheless, though emphasizing relevant constraints, he focuses on the choices of nations.
I91 More frequently, Hoffmann uncovers confusion or contradiction in the nation's choice.
Thomas Schelling's Strategy of Conflict formulates a number of propositions which explain the dynamics of deterrence in the nuclear age.
Confidence in the contention stems not from an inductive canvass of a large number of previous cases, but rather from two calculations.
In a situation of ""balance"" but vulnerability, there are values for which a rational opponent could choose toltrike first, g. to dcstroy etaemy capabilities to retaliate.
Whereas most contemporary strategic thinking is driven implicitly by the motor upon which this calculation depends, Schelling explicitly recognizes that strategic theory does assume a model.
Each assumes that what must be explained is an action,e., the realization of some purpose or intention.
Each assumes that the action is chosen as a calculated response to a strategic problem.
For each, explanation consists of showing what goal the nation was pursuing in committing the act and how this action was a reasonable choice, given the nation's objective.
This set of assumptions constitutes the frame of reference which is here labeled the rational policy model.
Indeed, that occurrences in foreign affairs are the acts of nations seems so fundamental to thinking about foreign affairs that this conceptual model has rarely been recognized.
To explain an occurrence in forcign policy, so the prevailing consensus maintains, simply means to show how the nation could have rationally chosen that action.
These brief illustrations from several areas of the literature amount to no argument by innumeration.
Rather, this essay attempts to convey a grasp of the model which will permit the reader to uncover numerous other examples from the literature with which he is most familiar.
To assert that Model I is the standard frame of reference is not to deny highly visible differences among the interests of Soviotologists, diplomatic historians, international relations theorists, and strategists.
Indeed, in most respects, differences among the work of Hans Morgenthau, Stanley Hoffmann, and Thomas Schelling could not be more salient.
The literature of contemporary strategy employs the most refined version of the conceptual model.
Other variants, which can be characterized by modifying the basic paradigm, are noted.
Earlier drafts of this essay have aroused heated arguments concerning a proper name for this model.
To choose a name from ordinary language ib to court confusion, as well as familiarity.
Policy as National Choice Happenings in foreign affairs are conceived as actions chosen bV the nation.
Nations choose actions after calculations concerning value-maximizing means for achieving strategic goals and objectives.
These ""solutions"" to strategic problems are the fundamental categories in terms of which the analyst perceives what is to be explained.
Moves in the chess game are explained as rational choices of a single player.
The nation, conceived as a rational, unitary decisionmaker, is the agent.
The nation has one set of specified goals , one set of perceived alternatives, and a single estimate of the consequences that follow from each alternative.
Action is chosen in response to the. strategic problem which faces the nation.
Threats and opportunities arising in the ""international strategic market place"" move the nation to act.
Action results from national choice among alternatives of a means calculated to achieve strategic objectives.
National security and national interests are the principal categories in which strategic goals are conceived.
Analysts rarely translate strategic goals and objectives into an explicit utility function; nevertheless, analysts do focus on major goals and objectives and trade off side effects in an intuitive fashion.
Various courses of action relevant to a strategic problem provide the spectrum of alternatives.
Enactment of each alternative course of action will produce a series of consequences.
The relevant consequences constitute advantages and disadvantages in terms of strategic goals and objectives.
The rational agent selects the alternative whose consequences rank highest in terms of his goals and objectives.
The point of each is to place an action within a value-maximizing framework, -9III, Dominant Tnference Pattern Employment of this paradigm leads analysts to rely on a cange of loosely formulated propositions in producing explanations.
If a nation performed a particular action, that nation must have had goals and objectives towards which the action constituted a value-maximizing means.
The nation's objectives can be discovered by calculating w'at strategic values are maximized by the action performed.
The rational policy model's explanatory power stems from this inference pattern.
Puzzlement is relieved by revealing the purFosive pattern within which the occurrence can be located as a value-maximizing means.
General Propositions The disgrace of political science is the infrequency with which it formulates and tests non-trivial propositions of any generality.
Paradigmatic analysis argues for consciousness concerning the terms in 'hich analysis proceeds, and 3eriousness about the logic of explanation.
Explanations entail propositions.C213 Simply to illustrate the kind of propositions on which analysts who employ this model rely, the paradigm includes several.
The basic assumption of value-maximizing behavior produces propositions central to explanations in most contexts.
I An increate in the cost of an alternative,e., a reduction in the value of the set of ronsequences which will follow from that action, or a reduction in the probability of attaining fixed consequences, reduces the probability of that alternative being chosen.
A decrease in the costs of an alternative,e., an increase in the value of the set of consequences which will follow from that alternative, or an increase in the probability of *ttnining fixed consequences, increases the probability of that action being chosen.* given certain constraints.
But mo.; variants constrain the focal concepts stated in the strategic paradigm.
Thus national propetisities or personality traits reflected in an ""operctional code,"" concern with certain objectives, or special principles of action narrow the ""go.
A further variant, employed often by Hloffmann and by George Kennan, explains government action as deviation from the norm of rational choice, I' This model is an analogue of the theory of the rational entrepreneur which has been developed extensively in ecofiomic theories of the firm and the consumer.
Combined with various factual assertions, this general proposition yields the assortment of propositions which constitute the sub-theory of deterrence.
This proposition is derived from the general proposition plus the asserted fact that a second-strike capability affects the potential attacker's calculus by increasing both the probability and the costof one particular set of consequences which might follow from attack -namely retaliation.
Second-strike capabilities reduce the probability of escalation from the accidental firing of a missile to a full-blown nuclear exchange.
This proposition is derived from the general proposition plus the asserted fact that mutual second-strike capabilities increase and reduce for a particular set of consequences.
This proposition is derived from the general proposition plus the asserted fact that though increasing the costs of a nuclear exchange, a stable nuclear balance nevertheless produces a more significant reduction in the probability that such consequences would be choscii in response to a limited war.
The Soviet Union chooses its force posture as a value-maximixing means of implementing Soviet strategic objectives and doctrine.
Dinerstein explains the Soviet force posture of the 1950's as rational implementation of Soviet military objectives.
Faced with a puzzling occurrence, the analyst puts himself in the place of the nation.
Examination of the strategic charactetistics of the problem permits the analyst to use principles of rational action to sift through both commission and omissions.
Evidence about the details of behavior, statements of government officials, and government papers is then marshalled to present a coherent picture of the purposive choice from the point of view of the nation which had to act.
American nuclear superiority could be counted on to immobilize Soviet nuclear power; Soviet transgression of the nuclear threshold in response to an American use of lower levels of violence would be wildly irrational since it would mean virtual destruction of the Soviet Communist system and Russian nation.
American local superiority was so overwhelming that it could be initiated at a low level while threatening with high credibility an ascending sequence of steps short of the nuclear threshold.
All that was required was for the United States to bring to bear its strategic and local superiority in such a way that American determination to see the missile removed would be demonstrated, while at the same time allowing Moscow time and room to retreat without humiliation.
The naval blockade -or quarantine, as it was c&lled in order to circumvent the niceties of international law -did just that.
The United States government's selection of the blockade after weighing all available alternatives followed this logic.
Most of the time during the week that followed was spent canvassing all the possible tracks and weighing the arguments for and against each.
The Soviet Union had long been subjected to a nuclear threat both from bases within the United States and from bases less than 90 miles from her border.
Thus the real danger was that the United States would over-react to this Soviet move.
The Soviet action should be announced by the United States in a casual and calm manner, thereby deflating whatever political capital Khrushchev hoped to make of the missiles.
This explanation, produced without commentary,in terms of Model I, is consistent with prevailing explanations.
To arraign the Soviet Union before the United Nations Security Council held little promise since the Russians could veto any proposed action, and Zorin of the Soviet Union happened to be chairman of the Council for October.
To send a secret emissary to Khrushchev demanding that the missles be withdrawn would be to pose untenable alternatives.
On the one hand, an invitation would have been issued to Khrushchev to seize the diplomatic initiative, perhaps committing himself to strategic retaliation in response to an attack on tiny Cuba, certainly mobilizing non-aligned and left-wing opinion to press the United States towards a conference a la Munich.
On the other hand, an ultimatum which no great power could accept would have been tendered, thus justifying either a preemptive strike against the United States or at a minimum, our indictment in the court of history.
To confront Khrushchev at a summit would guarantee demands for United States concessions, and the analogy between U.S. missiles in Turkey and Russian missiles in Cuba could not be erased.
While withdrawals of our Jupiters in Turkey and Italy in order to replace them with superior, less vulnerable Mediterranean Polaris submarines was an action the United States had chosen, the middle of a crisis was no time for concessions.
The offer of such a deal might confirm Soviet suspicions that the West would yield and thus tempt them to demand more.
It would certainly confirm European suspicions that the United States would sacrifice their security in order to pro-, tect our interests in an area of no concern to them, thus widening cracks in the alliance.
OthLr nations would observe the United States's willingness to compromise the interests of third nations when the chips were down.
The difficulty with this proposal was that the missiles were property of the Soviet Union.
Soviet troops transported, constructed, guarded, and controlled the missiles.
The United States could take this occasion not only to remove the missiles but also to rid itself of Castro.
A Navy exercise -13had been long scheduled in which Marines, ferried from Florida in naval vessels, would liberate the imprisoned island of Vieques.
Preparations were made for an invasion, but as the last, not the first step.
An invasion in which American troops would be forced to confront 20,000 Soviet troops in the first case of direct contact between the troops of the two super powers in the postwar world posed the gravest possible risk of a world war and offered the prospect of an equivalent Soviet move against Berlin.
The missile sites should be removed by a clean, swift conventional attack with or without advance warning.
This was the firm, effective counter-action which the Soviet attempted deception deserved.
A surgical strike would effectively remove the missiles and thus eliminate both the danger that the missiles might become operational and the fear that the Soviets would discover the American discovery and act first.
Preceded by Presidential announcement of the missiles' presence on Saturday and accompanied by an explanatory address, increased surveillance of the island to prevent further instaliations, and a call for a summit, this would settle the matter.
The initial attraction of this alternative was dulled by several difficulties.
Even if the missile sites could have been destroyed, the Soviet MIG's and IL-28 bombers might attack Guantanamo or the Southeastern United States.
Moreover, as the Air Force assured the ExCom, destruction of all the missiles could not be guaranteed.E28] Some might be fired during the attack; some might not have been identified.
This might result in chaos and political collapse, eventually necessitating a United States invasion.
Second, a surprise air attack would of course kill Ruesians at the missile sites -and elsewhere, if the attack were more massive.
An attack on the military troops and citizens of a super power could not be regarded lightly.
Pressures on the Soviet Union to retaliate would be so strong that an attack on Berlin or Turkey was highly probable.
Indirect military action in the form of a blockade of one of several types became more attractive as the ExCom uncovered the ugliness of the other alternatives.
An embargo on military shipments to Cuba enforced by a naval blockade was not without .ts owo problems, however. -14Even the term ""blockade"" presented a formidable difficulty.
The likely solution to joint blockades would be the lifting of both blockades, bringing the United States back to the present point and allowing the Soviets additional time to complete the missiles.
Second, there were significant similarities between the drawbacks which disqualified the air strike and the possible consequences of the blockade.
If Soviet ships did not stop, the United States would be forced to fire the first shot, inviting retaliation.
A blockade offered the Soviets a spectrum of mischievous alternatives from respecting the blockade and talking while the missile installations were completed to counter-blockade and propaganda initiatives.
It was a middle course between inaction and attack, aggressive enough to communicate firmness of intention, but nevertheless not so precipitous as a strike.
No possible military confrontation could be more acceptable to the United States than a naval engagement in the Caribbean.
The flexibility of this first step allowed the United States by conventional buildup in Florida to exploit the threat of subsequent non-nuclear steps in each of which the United States enjoyed significant superiority.
But the explanation of the American choice of the blockade lies in a more general principle.
Above all, while defending our own vital interests, nuclear powers must avert those confrontations which bring an adversary to a choice of either a humiliating retreat or a nuclear war.
ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESS For some purposes, governmental behavior can be usefully summarized as choice of a unitary, rational decisiormaker: centrally controlled, completely informed, and value maximizing.
But this abstraction must not be allowed to conceal the fact that ""governments"" consist of a conglomerate of semi-feudal, loosely allied organizations, each with a substantial life of its own.
Government leaders do sit formally, and to some extent in fact, on top of this conglomerate.
Governments define alternatives and estimate consequences as organizations process information.
What a government does that is relevant to a problem can therefore be understood according to a second conceptual model, not as deliberate choice but rather as outputs of lar-e organizations functioning according to standard patterns of behavior.
To be responsi-'e to a broad spectrum of problem areas, governments consist of large organizations among which primary responsibility for particular areas is divided.
Each organization attends to a narrow set of problems and acts in quasi-independence concerning these problems.
But few important problems fall exclusively within the domain of a single organization.
Thus government behavior relevant to any important problem reflects the independent output of several organizations, sometimes partially coordinated by government leaders.
Government leaders can substantially disturb, but not substantially control, the behavior of large organizations.
Each organization must attend to a set of problems, process masses of information, and perfcrm a range of ections.
To perform these jobs the behavior of large numbers of individuals must be coordinated.
Rather, each player must perform the maneuvers specified by a previously established play, which the quarterback has simply called in this situation.
At any specified time, a government consists of existing organizations, each with a fixed set of standard operating procedures and repertoires.
The behavior of these organizations -and consequently of the government -relevant to an issue in any particular instance, therefore, is determined primarily by routines established in these organizations prior to that instance.
Explanation of a government action starts from this base line, noting incremental deviations from it. i I -16But organizations do change.
Occasionally -however rarely -sharp deviations from the base line do happen.
Both learning and change are influenced by existing organizational capabilities.
Borrowed from studies of organizations, these loosely formulated propositions concerning governments and organizations amount simply to tendencies.
When scientists tried to generalize about ""solids,"" they achieved similar results.
More adequate categorization of the various elements now lumped under the rubric ""organizations"" is thus required.
On the other hand, the behavior of particular organizations seems considerably more complex than the behavior of solids.
Additional information about each specific case is required for further specification of the tendency statements.
In spite of these two caveats, the characterization of government action as organizational output differs distinctly from Model I Attempts to understand problems of foreign affairs in terms of this frame of reference should produce quite different explanations.
The influence of studies; of organizations upon the present literature of international affairs is difficult to discern.E32] This lacuna stems from two failures.
First, specialists in international politics are not students of organization theory.
Second, organization theory has only recently come to study organizations as decisionmakers and has not yet produced behavioral studies of foreign policy organizations from the decisionmaking perspective.
It would be unreasonable to expect that these gaps will remain unfilled much longer.
Considerable progress has been made in the study of the business firm as a decisionmaking organization.
Scholars have begun translating these insights into contexts in which the decisionmaker is a g'rernment organization rather than a firm.
Interest in government organizations is spreading rapidly among institutions and individuals concerned with actual government operations.
As an expression more of the prospects than of the payoffs in this area of inquiry, an organizational process paradigm is articulated.
While not emploýyed in the present literature, it should be suggestive of paradigms which will soon be important.
Without the necessary but missing behavioral studies of the organizations which constitute governments, this formulation must remain somewhat abstract.
In order for the paradigm to get a grip in a specific case, the bare bones of its generalized statement must be fleshed out by detailed study of the characteristics of each organization involved.
Nevertheless, the present state of knowledge in this area does suggest a number of interesting implications relevant to the limits of explanatiocis and predictions according to the rational policy model. -17This paradigm's debt both to the orientation and insights of Herbert A Simon and to the behavioral model of the firm stated by Richard Cyert and James March is considerable.
L33] Here, however, one is forced to grapple with the less routine, less quantified, less categorized functions of the less differentiated elements termed government organizations.
Policy as Organizational Output The decisions and actions which constitute the happenings of international politics are outputs of organizational processes in three critical senses.
Though government leaders can trim the edges of this output and exercise some choice in combining outputs, the mass of behavior is determined by previously established repertoires.
Second, existing organizational processes, that is, administrative routines for employing present physical capabilities, constitute the range of effective choice open to government leaders confronted with any problem.
Only the existence of men, equipped and trained as armies and capable of being transported to North Korea, made entry into the Korean War a live option for the Chinese leaders.
The fact that the fixed programs (equipment, men, and routines) existing at the particular time exhaust the range of buttons which leaders can push is not always perceived by these leaders.
But in every case it is critical for an understanding of what is actuAlly done.
Third, organizational outputs structure the situation within the narrow constraints of which leaders must contribute their ""decision"" concerning an issue.
Outputs raise the problem, provide the information, and make the initial moves which color the fact of the issue which is turned to the leaders.
L34J If one understands the structure of the situation and the face of the issue -which are determined by organizational outputs -the formal choice by the leaders is almost always anti-climactic.
Analysis of formal governmental choice centers on the information provided and options defined by organizations, the existing organizational capabilities which exhaust the effective choices open to the leaders, and the outputs of relevant organizations which fix the location of S~-18pieces on the chess board and shade the appearance of the issue.
Analysis of the aggregation of actual occurrences which comprise government behavior relevant to an issue focuses on executionary outputs of individual organizations as well as organizational capabilities and organizational positioning of the pieces on the chess board.
The actor is not a monolithic ""nation"" or 'government"" but rather a constellation of loosely allied organinations which acts only as relevant organizations act.
Cognizance of the multiple facets cf foreign affairs requires that problems be factored and parcelled out as broad areas of responsibility to various organizations which constitute the government.
In order to avoid paralysis, primary power accompanies primary responsibility.
If organizations are permitted to do anything, a large part of what they do will be determined within the organization.
Factored problems and fractionated power are two edges of the same sword.
Factoring permits more detailed, specialized attention to particular facets of problems than would be possible if goverment leaders tried to cope by themselves.
The creation of what Richard Neustadt has called ""separated institutions sharing power"" must be paid for in the coin of discretion for considerable choice concerning what shall be attended to and how organizational responses are prograind.
Primery responsibility for a narrow set of problems encourages organizational perochicaliam.
Selective information available to '.he organization, recruitment of personnel into the organization, tenure of individuals in the organization, smell grokip pressures within the orginization, and distribution of rewards by the organiza•ion enhances these pressures.
Clients , govramnt allies (e.g., Congressional committees), and extra-national counterparts (e.g., the British Ministry of Defensi for the Office of the Secretary of Defense LISAj or the British Foreign Office for the Department of State LEURj. galvanize this parochicalime.
Thus organizations develop relatively stable propensities concerning operational priorities, perceptions, and issues.
Air Force is manned by careerists -19on a highly structured ladder, promotion on which is critically dependent on years of demonstrated, distinguished service to the Air Force mission.
Work routines , patterns of association and information channels (accents on enemy aircraft and United States aircraft design) combine with external pressures from Air Force organizations and fr~inds in Congress to make the Air Force's continual search for new manned bombers predictable.
Each organization's performance of its ""job"" has major consequences for other departments.
Important problems lap over the jurisdictions of several organizations.
Thus the necessity for decentralization runs headlong into the requirement for coordination.
Both the necessity for coordination and the centrality of problems of foreign policy to national welfare guarantee the interest of government leaders in the activities of the organizations among which problems are factored and power divided.
Government leaders can intervene and disturb organizational propensities and routines.
Central direction and persistent control of organizational activity, however, is not possible.
To the extent that rewards and punishments for the members of an, organization are distributed by higher authorities, these authorities can exercise some control by specifying criteria in terms of which organiratioral output is to be judged.
These criteria become constraints within which organizational activity proceeds.
Specification of relevant operational criteria for the activities of most government organizations is incredibly difficult.
Moreover, in the United States government, the leader's control over critical rewards and punishments is severly limited.
Intervention by government leaders does sometimes change the activity of an organization in an intended directitn.
L36i And lest the McNamara revolution in the Defense Department seem too striking a counterexample, the Navy's recent rejection of McNamara's major intervention in Naval weapon procurement should be studied as an antidote.
Although seldom revealed by formal mandates, an operational set of constraints defines acceptable level performance for each organization.
These constraints are typically embedded in rules for promotion and reward, budgeting procedures, and mundane operating practices.
Central among these constraints is organizational health, defined usually in terms of bodies assigned and dollars appropriated.
The set of constraints emerges from a mix of expectations and demands of other organizations in the government, statutory authority, demands from citizens and special interests groups, and bargaining within the organization.
The constraints represent a quasi-resolution of conflict -the constraints are relatively stable, so there is some resolution, but conflict among alternative goals is always latent, hence it is a quasi-resolution.
Typically, the constraints are formulated as imperatives to avoid roughly specified discomforts and disasters.
That budget also reduced the Air Force's percentage of the defense pie.
The existence of conflict among operational constraints is resolved by the device of sequential attention.
As problems arise, the subunits of the organization most concerned with that problem deal with it in terms of the constraints they take to be most important.
When the next problem arises, another cluster of subun.ts deal with it, focusing on a different set of constraints.
Organizations perform their ""higher' functions,g., attending to problem areas, monitoring information, and preparing relevant responses for likely contingencies, by doing ""lower"" tasks,g., preparing budgets, producing reports, and developing hardware.
Reliable performance of these tasks requires regularized behavior patterns characterized by simple standard operating procedures.
Rules of thumb permit concerted action by large numbers of individuals as responses to basic stimuli.
The rules are usually quite simple in order to facilitate easy learning and unambiguous application.
Without these standard procedures, it would not be possible to perform certain concerted tasks.
But because of standard procedures, organizational behavior in particular inst:uocs appears unduly formalized, sluggish, and often inappropriate.
Many organizations must be capable of performing actions in which the behavior of hundreds of individuals is carefully coordinated.
Assured performance requires clusters of established, rehearsed standard operating procedures for producing specific actions,g., fighting enemy units or constructing military installations.
Each cluster comprises a ""program"" (in the terms both of drams and of computers) which the organizatior, has available for deaiing with a situation.
The list of programs relevant to a type of activity,g., fighting, constitutes an organizational repertoire.
When properly triggered, organizations execute programs; programs cannot be substantially changed in a particular situation.
The more complex the action and the greater the number of individuals involved, the more important are programs and repertoires as determinants of organizational behavior.
Where %ituatitnscannot be creistrued as standard, organizations engage in search.
The style of search, and the soluLion in any particular case are largely determined by axssting routines.
Patterns of search reveal biases which reflect special -22training or experience of various parts of the organization, expectations, and communication distortions.
Organizations do not attempt to estimate the probability distribution of future occurrences.
By arranging a negotiated environment, organizations avoid the requirements that future reactions of other parts of their environment be anticipated.
The primary environmentrelations with other organizations which comprise the government, is stabilized by agreed budgetary splits, accepted areas of responsibility, and established conventional practices.
Between enemies, contracts and accepted conventional practices, for example, what Kennedy referred tc in the Cuban missile crisis as the rules governing 'the precarious status quo"", perform this function.
Where the international environment cannot be negotiated, organizations deal with remaining uncertainties by establishing a set of standard scenarios that constitute the contingencies for which they prepare.
For example, the standard scenario for the Tactical Air Command of the United States Air Force involves combat with enemy aircraft.
That these preparations are nor relevant to more probable contingencies,g., provision of closein ground support in Viet Main, has had little impact on the scenario.
Internal scoring systems are devised for measuring success in preparation for these scenarios.
The parameters of organizational decisionmakir4g change slowly over time as search in response to non-standard problems changes existing routines and allows the treatment of what were new situations as standard problems.
Confronted with undeniable failure of procedures and repertoires, authorities outside the organization demand change, existing personnel are less resistant to change, and critical members of the organization are replaced by individuals committed to change.
Dominant Inference Pattern If a nation performs an action of this type today, its organizational components must yesterday have been performing (or have had established routines for performing) an action only marginally different from that action.
The most adequate explanation of why a nation is doing such and such today is that its organizations were doing such and such yesterday.
Conversely, the most reliable predictiov of what a nation will do tomorrow is what its organizations are doing today.
The rational policy model demands confusion or conspiracy -mass incompetence or diabolic design.
A Naval War warning on November 28, report of a change in Japanese codes (evaluated as very unusual), reports of Japanese ships in Camranh Bay, orders to be alert for Japanese action in the Pacific, messages deciphered from Japan's most secure code ordering code-machine and secret paper destruction by Japanese embassies, United States authorization to destroy codes and secret papers in outlying islands, FBI notice that the local Japanese consul was burning papers, and personal warnings from Admiral Stark in Washington.
Instead the Navy's activity on December 7 vas identical with its behavior on December 6 which differed imperceptibly from its behavior on December 5 and so on.
Each of these details represents standard outputs of an organization 5unctioning according to established routines.
Detail and nuance of act-.ons by organizations are determined predominantly by organizational roitines, not government leaders' direction.
Thus the rational policy model's attempt to read out of these details, hints concerning subtle plans, each of the moves falling on a smooth trendline of goverimewat policy is misguided.
Standard operating procedures amount to routines for dealing with standard situations.
While routines allow large numbers of ordinary individuals to deal with numerous instances, day after day, without considerable thought, by responding to basic stimuli, this regularized capability for adequate performance is purchased at the price of standardization.
But specific instances, particularly interesting instances which may not have ""standard"" characteristics, are often handled sluggishly or inappropriately. -24A program,e., a complex action chosen from a narrow repertoire, is not designed for the specific situation in which it is executed.
Rather, the program is, at best, the most appropriate of the programs in a previously developed repertoire.
Since repertoires are developed by parochial organizations for standard scenarios defined by that organization, programs available for dealing with a particular situation are often ill-suited.
Major lines of organizational action are straight,e., behavior at one time is marginally different from that behavior at t-l.
Organizational budgets change incrementally -both with respect to totals and with respect to intra-organizational splits.
Though organizations could divide the money available each year by carving up the pie anew (in the light of objectives or changes in the environment), in practice, organizations take last year's budget as a base and adjust incrementally.
Predictions which require large budgetary shifts in a single year between organizations or between units within an organization should be hedged.
Organizational priorities, perceptions, and issues are relatively stable.
New programs and activities typically consist of marginal adaptations of existing programa and activities.
A program once undertaken is not dropped at the point where objective costs outweigh benefits.
Organizational stakes in adopted programs carry them quite beyond the loss point.
As early as March, 1940,Marshall had requested that an evaluhtive branch be established within G-2.
According to Marshall's request, G-2 's staff had been expanded, but the additions were concentrated in the ongoing espionage program.
In explanation, analysis, and prediction, administrative feasibility muxt be a major dimension.
A considerable gap separates what leaders choose (or might rationally have chosen) and what organizations implement. -25Organizations are blunt instruments.
Projects which require that several organizations act with high degrees of precision and coordination as surgical scalpels are not likely to succeed.
Projects which demand that existing organizational units deal with problems quite different from their accustomed duties and perform functions for which the organizational routines do not constitute ""programs"" are rarely accomplished in their designed 7orm.
Government leaders can expect that each organization will do its ""part"" in terms of whal the organization knows how to do.
Government leaders can expect incomplete and distorted information from each organization concerning its part of the problem.
Where an assigned piece of a problem is contrary to the existing goals of an organizaticn, resistance to implementation of that piece will be encountered.
These propositions illuminate Wohlstetter's explanation of the success of the Japanese attack on the Philippines -given nine hours warning.L391 It succeeded, ""not because of inadequate intelligence.
After the war warning of November 27, MacArthur had ordered the heavy bombers transferred to a safer field.
The probability of nuclear attack is more sensitive to a number of organizational factors than it is to the relevant range of balance and imbalance, stability and instability.
The er.emy's control system,e., physical mechanisms and standard procedures which determine who can launch rockets when, is critictl.
Second, the enemy's programs for bringinghis strategic forces to alert status determine probabilities of accidental firing and momentum.
At the outbreak of World War 1, if the Russian tzar had understood the organizational processes whichhis order of full mobilization triggered, he woulh have known that he had chosen war.
Third, organizational repertoires fix the range of effective choice open to enemy leaders.
Fourth, since organizational routines set the chessboard, the training and deployment of troops and nuclear weapons is crucial.
Civen that the outtre•ak of hostilities in Berlin is more probable than most scenarios for nuclear war, facts about deployment, training, and tactical nuclear equipment of Soviet troops stationed in Kast Germany -which will influence the face of the issue seen by Soviet leaders at th, outbreak of hostilities and the manner in which choice is implemented -are as critical as the question of ""balance"". -262.
Soviet force posture is determined by a number of organizational factors, within certain constraints set by government leaders.
Processes and procedures of the organizations which comprise the Soviet military and the research and development community are major determinants of this posture.
Thus, the ""bomber gap"" which was predicted by many Model I Sovietologists for the 1950's never materialized.
The fact that the Soviet military establishment included no Air Force, whose business it would have been to expand this system, does not seem irrelevant.
Soviet development and deployment of an Anti-Ballistic Missile system seems to be the result of activity of a Soviet organization, the PVO, whose perceptions, priorities and budget have pernitted development and deployment by continuation.
Evidence The bones of this paradigm allow an analyst to modify expectations generated by the rational policy model.
The general propositions do yield some explanatory and predictive power.
But satisfactory explanation according to this paradigm requires information about the behavior of specific organizotions.
Until more studies become available, categorization of organizations and specification of propositions will be severely limited.
THE IMPOSIT1ON OF A United States BLOCKADE OF CUBA Organizational Intellilgence.
At 7:00 P.M. on October 22, 1962, President Kennedy delivered the major foreign policy address of his career.
L403 This decision was reached at the pinnacle of the United States Govermnt after a critical week of deliberation.
What initiated that precious week were photographs of Soviet missile sites in Cube taken on October 14 by Air Force Major Rudolph Anderson.
L41J United States leaders might have received this information two weeks earlier -if a U-2 had flown over this area on the first day of October.
Lihus what determined the context in which American leaders ca• to choose the blockade was the discovery of missiles on October 14. -27There has been considerable debate over alleged American ""intelligence failures"" in the Cuban missile crisis.
The job of intelligence requires an incredibly complex organization, coordinating large numbers of actors, processing endless piles of information.
That this organization must function according to established routines and standard procedures is a simple fact.
The organizational routines and standard operating procedures by which the United States intelligence community discovered Soviet missiles in Cuba were neither more nor less successful than they had been the previous month or were to be in the months to follow.L45] The available record permits a fairly reliable reconstruction of the major features of the patterns of behavior by which the Soviet missiles were discovered.
L47] Refugees from Cuba brought innumerable reports of Soviet missiles, Chinese soldiers and a variety of other atrocities.
CIA staff at Opa Locka, Florida collected, collated, and compared the results of interrogations of refugees -though often with a lag since refugees numbered in the thousands.
The U-2 camera acquired the highest quality United States intelligence.
These earlier flights produced information on SAM sites (15 under construction according to intelligence available on October 3 and 25 predicted), coastal defense missile sites, MIG's, missile patrol boats, and IL-28 light bombers.
Yet the notorious ""September estimate"" concluded that the Soviet Union would not introduce offensive missiles into Cuba.L53] No U-2 flight was directed over the western end of Cuba (after September 5) before October 4.
Transmission time means ftt facts :an be ""in the system"" without being available to the head of the orgenisation.
Information mast be winnowed at every step up the organizational hi-rarchy, since the number of minutes in each day limits the number of bits of information each individual can absorb.
But those who select which information their boss shall see rarely see their bosses' problem.
Finally, facts vhich with hindsight are clear signals of an occurrence are frequently indistinguishable froa surrounding ""noise"" before the occurrenre.
Shipping intelligence experts noted both the facts that the ships had large hatches and the fact that the ships -29were riding high in the water.
For experts sensitive to the Soviet's pressing requirement for ships, however, neither the facts nor the inference carried a special signal.
The refugee report of Castro's private pilot's remark had been received at Opa Locks along with vast reams of inaccurate and even deliberately false reports generated by the refugee community.
This report and a thousand others had to be checked and compared before being sent to Washington.
The two weeks required for initial processing could have been shortened by a large increase in resources devoted to this source of information.L58] But the yield of this source w•as already quite marginal.
There was little reason to expect that a change in procedures which might have reduced transmisioon time to one week would be worth the cost.
The CIA agent's sighting of the rear profile of a strategic missile had occurred on September 12; transmission time from agent sighting to arrival in Washington typically took nine to twelve days.
That report arrived at CIA headquarters on September 21, two days after the USIB meeting.
Shortening this transmission time would impose severe cost in terms of danger to sub-agents, agents, and communication networks.
U-2 flights had produced no hard indication of the presence of offensive missiles.
The flight over Western Cuba on September 5, revealed SAM installations which were approaching completion.
Then on September 9 a U-2 on ""loan"" to the Chinese Nationalists was shot down over mainland China.L59J Recalling the outcry and debacle which accompanied the Soviet downing of Francis Cary Powers' V-2 on May 1, 1960, over the Sovift Union, the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance , whose responsibility it was to approve each V-2 flight, was quickly convened.L60] The intelligence community feared that a fresh outcry raised round the world would force the abandonment of U-2 flights and thus mean the loss of its most reliable source of information.
The State Department pressed arguments concerning the political consequences of the loss of another U-2, for examplp, over Cuba.
As a result, it was decided that rather than flying up one side of the island and down the other, future flights should ""dip into"" Cuban airspace and peer as much possible from the periphery.
The fourteen days between the September 19 estimate ani the decision in (11WR on October 4 to direct special flight over western uhba added a number of additional pieces to the picture.
L64] Shortly afterwards, the refugee report of Castro's pilot's claim also arrived.
On September 27 a ""hard copy"" report of the sgent's sighting, which had been circulated as an ""advance report"" on September 21, arrived.L65] This presumably included a sketch of the missile.
Moreover, Colonel Wright of the CIA had been studying the pattern of SAM installations photographed by the U-2 flight over Western Cuba on September 5.
J66] He noted that this trapezoidal pattern resembled photographs of SAM installations in the Soviet Union designed to protect strategic missiles.
These pieces of information led some DIA analysts between September 27 and October 2 to the hypothesis that the Soviets were placing strategic missiles in the San Cristobal area.L67j Reports were also received concerning action ir.the Pinar del Rio area.
The CIA marked the central and western end of Cuba ""suspicions"" on September 29 and certified highest priority for aerial connaissance on October 3.
Thus when McCone assembled O3MOR on October 4, in spite of the State Department's qualm concerning possible consequences of a loss of a U-2 over Cuba, a decision was made for an overflight of Western Cuba.A681 The gradual accumulation of pieces of evidence leading to the hypothesis that the Soviet Union was installing missiles and a decision to dispatch a U-2 over the western tip of Cuba is again routine and non-startling from an organizational perspective.
The ten day delay between decision and flight is another organizational story.[69i At the October 4 meeting, when the decision concerning the flight over Western Cuba was made, the State Department put the case concerning consequences of the loss of a V-2 over Cuba in the strongest terms.
Moreover, the Defense Department took this opportunity to raise an issue important to its concerns.
Given the incre&sed danger that a U-2 vould be downed, it would be better if the pilot were an officer in uniform rather than a CIA agent.
To the contrary, the CIA argued that this was an intelligence operation and thus within the CIA's jurisdiction.
Moreover, CIA U-2's had been modified in certain ways which gave them advantages over Air Force U-2's in averting Soviet SAM's.
Five days passed while the State Department pressed for less risky alternatives such as drones and the Air Force (in Department of Defense guise) and CIA en1aged in territorial disputes.
On October 9 a flight plan over San Cristobal was approved by caoNR, but the CIA's dismay, Air Force pilots rather than CIA agents would take charge of the mission.
At this point details become sketchy, but several members of the intelligence commuity have speculated that an Air Force pilot in an Air Farce U-2 attempted a high altitude overflight on October 9 that ""flamed out"",e., lost power and thus had to descend in order to resta.t its engine.
A second round between Air Force and CIA followed, *a a result of which Air Force pilots were trairad to fly CIA U-2's.
In the face of well-founded suspicions concerning offensive Soviet missiles in Cuba which posed a critical threat to the United States' most vital interest, squabbling between organizations whose job it is to produce this information seems entirely inappropriate.
Moreover, the issue was not simply which organization was to have Jurisdiction concerning U-2 flights over Cuba, but rather the broader issue of control of U-2 intelligence qctivities -a very long standing territorial dispute.
Deliberations of leaders in ExCom meetings produced broad outlines of alternatives.
Details of these alternatives and blueprints for their implementation had to be specified by the organization which would be responsible for performing these tasks.
Whether the United States could perform the surgical strike was a factual question concerning capabilities.
The majority of the members of the ExCom, including the President, initially liked the air strike.L71 What effectively foreciosed this option, however, was the fact that the air strike which they wanted could not be chosen with high confidence of success.
L72, After having tentatively chosen the course of prudence -given that the surgical air strike was not an option -Kennedy reconsiderei.
General Walter C Sweeny, Commnder of Ta'tical Air Forces, asserted again that the Air Force could guarantee no higher than ninety percent effectiveness in a surgical air strike.L74.
Organizations defined what the President believed V.S. military equipment and personnel were capable of performing in the Cuba missile crisis.
Specification of the air strike alternative provides a classic case of military estimates.
Specification of the details of this alternative was delegated to the Air Force.
From that perspective the problem was samplei elimination of the Communist Cuban thorn.
The Air Force was ut""ppv that it had been restrained fvm this task in lQt4l.
As the plan was prepared, discussion among the Joint Chiefs emphasized United States security requirements which might be affected by the strike.
The detail of that plan thus called for extensive bombardment of all missile sites, storage depots, airports, and, in deferenceto the Navy, the artillery batteries opposite the naval base at Guantanamo.L76i Political leaders do not normally examine detailed war plans; this was a normal case.
But the members of the ExCom repeatedly expressed bewilderment concerning Air Force assertions that the air strike would call for as many as five hundred sorties involve collateral damage, etc.
The ""surgical"" air strike in which the political leaders were interested and which many thought the Air Force was talking about was never examined in detail by the Air Force estimators during the first week of the crisis.
The grounds for Sweeny's assurance to the President that a surgical air strike would not guarantee destruction of the missiles was no careful study, Rather Air Force estimators had simply excluded the alternative with the assertion that since the MRBM's were ""mobile,"" extensive bombing was required.
During the second week of the crisis, civilian expercs examined the surgical air strike.
Careful study revealed that the missiles designated ""mobile"" could be moved and reassembled -in six days.
After the missiles were reclassified ""movable"" and detailed plans for surgical air strikes specified, this action was added to the list of live options for the end of the second week.
The task of specifying the details of the option named ""blockade"" belonged to the Navy.
Before the President announced the blockade on Monday evening, the first stage of the Navy's blueprint was in motion, and a problem loomed on the aorizon.L77; The Navy had a detailed plan for the blockade.
The President had several less precise but equally determined notions concerning what should be done, when, and how.
For the Navy the issue was one of effective implementation of the Navy's blockade -without the meddling and interference of political leaders.
A surface chronology establishes a context within which questions arise.
The President heard a discussion Ohout opeiation of the blockade for the first time at the meating of the formal Nastional Security CAuncil on Sunday, ""ctober 21, which ratified the pxcbom's blocka6e decision.
L78 Admiral .eorpe Ande'son, Chief of Saval Operstivrns, described the plans and procedures.
First, each approaching ship would be sigl•ed to stop for Soardi'R and inspection.
Finally, if there were still wo -33satisfactory response, a shot would be fired into her rudder to cripple but not to sink.
The quarantine was proclaimed Tuesday evening, after the Organization of American States approval had been obtained.
A careful reading of available sources uncovers an instructive incident.
L863 The Navy's blueprint for the blockade was thus changed by drawing the blockade much closer to Cuba.
This incident seems to suggest that organizational plans and procedures can be changed by political leaders successfully and at small cost.
A serious organizational orientation makes one suspicious of this account.
More careful examination of the available evidence confirms these suspicions, though alternative accounts must be somewhat speculative.
According to the public chronology, a quarantine drawn close to Cuba became effective on Wednesday morning, the first Soviet ship was contacted on Thursday morning, and the first boarding of a ship occurred on Friday.
L87j The Marcula had been trailed since about 10:30 the previous evening.
One can be certain, however, that Soviet ships passed through the line along which American destroyers had posted themselves before the official ""first contact"" with the Soviet ship.
Photographs of this vessel sLow the name Vinnita on the side of the veseel in Cyrillic letters.L903 But according to the official United States position, the first tanker to pass through the blockade was the Bucharest, which was hailed by the Navy on the morning of October 25.
Again simple mathematical calculation excludes the possibility that the Bucharest and the Vinnita were the same ship, since a tanker traveling at 10 to 20 knots could not reach Havana from the blockade line in a single day.
It seems quite probable, then that the Navy's resistance to the President's order that the blockade be drawn in closer to Cuba forced the President to allow one or several Soviet shi s to pass through the blockade after it was officially operative.
On Wednesday morning, October 24, what the President had been awaiting occurred.
The eighteen dry cargo ships headinn towards the quarantine stopped dead in the water.
The President became quite concerned lest the Navy -already riled because of the leashing of its designed blockade -blunder into an incident.
Sensing the President's fears, McNamara became suspicious of the Navy's organizational procedures and routines for making the first interception.
At one point McNamara asked Anderson what he would do if a Soviet ship's captain refused to answer questions about his cargo.
BUREAUCRATIC POLITICS Model II's grasp of government action as organizational output, partially coordir.ated by a unified group of leaders, provides a salutary antidote to the standard model's efforts at understanding government behavior as actions chosen by a unitary decisionmaker.
Rather, each of the individuals in this group is, in his own right, a player in a central, competitive game.
Government behavior can thus be understood according to a third conceptual model, not as organizational output but as outcomes of these bargaining games.
In contrast with Model I, the bureaucratic politics model sees no unitary actor but rather many actors as players, who focus not on a single strategic issue but on many diverse intranational problems as well, in terms of no consistent set of strategic goals and objectives but rather various conceptions of national, organizational, and personal goals, making government decisions not by rational choice but by the pulling and hauling that is politics.
The apparatus of each national government constitutes a complex arena for the intra-national game.
Political leaders at the top of this apparatus plus the men who occupy positions on top of the critical organizations form the circle of central players.
The necessary decentralization of decisions required for action on the broad range of foreign policy problems guarantees that each player has considerable baronial discretion.
The nature of problems of foreign policy permits fundamental disagreement among reasonable men concerning what ought to be done.
Separate responsibilities laid on the shoulders of individual personalities encourage differences in perceptions end priorities.
Thus responsible men are obliged to fight for what they are convinced is right.
What the nation does is sometimes the result of the This framework is entitled the bureaucratic politics model.
It might have been labeled administrative, internal, governmental, machine, or even palace politics.
In either case what moves the chess pieces is not simply the reasons which support a course of action, nor the routines of organiza~ions which enact an alternative, but the power and skill of proponents and opponents of the action in question.
This characterization captures the thrust of the bureaucratic politics orientation.
If problems of foreign policy arose as discreet issues, and decisions were determined one game at a time, this account would suffice.
Vietnam or the proliferation of nuclear weapons, emerge piecemeal, over time, one lump in one context, a second in another.
Each player is forced to fix upon his issues for that day, fight them on their own terms, and rush on to the next.
Thus the character of emerging issues &ad the pace at which the game is played converge to yield government ""decisions"" and ""actions"" as collages.
To explain why one particular formal governmental decision was made or why one pattern of government behavior emerged, it is necessary to identify the games and players, to display the coalitions, bargains, and compromises, and to convey some feel for the confusion which contributed to the foul-ups.
The concept of national security policy as political outcome contradicts both public imagery and academic orthodoxy.
To accuse someone of ""playing politics with national security"" is a most serious charge.
For example, both Sorensen and Schlesinger present the efforts of the ExCom in the Cuban missile crisis as rational deliberation among a unified group of equals.
What public conviction demands, the academic penchant for intellectual elegance reinforces.
Internal politics is messy; moreover, according to prevailing doctrine, politicking lacks intellectual content.
As such, it constitutes gossip for journalists rather than a subject for serious investigation.
Occasional memoirs, anecdotes in historical accounts, and several detailed case studies to the contrary, most of the literature of foreign policy avoids bureaucratic politics.
The gap between academic literature and the experience of participants in government is nowhere wider than at this point.
The paradigm articulated here relies upon this small but increasing number.
Little labor has been invested in squeezing these insights into propositions.
Systematic investigation of major players' games, categories of decisions and actions, and the ""fine print"" of bureaucratic politics is required.
Until this work is more advanced the bureaucratic politics paradigm can be no more than a tentative formalization of an orientation.
Following Wittgenstein's employment of concept of a ""game"", national inputs into international affairs can be conceived as outcomes of intricate and subtle, simulcaneous, overlapping games among players located in positions, the hierarchial arrangement of which constitutes the government.
The moves, sequences of moves, and games of chess are thus to be explained in terms of the bargaining among players with separate and unequal power over particular pieces and with separable objectives in distinguishable subgames.
The actor is neither a unitary nation, nor a conglomerate of organizations, but rather a number of individual players.
Groups of these players constitute the agent for particular goverwent decisions and actions.
Individuals become players in the national security policy game by occupying a critical position in an administration.
The theatrical metaphor of stage, roles, and actors is more common than this metaphor of games, positions, and players.
Nevertheless, the rigidity connoted by the concept of ""role"" both in the theatrical sense of actors reciting fixed lines and in the sociological sense of fixed responses to spccified social situations makes the concepts of games, positions, and players more useful for this analysis of aative participants in the determination of national foreign policy.
Objections to the terminology on the grounds that ""game"" connotes non-serious play overlook the concept's application to most serious problems both in Wittgenstein's philosophy and in contemporary game theory.
Game theory typically treats more precisely structured games, but Wittgenstein's examination of the ""language game"" wherein men use words to communicate is quite analogous to this analysis of the less specified game of bureaucratic politics.
Wittgenstein's employment of this concept forms a central strand in his Philosophical Investigations.
The advantages and handicaps with which each player can enter and play in various games stems from his position.
The two sides of this coin are illustrated by the position of the modern Secretary of State.
First,in form and usually in fact, he is the primary respository of political Jucgment on the political-military issues which are the stuff of contemporary foreign policy; consequently, he is a senior personal adviser to the President.
Second, he is the colleague of the President's other senior advisers on problems of foreign policy, the Secretaries of Defense and Treasury, and the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs.
Third, he is the ranking United States diplomat for serious negotiation.
Fourth, he serves as an administration voice to Congress, the country, and the world.
The perspective stemming from the daily work which be must oversee--the cable traffic by which his department maintains relations with other foreign offices--conflicts with the President's requirement that he serve as a generalist and coordinator of contrasting perspectives.
The necessity that he be close to the President restricts the extent to which, and the force with which, he can front for his department.
When he defers to the Secretary of Defense rather than fighting for his department's position--as he often must--he strains the loyalty of his officialdom.
The Secretary's resolution of these conflicts depends not only upon the position, but also upon the player who occupies the position.
How each man manages to stand the heat in his kitchen, each player's basic operating style, and the complementarity or contradiction among personalities and styles in the inner circles are irreducible pieces of the policy blend.
These begs include sensitivities to certain issues, commitments to various programs, and personal standing and debts with groups in the society.
For the factors which encourage organizational parochicalism also exert pressure upon the players who occupy positions on top of ker within) these organizations.
To motivate members of his organization, a player must be sensitive to the organization's orientation.
The games into -40which the player can enter and the advantages with which he plays enhance these pressures.
Thus propensities of perception and priorities stemming from position are sufficient to permit reliable prediction in many cases.
But these propensities are filtered through the baggage which players bring to positions.
Sensitivity to both the pressures and the baggage is thus required for many predictions.
But outcomes advance and impede each player's conception of the natiotial interest, his organization's interests, specific programs to which he is committed, the welfare of his friends, and his personal interests.
These overlapping interests constitute the stakes for which games are played.
Unsuccessful investment deplete both the stock of capital and the reputation.
Thus each player must pick the issues on which he can play with high probability of success.
But no player's power is sufficient to guarantee satisfactory outcomes.
Rather, deadlines and events raise issues in games, and demand decisions of incredibly busy players in ccntexts which significantly influence the face that the issue wears.
The problems for the players are both narrower and broader than the strategic problem.
For each player focuses not or. the total strategic problem but rather on tht decision which must be made now.
But each decision has critical consequences not only for the strategic problem but for each player's organizational, reputational, and personal stakes.
Thus the gap between what the player was focusing on and the problem upon which 'he analyst focuses is so wide that it may be unbridgeable.
Circuits,e., regularized ways of producing action concerning types of issues, structure the game by pre-selecting ths major players, determining their points of entrance into the game, and distributing particular adv&ntages and disadvantages for kach game.
Most critically, circuits determine ""who's got the action,"" that is, which department's Indians actually do whatever is decided.
Covernment decisions are made and government actions emerge neither as the calculated choice of a unified group, nor as a formal sumnary of leaders' preferences.
Rather the context of .hared power but separate judgments concerning important choices, determines that politics is the mechanism of choice.
Each player pulls and hauls with the power at his discretion for outcomes which will advance his conception of national, organizational, group, and personal interests.
The strategies and tactics employed are quite similar to those formalized by theorists of international relations.
But the game ot politics does not consist simply ef players pulling and hauling, each for his own chosen action.
But the staffers of Rarons fight to find issues, state alternatives, and produce arguwnts for their Chiefs.
Presidential staffers -ideally -struggle to catth issues antd structure games so 4s to maximize both the President's appreciation of advocates' arguments and the impact of Presidential decision.
Important government decisions or actions rarely emerge as steady-state outcomes of a single game.
Rather, what the government does is a collage composed of individual acts, outcomes of minor and major games, and foul-ups.
Outcomes which could never have been chosen by an actor and would hever have emerged from bargaining in a single game over the issue, are fabricated piece by piece.
Sophisticated players appreciate that each piece of the picture is but a piece, and adjust their play accordingly.
Players concerned with the aggregate work of art must attempt to manage the stream of acts, outcomes, and foul-ups, though this is the most difficult aspect of the game of politics.
Dominant Inference Pattern If a nation performed an action, that action was the outcome of bargaining among individuals and groups within the government.
That outcome included results of the triumph in the bargaining groups comitted to a decision or action, resultants which emerged from bargaining among groups with quite different positions and foul-ups.
Model III's explanatory power is achieved by revealing the pulling and hauling of various players, with different perceptions and priorities, focusing on separate problems, which yielded the outcomes that constitute the action in question.
The sum of behavior of representatives of a government relevant to an issue wae. rarely intended by any individual or group.
Rather separate individuals with different intentions contributed pieces which compose an outcome distinct from what anyone would have chosen.
Horisuntailv, the diverse demand, upon each player shape his priorities, perceptions. and issues.
For large classes of issues,g., budgets and procurement decisions, the stance of a particular playet can be predicted with high reliability from inform tion concerning his seat.
The aphorism ""where you stand depends on where you sit"" has vertical as well as horizontal application.
Vertically, the demands upon the President, Chiefs, Staffers, and Indians are quite distinct, first in the case of policy making, and second in the case of implementation.
His problem is to probe the special face worn by issues that come to his attention, to preserve his leeway until time has clarified the uncertainties, and to assess the relevant risks.
Foreign policy Chiefs deal most often with the hottest issue de Jour, though, they can get the attention of the President and other members of the govermnent for an issLe which they take to be important.
They must ""give the President confidence"" in the choice of the right course of action.
Most problems are framed, alternatives specified, and proposals pushed, however, by Indians.
Indians' fights with Indians of other departments, for example, struggles between International Security Affairs of the Department of Defense and Political-Military of the State Department are a microcosm of the action at higher levels.
To paraphrase one of Neustadt's assertions which can be applied down the length of the ladder, the essence of a responsible official's task is to induce others to come to see that what needs to be done is what their own appraisal of their own responsibilities requires them to do in their own interests.
For implementtion of foreign policy decisions, vertical demands differ.
The necessity that he build a consensus behind his preferred policy frequently requires fuzziness.
Different people mist agree with slightly different things for quite different reaons.
When a governmant decision is mrde, bottthe character of the choice and the reasons for the choice must often remain vague.
Conviction of footdraggers and subversives constitutes a difficult task when the decision is clear and the watchman is the President.
Where decisions are fuzzed -as the first requirement demands -this task strains even the resources of the President.
Moreover, most oversight, policing, 4nd spurring is done not be the President but by the President's men or the men who agree with the government decision.
Men who would move the elements of the government to act on what has been decided demand clarity.
The probability of nuclear attack depends primarily on the probability of attack emerging as an outcome of the bureaucratic politics of the attacking government.
This latter probability is composed of a number of elements of the game in the politics of the attacking government.
Whether the effective power over action is controlled by an individual, a minor game, or the central game is critical.
Second, though Model I's confidence in deterrence stems from an assertion that, in the end, nations will not commit suicide, Model III recalls the carcasses of national suicides with which history is strewn.
The major difference between a well understood stable balance of terror and a questionable balance may simply be that most members of the government appreciate fully the consequences of attack in the case of the former and are thus on guard against the emergence of this outcome.
If members of the United States government had been sensitive to the stream of decisions from which the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor emerged, they would have been aware of a considerable probability of that attack.
For example, in a crisis or after the beginning of conventional war, what happens to the information available to, and the effective power of, members of the central game.
A third element of importance to attacks are probable differences in perceptions and priorities of central leaders.
Pressures encourage both the Soviet Chairman and the United States President to feel differences between their own perspectives and responsibilities and those of other members of their central games.
Neither of them will likely perceive large differences between the death of one-million -45and one-hundred million of his own citizens when choosing to take, or refrain from taking, a risk.
Both may well appreciate the extent to which the ""kings"" are partners in the game against nuclear disaster.
If channels can be arranged, such cormunication offers the most promising prospect of resolution of a crisis.
The broad outlines of Soviet force posture are established as outcomes of bargaining in the central Soviet game.
The dominant fcature of bureaucratic politics in the Soviet Union is that the ""struggle for power"" is continuous.
Occupation of positions in the central game is always uncertain and risky.
Members of the Politburo and Central Committee are aware of the historical tendency for one man to assume considerable power.
Thus while a central part of life for tihe leader is how to stay on top, a large part of the problem for Politburo members is how to keep the leadership collective.
To reorganize is to redistribute advantages and disadvantages in the central game.
Shifts in the resource allocations constitute shifts in the power of central players.
Evidence Information concerning the details of differences in perceptions and priorities within a government on a particular issue is rarely available.
Accurate accounts of the bargaining which yielded a resolution of the issue are rarer still.
What the documents do preserve tends to obscure as much as to enlighten.
Thus the source of this information must be the participants themselves.
But, ex hypothesis, each participant knows one small piece of the story.
What is required is access to a large number of the participants in a decision before their memories fade or become too badly discolored,by an analyst attuned to the players and sensitive to bureaucratic politics.
The use of public documents, newspapers, interviews of participants, and discussion of close observers of participants to piece together the bits of information available is an art.
Transfer 6f these skills fronm the fingertips of artists to an outline which can guide other students of foreign policy is this model's most pressing need.
The Ex Con's choice of the blockadu cannot be understood apart (rom the context in which the necessity for choice arose.
A series of ovLrlapping bargaining games determined L-oth the date of the discovery of the Soviet missiles and the impact of titis d~scr.vcry on the administration.
An explanation of tlie politics of the ,Lrovery L consequently a considerable piece of the explanation of tun' United States blockade.
First. the bay of Pigs operation in April, 1961 raised the most serious internal dejbtLt about the President's Judgment, the wisdom of his advisors, and the q-ahlity of their advice.
No subseqoent major issue of nationol security wab decided without the inclusion of Theodore Sore.isen and the President's brother, KoberKennedy.
Third, by attempting to ov-erthrow Castro Wut then bungling the job, at least in part because of dovish squ.eamtshmesu, the President and his advisors were left standing in a position not unlike fLt.mberlain's after Czechoslovakia.
Having been tried and found war-ting once, the preisures to overreact in the next case would be overwhelming.
The months preceding the Cuban missile crisis were also awontha before the off.yvar Congressional elections.
Every headline about Cuba, every critic's cry -no matter how wild -flaunted the administration's heel.
His best hope was to overwhelm the critics by a barrage of official sr.:tements disclaiming any Soviet prorocation in Cuband thus deflating his opponent's case.
Thus the administration conducted a forceful campaign of denial designed to discredit critics' claims.
The President himself manned the front I1ne of -47this offensive, though almost all administration officials participated.
L114j Or, September 13 he lashed out at ""loose talk"" calling for an invasion of Cuba.Lll5.
I know that there is no present evidence, and I think that there is no present likelihood that the Cubans and the Cuban government and the Soviet government would, in combination, attem.pt to install a majur offensive capability.
A118 When Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin was called on Monday evening.
October 15 to be Informed of the United States discovery of missiles, he was on the platform celivering a speech to the National Press Olub.
Ll19i in this campaign to puncture the critics' charges and to reassure the public, the administration soon discovered that more than denials were required.
Thus, Kennedy fell into a tenuous semantic distinction between ""offensive"" and ""defensive"" weapons.
A number of Republicans tried to make electoral capital of this foreign policy issue, but provoked a response which had significant consequences for United States policy.
To most of the Congressional participants, the character of this response was unanticipated and irrelevant to their purposes.
But an equally important, more subtle, and less noted effect of this ""action in the wings"" occurred within the games inside the administration.
What the President least wanted to hear, the CIA was most hesitant to say plainly.
Fretting at Cap Ferrat, he bombarded his deputy, General Marshall Carter, with telegrams on September 7, 10, 13 and 16.
When thle Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance r convened on September 10, there was a sense of urgency.E128] Loss of another U-2 might incite world opinion to demand cancellation of U-2 flights.
The President's campaign against critics' claims of Soviet provocation in Cuba had begun.
To risk the downing of a U-2 over Cuba was to risk chopping off the limb on which the President was sitting.
L1301 The draft which they approved suggested both the bargaining from which the draft had emerged and the sensitivity of the players to the spectrum of issues.
On September 13 the President had asserted that there were no Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba and committed his administration to action if offensive missilvs were discovered.
Administration officials being called to testify before Congressional committees were denying that there was any evidence whatever of offcn sive missiles in Cuba.
The implications of a National Intelligence -49Estimate which concluded that the Soviets were introducing offensive missiles into Cuba were not lost on the men who constituted America's highest intelligence assembly.
Though McCone was quite convinced that the Soviets were introducing missiles into Cuba, he was on the Riviera.
The President had heard the hypothesis, so Deputy Director Carter was reluctant to come forward without harder evidence than was then available.
Given this climate of opinion and cluster of considerations, on the basis of the information available USIB unanimously adopted the proposed National Intelligence Estimate.
The necessity of official intra-government adherence to administration guidelines led some members of the military ard intelligence communities who disagreed with the administration position to resort to unofficial channels, particularly the Congress and the Press.
Senator Keating, Representative Kitchin, and others were receiving information from within the administration.
To insure against leaks if intelligence on offensive weapons did become available, President Kennedy ordered special security arrangements, including a special code, PSALM, which restricted infoimation ccncerning offensive weapons to a limited number who had special need to know.L131] The October 4 OJMOR decision to direct a flight over the western end of Cuba in effect ""overturned"" the September estimate, without, however, officially raising that issue.
This decision represented McCone's victory for which he had lobbied with the President before the September 10 decision, in telegrams before the September 19 estimate, and in person after his return to Washington.
Though the politics of the intelligence community is closely guarded, several pieces of the story can be told.
By September 27, Colonel Wright and others in CIA believed that the Soviet Union was placing missiles in the San Cristobal area.
This area was marked suspicious by the CIA on September 29 and certified top priority on October 3.
By October 4 McCone had the evidence required to raise the issue officially.
The members of COMOR heard McCone's argument, but were reluctant to make the hard decision which he demanded.
American overflight of the western end of Cuba was a matter of real concern.
This hesitancy accounts for the ten day delay between decision and flight, but the details of that bargaining must be held in abeyance.
This revelation fell upon highly politicized players in an extraordinarily complex context.
What each of the central participants saw, and what each did to cover both his one and the administration's nakedness, provided a spectrum of issues and answers.
First, in terms of the President's attention and priorities at that moment, Khrushchev had chosen the most unhelpful act of all.
In a highly sensitive domestic political context where the opponents demanded action against the Soviet interests in Cuba, Kennedy was following a policy of reason and responsibility.
In support of that policy, he had drawn a distinction between ""defensive"" and ""offensive"" weapons, staked his full Presidential authority on the assertion that the Soviets were not placing offensive weapons in Cuba, and warned unambiguously that offensive missiles would not be tolerated.L1361 Second, the major thrust of his administration's policy towards the Soviet Union had been one of relaxing tension and building trust through trust.
At considerable political cost, he was attempting to leash the anti-Communist Cold Warriors and to educate both members of the government and the public out of prevailing devil theories of Soviet Communism.
Moreover, he, and his closest advisers, had madeevery possible effort to guarantee that all communication between the President and the Chairman would be straightforward and accurate.
As part of this exchange, Khrushchev had assured the President through the most direct and personal channels that he was aware of the President's domestic political problem and that nothing would be done to exacerbate this problem.
Specifically, Khrushchev had given the President solemn, trustworthy assurances that the Soviet Union was not importing offensive missiles into Cuba.l1371 But then this.
The missiles must be removed.L1381 The alternatives of ""doing nothing"" or ""taking a diplomatic approach"" could not have been more irrelevant to his problem.
These two tracks doing nothing and taking a diplomatic approach were the solutions advocated by twc of his principal advisors, to the issues they perceived.
For Secretary of Defense McNamara, the missiles raised the spectre of nuclear war.
To combat this spectre, he first framed the issue as a straightforward strategic problem.
To understand the issue, one had to grasp two obvious, but difficult points.
The United States should not initiate a crisis with the Soviet Union, risking a -51probability of nuclear war (which the President estimated was ""etween one to three and even) over an occurrence which had such small strategic implications.
The perceptions of McGeorge Bundy, the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs, are the most difficult of all to reconstruct.
The Soviet Union should be arraigned before the court of world opinion and the United States should appeal to the United Nations or the Organization of American States for an inspection team.
This should not be made an issue between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The President's brother, Robert Kennedy, saw more clearly than McNamara the political wall against which Khrushchev had backed the President.
But like McNamara, the issue for Robert Kennedy was the prospect of nuclear doom.
From the outset he probed for an alternative that would prevent the air strike.
The initial reaction of Theodore Sorensen, the President's Special Counsel and ""alter ego,"" especialiv for major speeches, fell somewhere between that of the President and his brother.
If the President,was the architect of the policy which the missiles punctured, Sorensen was the draftsman.
But like Robert Kennedy, Sorensen feared lest the shock and disgrace lead to disaster.
Now was the time to do the job for which they had been preparing contingency plans.
As the President recalled on the day the crisis ended, ""An invasion would have been a mistake -a wrong use of our power.
It was Rusk who remarked on the morning after the President's announcement of the crisis to the world ""We have won a considerable victory.
You and I are still alive.""[146j But he never wavered from his conviction that ""we must see it through,"" whatever the consequences. -52McCone's perceptions flowed from his confirmed prediction.
As the Cassandra of the incident, he argued forcefully that the Soviets had employed the missiles in a daring political probe whiLA the United States must meet with force.
At the outset of the crisis, the individuals who convened at the President's discretion as the ExCom, whistled many different tunes.
The process by which this outcome emerged is a story of the most subtle and intricate probing, pulling, and hauling; leading, guiding, and spurring.
Indeed, what prevented the air strike was a fortuitous coincidence of a number of factors -the absence of any one of which might have prevented blockade of the air strike.
First, McNamara's vision of the spectre set him firmly against the air strike.
His initial attempt to frame the issue in strategic terms struck Kennedy as particularly inappropriate, given the President's problem.
Once McNamara had appreciated that the name of the game was a strong response, however, he and his deputy Gilpatric conceived of the blockade as a fallback.
When this Secretary of Defense -whose department had the action, whose reputation in the Cabinet was unequaled, in whom the President had demonstrated full confidence -marshalled the arguments for the blockade and refused to be moved, the blockade became a formidable alternative.
His arguments against the air strike on moral grounds struck a chord in the President.
Moreover, once his brother had stated these arguments so forcefully, the President could not have persisted in his preferred course without, in effect, agreeing to become what RFK had condemned. -53The President learned of the missiles on Tuesday morning.
On Wednesday morning, in order not to suggest to the Russians that we had discovered anything, the President flew to Connecticut to keep a campaign commitment, leaving RFK as the unofficial chairman of the group.
By the time the President returned on Wenesdav evening, a critical third piece had been added to the picture.
A powerful coalition of the advisors in whom the President had the greatest confidence, and with whom his style was most compatible, had emerged.
Fourth, the coalition th&t had formed behind the President's initial preference gave him cause to pause.
Who supported the air strike -the Chiefs, McCone, Rusk, Nitze, and Acheson -more than how they supported it, counted.
Fifth, a piece of inaccurate information, which no one probed, permitted the blockade advocates to tuel uncertainties in the President's mind.
When the President returned to Washington Wednesday evening, RFK and Sorensen met him at the airport.
Sorensen gave the President a four-page memorandum outlining the areas of agreement and disagreement.
Some of the members of the ExCom, however, met with the President that morning and afternoon.
Thursday evening the ExCom convened not at the State Department, but at The White House, with the President.
Kennedy declared his tentative choice of the blockade and directed that preparation be made to put it into effect by Monday morning.
During the second week of the crisis, civilian experts examined the surgical air strike option, discovered that it could be chosen with high confidence, and thus added it to the list of possible choices for the end of the second week.
That no one probed this estimate earlier poses an interesting question for further investigation.
A coalition, including the President, thus emerged from the President's initial decision that something be done; McNamara, Rubert -54Kennedy, and Sorensen's resistance to the air strike; incompatibility between the President and the air strike advocates; and in inaccurate piece of information.
To get from this coalition to a government decision, the coalition had to get the air strike advocates on board.
Acheson, the leader of the air strike zamp, had attacked the Attorney General bitterly in a previous meeting.
He received an invitation from The White House.t1551 The President listened to Acheson's argument, but left no question in Acheson's mind about where the buck stopped.
Otherwise, lie said, ""Delay and dissension would plague whatever decision he took.""(1571 but Friday morning's ExCom meeting reopened the matter.
Over Sorensen's protest that a decision had been reached the night before, the air strike advocates continued to press their arguments.
The President could not possibly order an air strike.f160] Sorensen agreed to write the first draft of a blockade speech.f1611 The air strike advocates had lost.
Dean Acheson did not return to the meeting the next day, but instead, retired to his farm in Maryland.rL162] Saturday morning the group approved -or at least acquiesced in -r Sorensen's draft of a blockade speech.
L1631 Saturday afternoon the National Security Council met for the first time in order to make the final decision.f 16 4 7 The meeting resembed a Greek play in which powers maneuvered according to the plot which moved inexorably towards the determined outcome.
At the conclusion of the presentations, there was an awkward silence which was broken by Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric, ""Essentially, Mr President, this is a choice between a limited action and unlimited action.""b1663 Kennedy nodded his agreement, but with reservations.
First, the United States simply could not give up Guantanamo at this point.
Second, thoLgh he previously ordered withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles, the middle of a crisis was not time for concessions that could destroy the alliance by confirming European suspicions concerning our willingness to sacrifice their security to protect our interests in an area of no cncern to them.
Instead of taking the diplomatic defensive, the President asserted that we should press our indictment of the Soviet Union for its duplicity and threat to world peace.
Lovett, McCone and others joined in a much sharper attack of Stevenson's diplomatic proposals.
Again, General Sweeny, Commander of the Tactical Command, asserted that the Air Force could guarantee only 90 percent effectiveness in a surgical air strike.
His statement at the Saturday mecting end this last minute reconsideration simply ""prepared the record"" in case his chosen course ran aground.f1743 At least he would not be vulnerable to the charge that he had not heard the Air Force's case.
Thus, the decisiun which Kennedy announced to the world on 'uesday evening, October 22, emerged -part resultant and part result, a melange of misperception, miscommunication, misinformation, bargaining, pulling, hauling, and spurring as well as the ""sugar and spice and everything nice"" of the more conventional accounts. -56V CONCLUSION This essay constitutes a preliminary stage in development and support of the general argument stated at the outset.
The standard frame of reference employed by foreign policy analysts in producing explanation has been raised to an explicit level.
When one central puzzle of the Cuban missile crisis was fished with each of the models in turn, the catches were quite different.
Though the conceptual models are not exclusive, most analysts do proceed predominantly in terms of one model.
First, formulation of alternative frames of reference and Ce.... tration that different analysts, relying predominantly on different models, produce quite different explanations should encourage analyst's selfconsciousness about the nets which he employs.
The effect of these ""spectacles"" in sensitizin~g the analyst to particular aspects of what is going on -framing the puzzle in one way rather than another, encouraging the analyst to examine the problem in terms of certain categories rather than others, directing the analyst to particular kinds of evidence, and relieving puzzlement by one procedure rather than another -must be recognized and explored.
Models II and III may suggest additional, perhaps new, facets of problems, and perspectives from which they can be viewed.
Inspection of these explanations, and articulation oi the conceptual models employed in producing them, is a first step.
Serious attention to the logic of explanation, and explicit formulation of the propositions relied upon in substantive studies, is a second.
Separation of the various intellectual enterprises in which foreign policy analysts engage, and specification of the logic of each, is a third.
Formulation of a common language and framework for self-conscious conversation about what foreign policy analysts do amounts simply to a start.
We are left at a halfway house, built from a number of crisscrossing strands, each requiring further development, each on its way to separable conclusions.
But this is typical of work in progress. -57Articulation of conceptual models as paradigms sharpens differences and understates overlaps for the sake of expository emphasis and clarity.
Mixed models, e.g. combinations of I and III or II and III, must be considered.
Each concentrates on an area of importance to that particular type of analysis, relegating other important variables to a ceteris paribus clause.
Though Models II and III contribute significantly to an understanding of the United States blockade, Model TI should be especially powerful in explaining routine executionary activity and Model III in understanding ""solutions"" to issues which present many alternatives to strongly divided players.
A typology of decisions and actions, some of which are more amenable to treatmenL in terms of one model and some to another should be developed.
These three models exhaust neither the dimensions on which they are arranged, nor the dimensions relevant to explanations of government behavior.
Further models, for example, a cognitive model or a ""shrink"" model focusing on the psychological characteristics of central players should be considered.f176] 5.
Government behavior is but one cluster of factors relevant to occurrences in foreign affairs.
Nevertheless, the dimensions of the chess board, the character of the pieces, and the rules of the game -factors considered by international systems theorists -constitute the context in which the chess pieces are moved.
The sensitivity of models of government behavior to facts about the international system must be investigated.
The relevance of these three models to activities of foreign policy analysts is not limited to explanation.
How the models can be applied to further ac-ivitles of prediction, evaluation, and recommendation provides a challenging problem for future research.
Analogues of these conceptual models are employed in attempting to understand government policy in other substantive areas.
Anaccount of the blockade which drew heavily from all three would be preferred.
Perhaps this entails a comprehensive model in which each -58of the paradigms is but a building block.
A grand synthesis would seem, however, an issue for demonstration rather than assertion.
For the subject matter may not permit anything grander than separate but strong building blocks.
In either case, it is possible to speculate about several pieces from which a meager, ad hoc, working synthesis might be built.
The Model III analyst centers both on the emergence of a blockade decision in the ExCom and on other elements of government behavior.
For Models II and III this strategic problem establishes the context within which investigation proceeds.
That Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba posed a strategic problem which created high probability of United States reaction is the ballpark for all three models.
Given United States values and capabilities, the probability of a strong reaction,g., invasion, air strike, or blockade, was considerable.
Model II emphasizes organizational constraints in choice and organizational routines in implementation.
Organizational processes which produced awareness of the problem on October 14 (rather than two weeks earlier or later), organizational routines which defined the alternatives, and organizational procedures which executed the blockade overshadow the ""choice"" which the unified group of leaders contributed within these constraints.
Model III accents the active games of individual players within the leadership group.
Bargaining among players who shared power but saw separate problems yielded discovery of the missiles on a certain date in a special context, a definition of the problem which demanded strong action, a coalition of Presidential intimates set on averting holocaust, failure to probe a military estimate, and consequently a blockade.
In the absence of a number of particular facts about players and games, the outcome would have been different.
For example, had Cuba II occurred at the time of Cuba I Robert Kennedy and Sorensen would not have been members of the critical national security policy game, the military chiefs would have had more chips, and an air strike would most probably have emerged.
Strategic surrender is an important problem of international relations and diplomatic history.
Whether implicit in explanations or more explicit in analysis, both diplomatic historians and strategists rely upon propositions which can be turned forward to produce predictions.
North Vietnam will surrender when she realizes ""that continued fighting can only generate additional costs without hope of compensating gains, this expectation being largely the consequence of the previous application of force by the dominant side.""[178i United States actions can increase or decrease Hanoi's strategic costs.
Bombing North Vietnam increases the pain and thus increases the probability of surrender.
That -""other things being eqral"" -nations are more likely to surrender when the strategic cost-benefit balance is negative, is true.
Models II and III focus upon the government machine through which this fact about the ""international strategic marketplace"" must be filtered to produce a surrender.
These analysts are considerably less sanguine about the possibility of surrender at the point that the costbe.Iefit calculus turns negative.
Never in history (i.e. in none of the five cases which I have examined) have nations surrendered at that point.
When, depends on processes of organizations and politics of players within these governments -as they are affected by the opposing government.
Moreover, the effects of the victorious power's action upon the surrendering nation cannot be adequately summarized as increasing or decreasing strategic costs.
Imposing additional costs by bombing a nation may increase the probability of surrender.
An appreciation of the impact of the acts of one nation upon another thus requires some understand.rig of the machine which is being influenced.
For more precise prediction, Models II and III require considerably more information about the organizations tnd politics of North Vietnam than is publicly available.
On the bisis of the limited public information, however, these motOels can be suggestive.
The government must know that the strategic cost-benefit calculus is negative.
But neither the categories, nor the indicators, -60of strategic costs and benefits are clear.
And the sources of information about both are organizations whose parochial priorities and perceptions do not facilitate accurate information or estimation.
Military evaluation of military performance, military estimates of factors like ""enemy morale,"" and military predictions concerning when ""the tide will turn"" or ""the corner will have been turned"" are markedly distorted.
In cases of highly de-centralized guerrilla operations, like Vietnam, these problems are exacerbated.
Only highly visible costs can have direct impact on leaders without being filtered through organizational channels.
Second, since organizations define the details of options and execute actions, surrender is likely to entail considerable bungling in the early stages.
No organization can define options or prepare programs for this treasonous act.
Thus, early overtures will be uncoordinated with the acts of other organizations,g., the fighting forces, creating contradictory ""signals"" to the victor.
Model III suggests that surrender will not come at the point that strategic costs outweigh benefits, but that it will not wait until the leadership group concludes that the war is lost, Rather the problem is better understood in terms of four additional propositions.
First, strong advocates of the war effort, whose careers are closely identified with the war, rarely come to conclude that costs outweight benefits.
Second, quite often from the outset of a war, a number of members of the government (particularly those whose responsibilities sensitize them to problems other than war,g., economic planners or intelligence experts), are convinced that the war effort is futile.
Fourth, the course of the war, particularly actions of the victor, can influence the advantages and disadvantages of players in the loser's government.
How United States bombing , threats, promises, or action in the South affect the game in Hanoi is subtle but nonetheless crucial.
That these three models could be applied to the surrender of governments other than North Vietnam shoLid be obvious.
Horelick, A and M Rush, Strategic Power and Soviet Foreign Policy, Chicago, 1965.
An Analysis of Soviet Calculations and Behavior,"" World Politics, April, 1964.
This proposition was formulated earlier by A Wohlstetter, ""The Delicate Balance of Terror,"" Foreign Affairs, January, 1953.
Though this was the formulation of the argument, the facts are not strictly accurate.
For example, President T Roosevelt applauded Japan's attack on Russia in 1904.
Bruck and B Sapin, Foreign Policy Decision-Making, Glencoe, 1962, constitutes a partial exception.
United States Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, Lterirn Roport on Cuban Military Build-up, 88th Congress, 1st Session, 1963, 2.
Wohlstetter, R., ""Cuba and Pearl Harbor,"" Foreign Affairs, July, 1965, 706.
U.S., Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 88th Cong., 1st Sess., 1963, 25ff.
Cuban Military Build-up; Department of Defense Appropriations Hearings.
For Hilsman, To Move a Nation, 186; Able, Missile Crisis, 24; Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 64; Able, Missile Crisis, 24; Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 1-30.
A verbatim transcript of a presentation actually made by General Carroll's assistant, John Hughes; and Hilsman's statement, To Move a Nation, 186.
See McNamara's testimony under pressure, Department of Defense Apprcpriations, Hearings, 69.
Testimony of General Carroll, Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 68.
Strictly, General Carroll testified that this piece of information arrived on September 18.
United States Proclamation on Interdiction of Offensive Weapons, October 23, 1962, Bulletin, XLVII, 717.
This hypothesis would account for the mystery surrounding Kennedy's explosion at the leak of the stopping of the Bucharest.
An L'tterim Report,"" Journal of Conflict Resolution, December, 1959; To Move a Nation.
Inclusion of the President't Special Assistant for National Security Affairs in the tier of ""Cheifs"" rather than amoig tie ""Staffers"" involves a debatable choice.
He is especially dependent on good relations with the President and the Secretaries of Defense and State.
The decision to include this position among the Chiefs reflects my judgment that the function which McGeorge Bundy served is becoming institutionalized.
Hammond, P., ""Super Carriers and B-36 Bombers,"" in H Stein, ed., American Civil-Military Decisions, Birmingham, 1963.
For discussion of the accuracy and frankness of these remarks see Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 4Off.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee; Senate Armed Services Co.mmittee; House Committee on Appropriations; House Select Committee on Export Control.
For composition of IIS13 .ee -.epaitment of Defense Appropri;ti'ns, Heari•gs, 51.
A basic, but somewhat contradictory, account of parts of this story @me•-ges in the Department of Defense Appropriations. jearinio, 1-70 133.
Thus my position is quite distinct from boch poles in the recent ""great debate"" concerning international relations.
While many ""traditionalists"" of the sort Kaplan attacks adlpt the first posture and many ""scientists"" of the sort attacked by Bull adopt the second, this third posture is relatively neutral with respect to whatever is in substantive dispute.
The Case for a Classical Approach,"" World Politics, April, 1966; M, Kaplan, ""The New Creaw Debate: Taaditionalism vs.
