Committee Background The Security Council focuses on maintaining international peace and security, accomplishing this task by determining the existence of a possible act of aggression or threat to peace.
When such risks are detected, the council must call upon the parties to settle their disputes in a peaceful manner, recommending methods of adjustment or settlement.
In extreme cases, the council has the authority to impose sanctions or authorize the use of military action for the purpose of maintaining order.
It is made up of 5 permanent member states and ten non-permanent members.
The rest of the SC members are elected by the General Assembly and serve for two-year terms.
In the case that a non-member state holds a valuable and relevant position in the issue being discussed by the Council, the nation may participate in the discussion but cannot vote on a resolution.
Finally, in order for a resolution to pass in the Security Council, at least 9 of the 15 members need to approve the proposal.
During the Cold War, newly elected president John F Kennedy had promised to be tougher with the communist Soviet Union seeing as the 1961 Vienna Summit left him frustrated and unsatisfied.
Additionally, Fidel Castro's nationalization of American companies led Kennedy to withhold all aid meant for Cuba and all imports of Cuban sugar, the backbone of their economy.
In light of Cuba and the Soviet Union's new military alliance, on October 14, 1962 the United States sent a U-2 spy plane to Cuba and discovered a nuclear missile site being built by the Soviet Union which could be used to target anywhere in the United States.
Worried about the repercussions of his past actions on the whole country, Kennedy secretly met with several advisors before October 22nd, and on that day, President Kennedy called a meeting with the National Security Council to publicly announce that American citizens were under threat by both the Soviet Union and Cuba.
After the United States failed to overthrow Fidel Castro’s regime at the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Soviet government came to an agreement with Castro in which the Soviets could install nuclear weapons in Cuba due to its proximity to the United States.
This was done in order to ensure that the United States would not try to invade Cuba like they had attempted previously.
As the ever growing tensions between the two world’s superpowers grew, the United States and the allies had a clear advantage when it came to nuclear threats.
On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy appeared on National television informing the general American public about the things that were currently happening between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Since the missiles were placed just 90 miles from the south of Florida, the threat of quickly reaching eastern United States hovered over every single American.
As tensions between both countries continued rising, Americans faced an omnipresent threat of being annihilated by a nuclear weapon.
In 1961, the USA failed to overthrow Cuba’s communist government dictated by Fidel Castro with an invasion known as the Bay of Pigs, given the location of the invasion.
As a result, Cuba sought out support from the USSR, which they undoubtedly agreed to provide, as they could then secretly transfer nuclear missiles to Cuba.
They did this not only to protect Cuba, but most importantly to counter USA’s missiles located in Italy and Turkey.
On October 14, 1962, U-2 spy planes controlled by the USA flew over Cuba and took pictures.
This revealed medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles under construction.
Nikita Khrushchev, former USSR leader who had previously stated that there were no offensive weapons being transported to Cuba, had been caught lying and President Kennedy was furious.
Khrushchev had told Kennedy that the weapons were only defensive, that they were only meant to avoid another United States invasion, and that it would not include missiles.
Initially, Kennedy had pledged to take action if the USSR sent nuclear weapons to Cuba, and because Khrushchev did, he had to do something about it.
Their Defence Secretary mentioned that if the president decides to send an airstrike, it must occur before the nuclear weapons are functional.
The photos of the U-2 spy planes show evidence that the warheads are not yet assembled, nor on sight of the military base.
The Defence Secretary believed President Kennedy still had time but the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff disagreed.
The missiles were very near completion, it was only a matter of time until those missiles were used.
The Joint Chiefs believed an airstrike would not be efficient because Khrushchev could easily send more missiles to replace the damaged ones.
General McNamara said, “General Taylor will wish to comment on this, but the Chiefs are strong in their recommendation against that kind of an attack, believing that it would leave too great a capability in Cuba undestroyed.
It seems highly unlikely that that number would be required to carry out that limited an objective, but at least that capability is available in the Air Force alone, and the Navy sorties would rise on top of that number.
Other members of the meeting pointed out that airstrikes are not always fully effective, and that some missiles may survive the damage and be launched to counterattack.
This plan had a low chance of success, but it also had a low risk of starting a war.
The third option was the previously mentioned airstrike-invasion on Cuba.
On October 17, 12:00m. in the Caribbean, the United States sent forty warships just in case they were going to approach with the third plan.
Two days later, on October 19, 9:45 PM, the White House received reports of two finished medium-range missiles.
Days prior, EXCOMM had been neglecting the third approach of the airstrike-invasion.
The Joint Chiefs were still inclined to war, but Kennedy was not in favor of this because even though they had won a nuclear war, another war could still lead to the death of millions of citizens.
President Kennedy decided to go with the second approach, and the blockade started on October 21.
The next day, on October 22, President Kennedy alerted and informed Americans on the current situation.
In addition, he called on Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to eliminate the missiles or they would suffer from a counterattack from the United States.
Khrushchev saw this and realized that the Americans knew about the missiles.
Moscow time, and the United States embassy had also told him to expect a communication one hour before the broadcast.
Option two was to give the missiles to Cuba in order to defend themselves.
Instead of choosing between one of these options, they waited for the broadcast first.
On October 24, when Soviet ships were going to Cuba they were faced with the line of United States vessels enforcing the blockade.
If the Soviets had attempted to destroy the blockade, it would have likely led to a military confrontation that could have become a nuclear exchange.
Although what happened at sea went as planned, the United States didn’t do anything to address the problem of the missiles that were already located in Cuba.
It turned out that Kennedy was not planning on an invasion, so there would be no war on that day.
Still, Khrushchev was furious because of the United States blockade on Cuba, he still considered it as an act of war.
The missiles continued to be armed, so the United States prepared for an invasion.
On October 27, 1962, a spy plane was shot down by Soviet missiles, killing the pilot, Major Rudolph Anderson.
A few hours later, a Soviet nuclear submarine was hit by a small depth charge, from a United States Navy ship.
Since the submarine was too deep for radio communication, they thought war had already started so they prepared to launch a nuclear torpedo.
The call to launch the torpedo had to be decided by the three officers on board.
The captain and political officer decided to launch, but Vasili Arkhipov, who was second in command, disagreed.
His decision was called and perhaps saved the day, as it prevented the beginning of a nuclear war, but the crisis was not over yet.
The United States Military was put on DEFCON 2, an alert state used by the military to imply that they are one step ready for nuclear war.
There were hundreds of nuclear missiles ready to launch from both parties.
The metaphor of the Doomsday Clock was not far from reality, and was a minute before midnight.
What will happen next could possibly decide the fate of the entire world.
Historical Case Studies The Cuban Revolution The Cuban Revolution took place from 1953 to 1959 and it was mainly organized by Fidel Castro.
The event left him ruling from 1959 all the way to 1976 as Prime Minister and from 1976 all the way to 2008 as a dictator.
However, in 1944, he lost control of the government and moved to Florida.
His opposing candidate turned out to be Fidel Castro who came from an anti corruption party, something that was extremely needed at the time.
However, Batista took power before the election through a violent, yet bloodless coup.
After 2 failed attempts to get political power, Castro built an army and when Bautista lost the support of the Cuban army due to heavy taxes, poverty, and corruption, he fled the country.
Castro took that as an opportunity and arrived in Havana two days later giving a presentation to Cubans filled with allusions about a brighter future.
Bay of Pigs Invasion The Bay of Pigs invasion was a failed attempt to penetrate Cuban borders through the Bay of Pigs in April of 1961.
Americans were outnumbered by Cubans and they had to surrender after less than a day of fighting.
Castro came to power by highlighting the corruption of Batista in his dealings with American companies and his anticommunits sentiments.
After Kennedy was elected President, he decided to launch this invasion of Cuba to prove to the world that he would go all in to win the Cold War.
The invasion was staged not to look like an American attack on Cuba (hence the Cuban refugees being the ones fighting) so it would not look like an act of war.
America had their planes painted as Cuban planes so it would look like they were stolen.
After a failed attempt to destroy Cuban airfields because of Castro’s previous knowledge of the attacks, Kennedy wanted to pull out but it had become too late.
Two days later, this brigade arrived on the shore of the Bay of Pigs and was received by Cuban forces and a radio station broadcasting this event to people all across Cuba.
Operation Mongoose The disaster that was the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961, made the young president look weak, and gave initiative to Cold Warriors in both parties who could not stand the presence of a Soviet-aligned, cominunist dictatorship just ninety miles south of Florida.
This passion prompted General Maxwell Taylor to create a special investigation on the faults of the Bay of Pigs.
This investigation not only ignited the flame inside the Kennedy administration, but prompted the idea of doing something to undermine Fidel Castro.
Pressure from both political parties in the United States to do something to undermine Castro, prompted “Operation Mongoose” on January 19th, 1962.
Brushing aside a CIA National Intelligence Estimate which said that the Cuban dictator enjoyed too much support in Cuba to be overthrown, the operation continued.
This operation was organized by Robert F Kennedy, president John F Kennedy’s brother, and the plan was to create small, specific duties; not large-scale military invasion.
Robert Kennedy chose Edward Lansdale to take charge of this difficult task.
His knowledge of fighting communists came from his work in the Philippines in the 1950s.
All in all, this operation did little to no help in the crisis, and ultimately caused the American people more money.
Though this operation was “under the radar”, history has revealed that Operation Mongoose was, in its own way, every bit as disastrous as the Bay of Pigs.
Kennedy’s Speech to the Nation After the EXCOMM meeting, President Kennedy and the other representatives had decided to approach the situation with the ‘quarantine’ tactic.
This means that a naval blockade, named ‘quarantine’ in order to prevent an impression of an act of war (as the term blockade usually ment war was at hand), will be executed so that all ships bound to Cuba will be inspected and returned if they contain offensive weapons.
Now, on October 22, 1962, it was time to say this publicly in a televised speech.
He already decided the course of action, and the Government would report the crisis in extreme detail for everyone to be informed.
He also explained how the Soviets had already supplied Cuba with medium and long range missiles that could destroy any major city in the Western Hemisphere from Hudson Bay, Canada, all the way to Lima, Peru.
Kennedy quoted that the Soviet Government had claimed that the missiles were only planned to be used in self defence, and that the Soviets have missiles capable of so far ranges that there would not be a need to deploy these missiles outside the Soviet boundaries.
The news was in the front pages of many countries including France that supported America, China that was standing with the Cuban people, and many others.
Even more, Pope John XXIII sent a letter to the Soviet embassy in order to be sent to the Soviet Government in which he said, “We beg all governments not to remain deaf to this cry of humanity.
Thant sent appeals and messages, and relayed proposals and offers between all parties.
He offered reassurance and advanced the “noninvasion for missiles” formula which then formed the basis of the final agreement between the parties involved.
Thant was a major player in the formation of a resolution; in fact, he was shuttled to Cuba to mollify Castro, and helped secure a verification agreement for all three parties.
During the crisis, the Kennedy administration relied heavily on the UN Secretary-General for communication and accurate diplomacy.
It was until the world was in the midst of a possible nuclear war that Secretary-General Thant had to assume the role of an intermediary.
The UN Secretary-General sent the first message on October 24th, only a few hours after the imposed quarantine had taken effect.
The message contained an urgent halt of all arms shipments that were on their way to cuba.
This bought time for both the parties in order to create a peaceful solution.
The international community hailed Thant’s initiative and quick wit, which ultimately gave all parties more time to create a peaceful solution.
The delegates who participated were Adlai Stevenson, who was confronting the Soviet ambassador Valerian Zoran.
The United States ambassador, Adlai Stevenson, asked for an urgent meeting of the Security Council.
This was done to bring attention to the threat to the Western Hemisphere.
Since, the President of the United States reported dangerous military developments in Cuba.
Mr Stevenson stated that they could either decide to take action to bring peace, or they could stand by.
This is why the United States took action and created a blockade around Cuba.
On the other hand, Russian ambassador, Valerian Zoran, stated that by placing the blockade on Cuba, the US government was disregarding the rules of international conduct.
The delegate declared that there should be a consequence against the aggressive actions that the United States was taking against Cuba.
Key Players and Points of View Soviet Union The Soviet Union is one of the key powers taking role in this situation.
Tension between the USSR and the United States has been escalating for a very long time.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev states that the missiles are only for self defence, yet that promise can be broken any second.
Despite being furious, Khrushchev logically does not want war, “The Soviets never thought war was inevitable.” , but Khrushchev will do anything necessary to protect its country.
The USSR is open for negotiation, but at the same time ready to unleash all missiles in a call of war.
In that meeting Castro requested that Nikita ​Khrushchev place Soviet Union nuclear missile facilities on his island as preparation for future invasions.
That was very beneficial for the USSR during the Cold War as the United States was now in threat, and Cuba was the route to war between both countries.
The main problem for the United States was that after the new leftist ruler of the country came to power, and he allied with the Soviet Union which was the largest communist regime at the time and the United States’ rival in the ongoing Cold War.
When the Soviet Union decided to install their missiles in the island of Cuba, the United States and President John F Kennedy immediately thought of this as a threat.
The missiles were 90 miles south of Florida and had the capability of reaching targets in eastern states.
Up until that point, it seemed that the United States had been dominating the nuclear race, but this crisis put the Soviets close to the Americans and severely altered the nuclear rivalry between the two countries.
They held United States nuclear missiles ready to fire at United States President John F Kennedy’s command.
Geographically speaking, Turkey is a very close country to the USSR, meaning that it is within missile proximity of destroying all of the country’s important cities.
For this very reason, Turkey is metaphorically what the United States is using to keep the USSR in check, which is similar to the way USSR is using Cuba.
Possible Solutions The main solution which the United States could offer would be to remove the missiles from Turkey.
For this to work, the Soviet Union would have to agree to extract their missiles from Cuba as well.
Both of these extractions can be done under the supervision of the United Nations for a fair and secure deal.
However, in order to do so, both nations would need to agree to the extraction of these missiles in order for this to work, which can be frowned upon by the pride of American and Soviet citizens who do not like their leaders forming relationships with the enemy.
This issue as a whole is one that concerns every single country that is present in this committee, and should be taken with the appropriate seriousness.
A nuclear war between the United States and the Soviet Union is something that would have disastrous consequences on the global community.
The casualties that would result from a detonation and the subsequent effects that it has on the population is something that we unfortunately witnessed in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Citizens from all countries are terrified by this threat, regardless of their alignment to a certain country.
The committee must come together and be a buffer between the United States and the USSR to de escalate this situation.
Both countries must come to an agreement and avoid putting their own and other citizens around the world at risk.
Countries within the committee must not be focused on their allegiance to any of the parties involved in this crisis.
Seeing as the repercussions for this conflict would affect all citizens of the world.
Compromise is the most important thing that all parties will need to consider in order to deal with this issue fairly.
