The first two sources are the letters exchanged by the leaders of East Germany and the Soviet Union.Then we introduce sources that show the influence of the United States to the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Primary Sources Letter from Ulbricht to Khrushchev on Closing the Border Around West Berlin This letter is written by the leader of the German Democratic Republic Ulbricht directed to the Soviet Leader Khrushchev.
It emphasizes that it was a measure to protect the GDR from West Berlin.
This letter repeatedly emphasizes the negative influence of West Berlin to the GDR including subversive measures.
It also mentions the people coming from West Berlin to East Berlin to buy goods and services, and after closing the border with a wall, there was plenty of those left for East Berlin citizens.
It finally appeals to the Soviet Union to strengthen the tie between the two countries, the GDR and the Soviet Union.
He agrees with the idea that the border control would strengthen the GDR’s economic and political environment.
Reference “Letter from Khrushchev to Ulbricht Regarding the Situation in Berlin,” September 28, 1961, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, SED Archives, IfGA, ZPA, J IV 2/202/130.
They blame Western powers and West Berlin for the decline of East Berlin.
They justify the construction of the Berlin wall by stating it was a measure to protect East Germany from the West.
These letters suggest that the tie between The GDR and the Soviet Union would become strengthened in the future.
Primary Sources Ronald Reagan’s speech at the Brandenburg gate, West Berlin, Remarks on East-West Relation.
Freedom replaces the ancient hatred among the nations with comity and peace.
Analysis United States’s influence, Cold War Conversation on GDR-FRG Economic Cooperation between Alexander Schalck and Egon Krenz Establishing common understanding, preparation of opening and further discussion.
Discussion on generous travel regulation as to secure tourist and visitor traffic.
Pierre Harmel, Belgium foreign minister, submitted the report to the NATO council.
First, NATO should maintain military strength to deter possible aggression from the Soviets.
Harmel and his work team accentuated the importance of collective defense as a stabilizing factor in international relations.
They also advocated for detente policies, saying that the improvement of the relationship between the United States and the USSR would be the solution to the political issues in Europe.
The report also put considerable emphasis on the problem of German reunification.
There would be no stable settlement without solving the question of divided Germany.
The significance of the Harmel Report lies in its inclination to detente policy.
It seems this report in part determined the subsequent diplomatic direction of NATO member states and encouraged the negotiation toward nuclear disarmament talks.
The Treaty of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons reached an agreement between the US, UK, and Soviet in 1968.
The strategic arms limitation talks began in 1969 between the United States and Soviet.
New Eastern policy that was meant to normalize the diplomatic relations between West Germany and Eastern European bloc was also promoted at about this point.
To sum, the Harmel Report marked the era of detente and proposed what the diplomatic strategy of NATO partner states should be.
This editorial cartoon by Herbert Block was published in the Washington Post, February 16, 1969.
In the cartoon, a pig wearing a military cap of the USSR holds a gun and whip.
The pig stands in front of other animals which represent Soviet satellites such as Rumania, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, Hungary, and West European communist parties.
The political cartoonist Herbert Block borrowed an idea from George Orwell’s satirical novel Animal Farm written in 1945.
Herblock showed the similarity between Joseph Stalin whom Owell had criticized in his novel and Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the communist party of the Soviet Union of the time.
In the novel Animal Farm, animals govern themselves, independent of human farmers.
They uphold the ideology of “Animalism” which is the allegory of communism.
Animalism justifies dictatorship by a privileged class and inflicts burden and distress on the rest of entire animals in the farm.
By using the idea of Animal Farm, Herblock criticized the Soviet aggression.
Herblock condemned Brezhnev for suppressing the democratization movement in Czechoslovakia by dispatching Warsaw Pact troops in 1968.
What was criticized in this cartoon was the doctrine of limited sovereignty, so-called Brezhnev Doctrine.
Brezhnev tried to justify military intervention in Czechoslovakia by alleging that the interest of the entire Socialist bloc transcends the sovereignty of a state.
Edward C United States Embassy, Iran Cable from Edward C Wells to the Department of State.
This is a propaganda in 1950 having priority Aims and Objectives of USIE Program in Iran that enhancing United States Prestige and Demonstrating Communist Fallacies.
In particular, America more utilizes the various media for propaganda than Soviet.
Actually, it is said that Walt Disney’s Americanization is most remarkable at that time because Hollywood’s output of the 1950s and early 1960s was its promotion of “American” ideals.
In particular, Film executives recognize that their main role is to sell “people’s capitalism” all over the world.
So, they can shift the idea not deny the communism but spread American ideology like capitalism.
In addition, this document is focusing on the Iran cable and therefore United States realize not only the importance of Walt Disney but also the significance of the strategy in the middle east.
This propaganda was published in May 1,1950 in the Department of State Airgram from Dean Acheson who is an American politician and lawyer who served as the 51st Secretary of State in the Truman administration and shaped American foreign policy in the early years of the Cold War., titled Anti-Americanism in the Arab World.
The purpose of this propaganda is to resist Anti-Americanism rising in the middle East at that time.
Dean’s policy is relatively generous although the Arab has the ideology of Anti-American.
In short, despite the fact that Arab has a negative attitude toward U.S., Dean tried to find some amicable solution for breakthrough.
On December 15, 1950, the Republicans in the House of Representatives voted unanimously to remove Atchison from the parliament.
In other words, his policy is not accepted in the United States during the Cold War period.
Mutual defense treaty between the United States and the Republic of Korea Description The United States and the Republic of Korea confirming their mutual protection from the threats of counter-bloc kor001.asp Analysis the separation of North Korea and South Korea led to the United States responsibility to maintain democracy in the republic of South Korea to promote deterrent of communist idealism led by the Soviet Union and China, centering its foreign policy on the containment of communism.
The Korean war reached international proportions in 1950 when North Korea, supported by the Soviet Union, invaded the South, and the United Nations, with the United States as the principal participant, joined the war on the side of the South Koreans The Korean War became the first major battle waged in the name of containment.
The United States and South Korea therefore publicly and formally declared determination to strengthen the peace in the Pacific area got the two nations to contract this treaty.
Description United States objectives for the Middle East in the cold war In this report marked the United States’ genuine view on the middle east during the cold war and how they will carry out their strategy so that the middle eastern nations will be cooperative with the West propaganda 020.pdf Analysis there were anti-americanism prevalent in most Arab-nations.
In order for those nations to take on the site of the United States, the United States seek cooperation with those nations by stabilizing the political and social progress.
Another objective which is to gain prestige in the middle east comes the first prioritization. the conference concluded that the United States’ military-political objectives in the middle east during the cold war was to first mobilize strength for the containment of communism, and second, to restore and strengthen confidence in the West, and third build sufficient military strength in each country in order to maintain internal security, and forth to construct and insure the availability of allied air, army bases, the fifth to organize joint staff planning for the defense of the area.
Most of these objectives boil down to the United States strategy for the back up by insuring the middle east maximum support of the allied war.
The report also exhibit that the US’s active support to Turkey is based on how Turkey is recognized and important to Middle East defense.
By building up Turkey’s economy and dealing with Turkey’s exposed situation, the United States aim to to gain regional military cooperation from adjacent receptive regions.
The Cold War was fought from the political, economic, and propagandic perspectives, and there were only a limited number of situations in which weapons were employed.
The Cold War lasted for about half a century, but it does not mean that the extremely tense situation lasted throughout the period.
There was an intermittent detente in search of negotiations and dialogue for improving relations between the United States and the Soviet Union, but due to various factors, the tension was revived many times.
Thus, it can be said that the Cold War was a repetition of tensions and detente.
On this page, we will introduce what happened between these repeated tense situations and detente, and how the United States and the Soviet Union dealt with the incidents.
About this page We have chosen primary sources that symbolizes the conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union in the Cold War.
The posters that seem to criticize each other well represent the ideological conflict.
We look at the Sputnik shock from both the United States and Soviet perspectives.
In addition, we will use telegrams and letters to show the tense situation of the Cuban crisis, the most tense time during the Cold War.
Ideological Conflict Anti-Communist Poster Made in the United States Notice of rally at the Hippodrome to fight communism, location unknown.
This poster was displayed in the Truman Centennial Exhibit, and 4 years before that, the Moscow Olympics were held that many Western Bloc boycotted.
Anti-communism was widely spread with an effort made by the government in American society during the Cold War.
This anti-communist propaganda poster symbolizes how the United States government wanted to depict Stalin as evil, with a skull behind his face.
It can be said that the government of the United States tried to fear Communism with the use of the word ‘death’ and implant anti-comminist idea in the minds of American citizens.
The pie chart at the top shows the transition of capitalist states’ industrial production from 1948 to 1960.
The pie chart in the middle shows the transition of capitalist states’ export volume from 1948 to 1960.
The pie chart at the bottom shows the transition of gold quantity from 1948 to 1960.
The bar graph at the top shows the average economic growth rates of some countries from 1953 to 1960.
The arrows show the next ten years’ economic growth of capitalist states and communist states.
The top arrow indicates capitalist states, and the bottom one indicates communist states.
This poster implicitly tells that communism is superior to capitalism in terms of economy.
The pie charts indicate that capitalist states lost their national power in the field of industrial production, export volume, and gold quantity by 1960.
Moreover, from 1953 to 1960, capitalist countries developed their economy better than communist countries, but next ten years after 1960, it is predicted that communist countries develop their economy better than capitalist countries.
The Soviet Union claims that a communist country, the Soviet Union, is greater than a capitalist country, the United States, using these data and predictions.
Dramatic accomplishments in space are being increasingly identified as a major indicator of world leadership… … i) More resources and more effort need to be put into our space program as soon as possible.
We should move forward with a bold program, while at the same time taking every practical precaution for the safety of the persons actively participating in space flights.
However, the news of the successful launch of the first artificial satellite “Sputnik 1” by the Soviet Union on October 4, 1957 caused shock and a sense of crisis to the governments and societies of Western countries including the United States.
This memorandum sent to President John F Kennedy at the time shows that the United States admitted that the Soviet Union was one step ahead in terms of space exploration, in response to the fact that the Soviet Union succeeded in launching the first artificial satellite of mankind.
It can also be said that there was a sense of urgency that great efforts must be spent on the US’s space development programs in order for them to overtake the Soviet Union and become a world leader in space development.
Pravda Newspaper Article, ‘Announcement of the First Satellite’ For several years scientific research and experimental design work have been conducted in the Soviet Union on the creation of artificial satellites of the earth.
As already reported in the press, the first launching of the satellites in the USSR were planned for realization in accordance with the scientific research program of the International Geophysical Year.
As a result of very intensive work by scientific research institutes and design bureaus the first artificial satellite in the world has been created.
The scientific experiment accomplished at such a great height is of tremendous importance for learning the properties of cosmic space and for studying the earth as a planet of our solar system.
During the International Geophysical Year the Soviet Union proposes launching several more artificial earth satellites.
These subsequent satellites will be larger and heavier and they will be used to carry out programs of scientific research.
Artificial earth satellites will pave the way to interplanetary travel and, apparently our contemporaries will witness how the freed and conscientious labor of the people of the new socialist society makes the most daring dreams of mankind a reality.
During the International Geophysical Year, the Soviet Union succeeded in creating the artificial satellite earlier than any other country.
It says its contribution will be useful for subsequent scientific research held in the world.
It seems that the Soviet Union tells how great the country is and how important it is in the world.
It is because it is a communist country that the Soviet Union made a great achievement.
Implicitly, the Soviet Union states that communism is superior to capitalism like the United States.
CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Background Information On October 14, 1962, a photo taken by a United States Air Force reconnaissance plane over Cuba revealed that a missile base by the Soviet Union was under construction.
Since this would make it possible to attack the United States mainland with nuclear weapons, President Kennedy made a televised speech on the evening of the 22nd, declaring a sea and air blockade around Cuba to prevent offensive weapons from being brought in.
Since the Soviet Union had already sent ships loaded with equipment and weapons to Cuba, any attempt to break through the United States sea blockade would have resulted in a direct conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union, and a nuclear war was imminent.
According to information which we received, the USA policy toward Cuba occupied a major place in the work of the meeting.
At present Cuba is a political problem, and not a problem of security of the USA; thus, political, economic and other means are needed to solve it, rather than military.
All this, in the calculations of the USA government, should cause serious economic and political complications for Cuba and ultimately lead to the outbreak there of mass dissatisfaction and to huge anti-government demonstrations.
The West Berlin issue at present remains sharpest and most fraught with dangers.
The part, “the USA intends to achieve the greatest possible political, economic, and moral isolation of Cuba from other Latin American countries and other countries of the “free world,” and also hinder the provision of assistance to Cuba from Socialist countries in all possible ways.” is a good example of the distinction the United States makes between socialist and free countries.
Following Kennedy’s speech on the Cuban issue yesterday, a broad campaign was deployed here, called forth in order to impart to the developing situation even more extraordinariness and seriousness than was done in Kennedy’s speech itself.
In a briefing conducted by the USA Ministry of Defense yesterday evening, McNamara categorically declared that the USA will not stop short of sinking Soviet ships which are bringing “offensive types” of weapons to Cuba, if those ships will refuse to obey the demands of American warships.
It is reported that the President’s official proclamation about the introduction into force of measures to assert a quarantine on the delivery to Cuba of offensive types of weapons will be published before the end of the day today or tomorrow morning after the formal agreement with other members of the Organization of American States.
He first asks him to imagine what it would be like if the United States and the Soviets were on opposite sides.
He goes on to say, “you are threatening that if we do not obey your orders, you will then use force.
But from the part, “No, Mr President, I cannot agree to this, and I think that deep inside, you will admit that I am right.
The use of the word “we” emphasizes that the Soviets and the Americans share the same goal.
The structure of this letter is both logical and emotional, and each word is well chosen.
The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan and the US’s Protests Excerpt from the minutes of the CC CPSU Politburo meeting, ‘reply to an appeal of president carter about the issue of Afghanistan through the direct communications channel’Top Secret Dear Mister President, In reply to your message of 29 December I consider it necessary to say the following.
It is impossible to agree in any way with your assessment of what is going on right now in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.
We have already given explanations about what is actually going on there based on the facts and also the reasons which caused us to favorably respond to the request of the government of Afghanistan to introduce a limited number of Soviet troops to the American side confidentially through the American ambassador in Moscow and to you personally.
In connection with the content and the tone of your letter I consider it necessary to again explain that the request of the government of Afghanistan and the granting of this request by the Soviet Union are exclusively the business of the USSR and Afghanistan, who control their relations themselves by their own agreement and, of course, cannot permit any outside interference in these relations.
They, like any UN member, have the right not only of individual but also of the collective self defense stipulated in Article 51 of the UN Charter which the USSR and United States themselves formulated.
In light of all this, the immoderate tone of some of the wording of your message is striking.
I don’t think that the work to create more stable and productive relations between the USSR and United States could become useless if, of course, the American side does not want this.
I think that this would also not be to the advantage of the United States of America itself.
It is our conviction that it is a mutual matter how relations between the USSR and United States develop.
We think that they ought not to be subject to fluctuations under the influence of any outside factors or events.
In response to the United States criticism of the advance to Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, the USSR claimed that it just accepted Afghanistan’s request, and the United States has nothing to do with the matter between the Soviet Union and Afghanistan.
I therefore urge the USOC, in cooperation with other National Olympic Committees, to advise the International Olympic Committee that if Soviet troops do not fully withdraw from Afghanistan within the next month, Moscow will become an unsuitable site for a festival meant to celebrate peace and good will.
Should the Soviet Union fail to withdraw its troops within the time prescribed above, I urge the USOC to propose that the Games either be transferred to another site such as Montreal or to multiple sites, or be cancelled for this year.
If the International Olympic Committee rejects such a USOC proposal, I urge the USOC and the Olympic Committees of other like-minded nations not to participate in the Moscow Games.
I call for your support and your help in rallying the support of the other Olympic Committees throughout the world.
However, following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the previous year, President Carter of the United States protested and called for a boycott.
As a result, many countries in Western Bloc such as Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, and Japan did not participate.
This Moscow Olympic Games were considered the worst of all, as international political conflicts were brought into sports.If the Soviet Union became the host country of the Olympic Games, it means that it would appeal its national power and the idea of ​​communism to the whole world, which seemingly is what the United States wanted to prevent.
In this letter, President Carter states that the Soviet Union’s hosting of the Olympics will destroy international friendship and goodwill.
From this, it can be seen that the United States is in direct opposition to the Soviet Union and its communist ideology.
America and transatlantic interactions The interwar period is years after WWI and before WWII when the international system has been reorganized.
Germany was especially economically destroyed for taking the burden of the Great War.
This article examines how the transatlantic regions looked like in the 20th century, including but not limited to the interwar period and after the Great Wars by focusing on how people survived that era.
The development of American film can be highlighted with the presence of Hollywood.
The film has become a popular mass culture in America, shared and enjoyed by many Americans and people in the world.
Charlie Chaplin, “Charlie Chaplin – Factory Scene – Modern Times” The Modern Times is unique for its critics of society.
Charlie Chaplin humorously criticizes the systematized labor condition under American capitalism, which only aims for its production efficiency.
By filming simple works such as fastening the screw, the film presents how a man becomes integrated into a part of the machine with an absence of human value.
The American way of production has been criticized for its lack of consideration towards human rights and ethics.
Therefore, the film of the Modern Times successfully represented critics of the modernized American society with continuous and systematized works only aiming for an increase of productivity.
Non-American have also contributed to the development of the film industry.
During the interwar period, when Germany has been experiencing economic difficulty from the loss in WWI, many have migrated to America.
Accordingly, many of the German migrants have also impacted the film industry.
Adam Kessel is one of the notorious pioneered producers of motion video, with roots in german immigrants.
This news paper addressing about Adam Kessel proves how the American film industry has been built upon not solely by Americans but also by non-Americans.
Flapper culture was one of the expressions to obtain more independence and political and social rights.
This culture flourished in the 1920s, and it lasted until the Great Depression happened.
Flappers were connected with various cultural aspects, lifestyles, and attitudes, such as jazz music, alcohol, and dance hall.
Among these factors, fashion was also the significant element that shaped what the flappers were.
There is no specific origin of flappers and their culture determined by past studies, but the flappers appeared in the media in the transatlantic nations, including the United States and European countries.
Therefore, this paragraph comprehensively analyzed the penetration of flapper fashion in the United States, Germany, and France, mainly with the magazines and newspaper articles issued around the 1920s.
On the other hand, The Ogden standard-examiner issued in 1922, flapper suits, business attire for flappers, were introduced by Lady Duff-Gordon, “Lucile” of London, a fashion designer.
In the same year, the magazine, The Flapper, published in November in Chicago, United States, informed the new moral norms of young women.
According to the article, it emphasized flappers as “an act of rebellion” to insist on their freedom as women.
The Weekly journal-minor, a weekly newspaper published in Arizona in October 1922, defined thirteen qualifications of typical flappers in its article.
Among the lists, bobbed hair and knee-length skirts are the critical characteristics illustrated in every article.
There was no critical comment regarding the modern concept at that time, and the article just explained their features.
The article showed the photos of women, not looking like a teenager, as a representative of flappers.
From this picture, the definition of flappers shifted to older women in the United States . b.
GermanyGermany’s weekly newspaper, the Berliner Illustrirte Zeitung, had critical views toward flappers or New Women in 1925.
The article condemned the change from flappers to masculinization of women.
For instance, bobbed hairs were replaced by male hairstyles, and they wore husband’s coats.
Against the Masculinization of Women” What started as a playful game in women’s fashion is gradually becoming a distressing aberration.
With the hoop skirt the dictates of fashion brought the accentuation of the female form to an extreme, and now things are moving in the completely opposite direction.In the theater we might enjoy, one time, seeing an actress playing a man’s part if she is suitable for the role; but not every woman should venture to display herself in pants or shorts, be it on stage or at sporting events.
France In 1924, the song “Elle s’était fait couper les cheveux” sung by Alexandre Dréan was published and its lyrics represent the situation of flappers in France.
The lyrics repeat, “she cut her hair” or “elle s’était fait couper les cheveux” in French in the chorus, and she aimed to keep in step with the latest fashion.
From these lyrics, bobbed hair was also famous in France, and it was the trend among young women in the early 1920s.
Flapper fashions, such as bobbed hair and shortened skirts, made waves across the United States and European countries.
The flappers desired to liberate themselves from traditional norms and to improve women’s political and social status and attitudes as equal as men.
Young women were attracted to the trend, and newspapers and magazines reported the situation.
However, men regarded flappers as a threat to their status and accused them because it was apart from their ideal status of women.
Flapper’s fashion in the United States and Europe worked together with the women’s emancipation movements in the 1920s.
In 1965, a student-led organization SDS held ‘The March on Washington to End the War in Vietnam’ to protest against United States military presence in Vietnam and liberate both Vietnamese and American people.
Such anti-war sentiment spread across the US, and gave rise to movements of not only anti-war but also resistance to the government and traditional values.
This brought about counterculture, and It revolves around hippie culture, rock’n’roll music, hallucinogenic drugs, free love, and so on.
Eventually, counterculture spread outside of the United States to Europe, and evolved into a transatlantic phenomenon.
Underground Press Underground press emerged from the counterculture movement that was active during the 1960s.
Underground press inherits the principles of the counterculture, by challenging hierarchical structures of social and governmental orthodoxies which appear to them as hypocritical, materialist and authoritarian.
As opposed to the establishment press which was hidden and restricted information to publish, the underground press was more open to anyone, and any generation took direct control of the print communication media.
The counterculture of the underground press advocated newly established liberal values such as anti-war, sexual freedom, Black Power and so on, in a unique form of its manifestation.
Image 1 comes from the book ‘SHOTS’ which collected photographs from underground press.
It shows a photo of a dying NLF soldier and American News correspondents interviewing the man.
The quote critiques how the establishment press frames Vietnam war in favor of the United States military aggression, by distributing information or contents that justify American oppression and fuel hatred towards Vietnamese “enemy” among American people.
Image 2 from Shrew magazine depicts the struggles of women as being secondary to men in the hierarchy of gender.
It illustrates that while men can pursue their career as scientists or engineers, women have no choice but to become secretaries or housewives and their final “goal” is to get married to a man.
Both images characterize underground press as resistance against establishment press, and social orthodoxies or hierarchies, which disseminated underrepresented voices in the movement of counterculture.
Rock Music Counterculture diversified rock music and brought great enthusiasm among mass audiences.
Psychedelic rock music emerged, and was widely adopted by popular musicians like The Beatles and The Rolling Stones.
Later around the 1970s, punk music flocked in and became a central part of mainstream music.
Punk music was not merely cultural but also a political movement, which was critical of establishment culture and encouraged the formation of a more liberal and better informed society.
Through listening to punk, a significant part of a generation learned about gender inequalities, racism, civil rights, sex, and punk music taught that these are unacceptable ‘crime’ in society.
Original lyrics of God Saves the Queen One of the greatest punk rock bands is Sex Pistles.
Image 3 is a sticker to promote one of their singles God Save the Queen, and image 4 is the original handwritten lyrics of the song.
Image 3 depicts Queen Elizabeth Ⅱand paints her eyes and mouth black with the song title and their name.
It looks as if Sex Pistles and the song made her blind and silenced, putting into a powerless being.
By covering her facial features but the crown on her head, it ceases her existence and only shows the privileged ‘title’ as being a Queen.
While God save the Queen is the same title as the British national anthem, the lyrics assault the Queen and the monarchy.
It depicts the queen as facist and inhumane being, and that England’s future under her regime is gloomy.
It implicitly depicts the dark history of the UK such as the period of imperialism and equates it as crimes that cannot be atoned for.
Furthermore, the lyrics are composed in a way that the same line has two parts which contrast each other in their meanings.
Such composition style and use of expression enhances the strong irony towards British monarchy.
This song is the representative of Sex Pistles Anarchism attitudes through their punk rock music.
The attitude of a large segment of young people shows that they have a proper and honest stance toward our Workers’ and Peasants’ State, toward socialist work, and toward learning.
We cannot, however, overlook the fact that there is a segment of young people who exhibit the tendencies of American non-culture , of Texas-style ideology, and of cowboyism, and that these tendencies have intensified in recent weeks and months.
These phenomena profoundly contradict the civilized moral and ethical sensibilities shared by all decent people.
The enemy aims to bring about the weakening of our ideology, especially among youth, to foster intemperance and anarchy, in order to pit segments of our youth against their own Workers’ and Peasants’ State and to incite them to disturb the public peace.
They are spreading this agitation through their radio and television stations, especially over Deutschlandfunk, by smuggling indecent and inflammatory literature , but also, quite cunningly, by utilizing the non-culture of Western music and dancing, Beatles-ideology and collecting fads, and by encouraging slacking off at work.
In West Germany, they depend on these ways of life to poison young people psychologically and to prepare them ideologically for their criminal war plans with all possible means of brutalization and of stimulation of the basest instincts.
It is our society’s duty to combat all influences and manifestations of Western non-culture.
Excesses, such as the ever larger recent proliferation of Beatles-groups with American names 2 and almost exclusively Western and indefinable musical repertoires , have nothing in common with progressive life ideals.
We support modern and civilized dance music, and we are also not opposed to infectious rhythms, but we decidedly disapprove of those groups that violate all codes of morality and ethics, that perform barefoot and half naked, that contort their bodies and intoxicate our youth with agitating rhythms in order to lead them to excesses.
Incidences of slander and agitation against leading party and state personalities are occurring at these events.
Citizens are being harassed, accosted, and in some cases members of the security organs and party, state, and FDJ officers have been attacked.
The nature and frequency of these incidents in recent months prove that they are being purposefully organized and directed, but the masterminds and managers thereof are remaining behind the scenes.
This source illustrates the divided Germany due to the Cold War, and how the young people in West Germany or German Democratic Republic are influenced by American counterculture in their attitudes.
Socialist officers in East Germany aim to maintain and reinforce socialist working style and its disciplines among people in the area, but the officers recognize American culture tendencies that are exhibited by the working young people, and regard it as a threat.
By calling American/Western culture as ‘non-culture’ along with other expressions that show strong hostility and contempt, East Germany is depicted as more civilized, superior and decent people.
They also state that Western culture is an immense threat that would agitate people to slack off their work and psychologically “damage” the people, misled or “poisoned” by the Western ideology.
Moreover, the officers repeatedly mention The Beatles or Beatles-ideology, and Western music.
As a consequence, the last paragraph describes the “agitated” youth behavior and their resistance or attacks against security or state officials.
Therefore, counterculture was disseminated even in East Germany where opposing ideology bound the people, and it became influential enough to change the youth behavior and challenge the social orthodoxies or state authorities.
This is exactly what counterculture aimed for, and this case of East Germany exhibits transatlantic influence and interaction through counterculture.
References Alexandre Dréan, “Alexandre Dréan – Elle s’était fait couper les cheveux ,” Youtube video, 2:34.
Line outside of a Berlin Grocer People made a long line outside of the grocer in the morning and buy food as early as possible.
Starting from the default on its payment or reparation in 1922, the German government – Weimar government at that time – faced a series of problems.
Occupation of the Ruhr Reacting to the German’s default on reparation payment, the French government occupied the Ruhr region, where the German industrialization was centered.
Losing the heart of its economy, it became more difficult for Germany to supply finance for the reparation.
Hyperinflation Although the government promised to pay the worker’s wages in return to obeying the order of passive resistance, the government was not able to raise the money for that.
This rapid increase in the printed paper bill made the price of the mark out of control.
The more the government printed the bill, the less the value of money became.
The following document explains people’s lives under this hyperinflation.
I have lived through some very critical times during the Russian Revolution in 1917–18, but I do not remember a time quite as bad as this which has now befallen Germany.
Even in the worst times in Russia one always had a feeling that the suffering was for some ideal which would make it all worthwhile.
The mark has ceased to be currency and is merely a vast mass of paper packets representing so many dollars or pounds.
The number of packets to the dollar varies every day … Those who are lucky enough to have foreign currency can get along, but even then with difficulty.
Gustav Stresemann Gustav Stresemann was a politician and the Foreign Minister of Weimer Republic.
Once again the feeling of being pillaged and plundered flared up in intense resistance.
But this feeling now began to differentiate between those nations which apparently wanted to continue the conflict with Germany and those which held that a legal justification for the invasion did not exist.
Voices were heard from the United States of America which made it clear that America wanted a peaceful and united Europe as a basis for mutual cooperation.
Speech. – In his speech for Nobel Lecture, he mentioned the motivation to conclude Dawes Plan and Locarno Treaties and told that he considered the expectation of America.
From this, it can be assumed that there was a sort of intervention by and influence of America in the conclusion of these treaties.
German Immigrant Entrepreneurship Among German’s immigrants, there are different types for instance voluntary or rather forced to have contribution to American business in the period of twentieth century.
Although it was a harsh decision to make to left behind what they already familiar with and start new life from zero at somewhere far away, it is estimated that 270,000 to 300,000 in 1935 Jew succeed in depart from Germany before Official Banning for Jewish emigration in 1941.
Americanization in German culture The Monotonization of the World Explanation The author, Stefan Zweig, sounds an alarm on monotonized culture of the whole world including Germany due to the considerable influence of American culture.
He claims that Americanization breaks the tradition and negates characteristics of Germany, focusing on these four points; dance, fashion, cinema, and radio.
Analysis Europe remains the last bulwark of individualism and, perhaps, of the overly taut cramp of peoples—our vigorous nationalism, despite all its senselessness, represents to some extent a fevered, unconscious rebellion, a last, desperate effort to defend ourselves against leveling. – Stefan Zweig, “The Monotonization of the World” – The author considered this situation as the conflict between European countries with individualism and America with totalitarianism.
The boredom that does not, like the earlier European variety, come from calmness, from sitting on the park bench playing dominoes and smoking a pipe—a lazy waste of time indeed, but not dangerous.
American boredom is restless, nervous, and aggressive; it outruns itself in its frantic haste, seeks numbness in sports and sensations. – Stefan Zweig, “The Monotonization of the World” – As German people felt antipathy toward ‘Fordism’, they might characterized the culture as relaxed especially in terms of time and regarded having allowance as humanly.
Thus, in comparison, American culture and ideology connected with terms like “fast” or “efficient” was comprehended to be inhuman for them.
Two American women photograph women from Spreewald, Germany, dressed in their traditional clothing outside a hotel in Unter den Linden, Berlin.
Among Other Things, a Word for German Tradition Explanation George Grosz, a German caricaturist, makes an argument about German traditional culture , ideology, and economic policy which are destroyed by Americanization.
Not to be had for anything serious outside their nerve-grating businesses.
The women, made-up, manicured, highheeled, and neglected, with gigolos in the hotels and at the tea dance.
What life? -George Grosz, “Among Other Things, a Word for German Tradition” – Then one takes a look at American magazines.
Through the life in America, he gradually lost his painting style as a caricaturist, assimilating with American style, ironically.
Having influenced by Americanization, however, the German spirit toward art, especially the field of film industry, had kept their feelings of pride.
American cinematic photography is regarded, thanks to its as yet unparalleled recording equipment, its film stock and the brilliant work of its technicians, as the best photography in the world.
But the Americans have still not understood how to use their magnificent equipment to elevate the miracle of photography into the realm of the spirit; that means, for example, that the concepts of light and shade are not to be made mere transporters of mood but factors that contribute to plot.
I recently had the opportunity of showing an American technician a few scenes from Metropolis, in which the beam of an electric flashlight illumined the pursuit of a young girl through the catacombs of Metropolis.
This beam of light pierced the hunted creature like the sharp claws of an animal, refused to release her from its grasp, drove her unremittingly forward to the point of utter panic.
I, on the contrary, believe that the great German dramatic film of the future will have the thing play just as important a role as the human character.
Actors will no longer occupy a space that they appear to have entered by accident; rather the space will be constructed in such a way that the characters’ experiences appear possible only in it, appear logical only on account of it.
Universum-Film AG Berlin Stills: Eureka Entertainment Ltd According to Lang, the American film industry was characterized by its vast scale, numbers of equipment, and enormous financial resources, which the German film industry did not afford.
On the other hand, he predicted that the German film industry develops abstractly and synergistically cooperating with the performers in the films, the way, the Americans would not be capable of implementing it.
July 22, 2020 Presidency of Franklin D, Roosevelt Great Depression This event was symptomatic of a decade of economic uncertainty that was precipitated by the crash in the fall of 1929 when United States stock prices declined dramatically.
The resulting panic devastated the fortunes of many investors and caused major declines in consumption, industrial production, and employment, which in turn affected the United States and world economy for the next ten years.
The United States stock market had expanded rapidly during the 1920s, attracting many inexperienced investors.
George Mehales, a Greek immigrant who owned a diner in Spartanburg, South Carolina, began investing in the stock market just before the crash.
On that day of October 29, they told me I needed more cash to cover up.
Mehales had lost everything, including his restaurant, which he had to sell at a rock bottom price.
In the early 1930s, the United States moved further into economic instability, with the collapse of many banks, dramatically reduced spending on consumer goods, and increasing unemployment.
President Herbert Hoover’s response to these crises disappointed many, including WWI veterans, many of whom found themselves impoverished.
They rallied in Washington in 1932, hoping that they might be able to receive their military pension funds early.
When Congress rejected their appeals, some members of this so-called, “Bonus Army” reacted with frustration and violence.
United States Army troops were called in, and the image of U.S Army soldiers confronting the veterans of the Great War in the nation’s capital and virtually running them out of town did not sit well with the public.
In the election that took place in the fall of 1932, Roosevelt won by a landslide.
The 1932 Presidential campaign was one of the most momentous in American history.
With Republican President Herbert Hoover presiding over a nation in economic collapse, it was clear a Democrat would win the presidency in 1932.
The popular leader of the country’s most populous state, he attracted attention by aggressively using governmental power to help alleviate the suffering of the Depression.
Saddled with responsibility for the Depression, President Hoover was deeply unpopular.
But FDR relished campaigning and wanted to show the country he was up to the job.
He traveled to 41 states, making major addresses and hundreds of whistle-stop appearances.
His energy, charm, and commitment to action carried him to a decisive victory.
WPA Federal Theatre Playhouse By 1939, the New Deal had run its course.
In the short term, New Deal programs helped improve the lives of people suffering from the events of the depression.
In the long run, New Deal programs set a precedent for the federal government to play a key role in the economic and social affairs of the nation.
You have so many sheep and yet you want to take the last sheep of the poor man; so you said to the rich, to the Wall St. bankers: Leave the poor man his last sheep.
Frustration among people Roosevelt is a damn good man — you take all these young fellows and you can’t talk to them like in the old days to swing them over.
I only have one son and believe me I am glad I can’t buy him the things he needs.
WWII The Atlantic Charter “The President of the United States of America and the Prime Minister, Mr Churchill, representing His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, being met together, deem it right to make known certain common principles in the national policies of their respective countries on which they base their hopes for a better future for the world.
They will likewise aid and encourage all other practicable measure which will lighten for peace-loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments.
Franklin D Roosevelt Winston S Churchill” Analysis This charter is consisted of 8 articles and all of them reflected the thought of the President in that they agreed with no expansion of territory, paying respect to self-determination, mutual economic co-operation and exclusion of military power as a method.
This context can be seen as an emergence of concept for establishment of The United Nations.
Yesterday, December 7, 1941—a date which will live in infamy—the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan.
Indeed, one hour after Japanese air squadrons had commenced bombing in the American Island of Oahu, the Japanese Ambassador to the United States and his colleague delivered to our Secretary of State a formal reply to a recent American message.
And while this reply stated that it seemed useless to continue the existing diplomatic negotiations, it contained no threat or hint of war or of armed attack.
The attack yesterday on the Hawaiian Islands has caused severe damage to American naval and military forces.
In addition American ships have been reported torpedoed on the high seas between San Francisco and Honolulu.
As Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy I have directed that all measures be taken for our defense.
I believe that I interpret the will of the Congress and of the people when I assert that we will not only defend ourselves to the uttermost but will make it very certain that this form of treachery shall never again endanger us.
I ask that the Congress declare that since the unprovoked and dastardly attack by Japan on Sunday, December 7, 1941, a state of war has existed between the United States and the Japanese Empire.
Franklin D Roosevelt The White House, December 8, 1941 Analysis This manuscript implies Roosevelt’s thinking about the way to make the public opinion stand with joining to the war.
Additionally, he wrote the words, “without warning,” but later crossed them out.
He made some minor changes following the update of the situation in Hawaii.
That a United Nations conference on the proposed world organization should be summoned for Wednesday, 25 April, 1945, and should be held in the United States of America.
When the conference on world organization is held, the delegates of the United Kingdom and United State of America will support a proposal to admit to original membership two Soviet Socialist Republics,e., the Ukraine and White Russia.
Decisions of the Security Council on procedural matters should be made by an affirmative vote of seven members.
The study of the procedure of the dismemberment of Germany was referred to a committee consisting of Mr Anthony Eden, Mr John Winant, and Mr Fedor T Gusev.
This body would consider the desirability of associating with it a French representative.
Protocol On the Talks Between the Heads of Three Governments at the Crimean Conference on the Question of the German Reparations in Kind 1.
Germany must pay in kind for the losses caused by her to the Allied nations in the course of the war.
Reparations are to be received in the first instance by those countries which have borne the main burden of the war, have suffered the heaviest losses and have organized victory over the enemy.
Removals within two years from the surrender of Germany or the cessation of organized resistance from the national wealth of Germany located on the territory of Germany herself as well as outside her territory , these removals to be carried out chiefly for the purpose of destroying the war potential of Germany.
Annual deliveries of goods from current production for a period to be fixed.
For the working out on the above principles of a detailed plan for exaction of reparation from Germany an Allied reparation commission will be set up in Moscow.
It will consist of three representatives – one from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, one from the United Kingdom and one from the United States of America.
The British delegation was of the opinion that, pending consideration of the reparation question by the Moscow reparation commission, no figures of reparation should be mentioned.
The above Soviet-American proposal has been passed to the Moscow reparation commission as one of the proposals to be considered by the commission.
MAJOR WAR CRIMINALS The conference agreed that the question of the major war criminals should be the subject of inquiry by the three Foreign Secretaries for report in due course after the close of the conference.
That the Tito-Subasitch agreement should immediately be put into effect and a new government formed on the basis of the agreement.
That the Anti-Fascist Assembly of the National Liberation will be extended to include members of the last Yugoslav Skupstina who have not compromised themselves by collaboration with the enemy, thus forming a body to be known as a temporary Parliament and That legislative acts passed by the Anti-Fascist Assembly of the National Liberation will be subject to subsequent ratification by a Constituent Assembly; and that this statement should be published in the communiquﾃｩ of the conference.
ITALO-YOGOSLAV FRONTIER – ITALO-AUSTRIAN FRONTIER Notes on these subjects were put in by the British delegation and the American and Soviet delegations agreed to consider them and give their views later.
THE MONTREAUX CONVENTION AND THE STRAITS It was agreed that at the next meeting of the three Foreign Secretaries to be held in London, they should consider proposals which it was understood the Soviet Government would put forward in relation to the Montreaux Convention, and report to their Governments.
The forgoing protocol was approved and signed by the three Foreign Secretaries at the Crimean Conference Feb., 1945.
It is understood that the agreement concerning Outer Mongolia and the ports and railroads referred to above will require concurrence of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek.
The President will take measures in order to maintain this concurrence on advice from Marshal Stalin.
The heads of the three great powers have agreed that these claims of the Soviet Union shall be unquestionably fulfilled after Japan has been defeated.
For its part, the Soviet Union expresses it readiness to conclude with the National Government of China a pact of friendship and alliance between the U.S.S.R. and China in order to render assistance to China with its armed forces for the purpose of liberating China from the Japanese yoke.
Joseph Stalin Franklin D Roosevelt Winston S Churchill February 11, 1945.
Analysis This statement can be useful for knowing what superpower leaders thought when WWII was about to end.
Roosevelt used his power to get closer to make a global organization and realize world peace by involving Soviet into the agreement.
Also, it can be seen that, at the time of the Yalta Conference, Roosevelt and Churchill thought Stalin would do what he promised while Stalin tried to make the Europe to communist’s nations, which became the beginning of the Cold War.
FDR aboard HMS Prince of Wales with Winston Churchill, Harry Hopkins, W Averell Harriman, Ernest King, George Marshall, General Dill, Admiral Starck & Admiral Pound at Atlantic Charter Conference.
Shahn, B & United States Resettlement Administration, P Years of dust Resettlement Administration rescues victims, restores land to proper use / / Ben Shahn.
Edited by Daiki Takemoto and Sota Shigenai July 21, 2020 The End of the Cold War and Transatlantic History through NATO Introduction The Cold War mainly happened between the United States and the Soviet Union.
To be against the power from socialism countries , NATO was established within American-led alliances.
The Establishment of NATO NATO was formed led by British and America in the North Atlantic Treaty signed on 4 April 1949.
At the beginning, it used to be an intergovernmental military alliance of the West to compete with the East communist area led by the Soviet Union.
Warsaw Pact In May of 1955, at Warsaw in Poland, socialism states followed by Soviet Union made a military alliance which is called Warsaw Pact.
This alliance was established against NATO, Because NATO started to have strong power around Soviet Union and other socialism countries.
With this Warsaw pact, the world officially had to confront the society with Bipolarity, which means that main global economic, military and cultural influence is held between two states, the United States and the Soviet Union.
Warsaw Pact In the interests of further strengthening and promoting friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance, in accordance with the principles of respect for the independence and sovereignty of states, and also with the principle of noninterference in their internal affairs,… Article 1.
The contracting parties undertake, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations Organization, to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force, and to settle their international disputes by peaceful means so as not to endanger international peace and security.
The contracting parties declare their readiness to take part, in the spirit of sincere co-operation, in all international undertakings intended to safeguard international peace and security and they shall use all their energies for the realization of these aims.
Moreover, the contracting parties shall work for the adoption, in agreement with other states desiring to co-operate in this matter, of effective measures towards a general reduction of armaments and prohibition of atomic, hydrogen and other weapons of mass destruction.
The contracting parties shall take council among themselves on all important international questions relating to their common interests, guided by the interests of strengthening international peace and security.
They shall take council among themselves immediately, whenever, in the opinion of any of them, there has arisen the threat of an armed attack on one or several states that are signatories of the treaty, in the interests of organizing their joint defense and of upholding peace and security.
Bush aimed to show the United States idea of supporting Gorbachev’s reform in this meeting, and presented twenty specific proposals, including normalizing trade and arms control agreements.
And there is virtually no problem in the world, and certainly no problem in Europe, that improvement in the U.S.-Soviet relationship will not help to ameliorate.
Our meeting was characterized by openness, by a full scope of the exchange of views.
Today it is even difficult, and perhaps there is no sense, to explain the entire range of issues that we have discussed.
The President and I myself also felt it necessary to exchange views on our perception, both from Moscow and Washington, of the hot points on our planet.
Chairman Gorbachev, President Bush called on you to end the cold war once and for all.
In the first place, I assured the President of the United States that the Soviet Union would never start a hot war against the United States of America, and we would like our relations to develop in such a way that they would open greater possibilities for cooperation.
Naturally, the President and I had a wide discussion — rather, we sought the answer to the question where we stand now.
We stated, both of us, that the world leaves one epoch of cold war and enters another epoch.
We’re just at the very beginning of our long road to a long-lasting peaceful period.
Three nations joined this partnership in 1999, followed by Seven nations in 2004, and in 2009, two more nations joined.
Counter-terrorism In response to the terrorist-related terrorist attacks in the United States in 2001, article 10-2 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty was invoked.
While agreeing to the subsequent war on terror, the countries continued to participate voluntarily, with the participation of NATO instructors in the new Afghan army’s training.
Any such armed attack and all measures taken as a result thereof shall immediately be reported to the Security Council.
President Trump and NATO In 2017, when Donald Trump became president, he did not hide his discontent with the disparity between the United States and the other countries ‘ military spending.
It was reported that Trump leaked his intention to disengage from NATO in 2019/1.
I just left recently and we’re going to pick up at least another, close to a $1 billion extra.
The United States is paying close to 90% of the costs of protecting Europe.
Small countries, big countries, all these countries we are supposed to protect them.
Now we are in World War III and protecting a country that wasn’t paying its bills.
This situation almost caused a nuclear war; however, the communication between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev prevented the war.
Although the United States invasion of Cuba was prevented, the missiles in Cuba were returned to the Soviet Union, contrary to Castro’s will.
Those questions will be answered by analyzing letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev, and between Khrushchev and Castro.
The analysis of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro through letters reveal their aim or feeling towards this crisis.
In this letter, Khrushchev strongly opposes the blockade of cargo to Cuba announced by President Kennedy on October 22.
For Khrushchev, the United States action was regarded as the act of ultimatum rather than quarantine referred by the President and criticizes it as a violation of the freedom of navigation guaranteed in international law.
One characteristic of Khrushchev’s attitude in this letter is that he intends to blame the United States as the imperialist country that threatens the sovereignty and right of other nations.
Through the harsh tones in his usage of words, the high tension between the Eastern and Western bloc during the Cold War could be implied, the situation in which slight misunderstanding or acts of aggression could lead to a nuclear war that would cause huge destruction to the whole world.
Khrushchev depicts himself as a strong leader of the Soviet Union whose role is to face the United States in a resolute manner and never compromise from his side.
Therefore, this letter demonstrates the strong attitude of the Soviet Union countering the United States, and also the official beginning of the Cuban missile crisis, the period with the highest tension during the Cold War.
Khrushchev suggests a way to relieve this tension by the Soviet agreeing on the removal of weapons in Cuba in exchange for the United States retreating their counterparts from Turkey under the surveillance of the United Nations.
At the same time, he also explains the Soviets being in a similar situation as the United States by facing the threat of nuclear weapons by the United States bases in Italy and Turkey.
One significant shift from his last letter is that the tone of his language becomes more softened and demonstrates his willingness to somehow tackle the ongoing tension through negotiation.
The fact that Khrushchev showed the Soviet’s willingness to accept the deal with the United States could be evaluated as a significant step to avoid physical war.
By offering a deal, Khrushchev might attempt to demonstrate himself as a reasonable leader who is seeking international peace.
Through this letter, Khrushchev’s intention to justify the Soviet’s action of deploying missiles as defensive measures to protect the people of Cuba could be implicated.
He emphasizes the Cuban people’s desire to maintain their national security, and the role of Soviet to protect their interest as a natural action.
At the same time, by justifying their construction of a military base in Cuba, Khrushchev indirectly criticizes the United States action as aggressive and violating the sovereignty of other countries.
Furthermore, he repeatedly emphasizes the similarity of situation and interest between the two countries by claiming that the United States is also threatening the security of the Soviet with deployed missiles in Italy and Turkey.
Therefore, this suggests that Khrushchev’s offer of making a deal does not necessarily mean that his recognition of the United States has changed dramatically.
Kennedy agrees that they must find an immediate solution to this problem, however, he suggests that the first thing that should be taken care of is the weapons in Cuba and they must immediately make the weapons inoperable.
Kennedy writes down what he comprehended from Khrushchev’s letter from October 26.
First, Khrushchev must agree to remove the weapons in Cuba under the observation by the United Nations and stop the further introduction of weapons in Cuba.
Second, if he does so, the United Nations will give assurance that the United States and other western nations will not invade Cuba.
In this letter, Kennedy is accepting Khrushchev’s suggestions and stressing that by working together they can achieve the reduction of tensions.
With that being said, he organizes the main ideas which Krushchev mentioned that Kennedy agrees with and states that the removal of the weapons must be done under the observation of the United Nation.
The way it is written is as if they are collaborative solutions, however, we can see that all actions must be observed by the United Nations.
Throughout the letter, Kennedy stresses that the removal of the weapons and the cooperation of Krushchev is a must in order to reduce the tension, and reducing tension is a common goal that Kennedy and Krushchev have.
Khrushchev reconfirms that the Soviet Union would terminate the “further work on weapons construction sites” and “dismantle the arms” to be returned to the Soviet Union.
Since those weapons were only for “defensive purposes”, Khrushchev agreed to remove them once President Kennedy guaranteed that “there would be no attack” in his last letter.
In this letter, Khrushchev welcomes the United States positive response to his deal to the removal of weapons in Cuba in exchange for the United States guaranteeing the security of Cuba and the Soviet Union.
It seems that both leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union have agreed on the importance of maintaining international peace as the leading power of two blocs.
At the same time, this letter implies that such a consensus does not necessarily mean that the Soviet’s attitude toward the United States has become positive.
Throughout the letter, Khrushchev continuously makes sure that it is the United States side who conducted aggressive actions that led to this tension.
Once again, Khrushchev claims that the Soviet’s economic and military assistance for Cuba is to protect them from external invasion.
By justifying their action, Khrushchev attempts to blame the United States for their aggressiveness that threatens the sovereignty of other nations with contentious violation of their territory.
In contrast, he insists on the positive and virtuous image of the Soviet Union as a country that respects international peace and moral values.
Therefore, this letter could be regarded as evidence of unsolved ideological divide between the two blocs even after the avoidance of physical conflict.
Kennedy makes sure that they are on the same page that suggestions made in previous letters will be carried out at once so the United States can remove their quarantine measures.
Emphasizes that the American aircraft only made an error and mistakenly violated the Chukotska Peninsula.
Kennedy once again stresses that they can make real progress towards peace.
Also discusses further possible problems that should be solved among the two countries and when to discuss them.
Considering that this letter was sent to Kruschev before their official reply from the previous letter, we can see the urgency of the problem of the aircraft.
Kennedy did not want to ruin the progress he had made with Kruschev and in order to do so, he needed to send this letter to clear any misunderstandings that Soviet might have.
After sorting out what happened with the aircraft, Kennedy mentions further problems that need to be solved other than the removal of weapons in Cuba.
First, he does not want the aircraft incident to get in their way and by telling Kruschev that they can collaborate on solving many different problems, Kennedy is trying to show that he wants to make peace.
Second, the Cuban crisis is towards the end and they can afford to think about problems other than the problems in Cuba.
If the United States were to invade Cuba, the USSR should never allow it to happen and should strike first with their nuclear artillery.
Even if the USSR were to strike first, it is justifiable as the United States is aggressive, extremely dangerous, brutal, violates international law and morality, and disregards public opinion.
This is probably used to depict the United States as colonizers that are trying to steal land and Cuba as the country being colonized.
Moreover, Castro depicts the USSR as the “defender of peace” and the United States as the bad guy in this scenario.
It is possible that Castro wanted the USSR to hate the United States more than it actually does so that the usage of nuclear weapons is for defeating the bad guys and for justice which is in Castro’s best interest.
Also, Castro alluded in the letter that the USSR is the defender of peace and Cuba is there to help them realize it.
This connotes that although Castro is willing to retaliate to the USA it is mainly the USSR whose gonna do all the dirty work.
After the United States decided not to invade Cuba However, a United States airplane flew over the territory of Cuba and it was shot down by Cuba Khrushchev warns Castro not to provoke the United States by any means because it can lead to an agreement that is disadvantageous to the USSR and Cuba.
In order to fulfill this objective, the cooperation of Cuba for not answering any American provocation was necessary.
Khrushchev saw this Cuban action as an answer towards American provocation and against his will.
Clarification that Cuba never shoots commercial airplanes with civilians on board.
However, Cuba took down a United States aircraft because it was planning to ambush Cuban troupes so it was for self-defense.
Castro requested that Cuban troupes be allowed to shoot down enemy aircraft and soldiers if it is for the sake of self-defense.
It will be guaranteed that every move that Cuba took will be conveyed to the USSR authorities.
Although it is in the best intentions of Cuba to resolve the conflict with a peace treaty, The USA violated the airspace law therefore Cuba had to take precautionary measures.
In the letter, Castro seeks permission to launch antiaircraft weapons in the United States aircraft.
This speaks on so many levels on the kind of relationship that the USSR and Cuba have.
The USSR remains the head of the operations for the cold war and Cuba’s geographical proximity to the USA might be the one factor for being its ally.
Due to this, it can be said that both countries use each other for their own advantage.
Cuba uses the USSR for beefing up its military power and the USSR uses Cuba as a strategic location to launch missiles if a war were to occur.
Therefore it can be said that the alliance is based on personal benefits that each party can gain rather than actually caring about the mutual benefits of each other.
This is an exchange with the United States promising not to invade Cuba and lifting quarantine.
USSR continues to support Cuba but Cuba also needs to support itself with the weapons already given by the Soviet Union.
There are mainly 2 thoughts conveyed by Khrushchev through this letter: 1) his satisfaction with the result of the conversation with Kennedy and 2) the need to prevent Cuba from violating the agreement with Kennedy.
One main aim of this letter is to explain Castro the decision Khrushchev and Kennedy made, which is the Soviet Union removing the missile base in exchange for the United States lifting “quarantine” and promising not to invade Cuba.
Even though he does not trust the United States especially for the invasion, he accepts this deal with Kennedy.
As he states “we have succeeded” in this letter, he values the fact that the Cuban invasion and the nuclear war were prevented.
This phrase “we have succeeded” might entail the meaning of the act of persuading Cuba to follow this decision.
From the last letter from Castro, Khrushchev must have understood the fear of the United States invasion in Cuba which led Cuba to shoot down a United States aircraft.
However, such Cuban acts of attacking the United States under any condition can violate the agreement built by Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Thus, Khrushchev tried to convince Castro to follow this agreement through this letter by showing sympathy with Cuba and pointing out the importance of Cuba as the reason for avoiding nuclear war.
Castro begins with the question as to why the USSR withdrew its nuclear missiles from Cuba.
The Cuban citizens had enough hardship and that they are ready to topple down the imperialism nation.
Castro, later on, posed a question to Krushchev that what if they were attacked by America they would be armless thus more casualties in the process.
He also pointed out that it is in the best interest of the USSR to protect Cuba for some of its troops are stationed here and their lives should also be protected.
The United States forces are posing a threat to invade Cuba and now more than ever Cuba needs the protection of the USSR and its missiles.
Castro implores Krushchev that it is in the best interest of the USSR to never let the United States launch a missile in Cuba as the USSR troupes are also present in Cuba.
It could be inferred that Castro knows that Cuba alone could not stop the forces of the US, therefore, hiding behind USSR’s back and teaming up with them is the most strategic thing to do.
In this letter, Cuba’s president shows a great deal of aggressiveness towards the Imperialists even going as far as saying that the usage of a nuclear weapon can be justified because of the US’ action.
This just shows the dissent that Castro has for the United States and it shows that he is not afraid to take matters into his own hands.
This is due to the fact that the prior year during the bay of pigs invasion, the United States tried to topple down Castro’s regime in order to stop communism.
This resulted in the country’s antagonistic relationship with the United States and fear for another colonization.
Although in this letter Cuba made it seem like the USSR has the most to lose when withdrawing the missiles, it is actually Cuba that is geographically closer to the US, therefore, easier to invade.
The USSR knew that regardless of circumstance the United States cannot easily launch missiles to them therefore having a more laid back attitude of withdrawing the weapons.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro Kennedy Kennedy is the most secretive and political in his letters.
Throughout his letters, he stresses the common goal of achieving peace and he is very clear about what must be done to achieve peace and reducing the tension.
Also, Kennedy puts emphasis on what is the best for United States citizens and that Cuba and the United States will both benefit from the suggestion made by Khrushchev and Kennedy.
Khrushchev Towards Kennedy Khrushchev is presenting himself as a leader of Eastern bloc who confronts the Western bloc, particularly the US, in an equal position.
Even though the tone of his language becomes more moderate from his second letter, it could be implied that he does not fully trust the United States as a potential partner.
Despite the shift in his attitude , his attempt to present the Soviet Union as a virtuous nation and criticize the American aggressiveness remains consistent.
As a representative of the Soviet Union, Khrushchev needs to present him as a strong leader who can confront the United States in a rigorous manner.
Through the strong tone of his language, especially in his letter to Kennedy on October 24, he assumes the role of criticizing the United States blockade not only as of the Secretary-General of the Soviet Union but also as the leader of the Eastern bloc.
His intention as well as the responsibility to be the strong leader with confidence.
Khrushchev assumes the role to always portray the Soviet Union as being both materially and spiritually superior to the United States.
Throughout the letter, Khrushchev clarifies that the United States to be blamed for the cause of this crisis.
On the other hand, he justifies the Soviets as a country that respects the sovereignty of each nation and protects international peace by citing the Soviet assistance of Cuba.
Therefore, it is understood that letters between the political leaders were utilized as a device to promote the ideology of their blocs and demonstrate its superiority.
Although Khrushchev offers the deal to solve this crisis with negotiation, his use of vocabulary and expressions remains within the ordinary — as international leader.
Even in the letter directed to Kennedy, which could be regarded as a more personal way of communication, Khrushchev deliberately chooses his words as not to be found fault with his words.
His remarks on the protection of international peace could be regarded as a usual expression as the representative of the leading power, and it could be said that the relationship between the Soviet and United States remains somewhat superficial.
Towards Castro Through his letters to Castro, Khrushchev shows his desire to place Cuba under his control for the better compromise with Kennedy.
In other words, Khrushchev only saw Castro as the leader with a similar vision in the practical region.
This perspective can be understood from the comparison of the letters on Oct. and 30 to see how Khrushchev changed his standing point after the agreement with Kennedy.
As the agreement between Khrushchev and Kennedy was under discussion, Khrushchev wished not to give any harmful elements.
By considering this situation, it is noticeable that Khrushchev saw some actions and proposals by Castro, such as the shooting of American aircraft, as troublesome in the negotiation with Kennedy.
In the letter of Oct., the main message was the contents of the concluded agreement.
Here, it is remarkable to see the change in Khrushchev’s attitude after his goal was achieved.
In this case, his goal was a successful negotiation with Kennedy; thus, Khrushchev only took advantage of Castro and did not consider him as vital as Kennedy.
Therefore, Castro wanted to take aggressive measures in order to ensure Cuba’s safety.
Since the geographical location of Cuba is what makes it a key country in the cold war, it poses a big threat on Cuba’s behalf.
That is why Castro was furious about the withdrawal of the nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Cuba probably wanted more conflict between the USA and USSR hence portraying the United States as imperialists bad people and USSR as the good people bringing peace.
This is due to the fact that if the USSR were to win, the major threat that poses menace on their country would be annihilated.
Being under the United States rule in the past, Cuba knew the military prowess that the United States has.
Having the geographical disadvantage and historical background of being under the tutelage of the USA made Castro feel like there is a need for more aggressive actions.
The History of United States colonizing countries poses a big threat to the sovereignty of Cuba.
This has been done through the rhetoric of portraying the United States as an imperialist country and Cuba as an underdog country trying to protect its autonomy.
However, when the USSR withdrew the missiles this made Castro feared that it would make Cuba vulnerable to United States invasion like the prior year with the bay of pigs invasion.
Therefore more radical measures needed to be taken to ensure that the invasion that happened a year before will not happen again.
Castro had taken aggressive measures to ensure Cuba’s self-autonomy will not be infringed again.
Cuba’s long history under imperialist countries like Spain and the United States made its relations with the USA antagonistic.
Moreover, a year before the whole missile crisis the bay of pigs invasion took place to oust the Castro regime.
I believe that rather than Castro being a radical belligerent leader, Castro did what every leader of the country would have done to ensure the sovereignty of the nation.
