Kruschchev was determined to support Castro and keep a Communist regime alive in Cuba, and he had a plan.
Despite several CIA-sponsored assassination attempts and the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961, Castro had evaded death on every occasion the United States had sent it toward him.
President John F Kennedy and his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, were pursuing a two-track strategy to get rid of the regime of Fidel Castro.
And almost before the last of the blowback from the Bay of Pigs fiasco was over, the Kennedy brothers and the United States military made the destruction of Castro and his regime their number one priority.
Beginning in mid-1961, the Kennedy Administration began a two-track campaign to deprive Fidel Castro of his regime and life.
Both OPLANs were design to rapidly mobilize an invasion force roughly the size of the United States force on D-Day, the only real differences between the two being the duration of the mobilization and the forces available at the end of that period.
For over a year in 1961 and 1962, Mongoose teams conducted a variety of raids and strikes on Cuban infrastructure targets including oil refineries, sugar mills, and maritime targets, including cargo ships.
In addition, dozens of additional assassination attempts against Castro were considered, planned, and attempted.
Edward Lansdale, USAF and William Harvey of the CIA, with the actual forces being drawn from CIA resources, including the anti-Castro Cuban expatriate community.
These plans were hardly a surprise to either Castro or Khrushchev, both of whom had few doubts about the intent toward Cuba by the Kennedys or the United States.
For Khrushchev, the Cuba problem was just the latest challenge to his tenuous hold on power as the leader of the Soviet Union and the Communist World.
Photo courtesy of Norman Polmar, John D Gresham, and Dino Brugioni With his own strategic deterrent force in tatters, a growing vulnerability to nuclear blackmail from the West, growing political pressure from the Stalinist wing in his own government, and the only Communist toehold in the Western Hemisphere in jeopardy, Nikita Khrushchev was a man badly in need of a “Hail Mary” pass just to get some breathing room to operate.
A survivor of Josef Stalin’s homicidal and paranoid rule, 20 years earlier Khrushchev had been the political force behind the Soviet victory at Stalingrad.
And in early 1961, he began to devise a spellbinding idea that might solve all his problems in a single stroke.
While vacationing in May 1962, Khrushchev began to tell members of his inner circle of a plan to forward-base a number of medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles to Cuba, along with a large joint task force of ground, air, naval, and air defense forces.
In addition, the 50,000-man JTF would provide a bulwark against any American attempt to invade Cuba, and thus preserve the Castro regime.
The target date for completion of this deployment would be October 1962, and it would be known as Operation Anadyr.
