Whether you use Dropbox, Drive, G-Suite, OneDrive, Gmail, Slack, Notion, or all of the above, Dokkio will organize your files for you.
It all started with the failed United States invasion of Cuba’s the Bay of Pigs in 1961.
The leader of Cuba Fidel Castro approved Soviet leader Nakita Khrushchev plan to put missiles on the island of Cuba This is when the crisis started for the United States of America and the date was October 15, 1962.
To solve this crisis President John F Kennedy met with his advisors for several days to resolve the problem of having missiles on Cuba.
These missiles were a problem for the United States because of their closeness to the states and the treat of necular war.
After long difficult meetings The United states placed a naval blockade surrounding Cuba to prevent the shipment of missiles from the Soviet Union to Cuba.
An agreement was finally reached on October 28, 1962 between the United States and Soviets that the United States would not invade Cuba as long as the missiles were removed from Cuban soil.
Possible nuclear missiles on Cuba The installation of nuclear missiles on Cuba was a result of Fidel Castro’s fear of invasion from the United States.
It was when the U.S did a mock invasion on a Caribbean Island with the intention of overthrowing the leader “Ortsac” that Castro became paranoid that the U.S would invade Cuba.
This is why, when Nakita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union, proposed an alliance to Castro, the Cuban general immediately agreed to it.
The nuclear missiles were then shipped from Europe to Cuba in secret and installed in several places on the island.
Fidel Castro and Nakita Khrushchev Reaction of the United States October 14th, 1962, A United States spy plane “U2” spotted medium range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Despite Andrei Gromyko’s denial President Kennedy decided to put out a naval quarantine or a blockade around Cuba, in order to avoid too much violence in demanding removal of the missiles.
After putting up a blockade around Cuba, President Kennedy announced the situation to American people, he announced that the missiles are destructive regardless of USSR’s statement that these weapons were only for defensive reasons.
By the end of President Kennedy’s announcement Cuban troops was getting ready to defend Cuban from U.S attack.
In conclusion, United State’s reaction to Missiles in Cuba was setting up blockade around Cuba demanding no more weapons in Cuba from USSR or else United States would invade Cuba, additionally President Kennedy announced the situation to the public causing Fidel Castro, Cuban communist leader, to mobilize his troop.
After four long days of challenging each other at the quarantine line, finally a solution was found.
Secretly, John F Kennedy also agreed to withdraw from the American nuclear-armed missiles at the iron curtain.
When the agreement was finalized, the ships were sent back and the relationship between Russia and America changed positively.
They promised, among others, to resume their explorations together, in order to avoid a similar situation.
It is now thought that a nuclear war between these two countries is almost unlikely to ever take place.
SOLUTIONS As tension continued to build up, Fidel Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev suggesting an attack on the U.S because they were going to invade Cuba.
After many days of tension and after the USSR had refused several times to listen to the United States proposals for the missiles to be removed from Cuba, they seemed to have finally reached an agreement.
Kennedy, and the United States troops were ready to invade Cuba if the missiles were not to be removed, but what they ignored was that the Cubans had several missiles ready to launch into the U.S, tipped with a nuclear point that would destroy all the major cities.
Luckily, the USSR finally reacted to the U.S demands of removing the missiles from Cuba, if the U.S promised to not invade Cuba.
The U.S agreed, but then the USSR asked in addition, that the U.S removed their missiles in turkey in exchange for the soviet ones in Cuba.
The Soviets trusted the U.S that they would not invade Cuba and removed the missiles.
This was not made public until later on, but the war was avoided because the U.S agreed in removing their missiles in turkey, in addition to promising to not invade Cuba.
Kennedy and Khrushchev are considered as heroes for having found a compromise, since this is the closest the world has ever come to a nuclear war.
Giulia Pignatti The Aftermath After a long and tensed nuclear war United States and USSR finally reached an agreement of removing missiles from Cuba and Turkey and not to invade Cuba.
However, the prisoners of the war remained in custody for 20 months, as the United States negotiated a deal with Fidel Castro.
A week later, on December 29th a ceremony was held where the surviving Brigade members gathered for a ceremony in Miami’s Orange Bowl.
The failure of Bay of Pigs still had an impact on Kennedy’s administration.
Therefore a commitment was made to erase the record of Bay of Pigs, the destruction of the Cuban government and economy along with the possible assassination of Castro.
After 40 years the relationship between Cuba and United States still remained tensed and weak.
